

Death toll nears 200 as Bombay rocked by series of bomb blasts
NEARLY 200 people were killed and hundreds injured yesterday in a series of bomb explosions in Bombay, the Indian commercial capital still recovering from brutal Hindu-Muslim violence.
Up to 13 bombs went off across the city, many of them car bombs.
Among the main targets were the Bombay Stock Exchange and the Air India building, a major city landmark.
More than 1,100 people were injured, many of them seriously, and 197 died, an official spokesman said.
No-one claimed responsibility for the co-ordinated series of explosions across Bombay during a busy afternoon.
Police said they had no immediate clues.
The main city centre hospital was packed with injured people, many brought by taxi, and inundated with hundreds of people trying to find relatives among the dead or injured.
Three wards were packed, with two and three patients sharing some beds as doctors struggled to cope.
Stretchers, beds and floors were spattered with blood.
Shankarrao Chavan, the home minister, told parliament in New Delhi: ‘We suspect an international conspiracy.’
Mr Chavan did not say who might be behind the alleged conspiracy, but such statements are usually aimed at Pakistan, predominantly-Hindu India's Islamic neighbour.
The two have fought three wars since independence of Britain in 1947.
Indian and local Maharashtra state leaders, mindful of recent nationwide Hindu-Muslim carnage in which some 2,000 people died, appealed for calm.
The prime minister, PV Narasimha Rao, in a statement clearly aimed at potential sectarian strife, urged the nation to ignore rumours in the wake of what he called the ‘inhuman and criminal bomb blasts’.
Sharad Pawar, chief minister of Maharashtra state, said federal paramilitary police were being flown to Bombay, the Maharashtra capital, and that all roads into the sprawling city of 12 million people had been blocked.
The first bomb rocked the 26-storey Bombay Stock Exchange, smashing windows and sending shards of glass lancing across the busy trading floor.
Outside, more knife-like pieces of glass flew through the narrow streets in the heart of Bombay's business quarter.
‘I saw one man thrown at least 20 feet in the air by the blast,’ said a porter, Anand Mojar, from his hospital bed.
Witnesses said some of the floors of the new building, opened only a few months ago, were sagging.
Bombs also hit two luxury hotels near the airport, a cinema, a shopping complex, a jewellery bazaar and a train leaving the teeming Victoria Terminus, Bombay's main railway station.
Another bomb blew up a petrol pump near the headquarters of the Shiv Sena party, part of the Hindu nationalist movement.
— Reuter 
Volatile valley, Page 9
Carnage: wrecked vehicles after the explosions in the centre of Bombay.
Many bombs had been attached to cars.
Inquiries after grim find at cemetery
By Alison Daniels
EDINBURGH detectives are involved in a major investigation after the discovery of the body of a young man thinly covered by earth in a shallow grave in the city's Seafield Cemetery.
Last night a post-mortem examination was being carried out to discover how the man died but police said they were treating the death as highly suspicious.
The grim find was made shortly after 9am by a grave-digger who noticed a patch of disturbed ground inside the cemetery garden near the Seafield entrance to the crematorium.
He investigated, found the body and raised the alarm.
Police have not yet been able to identify the man.
Last night Chief Insp Bryan Lowrie said it did not appear the body had been in the graveyard for any length of time and certainly no longer than a week.
After the discovery, police screened off the garden and sealed off the cemetery.
The body was taken to the city mortuary.
Last night police were unable to confirm whether the man had been injured before he was hidden beneath a thin layer of soil.
While mourners gathered in another part of the private cemetery for a burial, a forensic team searching the scene were joined by CID officers.
The investigation is being led by Det Supt Eric John, and if the police launch a murder inquiry it will be the third unsolved killing in the Lothians in the last five weeks.
Dummydummydummydummy Angry Yeltsin plans appeal to the people
RUSSIA teetered on the brink of anarchy last night as President Boris Yeltsin virtually declared war on a conservative legislature that had bluntly rejected his attempts to arrive at a power-sharing agreement.
Mr Yeltsin flung himself into preparations for a plebiscite to undercut the legislature's power, amid fears that the country was descending into turmoil or even civil war.
A turbulent third day's debate at the Congress of People's Deputies was marked by emotion and alarms over a report — later discounted — that troops were approaching the Kremlin.
Mr Yeltsin walked out of the Kremlin Grand Palace after the Congress had ignored his appeal to save an agreement reached in December.
Its 495-326 vote had the effect of curbing Mr Yeltsin's authority and cancelling his plans for an April referendum.
But later the deputies set the stage for possible compromise by agreeing to debate a referendum after all.
Their change of mind came after the president's aides had said that if denied a referendum he would carry out a non-binding plebiscite anyway to settle the power struggle that has paralysed his reform programme.
Apparently fearing that an increasingly angry president might try to disband the legislature, deputies also voted to continue their session into a fourth day today, ‘to watch attentively that the executive observes the constitution’, in the words of the parliamentary chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov.
The crisis moved world markets, alarmed the West and prompted President Bill Clinton to declare that Mr Yeltsin personally represented democratic and market reform in Russia.
In Washington the state department said Mr Yeltsin had sent a message assuring the United States that he remained committed to democracy, human rights and civic order.
He also stressed his belief that ‘people should have the right to express their views through the ballot box, and he would continue to look for a way to give people the chance to exercise their democratic rights,’ the department's spokesman said.
The message was passed in a telephone call on Friday morning from the Russian foreign  minister , Andrei Kozyrev, to the US secretary of state, Warren Christopher.
In Moscow a spokesman for Mr Khasbulatov, Mr Yeltsin's main rival, said the Russian leader had acted emotionally in walking out of Congress.
‘An American president's proposals are not always supported by Congress — that doesn't mean he has to stamp his foot and leave Capitol Hill,’ he said.
But a presidential spokesman, Vyacheslav Kostikov, said the 62-year-old leader would not return to Congress.
‘Yeltsin…left the Congress because he understands he has only one partner left with whom he can talk.
That is the people.’
‘The smooth reformist period has ended,’ Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Shakhrai told journalists.
‘The Congress has led the country to the  threshold beyond which lies the path to revolution, street rule and chaos.’
Mr Khasbulatov said it was Mr Yeltsin's executive branch and not Congress that threatened law and order.
Yeltsin aides said the referendum, on whether the president or the parliament should be supreme in Russia would probably take place on 25 April.
Conservative regional council chiefs denounced the idea and declared their backing for Congress.
Some may even refuse to take part, raising the long-term danger of a breakdown of Moscow's control over the Russian provinces.
But miners in Russia's biggest coalfield, Kuzbass in western Siberia, declared their support for the embattled president and threatened to strike.
Some political groups, such as the Civic Union industrial lobby, called for early elections for both president and the Congress to break the deadlock.
Earlier Mr Yeltsin had appealed to the 1,000-odd deputies to accept amendments to a hardline resolution and save the power-sharing compromise struck at the last Congress in December.
‘Otherwise…there won't be parliamentary power in Russia or dual power but a power vacuum that would weaken Russia,’ he said.
He accuses parliament of sabotaging his market reforms, using powers inherited under Russia's Soviet-era constitution.
But many deputies see Congress as a barrier to dictatorship.
In Hong Kong yesterday officials of the Group of Seven (G7) industrialised countries began their first meeting of a weekend session with the discussion believed to focus on emergency aid for Russia.
Hotel staff said the Russian deputy premier Boris Fyodorov would arrive at the talks today.
Mr Fyodorov made it clear in Moscow on Thursday that Russia was desperate for the West's help, but he also vowed to press ahead with reform with or without G7 financial assistance.
‘We will not stop (reforms) to wait for any decisions from the G7, whether we receive aid or not,’ he told reporters.
Sharp exit: Mr Yeltsin walks out past Mr Khasbulatov
Smith pledge on Scottish water sell-off
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
A PLEDGE to return ownership of privatised Scottish water to local councils was made by the Labour leader, John Smith, yesterday.
In a relaxed first address to Labour's Scottish conference at Inverness which brought him a warm reception, he closed the embarrassing divide in party ranks over water privatisation.
He declared his ambition to attend, as a Labour Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, the opening day of the Scottish parliament.
He vowed it would be empowered to ‘return Scottish water to the ownership and control of local authorities’.
Mr Smith launched a stinging attack on John Major, ridiculing him as a man who has lost control of events.
Mr Major was a man who had humiliated himself in the Commons defeat over the European Committee of the Regions, he said, adding that the Prime Minister had been forced to ‘hop into bed’ with a party pledged to destroy the Union.
Mr Smith warned that if the Government raised VAT rates in next week's Budget, it would be a huge betrayal of the British people after Mr Major's election promise that there would be no increase.
Norman Lamont's budget would be judged by one test: whether, in an economy with three million people out of work, it would create jobs.
But Mr Smith warned: ‘This will be a budget designed to save the skin of the Chancellor, not a budget to rescue the British economy.’
He challenged Mr Lamont to repeat his assertion that unemployment was a price well worth paying.
‘If unemployment is a price worth paying, there is only one person in this country who should pay the price and that is Mr Major.’
‘He bleats that his critics are talking the country down.
But everyone knows who is pulling this country down.
Talk to anyone.
Talk to the 5,000 Rolls-Royce workers who joined the three million people without work yesterday.
‘Never in the history of post-war government has an administration proved so inept, so clueless, so complaining, so incompetent.’
But, he said, last week the beleaguered Mr Major had found new friends in the SNP — which had for weeks been urging all-party opposition talks on the government of Scotland, but had been in secret negotiations with a Tory government.
After such duplicity the shadow Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, was ‘wholly right to tell the SNP we could not work with them while they behaved in such a cynical way.’
The people of Scotland would remember it was the SNP who voted with Mrs Thatcher to bring a Labour government down.
‘You can always rely on the SNP for one thing — when it really matters, you know they will let you down.’
Mr Smith said the Government's stock-taking exercise invited ridicule as a set of inadequate minor adjustments to an out-dated system by a discredited government.
‘It fails to meet the central question in Scottish politics which is that any change which is to be meaningful must involve the transfer of political and legislative authority from Westminster to a parliament elected in Scotland by Scots.
‘We in the Labour Party will settle for nothing less.’
Hatton slams ‘nonsense over grotty land'
DEREK Hatton last night attacked his trial as a lot of nonsense over three grotty pieces of land ‘that no-one since Adolf Hitler had shown any interest in’.
Mr Hatton, beaming with relief, drank champagne from tea mugs to toast the decision which cleared him yesterday of plotting to defraud Liverpool city council.
Speaking to journalists, the former deputy Labour leader on Liverpool council hit out at the police decision to press ahead with the action against him.
He said: ‘People who have sat through this trial have said to me what on earth is it all about?’
Full story, Page 3
200 killed in Bombay blasts
NEARLY 200 people were killed and hundreds injured yesterday in a series of bomb explosions in Bombay, the Indian commercial capital still recovering from brutal Hindu-Muslim violence.
Up to 13 bombs went off across the city, many of them car bombs.
Among the main targets were the Bombay Stock Exchange and the Air India building, a major city landmark.
More than 1,100 people were injured, many of them seriously, and 197 died, an official spokesman said.
No-one claimed responsibility for the co-ordinated series of explosions across Bombay during a busy afternoon.
Police said they had no immediate clues.
The main city centre hospital was packed with injured people, many brought by taxi, and inundated with hundreds of people trying to find relatives among the dead or injured.
Three wards were packed, with two and three patients sharing some beds as doctors struggled to cope.
Stretchers, beds and floors were spattered with blood.
Shankarrao Chavan, the home minister, told parliament in New Delhi: ‘We suspect an international conspiracy.’
Mr Chavan did not say who might be behind the alleged conspiracy, but such statements are usually aimed at Pakistan, predominantly-Hindu India's Islamic neighbour.
The two have fought three wars since independence of Britain in 1947.
Indian and local Maharashtra state leaders, mindful of recent nationwide Hindu-Muslim carnage in which some 2,000 people died, appealed for calm.
The prime minister, PV Narasimha Rao, in a statement clearly aimed at potential sectarian strife, urged the nation to ignore rumours in the wake of what he called the ‘inhuman and criminal bomb blasts’.
Sharad Pawar, chief minister of Maharashtra state, said federal paramilitary police were being flown to Bombay, the Maharashtra capital, and that all roads into the sprawling city of 12 million people had been blocked.
The first bomb rocked the 26-storey Bombay Stock Exchange, smashing windows and sending shards of glass lancing across the busy trading floor.
Outside, more knife-like pieces of glass flew through the narrow streets in the heart of Bombay's business quarter.
‘I saw one man thrown at least 20 feet in the air by the blast,’ said a porter, Anand Mojar, from his hospital bed.
Witnesses said some of the floors of the new building, opened only a few months ago, were sagging.
Bombs also hit two luxury hotels near the airport, a cinema, a shopping complex, a jewellery bazaar and a train leaving the teeming Victoria Terminus, Bombay's main railway station.
Another bomb blew up a petrol pump near the headquarters of the Shiv Sena party, part of the Hindu nationalist movement.
— Reuter 
Volatile valley, Page 9
Carnage: wrecked vehicles after the explosions in the centre of Bombay.
Many bombs had been attached to cars.
BBC pulls the plug on Eldorado soap
THE BBC last night axed Eldorado, the supersoap set on the sunny Costa del Sol that turned into a multi-million pound flop.
The news came as a crushing blow to the cast and production team on the £10million set in Spain who had hoped for a reprieve after a recent upturn in viewing figures.
The new controller of BBC1, Alan Yentob, said he made the ‘very hard’ decision last night to halt the soap after its first 156 episodes end in July.
He added: ‘Eldorado has been a brave venture to which many people have given huge energy and commitment.
But I believe it is better to call a halt now at a point when the option to renew contracts has arisen.
I know that this decision will be painful for the cast, production team and crew.’
The show was the brainchild of producer Verity Lambert, who saw Mr Yentob in London yesterday to be told his final decision.
Afterwards, she said: ‘Everybody has worked very hard from the beginning and in recent weeks their efforts have paid off on screen.’
The show was filmed entirely on location in Spain, where a 25-acre village was specially built for the purpose.
It had a cast of virtual unknowns and failed to score highly in the ratings, with average viewing figures of only five million — although it had picked up in recent weeks with about seven million.
Several of the original cast were written out within months of the launch, and there were many other changes — but all failed to make the soap a winner.
The BBC head of drama services, Peter Cregeen, flew to Spain yesterday afternoon to break the news.
Some of the 150 or  so cast  and production crew he gathered together at a local hotel broke down and wept as he confirmed their worst fears.
Later, Mr Cregeen said: ‘There were some people who were resigned to it, but obviously when people have a lot of involvement in something they are going to take news like this badly.’
The location publicity officer, Liz Kallend, looking shaken, said: ‘Everyone thought that the show had turned the corner.’
Victim of a serial killer, Page 3
Murder hunt after find at cemetery
By Alison Daniels
EDINBURGH detectives launched a murder hunt last night after the discovery of the body of a young man thinly covered by earth in a shallow grave in the city's Seafield Cemetery.
The investigation to find the killer of David Edwards, 25, will be led from an incident room set up at Leith police station.
The grim find was made shortly after 9am by a grave-digger who noticed a patch of disturbed ground inside the cemetery garden near the Seafield entrance.
He investigated and raised the alarm after finding the body of Mr Edwards, who was unemployed.
Police said he lived in the Leith Walk area of Edinburgh.
Last night Chief Insp Bryan Lowrie said it did not appear the body had been in the graveyard for any length of time and certainly no longer than a week.
Police screened off the garden and sealed off the cemetery.
The body was taken to the city mortuary.
Last night police were unable to confirm whether the man had been injured before he was covered by soil.
While mourners gathered in another part of the private cemetery for a burial, a forensic team searching the scene were joined by CID officers.
The investigation is being led by Det Supt Eric John, and the murder inquiry will mark the third unsolved killing in the Lothians in the last five weeks.
Car park chief cleared of industrial espionage
THE CHIEF executive of National Car Parks was cleared at the Old Bailey in London yesterday of mounting a campaign of industrial espionage against his main rival, Europarks.
The NCP boss, Gordon Layton, 56, and Simon Hewitt, 38, then a manager of the security firm KAS, were found not guilty of conspiracy to defraud Europarks by dishonestly acquiring information about its business affairs.
Neither man gave evidence but their counsels argued neither had believed they were breaking the law.
Layton, of Regent's Park, London, believed he was acting in a ‘perfectly legal and ethical way’ when he hired KAS to find out more about Europarks.
He was concerned to discover how they were winning lucrative car parking contracts and whether there was a leak of information from his own company.
He ‘wanted to act in the interests of his company, NCP, and he wanted to avoid breaking the law and he wanted to act within what was regarded as ethical’ said his counsel, Alexander Carlile, QC.
When Layton hired Mayfair-based KAS, started by Sir David Stirling, founder of the SAS, its day-to-day running was in the hands of another former SAS colonel, Ian Crook.
Later Hewitt took over.
During the two-month trial, David Paget, prosecuting, said KAS operatives, many of them former SAS soldiers, tailed Europarks directors to their homes, searched their dustbins and got jobs in the company's car parks.
A former army captain, Jane Turpin, used a fake CV to get a top secretarial job at Europarks where she photocopied documents and sent regular reports about the company and its personnel to Layton via Hewitt.
After the verdicts, Judge Richard Hawkins refused an application for Layton's costs to be paid from public funds saying the defendant had brought suspicion upon himself.
The prosecution then formally offered no evidence against Hewitt on a charge of obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception by helping Turpin fake a CV to get a job with Europarks and a not guilty verdict was recorded.
The two charges of conspiracy and obtaining pecuniary advantage against Turpin had been dropped.
As Layton left the Old Bailey on a bicycle, NCP's board welcomed his acquittal and called for the law to be clarified.
The three-year NCP investigation is believed to be the biggest ever in this country into alleged industrial espionage.
Trial costs are estimated at £4 million.
— PA
Plumber award
YESTERDAY The Scotsman wrongly described Edinburgh plumber Lawrence Allison as the winner of a competition to find the plumber of the year.
In fact, the competition, by Scottish and Northern Ireland Plumbing Employers' Federation (SNIPEF), has just been launched.
Customers are invited to nominate their plumber for the title.
Application forms are available from all SNIPEF members.
The winner will be announced in six weeks' time and both the winning plumber and the nominator will receive holidays to Majorca.
Girl held as boy's death case is revived
A 15-YEAR-old girl was in custody last night after police reopened inquiries into the death of an infant.
Steven Jarvis, who was 21 months old, was found dead at his home in Thornhill, Southampton, last November and a verdict of accidental death was recorded at an inquest last week.
The hearing was told the child had been left with a 14-year-old baby-sitter.
The teenager left him alone to go to a disco but when she and a friend returned they found the child dead.
The coroner concluded he had choked to death when he tried to climb out of his cot.
It is understood that a teenage girl went with her mother to police in Southampton and made a statement which led to detectives reopening the inquiry.
A Hampshire Police spokesman said today: ‘We can confirm we are reinvestigating the circumstances leading to the death of Steven Jarvis and we now have a 15-year-old girl in custody helping us with our inquiries.’
Hurd hits at pack instincts of press
THE QUALITY press and television programmes are guilty of ‘a falling away of accuracy and a sloppiness in dealing with facts and quotations’, the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, claimed yesterday.
He attacked the lobby system of political reporting and the increased tendency for critics to hunt as a pack.
Elsewhere in a key speech, Mr Hurd said the storm which blew through Britain's institutions last year, ‘uprooting some and damaging others’, has now blown itself out, leaving 1993 a year for ‘recovery and replanting’.
Mr Hurd said in Oxford: ‘A period of soul-searching does nobody any harm unless it is prolonged to the point where it becomes weakening and ridiculous.’
He claimed Britain did not have the balance right between doers and critics.
‘If the quantity of questioning and criticism has greatly increased, what can be said of the quality?
‘I am not thinking here of the tabloid press, whose characteristics have been much debated recently, but more particularly of the quality press and the TV programmes which expect to be taken seriously.
‘Am I alone in detecting a falling away of accuracy — a sloppiness in dealing with facts and quotations which editors would not have tolerated even a few years ago?’
Mr Hurd said there was an increased tendency for the critics to hunt as a pack.
‘The lobby system of political reporting encourages this tendency.
‘Suddenly serious political observers all discover simultaneously that the main story of the day is a lunch party given by Margaret Thatcher.
Individual minds separately at work could never have reached such a silly conclusion.’
Mr Hurd went on: ‘Last year, a fierce wind blew through the institutions of Britain, uprooting some and damaging others.
The monarchy, the political system, the judiciary, the police and the established church all took hard knocks.
‘Part of the framework on which both Government and Opposition base their economic and European policies was swept away.
‘I believe the storm has now blown itself out and that 1993 is a year for recovery and replanting.’
Mr Hurd appealed for a period of calm for the Royal Family.
‘The monarchy is the focus of loyalty and service.
Through the centuries it has changed at intervals by learning from errors and misfortunes, constantly adapting itself to new situations.
‘A lot of people inside and outside the country make a lot of money from caricaturing and criticising the Royal Family.
‘It is, perhaps, not too much to ask on their behalf for a period of calm during which they can reassert, each in his and her own way, the tradition of public service to which they are clearly dedicated.’
— PA
Victim tells of escape from fireball car
THE scarred survivor of a fireball sobbed in the witness box yesterday as he recalled his dramatic escape from a murder-trap car which he thought had killed his girlfriend.
Ivor Stokle, 34, a quantity surveyor, told a hushed Bristol Crown Court how he and his girlfriend, Mrs Pauline Leyshon, 43, were kidnapped at knifepoint from a bungalow, beaten and bound before being placed in a blazing car which was pushed off a hillside.
Mr Stokle repeatedly broke down sobbing as he relived the events of the attack.
He gave evidence in a low, strained voice, often scratching vivid red scars on his face, chin and neck.
His dramatic evidence was given on the fourth day of the trial of his former common-law wife Shiela Stroud, 32, and her lover Mark Evans, 31.
The Crown claims that the couple from Staunton stood to gain £138,000 in insurance policies on the death of Mr Stokle.
It also alleges they hired Norman White, 30, of Gloucester, with the promise of £30,000 to carry out the killing.
All three deny joint charges of attempting to murder Mr Stokle and Mrs Leyshon.
Alan Jenkins, prosecuting, alleged that Stroud, a horse breeder, was in debt and under pressure to pay £20,000 to Mr Stokle as part of a property deal on the bungalow they had bought together.
Mr Stokle recalled how he and his girlfriend went to the bungalow to meet Evans and Stroud, apparently to discuss a financial settlement.
As they drank tea, with Evans out of the room, a black man burst in.
He was wearing a wet weather suit and a hood, concealing most of his features.
He held a seven-inch knife at Mr Stokle's throat and ordered him to lie face down on the floor.
Mr Stokle said he was then tightly bound.
He said he heard Stroud say: ‘This will teach you to shit on me.’
He and Mrs Leyshon were taken bound under the canvas cover of Stroud's pick-up truck to Barrow Wake.
There they were dragged from the truck to Mr Stokle's Vauxhall Viva car, which had followed.
Inside the car, he managed to free some of his bonds.
He knew the area and told his girlfriend not to worry.
‘I told her: ‘They are not going to kill us’.’
But then their car was hit in a sudden ‘thump’.
It started moving and was on fire.
He said: ‘I heard a whooshing noise and saw smoke.’
He sobbed as he added: ‘I shall never forget that as long as I live.
Mark shouted: ‘Flame ho!’ and the car was engulfed in flames.’
Mr Stokle described how he was screaming as the car's interior burned.
He instinctively covered his eyes and face with his hands.
‘I knew I had to get out as the whole car was on fire.
I had anticipated the car being pushed downhill but I did not anticipate the fire.’
He turned in his seat to raise his bound ankles over his girlfriend and kicked three times to free her door.
He then staggered uphill to a courting couple and pleaded: ‘Help me, I think they have murdered my girlfriend and burned her alive.’
But shortly afterwards he saw his injured girlfriend slumped in a police car nearby.
The court had heard previously that Mr Stokle and his girlfriend spent nearly two months in hospital recovering from 30 to 40 per cent burns to their bodies.
The trial continues on Monday.
Mr Stokle leaves the court after giving evidence yesterday
Human torch at immigration office
A MAN was in hospital yesterday suffering from serious burns after setting fire to himself in a London immigration office, the Home Office said.
The 35-year-old Kurd from Turkey was waiting for a routine appointment in the Croydon  Immigration Office in south London when he doused himself with petrol.
He was taken by helicopter to the burns unit at Queen Mary's hospital in Roehampton.
A second person in the office was also reported to have received treatment for shock.
— PA
The Home Office refused to reveal whether the man was seeking asylum and said it did not comment on individual cases.
An inquiry into the incident would be held.
However, the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants warned that the immigration authorities'’ cold and brutal’treatment of asylum seekers was leading to a dangerously volatile situation.
‘It is creating a pressure cooker situation which will explode,’ said the council's director Claude Moraes.
Kurds in Turkey say they have been tortured and repressed in a bloody campaign by the government to crack down on separatist  guerrillas fighting for an independent Kurdistan.
Third remand for Bulger case boys
TWO ten-year-old boys were yesterday remanded in custody for a further week accused of the abduction and murder of two-year-old James Bulger.
It was their third court appearance.
James was found dead beside a railway line in Liverpool after disappearing from a shopping precinct in Bootle last month.
There was again strict security at the court building in Liverpool town centre but there was no repeat of the noisy scenes that accompanied the first two remands. — PA
Boy all at sea for love says it was not worth it
A LOVESICK teenager who landed in court after stealing a dinghy to make a cross-Channel voyage to see his French sweetheart yesterday admitted she was not worth it.
David Burnett's 16ft inflatable boat with an outboard motor was taken in tow by a trawler 25 miles off Cornwall.
At Truro Crown Court Burnett, 18, of Falmouth, was sentenced to 120 hours community service.
He had pleaded guilty earlier to taking the craft without authority last March.
The assistant recorder, David Barlett, told Burnett: ‘Like a latter-day Francis Drake, you go off into the ocean, heading apparently for France, but it turns out actually in the direction of Canada.
You could have been killed by your own foolhardiness and so could others in an attempt to find you.’
Burnett, asked whether the French schoolgirl was worth what he had done, said: ‘No’.
All he took with him on his voyage was a spare pair of shoes, a sandwich and a 1992 sports diary with a map of the world, the court heard.
Serb shelling kills children as British unit pulls out
BRITISH soldiers who were being held ‘hostage’ by women and children in a Bosnian village have pulled out following a shelling attack by besieging Serb forces.
The British commander, Maj Alan Abraham, decided the situation was getting too dangerous, said Maj Martin Waters, an army spokesman.
‘The shelling was getting closer, so a decision was made that to protect the civilians and to protect the soldiers’ own lives,’he said.
The shelling of the Muslim village of Konjevic Polje forced the soldiers, members of the 9th/12th Lancers, to look on helplessly as women and children were killed and injured.
Dozens are thought to have died and at least six children under the age of five were injured, with two having legs blown off.
Maj Waters said: ‘It was well-aimed artillery fire, carefully avoiding UN vehicles.
It was aimed at the women and children.’
The major said a British doctor with the World Health Organisation, Simon Mardell, 35, an accident and emergency specialist from Aberdeen, and an army medic had treated casualties.
But they had had to operate without anaesthetic and with only limited supplies.
Dr Mardell arrived in Konjevic Polje on Wednesday after walking 15 miles from Srebrenica where the UN commander in Bosnia, Gen Philippe Morillon, of France, was suffering difficulties of his own.
Sources at UN headquarters in Belgrade said Gen Morillon was also being prevented from leaving by crowds of women and children.
Gen Morillon had arrived late on Thursday to try to negotiate safe passage for the trapped British-led convoy and had been planning to leave yesterday when his party of about 15 was blocked in.
A UN spokeswoman in Belgrade said she had heard Srebrenica was being shelled by Serbs while Gen Morillon was stranded there.
Giving details of the situation at Konjevic Polje, Maj Waters said one armoured vehicle with five men had escorted a convoy to Konjevic Polje on Thursday to help in the evacuation of 75 wounded people.
It had been prevented from leaving after Serbs said the convoy could bring out only women and children.
Crowds of women and children ringed the convoy with burning bales of hay and told the soldiers the convoy should take all the wounded or none.
Maj Abraham said the villagers did not want the convoy to leave because ‘we offer them a chance of life.
The people see us as their only hope of survival’.
Yesterday, another British armoured vehicle with six men arrived in the village.
Then, however, began the shelling by the Serb forces who accused the Muslims of using the troops as a human shield.
The barrage initially had been aimed at the civilians but Maj Waters said as it got closer to the convoy, two trucks had been damaged.
Several hours after their withdrawal, the 11 soldiers and Dr Mardell arrived at the Serbian town of Banja Koviljaca.
A member of the Royal Irish Regiment was ‘very seriously ill’ in hospital last night after being wounded by a mine in Bosnia.
The man, whose name has not been released, was in Woolwich Military Hospital, London, after being airlifted to Britain on Thursday.
He is understood to have head and chest injuries and may have shrapnel in his brain.
War crimes, Page 9
Girl aged 15 accused over baby's death
POLICE last night charged a girl of 15 with the murder of a 23-month-old child discovered hanging by his jumper from his cot.
Stephen Jarvis was found dead after his unmarried mother, Natalie Weller, of Thornhill, Southampton, Hampshire, left him in the care of a teenage babysitter.
The babysitter, 14 at the time of Stephen's death in November last year, told police she found the little boy dead after leaving him alone to go to a disco.
A verdict of accidental death was recorded at an inquest last week.
Detectives arrested a girl yesterday afternoon at an address in Bitterne, Southampton, and she will appear before Southampton magistrates today.EP
Caviare withdrawn after health scare
By Frank Urquhart
CANS of a fish product, manufactured by a Scottish company, have been withdrawn from sale throughout Britain as a precautionary measure because of a possible link with a case of suspected botulism in which a woman was paralysed from the neck down.
The precautionary withdrawal of all cans of lumpfish caviare, manufactured by MacFish at Fraserburgh, was ordered by the company after a Government health warning.
The woman, who had bought the can on the Isle of Wight, was admitted to Hasler Royal Naval Hospital in Portsmouth earlier this week suffering from sickness, double vision and paralysis.
She was said last night to be out of intensive care and making progress.
A Scottish Office spokesman said there was a possibility of an association between the caviare and the human paralytic illness suffered by the female patient in the south of England, but there was insufficient evidence to confirm a link.
He advised consumers not to eat the product, but stressed: ‘This warning is specifically limited to Macrae Lumpfish Caviare and no other product is implicated.’
A spokesman for MacFish said: ‘It is all suspicion at the moment.
There is nothing confirmed at all.
Clearly there are lots of precautions and investigations under way.
‘This affects only one product which has been voluntarily withdrawn as a precautionary measure.
We are fully co-operating with the Scottish Office in their investigations.’
Nobody barred as Evelyn Glennie beats time at Craiginches
THE percussionist Evelyn Glennie yesterday took time out from her hectic tour of Scotland's smaller venues to stage a special performance for inmates at Aberdeen's Craiginches Prison, writes Frank Urquhart.
It was her second visit to the prison in three years.
As she warmed up for a short recital in the prison's dining hall, Evelyn said: ‘Music is incredible medicine for every human being in some sort of way or another.
Why should we exclude people who are in prison?
‘We need to try and help them progress in life as opposed to literally shutting the door in their faces.
I think sometimes music can affect prisoners in a very deep way.’
For the first time in her professional career as a soloist she is forsaking the large concert venues to take her music to some of the remoter parts of Scotland in a tour being sponsored by British Telecom.
The tour includes performances at Inverurie, Pitlochry, Oban and Stornoway.
Evelyn, who is also due to give a performance at Dumfries young offenders institution, said: ‘I always enjoy playing in my native Scotland, and this tour is particularly special.’
IAN RUTHERFORD
Hatton is cleared of fraud charges
DEREK HATTON, the former Labour politician cleared yesterday of plotting to defraud Liverpool city council, last night hit out at the police decision to press ahead with the action against him.
At a hastily-convened news conference, he said it would be ‘naive’ to suggest that somewhere along the line there was not a link with his political activities in the 1980s.
He said: ‘The assistant chief constable of Merseyside said that this was going to be the greatest fraud trial since Poulson.
It came down to three grotty, scrappy bits of land that no-one since Adolf Hitler had shown any interest in…
The investigation was a lot of nonsense at the end.’
A jury returned not guilty verdicts on two charges against the former deputy council leader over car park deals in Liverpool.
Also cleared with Mr Hatton, 45, at the end of the eight-week trial at Mold Crown Court in Clwyd, north Wales, were his tailor, businessman John Monk, and ex-Labour councillors John Nelson and Hannah Folan.
The prosecution had alleged that Mr Hatton used his influence on the two councillors — who chaired influential committees — to swing deals for his close friend Monk, 45, without proper competition.
None of the accused gave evidence during the trial.
Mr Hatton's counsel, Rodney Klevan QC, told the jury of seven women and five men not to allow a ‘political witch-hunt’.
He said there was no evidence of any conspiracy.
Mr Hatton and Mr Monk had denied the two charges of conspiring to defraud the council.
Mr Nelson, 49 and Miss Folan denied one charge relating to separate areas of land used for car parking.
The charges were brought during a wide-ranging Merseyside police investigation, codenamed Operation Cheetah.
It was headed by Det Supt Bill Coady, who sat grim-faced with fellow detectives in the court a few feet from the dock as the verdicts were announced, to gasps from the court's public gallery.
Mr Hatton sat down for a moment and dropped his head briefly into his hands.
He waited for a few moments to compose himself, then left the court with his arm round his wife, Shirley, to face a large crowd of waiting reporters and cameras.
He said: ‘I am absolutely, totally delighted and overjoyed.
It has been 3 years in which my family were put through things they never ever deserved to be put through.
Serious and important questions have to be asked about what went on.’
Alan Rawley, prosecuting, told the judge, Mr Justice Waterhouse, there would now be no trial on four other counts which appeared on the original indictment, involving other alleged land deals.
Hatton, Monk and Nelson were acquitted on of conspiring to defraud Liverpool city council between November 1986 and February 1987 over land leased to Monk as a car park in Manesty's Lane, Liverpool, allegedly at a value less than could be raised on the open market, without proper competition.
Hatton, Monk and Folan denied a similar charge relating to land at Brownlow Hill, Liverpool between July 1987 and January 1988.
Businessman Roy Stewart, 55, was found not-guilty along with Hatton and Folan of a third fraud conspiracy charge on the judge's direction last week.
Mr Stewart, managing director of Rogerson's Developments, faced no further charges and was released at that stage.
Last night Liverpool council commented in a statement: ‘These matters have now been resolved by the courts after one of the most thorough investigations ever undertaken into any council's affairs.’
The council's standing orders now mean that, except under special circumstances, all disposals of land and property are dealt with by public auction or tender.
Derek Hatton outside the court after yesterday's verdict
Former director general critical of Birt
THE BBC director general, John Birt, was under increasing pressure last night, with one of his predecessors criticising his tax arrangements.
Alasdair Milne, director general from 1982 to 1987, said: ‘Birt has no understanding of the BBC if he thought he could get away with this.’
Earlier, a Labour MP, David Winnick, called on Mr Birt to resign.
‘In all the circumstances it would be of considerable help to the BBC if Mr Birt seriously considered resigning,’ he said.
The BBC had no comment to make about the deepening row and said it had no knowledge of any plans to oust him.
Mr Birt became the £140,000-a-year director general at the end of last year but was employed by his own company to gain tax advantages.
When the arrangement was revealed two weeks ago he immediately became a member of staff and said the advantage had amounted to only £810 a year.
He admitted the revelations had ‘certainly damaged’ his relations with staff and hoped his swift move would limit the damage.
As many as 64 MPs have lined up to criticise his management style and union leaders say there could be up to 6,000 job losses at the corporation, which employs about 20,000 people.
Individual governors are understood to be unhappy at the tax arrangements and the way it appears to have damaged Mr Birt's credibility in the eyes of licence payers.
Last night he won the backing of Peter Mandelson, Labour MP for Hartlepool and the party's former communications director, who said he did not think Mr Birt should consider resigning.
‘What is important is that Mr Birt's immediate apology and correction of his tax position were accepted on behalf of the BBC governors.’
Mr Birt was headhunted as a freelance from London Weekend Television six years ago where he had similar tax arrangements with the commercial station.
He began as deputy to Sir Michael Checkland and was appointed his successor without any other candidates being interviewed.
Roger Gale, chairman of the Tory back-bench Media Committee, also called the ‘hounding’ of Mr Birt a disgrace.
He said in his North Thanet constituency: ‘If the manner in which he was contracted gives cause for concern then those culpable are those within the BBC management who made the arrangements.
‘If we do not like the tax law then we should change it.
It is, though, quite wrong to persecute one man for using the law to his advantage.’
‘I am appalled at the manner in which Mr Birt's affairs have been leaked from within the BBC.
This smacks of an orchestrated campaign by those who are opposed to his policies and would like to do him dirt.’
Mr Gale said he did not agree with all of Mr Birt's policies.
‘But I see no reason for him to be hounded from office for endeavouring to restructure the BBC to meet the needs of tomorrow rather than the needs of yesterday under the thinly-veiled guise of impropriety.’— PA 
Editorial, Page 10
Rosyth wins contract in spite of Devonport ploy
By Allan McLean
AN ATTEMPT by management at Devonport to poach the refitting of a destroyer from Rosyth Royal Dockyard has failed, but the unsolicited bid has caused two weeks' delay to work on HMS Gloucester.
‘Rosyth gives the best value for money in this case,’ a spokesman for the Ministry of Defence said yesterday, confirming that the contract had been awarded after the Devonport move had been examined.
Up to 300 workers at the Fife yard will be employed for 14 months, giving the Type 42 destroyer a major refit and upgrading its weapons capabilities.
Work will start on Monday, involving an average of 250 of Rosyth's remaining workforce of 3,500.
The minimum number working on HMS Gloucester at any stage will be 200.
The ship has been at Rosyth for some weeks and work should have started on 1 March.
But nothing could be done until the MoD had considered the Devonport bid, which was submitted last month in spite of the refitting having been earmarked for Fife in the so-called core programme for the Scottish yard.
‘It was crucial for us to secure this contract.
It guarantees work here.
We cannot afford to turn work away and we cannot afford to lose work,’ a spokesman for Babcock Thorn, Rosyth's management company, said last night.
‘It is clear that we were able to demonstrate to the ministry that we are able to do the work and give value for money.
Obviously we are very pleased to have secured this contract,’ he added.
Rosyth's victory was being seen in industry circles yesterday as a snub for Devonport in its company's attempts to discredit the Fife operation.
There is intense rivalry between the yards over future Trident submarine overhauls and other work for the Royal Navy, amid fears that one of the sites may face eventual closure.
Both have been hit by substantial redundancies.
DML, the company which manages the Plymouth yard, is believed to have offered to do the job for £15 million, but the value of the contract has not been officially revealed.
The Rosyth spokesman declined to say what it was worth.
Knives bill passes its second reading
NEW LAWS to clamp down on the carrying of knives in Scotland were ‘nodded through’ without dissent in the Commons yesterday.
The Carrying of Knives Etc (Scotland) Bill passed its main parliamentary hurdle, the second reading, with minimal formalities.
Under the legislation, which has Government backing, it will become an offence to carry a knife in public unless it specifically relates to work, religion or national costume.
It shifts the onus of proof in convictions from the police, who currently have to prove intent, to the public, who would have to justify carrying any sharpened blade.
The bill, championed by Phil Gallie, Conservative MP for Ayr, is expected to enter committee stage within weeks, on target for implementation during the summer.
Labour told to fight Tory spivvery
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
TORY plans to reform Scottish local government are designed to neuter local democracy and shunt power upwards to the Scottish Office, the Scottish Labour party conference at Inverness was told yesterday.
Norman MacAskill, Inverness, said the Conservatives' case for re-structuring councils was fraudulent, as the majority of those who wanted single-tier councils saw it as part of the move to a Scottish parliament.
He said it was a tragedy that councils' energies were being diverted into a fight to preserve local democracy.
‘The Tories’ only purpose is to neuter local democracy, shunt power upwards to the Scottish Office and sideways to the Tory placemen and devolve power to the Rotary Club tea-room.
‘Support the campaign to say no to the spivs and con-men of the Scottish Tory party and yes to the campaign to preserve a genuine and diverse local democracy throughout Scotland, particularly here in the Highlands.’
The conference supported his motion calling for regional and district councils to be retained in the Highlands.
He argued that the region's low population density meant that small councils, while locally accountable, did not have a wide enough tax base or the strategic planning capability of the regional council.
But Labour Party councillors also came in for some criticism from delegates.
Linley Park, South Aberdeen, attacked compulsory competitive tendering which she said had produced wage rates as low as £1 an hour for cleaners in Kincardine & Deeside.
But she criticised high pay awards to some council chief officials.
She said it was not right that councillors should offer chief officials pay rises of 27 per cent while handing out 1.5 per cent to low-paid staff.
Ms Park praised the Grampian regional Labour group for refusing to support high awards to officials.
Jim Cameron, National Communications Union, criticised the party for being slow to deal with the problems of crime and fear faced by people in council housing schemes.
He said: ‘We keep building massive new police offices, but we never build any where we can get the police into the estates where there is constant lawlessness, where the drug barons rule.’
Speaking to a motion carried by the conference calling for a housing policy review and for ‘massive public investment’ in quality homes for rent, he said he was glad Labour was now addressing the problem, for you could not build decent homes without creating a safe environment to live in.
The party yesterday unveiled its plans to attract new members with less bureaucracy and more political education, campaigning and fun.
During a debate, the party was reminded that one in 20 Labour members is under 25 years old while the average age of the party is 45.
The importance of youth was highlighted by proposals for an annual youth conference and the establishment of youth sections.
The conference condemned what John Lamb, a public employees union official, said were attempts by the new North Ayrshire and Arran NHS Trust to circumvent the law and reduce the pay and conditions of 700 ancillary workers.
JOHN PAUL Front bench: John Smith prepares for his speech, enjoying the sunshine along with supporters Richard and Dorothy Whiting
Call to SNP's left wing sets rousing tone for conference
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
DISILLUSIONED members of the Scottish National Party were urged to quit its ranks and join Labour.
In a rousing speech, the Scottish secretary, Jack McConnell, set the tone for the Inverness conference.
Mr McConnell revelled in the SNP's recent difficulties which he described as a ‘gift’ for Labour.
In a demonstration of the party's renewed confidence, he issued a direct invitation to the left wing of the SNP after their leadership's damaging deal with the Government in last Monday's Commons vote on the Maastricht bill.
He told delegates: ‘A lot of good people, good socialists have been deluded into joining the SNP in the last few years because they thought that was the best way to defeat the Tory government.
‘This conference says to those people this weekend: ‘In the light of what's happened this week come into the Labour Party.
If you want to campaign for socialist policies against this government, join the Labour party.
Leave the SNP, you'll be welcome with open arms into our ranks’.’
Earlier, in one of the best speeches by an outgoing party chairman in recent years, Anne McGuire added her voice to chorus of attacks on the SNP's action.
She said: ‘Scots can spot a shabby sell-out when they see it even when couched in sham patriotic language.
If the SNP are serious about co-operation they should show willing by investing the same energy they use to attack us to attack the Conservative government.’
In what she acknowledged was a difficult year for the Scottish party, Mrs McGuire admitted the party had yet to fully come to terms with the election defeat last April.
She argued for party members to turn their attention to policy and organisational issues in order to meet the challenges of the next century.
She called for greater clarity in party policy and less concentration on image, and identified two areas which the party needed to examine more closely: women's representation and links with the trade unions.
Lib Dems were close to a deal on Maastricht
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
THE Liberal Democrats were prepared to do a deal which could have rescued the Government from its humiliating defeat in last week's Maastricht rebellion.
An agreement which could have secured the votes of the party's 21 MPs was scuppered only because of a row over Wales.
The Government lost by 22 votes.
If the Liberal Democrats had voted with the Government rather than against, John Major would have been spared the embarrassment of defeat and the delay to the Maastricht Bill because of the consequential need for a report stage.
Even abstention would have put the Government within a whisker of victory.
The Scottish National Party has been vilified by Labour for its decision to join the Government lobbies after securing an understanding from Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, which will give Scotland at least four seats on the European Community committee of the regions.
The three SNP MPs justified the decision on the grounds that the deal secures representation for each of the main four political parties in Scotland and prevents Mr Lang from directly appointing ‘creatures of his own party’.
The Liberal Democrats were seeking three places on the 24-member body, which is to play a consultative role in securing adequate resources for the EC's regional communities.
In backroom negotiations while similar talks were taking place with the SNP, they demanded one place from Scotland, one from England and one from Wales.
But the Government had already done a deal giving the Welsh nationalists, Plaid Cymru, a guaranteed place and were determined to keep two others reserved for the main parties, Labour and the Tories.
Alec Carlisle, the leader of the Welsh Liberal Democrats — who gained half as much again in terms of votes as PC — vetoed the deal, making it clear his position was on the line.
A Liberal Party spokesman refused to be drawn on the price the Government wanted if it had met the demands, saying that, since the deal fell through, it was hypothetical.
The latest revelation about the Government's courting of minority parties came amid persistent speculation at Westminster that, on the Europe question, Mr Major has lost control and is effectively running a minority Government.
That view was strengthened by the Government's decision to back off from Thursday's confrontation with its own rebels out of fear of another defeat.
There is renewed speculation that a referendum may present the Government with the only practical way out of the Maastricht quagmire, in spite of fresh assurances from the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, that the European Communities (Amendment) Bill would survive sufficiently intact to allow ratification of the treaty.
Downing Street confirmed that Mr Major was aware of whispers that dissatisfaction with his leadership could provoke a ‘stalking horse’ challenge in the autumn.
A spokesman said he was ignoring the rumours.
Stress on ‘P-word’ in Clarke's crime plan
A TOUGH new blueprint to crack down on crime, with the accent on punishment, was unveiled yesterday by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke.
‘I want more emphasis on the fear of deterrents than the fear of crime,’ he said.
‘Unlike the Labour Party we are not afraid to use the P-word — punishment.’
He told the Conservative western area conference in Weston-super-Mare of his plans to root out crime.
‘We do not want those probation workers who confuse understanding with justification.
We know that you can understand all you like but in the end offenders must face their personal responsibility.
Mr Clarke set out his plans.
He:
Vowed again that he would increase the top penalty for causing death by dangerous driving to ten years.
Denounced ‘designer violence’ on TV, warning programme-makers that they cannot avoid the issue by raising the bogey of censorship.
Promised a prison service to punish and rehabilitate.
‘The public want to see the courts pass sentences that are just and to do this the courts must use the powers this Government has given them.
‘The record shows that we have given the courts the tools to do the job and that Labour has not supported us.’
He vowed to monitor very closely the working of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 to ensure that:
Longer sentences can be passed for violent and sex crimes;
All prisoners serve at least half of their sentence in prison, rather than a third as before;
All prisoners serving a year or more will be put on licence when released and supervised up to the three-quarter point of their sentence and, for some sex offenders until the end of their sentence;
All prisoners will be returned to custody to serve the rest of their sentence if before that sentence expires they commit a further imprisonable offence.
Later the shadow home secretary, Tony Blair called on the Government to establish a new sentencing council to provide greater consistency and end the ‘sentencing lottery’.
— PA
EDINBURGH Investigators look at airport death
THE Air Accidents Investigation Branch of the Department of Transport yesterday announced that it was investigating the accident at Edinburgh Airport on Thursday night when Gulzar Sattar, 32, a technical supervisor, of Harvie Avenue, Newton Mearns, died.
He was killed by a propeller when manning a ground unit which was being used to help prepare an Air UK Fokker 27 aircraft for a flight to Leeds-Bradford Airport.
GRANGEMOUTH Three in court on murder charge
THREE men appeared in court yesterday charged with beating a man to death in Grangemouth.
James Brown, 26, of Wallace Street, Alloa; Kenneth Greenhill, 25, of Norwood Crescent, Alloa, and Stuart Greenhill, 23, of Waverley Crescent, Grangemouth, appeared in private at Falkirk Sheriff Court accused of murdering Stuart Mains, 27, of Stevenson Street, Grangemouth, on 7 March.
They made no plea and were remanded in custody for seven days.
GLASGOW Man dies in two-car smash
A 23-YEAR-OLD man, Matthew Burns, of Torrigay Street, Milton, Glasgow, was killed in a two-car collision on the Stockiemuir road, Milngavie, yesterday.
Two women in the second car went home after treatment for minor injuries at the Western Infirmary.
The crash at High Craigton, around 8am, blocked the road for several hours.
LOTHIAN Region reports 430 assaults on staff
STAFF in Lothian Region suffered a total of 430 assaults last year, a council report revealed yesterday.
The social work department bore the brunt of the violence between December 1991 and November 1992, with 272 incidents recorded.
In education there were 141 assaults during the period.
The figures compare with a total of 448 incidents in the previous year.
Councillor is censured for removing keys
A REGIONAL councillor has been censured for removing three sets of keys from a district council's offices.
Tom McAughtrie, Labour group leader on Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council, claims he took them to show lack of security in the building.
‘It is a storm in a teacup,’ he added.
The incident, which took place on 3 March, was discussed in private this week by members of Nithsdale District Council in Dumfries.
They approved a motion ‘condemning the actions’ of a member of the regional council who ‘removed items of property from the district council chambers with no knowledge, authority or assent of the council.’
Driver jailed for killing jogger
A DRIVER who caused the death of a 16-year-old jogger while his blood alcohol was more than twice the limit was jailed for 18 months yesterday.
Alexander Ballantine, 51, who was found guilty of driving dangerously by a jury after a trial at Dingwall Sheriff Court last month, was also banned from driving for five years.
The victim's mother later attacked the sentence as being too lenient and said she is considering an appeal.
Ballantine, of Mossat House, Aultbea, had admitted causing the death of Louis Innes-Loo by driving carelessly on the Poolewe to Aultbea road and while over the limit.
He had denied the alternative and more serious charge of driving dangerously.
Sheriff Donald Booker-Millburn, who deferred sentence until yesterday for background reports, said a prison term was the most appropriate sentence.
Louis, an all-round sportsman and only child, was struck while jogging at the edge of the road on 13 July.
He was on a visit to his mother's home at Glen Nairn, Londubh, Poolewe, during a holiday from boarding school in Fort Augustus.
The trial heard Ballantine's Volvo car struck Louis after mounting a grass verge as he overtook a lorry on the outskirts of Poolewe.
The vehicle then careered across the road, down a 4ft embankment and stopped on the beach.
The boy was killed instantly and Ballantine was seen later crying a few yards away from his body.
The defence solicitor, Jack Gowans, said Ballantine has a drink problem but is a kind, intelligent and caring man.
He said he was now a broken and sorry man whose life is virtually in tatters.
His marriage has broken up, he rarely sees his teenage daughter and he faces a bleak future.
Afterwards, Louis's widowed mother, Catherine Innes, 43, said: ‘For taking a young boy's life, 18 months is not enough.
My husband died 11 years ago and I built my world around Louis.
I cannot see what will happen in the future at the moment.’
The case made Scottish legal history as it was the first prosecution brought under the new Section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988.
The section, introduced last July — less than two weeks before the accident — made it a specific offence for a driver to cause death by careless driving and while over the drink-drive limit.
ORKNEY Call for helicopter to survey shipping
ORKNEY Harbours Authority is calling for a helicopter to be based on the islands for rescue work and pollution control, following the Braer oil tanker disaster in Shetland.
A helicopter, the authority said, would not only help the speedy identification of vessels which fail to respond to radio requests for information as they pass through the Pentland Firth, but would also carry out oil pollution surveillance flights.
Call to restrict routes for hazardous cargo
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
SCOTTISH Natural Heritage has called for all ships carrying hazardous cargo to be banned from the Minches and Fair Isle Channel.
Following the Braer disaster, the Government's adviser on environmental issues also recommends that shipping is routed clear of the Western Isles and the outlying islands, including St Kilda and North Rona.
SNH, in its submission to Lord Donaldson's inquiry on the prevention of pollution from merchant shipping, identifies measures which it claims are vital to the protection of Scotland's marine and coastal environments.
After leaving port, tankers and other vessels with hazardous cargo should exit coastal waters by agreed safe routes and remain well away from all coasts until they reach their destination.
SNH says the routing should be mandatory, not voluntary as presently proposed.
The agency calls for radar to be installed to cover the whole Scottish coast, and says tanker masters should be required to report significant failures to the Coastguard immediately they happen.
The SNH chairman, Magnus Magnusson, said: ‘It is essential that we focus every effort towards prevention, rather than cure of accidental pollution.’
SNH stresses the importance of minimising pollution from minor accidents and daily operations.
The submission states: ‘Routine spillages and other mishaps pose an insidious threat to our seas and coasts every bit as serious as those arising from dramatic events like the wreck of the Braer.’
The Merchant Navy officers' union, NUMAST, in its submission to the Donaldson inquiry, claimed yesterday that some tankers sail with crews unable to steer or understand basic safety rules.
The union claimed:
Crews cannot understand commands.
Foreign officers and ratings cannot understand collision prevention rules.
Crew members cannot steer or tie knots.
Foreign officers could not operate radar and other navigational equipment.
‘It's no good building safe ships and sending them on routes away from sensitive areas if they are then inadequately crewed and run by shady, cut-throat operators,’ said the NUMAST general secretary, John Newman.
‘Cost, not competence, is too often the dominant factor in the crewing of ships.
When evidence shows that some 80 per cent of accidents at sea arise through human error, that is totally unacceptable.’
The fishing ban imposed around parts of Shetland following the Braer oilspill is expected to be lifted within weeks, according to the Scottish Office fisheries minister, Sir Hector Monro.
He suggested the fishing ban in at least some areas could be lifted by April.
Sir Hector, who was in Shetland yesterday for the fourth time this year, said monitoring of water and fish samples around the islands would continue for as long as was necessary.
There were signs of steady improvement.
Sir Hector was in Lerwick to open the refurbished and extended fishmarket.
Trust will help to improve training of care workers
A TRUST is being set up in Scotland to help to improve the way a wide range of social problems are handled, writes Bryan Christie.
It aims to raise £50,000 to provide training bursaries for social workers, teachers and health care professionals who often have to deal with the consequences of violence and abuse.
The Sutherland Trust was launched at a ceremony in Edinburgh last night.
It has been set up in association with the Scottish Institute of Human Relations in honour of the institute's founder, the late Dr JD (Jock) Sutherland.
It will enable professional workers to draw on the training in psycho-dynamic learning and development available at the institute.
The initiative is seen as important, coming at a time when social problems such as depression and suicide, increased violence and child abuse of all kinds are increasing.
The importance of training was emphasised by Lord Clyde when he reported on the child abuse inquiry in Orkney, recommending an extra year of training for social workers.
That was subsequently rejected by the Government but the institute is now offering counselling training, designed specifically for such professionals.
Drug ran out, FAI is told
A LONG-STAY patient died after a private nursing home ran out of his medicine, an inquiry heard yesterday.
A chemist's shop where drugs were ordered was closed because it was a Sunday, a nurse said.
William Stockton, 32, of Iona Court, Govan, Glasgow, died the next day, the fatal accident inquiry at Paisley Sheriff Court was told, from heart failure and an epileptic fit, in September, l991.
Nurse Ian Ballantyne, 26, alleged that Mr Stockton had gone without his medicine on previous occasions.
He had been moved from the Royal Alexandria Hospital, Paisley, to the private Alexandra Nursing Home almost a year earlier having suffered brain damage after a stabbing incident.
Mr Ballantyne said that he ran out of a drug used to control Mr Stockton's epileptic fits.
He said: ‘I forgot to sign the card index that I had administered the drug and I could not order more because it was a Sunday.’
He denied the medicine ran out on the Saturday, a day earlier.
He told William Mackay, the solicitor acting for the dead man's family, that he discussed the shortage of drugs with other nurses.
He was the only nurse qualified to administer drugs, though care assistants were on duty.
He said: ‘There were 22 patients, some of them confused and it was a heavy workload.
It took me more than an hour to give out the medicines.’
He claimed that his governing body, the UK Central Council for Nurses and Midwives, recommended that at least two nurses gave out the drugs to patients.
The hearing was adjourned until 25 March.
Strathclyde is Scotsman debate winner
A TEAM from Strathclyde University is this year's winners of The Scotsman Scottish Inter Varsity Debating Tournament.
Tommy Tonner, 19, a third-year law student from Motherwell, and Alison Brolls, 21, a fourth-year law student from Bishopbriggs, swept the honours in the final at their university in Glasgow last night against teams from Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow universities.
Ms Brolls, who was formerly vice-president and debates convener of Strathclyde students' union, also won the prize for best individual speaker.
The Strathclyde pair were finalists in the Observer International Mace debating competition last week.
STIRLING Father flies to help death car survivor
A 12-YEAR-OLD boy, who survived in a fume-filled car in which his mother and eight-year-old sister died, was still recovering in hospital yesterday.
David Cairns, from Renfrewshire, was taken to Stirling Royal Infirmary early on Thursday after the car was found on a track leading to a farm near Balfron in Stirlingshire.
His father, who is serving with the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders in Germany and who was estranged from his wife, flew home yesterday to be with his son.
Man gets five years for 12-in knife attack
A MOTORIST who went out for a drive in his new car ended up at death's door after a knife attack in the street.
Surgeons were surprised that Daniel Kelly survived the assault, the High Court in Edinburgh heard yesterday.
The 12in knife blade which was plunged into his buttock entered his abdominal cavity.
When Mr Kelly was taken into Monklands General Hospital, he was at the point of death.
A litre of blood was found in his abdominal cavity.
Yesterday his attacker, James Brown, 35, c/o an address at Loanhead Road, Newarthill, Lanarkshire, was jailed for five years.
His case had been remitted from the Sheriff Court at Hamilton to the High Court for sentence.
Passing sentence, Lord Ross, the Lord Justice Clerk, told Brown: ‘The court has repeatedly said that a very serious view will be taken of assaults with a knife.
I am surprised that this case was not indicted in the High Court.’
Brown was found guilty after trial of assaulting Mr Kelly, 23, by punching and kicking him about the head and body, seizing hold of him, stabbing him on the body with a knife and to the danger of his life.
The attack took place in Carfin Road, Newarthill, on 23 April last year.
 Roderick Macdonald, QC, prosecuting, told the High Court the victim had tried to drive between two parked cars.
There were people standing in his way.
He got out to speak to them and an argument started which led to a fight.
Mr Kelly, a slater-plasterer ran off but found himself in a dead end.
At one point there were five people attacking him and he was being punched and kicked.
Mr Macdonald said the most significant thing was that Brown had gone back to his car nearby and returned to the fight armed with the knife which had a 12in blade.
He then stabbed Mr Kelly in the backside with the knife which penetrated to a depth of four to six inches.
Allan Muir, defence counsel, told the court that Brown had no previous convictions for violence.
Brown smiled and gave a thumbs up sign to the public benches as he left the dock.
More GPs opt for fundholding
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
ALMOST 700,000 Scots will be patients of fundholding family practices in the coming year as interest increases in a scheme once strongly opposed by doctors.
The number of fundholding general practices in Scotland is set to rise to 76, covering one patient in every eight in the country.
At a meeting yesterday of the Scottish Association of GP Fundholders at Falkirk, Scotland's health minister, Lord Fraser, said: ‘It is clear momentum is growing.’
He disputed claims by some doctors that fundholding was leading to the establishment of a two-tier service and added: ‘The achievements of pioneering fundholders among you have been impressive.
They include many examples which prove an immediate beneficial impact on patient care.’
Under the fundholding arrangements, doctors are given their own budgets to spend.
They contract with hospitals to buy services on behalf of patients and can use any surpluses to invest in the practice.
In the coming year, changes are being made which will increase the range of the scheme.
Fundholders will be able to buy additional services for their patients including some mental health provision, chiropody, dietetics, district nursing and health visiting.
‘These new arrangements will allow fundholders to provide a wide range of innovative services for their patients.
These improvements will provide the best arguments for fundholding and are the hallmarks of its success,’ Lord Fraser said.
Awards for men who saved couple from blaze
By Susan Dean
TWO men who braved flames and choking smoke to rescue a Motherwell couple from their blazing home were yesterday given Firemaster's Commendations for ‘courageous and unselfish actions’ by Strathclyde Fire Brigade.
Off-duty police constable David Crowe was visiting his parents in the town's Coalhall Avenue in October last year when fire broke out in the house next door.
He ran to the back door, found a man lying on the floor and dragged him out.
PC Crowe was then joined by a neighbour, Hamish Fulton, but the two were beaten back from trying to get to the man's wife by thick black smoke.
The two men ran round to the front door, broke down the door with a sledge hammer and went upstairs, calling for the missing woman.
They finally found her lying in bed in a smoke-filled bedroom, and helped her to safety.
Without PC Crowe and Mr Fulton's actions the couple's lives could have been lost, according to the citation awarded to the two men at a ceremony in brigade headquarters at Hamilton.
More than 20 officers, each with 20 years service, were awarded long-service medals.
Generator pulls plug on coal haulage contract
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
THOUSANDS of rail freight jobs came under threat yesterday when the English electricity generator, PowerGen, announced it was cancelling its coal haulage contract with British Rail.
PowerGen, which along with the other English generator, National Power, makes up 50 per cent of BR's freight business, said the contract would be cancelled from next spring when BR privatisation is due to get under way.
While railway workers in England and Wales would suffer the brunt of redundancies, any severe job losses would be bound to have a knock-on effect in Scotland.
Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the biggest rail union, the Railway, Maritime and Transport Workers' Union, said that if BR lost the contract it would be a ‘devastating blow not only to the railways but also for the environment’.
He said it was obscene that PowerGen could cause anguish and anxiety in the families of 6,000 staff working for Trainload Freight and added: ‘There will be a public outrage if the Government does not act to ensure that the traffic stays with the railways.’
Mr Knapp estimated that the transfer of this amount of coal would add one million extra lorry movements to the already congested roads.
‘The Secretary of State announced measures to the Commons on 2 February to encourage freight transport to the railways.
I would urge him to use those measures now before the whole of BR's freight carrying capability collapses,’ he added.
However, BR said it was confident of persuading PowerGen to rethink its plans.
Officially, a spokesman for Trainload Freight sector said BR was in negotiation with PowerGen about a new contract, but it is understood that BR sees the contract cancellation as merely a negotiation ploy and feels a new deal could be struck.
In 1992-93, Trainload Freight expected to carry 18.35 million tonnes of freight for PowerGen, but that figure is now likely to be as high as 19.6 million tonnes.
‘We are carrying more tonnes for PowerGen than we expected, so we must be doing something right,’ said the Trainload Freight spokesman.
Dying cancer victim to give evidence at home
By Susan Dean
A DYING Ayrshire cancer victim, Alfred McTear, is to give evidence for his courtroom damages battle against two tobacco companies in his home next week because of worsening health.
Doctors have given Mr McTear, 48, a former smoker, only a short time to live, but his case — which will open the floodgates of claims if he is successful — will take months to be heard in court.
A special commission which would have been held at the end of the month has had to be brought forward because of Mr McTear's deteriorating condition.
It will now will be held in the front room of his home in Cherrywood Drive, Beith, on Tuesday, in the presence of the commissioner, QCs, junior counsel, solicitors and shorthand writer.
His solicitor, Cameron Fyfe, said: ‘The court recognises that Mr McTear will not survive to see his case to its completion, as this process could take several years.
‘The commission will act to all intents and purposes like a court within Mr McTear's front room, and this step will allow the case to continue after my client's death.’
Mr McTear, a father of three, is suing Imperial Tobacco for £500,000, for its failure to print health warnings on the cigarette packets in the 1960s.
He claims he would not have started if there had been warnings.
Rustlers strike again on south-west farms
RUSTLERS have struck at a farm in south-west Scotland, stealing 11 in-calf cows valued at more than £11,000.
The raid on Culquha Farm, Ringford, near Castle Douglas, brings to more than £30,000 the value of sheep, cattle and horses stolen in Dumfries and Galloway over the last 12 months.
Police have mounted a series of operations to try to catch the rustling gangs, some of whom are thought to travel from various parts of the country.
They target remote farms in the south-west with Dumfriesshire and the Stewartry worst affected.
An attempt to steal horses two weeks ago near Thornhill was thwarted when the raiders were disturbed.
Police and Scottish National Farmers Union officials in Dumfries and Galloway are urging farmers to set up farm watch schemes in an attempt to combat the attacks.
Some have already been formed at Lockerbie, Wigtown and  Eskdalemuir but Scotland's smallest police force is urging others to the same.
‘It is now a very serious situation throughout the region,’ said a police spokesman at Castle Douglas, where officers are investigating the latest raid.
The 11 in-calf cross-cows, mostly a red-brown colour, were taken from a shed between the 1 and 10 March.
‘The raiders must have had a large vehicle to transport the cattle which are valued at more than £1,000 each,’ the spokesman added.
Big unions want more cash spent on public transport
By Denny Macgee
SCOTLAND's two largest trade unions yesterday called for increased investment in public transport after a study which reaffirmed that Scotland has the lowest level of car ownership in Britain.
The survey, commissioned by GMB Scotland, shows that 42 per cent of Scottish households do not have a car and that a majority of the Scottish population are either totally or partially dependent on public transport.
In Glasgow the figure rises to 65 per cent of houses without a car, in Dundee it is 52 per cent, in Edinburgh 46 per cent and in Aberdeen 40 per cent .
The highest ratio of car owners per head of population was in Gordon where only 16 per cent of households did not have a car.
The figures compare with 23.9 per cent in the south-east of England.
Willie Queen, Scottish regional secretary of the TGWU, said: ‘This study shows that for a country like Scotland to function properly, an integrated and high-quality public transport system is not a luxury, it is a necessity.’
Mr Queen said that the unions were calling on everyone, MPs, local authorities and the public at large to join in opposing the privatisation of the railways and the piecemeal destruction of bus services by deregulation.
Investment in public transport was an investment in Scotland's future.
The TGWU will outline details of what must be done to improve Scotland's transport systems in a motion to the Labour Party's Scottish conference in Inverness today.
Robert Thomson, Scottish secretary of the GMB, said the study was prompted by persistent complaints from  shiftworkers about difficulties in getting to and from work late at night, early in the morning and at weekends.
The results, he added, vindicated their members' concern about the reductions in public transport.
‘Conservative Party political dogma should have no place in determining our vital public transport system.’
Robert Thomson: study prompted by complaints
Marriage to vanishing groom null
A MUSLIM woman who has not seen her bridegroom since the day of a registrar's office wedding had her marriage annulled yesterday by a Scottish judge.
Azra Sultana's family claim she was the victim of a fraud over her arranged marriage to Azhar Ahmed.
The couple went through a civil marriage ceremony in Dundee on 11 January last year.
Ms Sultana, 34, met her husband for the first time that day.
Her brother, Mohammed Bhatti, 33, told Lord Osborne at the Court of Session yesterday: ‘My family and sister are the victim of some sort of fraud.
That man used my sister to obtain a visa.’
Ms Sultana told the judge that she believed that she would only be truly married when she went through a religious ceremony in a mosque according to her faith.
A formal ceremony had been scheduled to take place in May but never went ahead.
The court was told that her appearance before the registrar was solely to comply with the formalities of Scots law.
Ms Sultana, of Lawrence Street, Dundee, said her family was approached in 1989 by Ahmed's family to arrange a marriage between them.
They did not meet prior to the civil marriage ceremony and spoke only briefly then.
Ms Sultana said that before the registrar's office wedding Mr Ahmed, of Heather Road, Birmingham, asked her family for her British passport and a copy of it was forwarded to him.
She told the judge that she now believed that Mr Ahmed, a Pakistani national, used the passport copy and subsequent marriage certificate to remain in this country.
Her brother Mr Bhatti, of Lawrence Street, Dundee, told Lord Osborne that under their faith a couple were not considered to be married until they had gone through a religious ceremony before a Mullah.
He said the registrar's office ceremony was ‘a formality, not a proper marriage ceremony’.
Mr Ahmed had gone back to Birmingham and the family heard that he was living with another woman.
Mr Bhatti said that Mr Ahmed subsequently told him: ‘My job was to get a visa which I have got now.
You can do whatever you like.
I used your sister…tough luck.’
Lord Osborne said he was satisfied on the evidence that when Ms Sultana went through the formalities of the civil marriage ceremony she did not truly consent to be married to Mr Ahmed.
He decided that the marriage was null and void.
Threat to rail jobs as top coal contract cancelled
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
THOUSANDS of rail freight jobs came under threat yesterday when the English electricity generator, Power-Gen, announced it was cancelling its coal haulage contract with British Rail.
Only option left in Hong Kong
CHRIS PATTEN, the governor of Hong Kong, gives the impression that he has run out of patience.
He wants to press on, he tells the world, with his plans to extend democracy in the colony before its 1997 handover to China.
Mr Patten, however, is engaged in more than simply relieving his own exasperation at Beijing's procrastination.
He is seeking, in a manner that appears to lack the kind of subtlety that comes as second nature to China's rulers, to call their bluff.
Out have gone his recently acquired diplomat's ways and in have been re-instated those more direct and bolder habits he learned on his journey to the higher reaches of Britain's Conservative Party.
The old men in Beijing may not be sure of how to respond to the tactics that such behaviour makes possible; certainly, previous governors chose to give them little experience of them, preferring the old, almost hallowed, practice of kowtowing to them.
The franchise proposals were first published last October.
The Chinese did not like them then and, it seems, entertain no warmer feeling for them now.
Giving the people of Hong Kong more democratic influence is the last development they want.
Indeed, they would prefer that any agreements they reach with the UK should be the result of direct exchanges between governments without any contribution from the individuals to be affected; they further argue that the role of the colony's legislative council is consultative only and that it has no legal authority.
Disabusing them of these notions is what Mr Patten is about.
The UK wants the citizens of its colony to be involved in settling their future and to give their legislators the final word on any deal.
From a British perspective this seems little to ask for, though the Chinese might be justified in wondering why such democratic principles were not applied long ago.
Even now, of course, the governor is far from offering a universal franchise: that degree of democracy is some way off.
Yet that weakness makes it extremely difficult for Patten to make any concessions on his plan.
He must persist with his present course.
True, his critics would rather he settled for an easier life.
There is, too, some uncertainty as to how much support his present strategy receives from the Foreign Office; apparently, not all of its advisers back the brash approach.
Some in the colony's business community share that view since following it in policy terms would allow them to continue their prosperous trade links across the border.
But in truth Patten has, at this stage, no other serious option.
He cannot delay any more for that would reduce his credibility among his Hong Kong constituents; they would be justified, moreover, in thinking that further waiting would sacrifice their interests.
Pushing on with his plans is, therefore, his best means of keeping faith with them; it is also the only sure way of establishing just what Beijing is prepared to do.
He really has no choice but to call China's bluff.
General takes on task of taming volatile valley As Kashmir gets a new governor, Rahul Bedi looks at the way three years of violence has affected the lives of people in the troubled state
INDIA'S troubled northern state of Kashmir, where militants have been waging an armed struggle for independence since 1990, has a new governor.
General KV Krishna Rao, a former army chief, replaces Girish Saxena to co-ordinate anti-terrorist operations by the army and paramilitary forces and organise elections in the state, where around 6,000 people have died in militant-related violence over the past three years.
More than 120,000 soldiers have been battling the militants in the Kashmir valley, supported by locals, who look upon the security forces as a vengeful occupying force which must be opposed.
By appointing Gen Rao, the Indian central government in New Delhi hopes to create a situation in which early elections can be held.
But the atmosphere in the Kashmir valley seems far too volatile for any talk of elections.
The road from the well fortified airport at Srinagar, the state's summer capital, to the town centre is lined with armed soldiers every few hundred yards.
Debris from buildings blown up by militants lies strewn between houses vandalised by the security forces in their search for Kashmiri militants.
The chatter of machine gun fire is frequently heard in Srinagar after dark and the sandbagged pickets of the security forces lining Srinagar's roads, once packed with tourists, are the liveliest centres of activity.
At night no light shows in the elegant houses on Srinagar's boulevards.
They have been padlocked by owners fleeing militant kidnappings, extortions and crackdowns by the security forces.
Those unfortunate enough to be carried away after a crackdown are uncertain whether they will return alive.
Hundreds of houseboats, which once sustained over 350,000 people, lie deserted along the picturesque Dal Lake.
Their owners, once amongst Srinagar's most prosperous, now vandalise their houseboats, selling antique carpets and artefacts for a pittance.
Frequent curfew and the security forces make trade almost impossible.
Young Kashmiris, suspected of being militants, stir out reluctantly, fearing detention and interrogation.
Ever since Kashmiri Muslim fundamentalists launched their armed struggle for independence in January 1990, tens of thousands have fled the valley leaving homes they have occupied for generations.
For Kashmir's three million Muslims the security forces are an occupying army.
And paramilitary soldiers, recruited from across India, are bewildered by the hatred locals feel for anything Indian.
Officials say over 6,000 people have died in militant related killings over the past three years.
These include 1,500 civilians, 2,300 militants and 520 security forces personnel.
Over 7,000 assault rifles, 500 rocket launchers and several tonnes of explosives have been recovered.
Girish Saxena says the situation is ‘lethal but contained’.
He says there is no tidy way to fight a proxy war sponsored by Pakistani-trained militants under civil law.
He also admits another 1,000 people have been killed in cross-fire between paramilitary troops and militants.
Locals, however, say this is a euphemism for innocent people being apprehended and tortured by the security forces before being shot.
Security officials concede the enormity of their task as there are around 4,000 militants in the Valley trained in the use of arms and explosives by Pakistan while another 3,000 are waiting for the winter snows to melt so they can cross over into India from Pakistan.
Security officials privately admit they are executing a ‘holding operation’ in Kashmir with commanders from several militant groups including the largest Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, the JKLF and the Hizb-ul-Mujahideen freely roaming Srinagar's streets, choosing their targets and the venue and time of their rendezvous with journalists and television crews.
The paramilitary control the main roads but rarely venture into the  labyrinthine streets across the Kashmir valley, controlled by militants.
By militant diktat no Kashmiri pays income or sales tax nor electricity or water bills.
It is an open secret in Srinagar that the security forces do not trust the local Kashmiri policemen or bureaucrats as many are militant supporters.
Pakistani irregulars invaded Kashmir — then an independent kingdom ruled by a Hindu king — in October 1948 after which its ruler acceded to India and troops were moved in from New Delhi to check the invasion.
By then, however, the invaders had already occupied a third of the state — which they still hold — before the UN brokered a ceasefire.
The UN observers office in Srinagar, manned by at least six officers is the world's oldest.
A UN resolution followed calling for a  plebiscite to decide Kashmir's future.
This has never been carried out and Pakistan and India fought another indecisive war over Kashmir in 1965.
Trouble erupted in January 1990 when Kashmiri militants exchanged five militants for the kidnapped daughter of the then home minister.
Encouraged by the Centre's capitulation, militants mounted attacks on government officials, burnt the Indian flag and declared their independence.
In response thousands of troops moved in and the war of attrition began.
Mandela in peace gesture From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
NELSON MANDELA, president of the African National Congress, announced last night that he would attend today's funeral of six children killed in an apparent ANC attack in Natal ten days ago.
He will share a platform with the leader of the rival Inkatha Freedom Party, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, in the Inkatha-controlled village of Mboyi, 30 miles from Natal's capital, Pietermaritzburg.
Yesterday Mr Mandela began a three-day tour of the Natal Midlands, cockpit of the virtual civil war between the ANC and Inkatha which has claimed thousands of lives over the last three years.
Speaking of his intention to attend the funeral, he said he hoped it would send out a signal for peace and democracy in the region.
The children were killed when masked gunmen opened fire on the minibus taking them to school.
Three youths arrested in connection with the attack are ANC members.
Another 14 people have since died in two apparent revenge attacks on vehicles in the area.
Earlier yesterday an Inkatha spokesman had said he did not think Mr Mandela would dare to attend the funeral.
It would be ‘extremely insensitive,’ he said.
It will be the first time in more than two years that the ANC leader has shared a platform with Chief Buthelezi.
The potential for violence during Mr Mandela's visit was  illustrated when he cancelled a visit to a township outside Ladysmith yesterday after an ANC supporter in the township had been shot dead and another seriously wounded by unknown gunmen.
In Pietermaritzburg Mr Mandela brought traffic to a stop when he went ‘walk-about’ in the main street.
Later, at Mooi River, north of Pietermaritzburg, he called on ANC supporters to ‘let bygones be bygones and forget old grudges against Inkatha.’
His appeal for reconciliation was in marked contrast to the attitude of the Stalinist leader of the ANC in the Natal Midlands, Harry Gwala, who in interviews has said: ‘We will kill Inkatha if they attack.
We won't greet them with Bibles.’
North Korea pulls out of nuclear arms treaty
COMMUNIST North Korea, suspected of building an atomic arsenal, said yesterday it was pulling out of a world agreement on limiting nuclear arms rather than face international inspection of secret military sites.
The Stalinist leadership said it was scrapping its membership of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which limits the spread of military nuclear technology.
‘The withdrawal from the NPT is a well-justified self-defensive measure against the nuclear war manoeuvres of the United States,’ North Korea said in a statement.
The announcement fuelled the West's already strong apprehensions over North Korea's nuclear capacity and may leave the isolated state's near-bankrupt economy open to retaliatory UN sanctions.
South Korea and Japan expressed grave concern and Seoul's cabinet went into emergency session to discuss counter-measures.
But North Korea threatened to hit back against any sanctions.
‘If measures or sanctions to put pressure on are taken, we will take counter-measures,’ said Pyongyang's ambassador to China, Chu Chang Ju.
‘It would be a foolish dream to use sanctions against (North Korea),’ he told a news conference in Beijing.
Sources at the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna, whose demands to inspect suspected North Korean nuclear facilities prompted the withdrawal from the NPT, said it was unprecedented for a signatory to renege on membership.
South Korea's foreign ministry said: ‘The North's professed reasons for pulling out of the NPT convince no one.
This only heightens the  suspicion that it is developing nuclear arms.’
Japanese leaders urged the North to reconsider, saying the move would have grave repercussions for the entire region.
North Korea, which denies any intention of developing nuclear weapons, says the two suspected sites are non-nuclear military installations and are outside the remit of IAEA inspectors.
The British Government said yesterday it was deeply concerned at North Korea's decision to withdraw from the treaty, saying the move cast doubt on Pyongyang's long-term nuclear intentions.
A Foreign Office spokesman said it was too early to consider sanctions against North Korea but added that Britain would consider what steps to take with other signatory states.
‘North Korea's decision is cause of great concern…and a reason to doubt North Korea's long-term intentions,’ the spokesman said.
Serb soldiers accused at war crimes trial
TWO SERB soldiers accused of war crimes went on trial yesterday in the first attempt by Bosnia's Muslim authorities to bring alleged perpetrators of atrocities to justice.
Borislav Herak, 21, and Sretko Damjanovic, 30, could face a firing squad if found guilty of the charges at their trial in the besieged Bosnian capital of Sarajevo.
They and Damjanovic's wife, who is charged with lesser offences, were led into the packed courtroom in handcuffs amid heavy security and the flash of cameras.
The court, filled with cigarette smoke, was crammed with reporters, Kalashnikov-toting guards, lawyers and members of the public.
Five judges hearing the case wore coats to keep out the cold in the unheated, high-ceilinged room.
Herak, a former soldier in the Bosnian Serb army, is charged with genocide, rape and looting.
His indictment lists 29 individual murders committed between June and October 1992.
It also covers the deaths of some 220 Muslim civilians whose killings Herak is alleged to have witnessed or taken part in.
Among Herak's alleged victims were eight Muslim women who he is charged with raping and murdering.
He has confessed to most of the charges to court investigators and western reporters and maintains he was not coerced into admitting his guilt.
Damjanovic, also a former soldier, is charged with four murders.
He has told reporters he was beaten and tortured into confessing to Bosnian authorities.
The two men were arrested at a Bosnian checkpoint last November when they made a wrong turn while driving through the Serb-held western outskirts of Sarajevo.
Damjanovic's wife, who was in the same car, is charged with harbouring the two and possession of stolen goods.
Herak's detailed admissions have angered and embarrassed rebel Serb authorities.
They question the voluntary nature of his confession and say rapes and murders by their forces are isolated and treated as crimes when detected.
Herak's chilling account of the fate of Muslim women being held prisoner in a motel in Vogosca, six miles north of Sarajevo, has been broadcast repeatedly on Sarajevo television.
The televised footage shows a gaunt, shaven-headed man, looking as much victim as tormentor.
Herak calmly narrates how he and other Serb soldiers were encouraged by their commanders to take Muslim women from the Vogosca motel, rape and then murder them.
‘At last judgment day has come,’ said Naim Kordic, a Bosnian doctor who heads the Sarajevo crisis centre and has treated a number of Muslim rape victims.
The trial is expected to last several weeks and began under heavy security in a city within range of Serb heavy artillery.
Several international human rights and relief organisations charge that Bosnian Serbs have engaged in the systematic rape, torture and murder of civilians during the former Yugoslav republic's 11-month-old war.
Confrontation sharpens as Patten calls China's bluff
By David Wallen, Diplomatic Editor
CONFRONTATION between Hong Kong and China over Governor Chris Patten's democracy proposals took a marked turn for the worse yesterday when the colonial administration ignored Beijing's reservations and published his new democracy blueprint ready to go into law.
The move came as a sign of frustration by Britain and Hong Kong over the way China has protested about the proposals since they were announced last October — but has failed to come up with any alternative ahead of elections already scheduled for 1995.
Hopes had risen on Thursday that China would abandon its block on talks on the proposals and accept Hong Kong government representatives and influence in any negotiating team with Beijing.
But they were ultimately dashed when China insisted that Hong Kong diplomats take second place to British representatives, thus demoting the views of the colony and effectively limiting the talks to the Britain and China.
The Hong Kong stock exchange plummeted as Mr Patten, criticised by businessmen in the colony for rocking its relationship with Beijing's power brokers, called an end to months of behind the scenes wrangling.
The Foreign Office and Downing Street backed Mr Patten and said they were ‘disappointed’ that talks had not emerged, while stressing that the governor's move did not close any options for the future.
Privately British officials believe Mr Patten will now have to endure a barrage of criticism from China over the next few weeks, following Prime Minister Li Peng's report to the 8th National Party Congress next Monday at which he is expected to lambast the colonial administration for trying to subvert China with western-style democracy.
Mr Patten announced his democracy blueprint last October, radically revising Hong Kong's unique functional constituency system, under which different professions and trades vote for their own councillors, and considerably enlarging the electoral base.
He also found ways around previously agreed limits of 20 directly-elected seats to the Legislative Council in 1995.
Mr Patten told legislators: ‘We wished to go the extra mile and give the Chinese side every opportunity to respond.
Unfortunately the outstanding differences have not been resolved and we still have no date for talks.’
He had delayed publishing the proposals four times in the hopes of a rapprochement.
China has said his blueprint, as it stands, violates previous Sino-British agreements.
Any new agreement would have to return to the spirit of those agreements, it insists.
The Chinese have insisted that it is only a matter between sovereign powers but British officials insist that local legislators have the final word on any Sino-British deal.
They have also warned that if Mr Patten proceeds with his plans without China's approval it will replace the colony's government, despite previously promising ‘a high degree of autonomy’ for 50 years after 1997.
In addition Beijing has threatened to void all business contracts signed by the colonial government without China's blessing.
In Britain yesterday Labour attacked Mr Patten, saying it was ‘very disappointed’.
Its Hong Kong spokesman, Alan Rogers, said: ‘If the Chinese were upset before then they are going to be very upset now.’
But the Liberal Democrat leader, Paddy Ashdown, who once lived in the colony, said the governor had taken a series of moves which were supported in the territory and should be supported in Britain.
David Howell, chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee, said China would recognise that ‘destabilising and smashing  Hong Kong is far too high a price to pay for China's hopes in the modern world.’
Protests against Scots-born doctor
STUDENTS protested in Harare yesterday against a Scots-born doctor accused of murdering five patients during experiments.
About 100 students from Zimbabwe University carried placards denouncing Dr Richard Gladwell McGown who was charged in a Harare court last week in connection with experiments in pain control which authorities say killed five patients.
One of the placards said ‘McGown, we are not guinea pigs’ and another called him ‘Dr Poison’.
McGown, 56, was arrested after a parliamentary select committee reported he had admitted to having ‘undertaken experiments without following laid down procedures to discover new ways of managing pain’.
McGown denies the charges.
The committee said the doctor had given morphine overdoses to over 550 people between 1986 and 1992.
It said McGown had ‘admitted that he was particularly interested to find out the sensitivity of black females to morphine when this narcotic is injected epidurally’.
Phone tapping claim bugs Mitterrand
AN official inquiry confirmed yesterday that French journalists and lawyers had been subjected to telephone tapping under President François Mitterrand but said it had not yet determined who had ordered the bugging.
The newspaper Liberation said yesterday that Mr Mitterrand's personal security office had requested more than 100 wiretaps in the mid-1980s.
The report compounded the problems facing the Socialist government just nine days before a general election.
Paul Bouchet, head of the National Control Commission on Security Intercepts, said in a statement: ‘It is clear that…the wiretaps were a severe violation not only of the victims’ private lives but also of the professional secrecy to which journalists and lawyers are entitled in a democratic society.’
But he added that it was too early to try to determine ‘the exact nature of the wiretaps and the identity of those responsible.’
Liberation published documents purporting to show that a since-dissolved security unit bugged the telephones of dozens of people between 1983 and 1986, including journalists, an actress, lawyers and an author.
At least 114 wiretaps were requested for reasons ranging from suspected arms trading to terrorist links or presidential security, but it was not clear if all the taps were actually carried out, the left-wing daily said.
A presidential spokesman declined comment.
Among prominent figures Liberation said the unit had sought to bug were actress Carole Bouquet, writer Jean-Edern Hallier, centrist politician François Froment-Meurice and lawyer Antoine Comte, who defended suspected Irish guerrillas arrested in error.
The paper said Hallier's favourite restaurant and well-known bars from which he made telephone calls were bugged.
Several of the victims said they would file lawsuits for invasion of privacy.
Mr Froment-Meurice said the methods the unit had used were ‘reminiscent of the Greek colonels’.
Aspin targets big US bases
THE US defence secretary, Les Aspin, yesterday recommended closing 31 major domestic military bases and reducing or shutting more than 100 smaller facilities in a move that will cost tens of thousands of jobs.
The Pentagon also said it was closing or reducing operations at another 29 military sites overseas, including 14 in Germany, as part of a plan to shut 42 per cent of US defence operations abroad.
Foreign bases can be closed without congressional approval.
The politically explosive domestic bases plan requires approval by an independent commission, President Bill Clinton and Congress.
It includes closing the naval shipyard at Charleston, South Carolina; the Orlando, Florida, naval training centre, and the Homestead, Florida, Air Force Base.
California would lose eight big bases.
The 29 foreign sites bring to 704 the overseas US installations being closed or reduced since 1990.
Of those, 650 are in Europe.
The defence department predicted that the domestic changes would result in the loss of 57,000 civilian and 24,000 military jobs over a six-year period.
Mr Aspin said the new round of closures would save $3.1 billion a year in defence spending beginning in the year 2000.
On Thursday President Clinton outlined a $20 billion, four-year programme to help workers and communities who lose jobs because of defence cuts.
Sanctions threat as US drops trade talks
THE United States yesterday cancelled talks set for Monday with the European Community over a public procurement dispute and said sanctions were now hard to avoid.
A government official said the US trade representative, Mickey Kantor, had ‘decided to cancel the talks when the EC indicated it had no  flexibility .’
‘The EC said they were not prepared to change their position,’ the official added.
The US negotiators had been due to meet their EC counterparts in Brussels to discuss the dispute over bids for EC utility contracts.
A senior US trade official said the decision to ditch the two-day talks made it more likely that the United States would go ahead with sanctions as it had threatened.
The trade official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said: ‘The sanctions will go into effect on 22 March if there is not a resolution of the problems.
We will be exchanging some information over the next couple of days or week.
Both sides must figure out what next step makes sense.’
Tension beats Mandela plan
HEIGHTENED tension in Natal province forced the ANC leader, Nelson Mandela, to cancel plans to attend the funeral of six children killed in an ambush ten days ago, African National Congress officials said yesterday.
Mr Mandela, who is on a three-day tour of powderkeg areas around the Natal provincial capital Pietermaritzburg, said earlier he planned to attend tomorrow's funeral.
The six children were killed in the first of three road ambushes near the  provincial capital which left 20 people dead since 2 March.
The head of the ANC's main political rival, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party, had also been expected to attend the funeral, giving him and Mr Mandela a rare opportunity to meet.
But ANC officials said that after a meeting with police, Mr Mandela had decided not to attend the funeral because of increased tension in the Table Mountain district, outside Pietermaritzburg.
Mr Mandela told an ANC meeting last night that President FW de Klerk's white minority government was behind the latest wave of political killings in South Africa.
‘The cause of this violence is the state security services…they are using certain organisations as a smokescreen so we cannot have a majority in an election,’ Mr Mandela told supporters.
Black communities around Pietermaritzburg have seen much of the fighting in a brutal turf war between the ANC and Inkatha supporters which flared in 1986, deeply dividing black communities.
Human rights monitors say more than 7,000 people have been killed in Natal province since the fighting began.
Earlier yesterday, Mr Mandela told supporters in Wembezi township, 75 miles west of Pietermaritzburg, that the international community should play a role in setting up an internal peace force.
Speaking in a hastily-erected tent on a dusty football field, Mr Mandela said the United Nations should appoint the commander of the force.
He said South Africa's security forces were unable to deal with the violence, adding: ‘We are calling for the formation of an internal peace force…the only qualification should be that the peace force be composed of people who are committed to democracy in this country.’
Political leaders said the latest killings in Natal province were a deliberate attempt to scuttle the country's fragile democracy talks.
Democracy negotiators are due to start a two-day meeting in Johannesburg on 1 April in a fresh bid to thrash out terms for transition to democracy after more than 300 years of white rule.
CHINA Vice-president dies at 85
THE Chinese vice-president Wang Zhen, an outspoken Marxist hard-liner and one of the last veterans of the Red Army's famous Long March six decades ago, died yesterday in Canton, aged 85.
He had been ill for many months and his five-year term would not have been renewed at the National People's Congress which starts on Monday.
Permission refused for large housing development
Your report (4 March) regarding the proposed housing and golf course development at Archerfield, East Lothian, may have given a misleading impression of the current situation.
The reason why development has not yet proceeded is not the objection by Scottish Natural Heritage, but the refusal of planning permission by Lothian Regional Council because of the impact of a large number of houses in this sensitive location.
The management plan referred to in your report was drawn up by East Lothian District Council for the developers, Parkdale Archerfield Ltd, to attempt to persuade Scottish Natural Heritage to withdraw its objection to the planning application.
However, Parkdale Archerfield Ltd is now in liquidation, and its appeal against the refusal of planning permission is being promoted by consultants working in effect on behalf of the company's principal creditor, the Co-operative Bank.
A public inquiry is due to be held in August.
The liquidator's objective in pursuing the appeal is clearly to maximise the sale price of the estate for the benefit of the bank.
What is equally clear is that the developer would not be Parkdale Archerfield as suggested in your report.
It is significant that the parties to the management agreement do not include the owners of most of the affected coastline: a family trust, the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers, and the owner of Marine Villa.
Perhaps these people feel, as do members of the local communities, that the coastline would not be in such urgent need of ‘protection’ were it not for the imminent threat of creation of a housing development, larger than the existing village of Dirleton, adjacent to it.
Archerfield: the derelict main house on the East Lothian estate
Tyrants and tribs with Ewen MacAskill mug Keeping up the stream of insults
AFTER a week of the Maastricht Bill and ‘taking stock’ on the Scottish constitution, how about something frivolous — assuming that is, that you don't regard Maastricht and ‘taking stock’as frivolous.
The subject is one that MPs indulge in — personal abuse.
It is an inevitable part of Commons life to have insults flying back and forth across the Chamber floor.
It is built for confrontation.
Facing one another hour after hour, it is inevitable there is banter and heckling.
Now most of this is completely predictable to the point of boredom, ritualistic knockabout.
But the last week or so has provided a couple of classics, little exchanges that appear to have nothing to do with policy and everything to do with ego, bitterness and vendetta.
Some are nasty.
How about Sir Nicholas Fairbairn, Conservative MP for Perth and Kinross, attempting to diminish his Scottish Tory colleague, Phil Gallie, by referring to him as Boutros-Boutros Gallie?
That got some cheap laughs.
Or how about Sir George Gardiner, the Thatcherite MP who has been one of the Major Government's most persistent critics?
At Prime Minister's Question Time, he rose to say that apart from Maastricht, he was fully behind the Prime Minister.
Almost everyone laughed.
But the best, and more interesting, came later that day.
Two thugs having a square-go in Glasgow could not have set about one another with any less ferocity than the Scottish Secretary and the Scottish National Party leader did on Tuesday.
Alex Salmond didn't go looking for a fight but Ian Lang gave him one anyway.
Salmond had been the recipient of abuse all that day, mainly from Labour for voting with the Government on  Maastricht the night before.
Relations between Lang and Salmond are not good at the best of times but, given that the SNP had been in the same lobby as the Government the night before, it might have been expected that Lang would have been at least polite.
Instead, Lang opted for maximum damage.
‘First, may I say how glad I was to see the honourable gentleman in the Government lobby last night,’ Lang said.
It was the political equivalent of a 2ft-long stiletto with a poisoned tip and it delighted the Labour and Conservative ranks.
MPs often accuse journalists of being overly simplistic, of personalising politics instead of considering policies.
Are they right?
The Lang versus Salmond exchange suggests the answer is no.
That incident pointed up the hostility between the two and that hostility reflects the political culture of Scotland.
This has been a tale of two countries this week, Scotland and Wales.
In Wales, the nationalists, Plaid Cymru, have been praised by its national newspaper, the Western Mail, for winning a package from the Welsh Secretary, David Hunt, in return for backing the Government on Maastricht.
Salmond was vilified by Labour and parts of his own party for making a similar deal with Lang.
The view is that Salmond was duped, that he was tricked into voting for the Government on Maastricht and got next to nothing in return.
He is aggrieved at the way this has been presented by the Scottish media, including The Scotsman.
The Daily Record portrayed the three Scottish Nationalist MPs as being the Three Stooges.
The SNP version is different.
It claims it secured a substantial deal for Scotland, one that ensured that Lang will not have patronage over the Scottish allocation of seats on the European Committee of the Regions.
The contrast between the treatment of the nationalists by the media in Wales and Scotland is marked.
MPs from Scotland and Wales have been circulating copies of The Scotsman and contrasting these with the treatment by the Western Mail.
So why is there such a contrast?
Was it because, as the SNP believes, the Scottish media is basically biased against it?
I doubt it.
The political culture in Scotland is much more confrontational on the constitutional issue than it is in Wales and the feelings run much deeper.
The hatred between Labour and the SNP in Scotland is not matched in ferocity between Labour and the nationalists in Wales.
The relationship between the nationalists and Tories on a personal level is also rather different.
The frosty duelling between Salmond and Lang is light years away from the cosier relations between Plaid Cymru president, Dafydd Wigley, and Hunt.
Salmond and Lang clearly do not like one another.
It is personal and not explained solely by the fact that Lang has a marginal seat and the SNP is the main competitor.
In contrast, Hunt attended Plaid's Christmas party.
Even John Major, who is a friend of Wigley's, turned up at a Plaid party a few years ago.
It is inconceivable that Lang would drop in on any such social function hosted by the SNP.
It is against the confrontational environment that exists in Scotland that the SNP decision to back the Government must be judged.
The SNP has had Labour doing somersaults for months on Opposition cross-party co-operation.
By voting with the Government, it let Labour walk away.
There were no happier men the next day than the Labour Scottish leadership.
MPs, especially the Government and front-bench spokesmen, frequently engage in abuse in a theatrical way, simply for effect.
It is not heart-felt, and the two opponents will happily chat away out of sight of the cameras afterwards.
The abuse being hurled at the SNP by Labour this week was not theatrical but real.
The tension between Salmond and Lang was equally real.
That, as much as anything, gives lie to the claims that the constitutional issue in Scotland is simply the obsession of the chattering classes.
Labour-SNP link key to change
What a surprise that the Government's ‘taking stock’ exercise was overshadowed by opposition in-fighting.
The SNP voting with Tories is a profound mistake, but Labour overstates its case.
Just like the EC paving motion debate last year, Labour does not adequately consult others when drafting amendments.
Many Labour MPs could not hide their glee at the SNP's action, such is their antipathy to cross-party co-operation.
Labour and the SNP hate each other more than they hate the Tories.
Indeed, they are two sides of the same coin: the inability of the Scots to articulate their feelings and politics, which is then manifest in blind hatred of opponents.
Labour-SNP hatred is more based on the past than present.
There is no difference in values as both are social democrat.
The fundamental difference is Labour sees Scotland as its territory.
Labour, however, is a minority in Scotland in the same way the Tories are in Britain.
Both get their main support from specific areas and confuse the interests of their base with national interests, and thus, party and nation.
What lies behind Tory ‘taking stock’ is just as confused a set of assumptions.
The Tories argue that only a vote for the SNP is a vote for change.
This makes the Tories a part of a majority Unionist coalition.
However, they also argue that only a vote for them is a vote for the Union.
The Tories cannot continue this double-think.
Either they are part of a Unionist majority which includes Labour and Liberal Democrats, or there is only the Tory Union.
If the former, then they have to accept that different unions are possible, devolved, home rule, federal.
The level of debate in Scots politics allows the Tories to get away with such arguments.
Only by Labour-SNP co-operation can change come about.
Labour and SNP, with their out-of-date 1950s visions of Scotland, seem to prefer the certainties of closed minds insulting each other, rather than radical change.
I do not think the people of Scotland are going to put up with such a tepid state of politics for that long.
Women's day
Yesterday was International Women's Day.
All over the world, including Scotland, women held conferences, workshops and seminars on the issues, political and personal which affect and in many cases, devastate their lives and those of their children.
There were also celebrations of significant women and of campaigns progressed.
The Scotsman chose to acknowledge the event by printing a colour photograph of three women in a fashion show.
The photograph was captioned, ‘Three little maids’.
This image represents a tiny fraction of the activities and aspirations of International Women's Day.
It may reassure your readers who need protection from reality, but grown-ups must find it at best sloppy and at worst malicious.
‘Colonialism’
The emotive, unthinking responses to my earlier letter by D J Hollingdale and Roy Morrison (Points of View, today) were prefigured in January 1992 by Tom Nairn in his column.
He said: ‘The mildest of positive discrimination — against, for example, the complete ‘Englishing’ of cultural institutions — must imply concentration camps, ravening gangs of Scotland-first hooligans, and a Georgian-style civil war.’
My wife is English and four of my children live and work in the south of England and consider themselves to be English.
I much enjoyed my 15 years in England and got on well with nearly everyone.
Nor did I deplore English accents; indeed that would be rather silly on the part of a professional linguist.
What I do deplore, and what people everywhere in the Highlands deeply resent, is the English take-over of land, homes and businesses of every kind, while the local people are forced to leave to look for work.
This deplorable situation has come about because no British government has given the people of the  Highlands and Islands the economic support that is given, for example, to Norwegians who live in difficult, out-of-the-way places.
This would have enabled the locals to stay there and preserve their language and culture.
Add to this the fact that our universities and practically all our major cultural institutions are run by English people, and that many of the executive posts in local government and other organisations are occupied by them, and it will be clear that Scotland is rapidly being colonised, indeed being turned into an extension of England.
This is intolerable because the two societies and cultures are utterly different.
It is to no-one's advantage that they should be homogenised.
I realise that the situation must be uncomfortable for some English people in Scotland, but then they have a ready solution.
Since they wish to live in this country, they should study and understand the situation and support the Scottish people's national aspirations.
DG looking dodgy
PERHAPS the most striking aspect of the John Birt affair has been the enthusiasm with which the great and the good of 1980s British television have lined up to kick him when he is down.
Alasdair Milne, one of Mr Birt's more embittered predecessors, offered the intemperate assessment that the BBC director-general's tax arrangements looked ‘monstrous and…beyond belief.’
Sir David Attenborough, naturalist and former BBC2 controller, invoked the craggy ghost of Lord Reith to declare that the BBC's founding father would never have allowed it.
Sir Curtis Keeble, former BBC governor, said the disclosures about Mr Birt's finances should be examined by the corporation's board.
Jeremy Isaacs, former chief executive of Channel Four, challenged Mr Birt to name the mystery secretarial assistant to whom Mr Birt's company paid a £15,000 salary, and who is now widely assumed to have been Mrs Jane Birt.
In a letter to a newspaper earlier this week, Mr Birt adopted the tone of one who was chastened but also slightly puzzled by the uproar over the revelation that the BBC's top executive was not a member of its staff.
Others may share his puzzlement.
Taken individually, the allegations — not all of them substantiated — seem less than devastating.
Many people who work in television — including some of its best-known faces — are self-employed freelances.
Many prominent men, among them several MPs, employ their wives as secretaries, though quite why his BBC secretary was not sufficient to his needs is unclear.
Not everyone with accounts to audit thinks to check the auditor's qualifications.
There are two reasons why Mr Birt's position begins to look vulnerable.
One is that, as David Mellor or several members of the royal family might attest, cumulative disclosures acquire momentum.
Mr Birt's display of candour and remorse has not stopped the seepage, leaving the vague impression the whole story may not yet be known.
The claim that his fiscal precautions netted the Birt household just £810 in 1990-91, for example, might be opened to question if the mystery secretary turned out to be Mrs Birt.
The bigger reason lies in that list of prominent critics.
Mr Birt is not just the director-general.
He is the man who arrived with the reputation, justified or not, of being the Government's avenging angel who was going to put to rights the cosy and costly BBC establishment.
To those who resented that mission, and the presumptions which underlay it, his discomfiture now is just too delicious to resist.
Everything's rosy down at the telecottage Paddy Ashdown's mission was to see hi-tech Orkney in action, Tom Morton explains
THERE is no sign of Paddy Ashdown.
John Ruscoe, dressed in manure-encrusted boots and a plaid shirt, has not seen the Liberal Democrat leader anywhere near his Finstown farm.
But then, he has been checking his lambs, fattening nicely for sale in the byre.
‘We'll get a good price this year, what with the devaluation of the Green pound,’ says the 41-year-old Ruscoe, his Stoke accent resonating across the Orkney landscape.
He is the picture of the Good Life escapee, but the 200-acre farm and picturesque house hide a profitable secret: a full-time job with computer giants ICL, designing and troubleshooting software from a tiny office in his loft.
Ashdown is keen to find out about teleworking, the buzz-word for the Ruscoe phenomenon.
In Orkney, favourite destination for many southerners fleeing the rat race, personal computers and modems are proliferating like the local rabbits.
Ashdown's office will cautiously admit only that the former jungle warrior is on a private visit to the islands, part of a series of nationwide consultations with ‘ordinary people’.
No publicity is being sought, and none is likely because no-one can find him.
Publicity is nothing new to the genial Ruscoe, however, who has been the focus of considerable interest since moving to his Orkney telefarm six years ago.
Highlands and Islands Enterprise and BT have marched a series of journalists to his door, stressing the benefits of the two organisation's £16 million ‘H&I Initiative’, which has provided the area with Europe's most modern digital telephone system.
In point of fact, Ruscoe's operation gains little from the initiative.
Finstown is still served by an old-fashioned exchange, a fact which bothers him little.
‘What I do is quite basic, really.
even the PC is quite an old one, and the tasks I have to accomplish down the line are fairly simple — electronic mail, basic word processing and the like.’
Muttering about noisy lines is not quite what BT wants to hear, but despite this, Ruscoe's operation is highly successful.
‘The error-correction on the computer has to work overtime occasionally,’ he admits.
In his cluttered roof-void office-cum-spare bedroom, where clothes dry under the skylight and ergonomics is too big a word to fit in, he writes massive chunks of operating software for mainframe computers, programmes which can take between one and a half and ten ‘man years’ to complete.
The material is fired down the telephone lines to ICL in Manchester on completion.
‘When ICL moved from Stoke to West Gorton in Manchester, I became a commuter and I didn't like it,’ he says.
‘I'd always wanted a farm, although I had no experience of it at all.’
The sheep farm (‘they're not very much trouble’) is a dream come true for Ruscoe, his wife and 15-month-old daughter; the lucrative staff job with ICL removes the financial worries which can come with life on the land.
Other worldly concerns can affect him, though.
Like the night four years ago when the mainframe computer controlling all ship movements in and out of Hong Kong, the world's busiest harbour, crashed.
‘It was just part of the job,’ says a phlegmatic Ruscoe.
‘They phoned about 10.30 at night, and of course because I had everything here, I was available.
I spoke to the people, analysed the fault sent it back down the line.
It took four hours to fix.
If you think about it, it was just a phone call.
It could have been anywhere — it could have been Wick.’
Paddy Ashdown is not in Wick.
Nor is he in Kirkwall, it appears.
Harvey Johnstone is, though.
He is the master of the electronic writingboard, which has revolutionised education for pupils, both adults and children, on the outer islands of Orkney.
In the Orkney Telecentre, a converted classroom at Kirkwall Academy, Ray Kastell conducts computer training courses and advises on computer telecommunications.
It is also the location for equipment which can link the islands of Westray, Stronsay, Sanday, Hoy, Papa Westray and Rousay with Kirkwall and Stromness, or even Aberdeen, for interactive lectures, tutorials or lessons.
‘It costs about £1.86 an hour in the afternoon,’ says Johnstone, engaged in a link-up between Kirkwall, navigation teacher Sean Milligan in Stromness and the pupils of Papa Westray primary school.
‘That's a fraction of the cost of sending teachers in to an island paying at least £50 a shot.’
The MV Thorsvoe is the main link between the island of Hoy and the Orkney mainland.
Paddy Ashdown is definitely going to Hoy, to look at the Hoy Telecottage, one of the community facilities set up in the wake of the H&I Initiative to take advantage of the facilities it offers.
He is nowhere to be seen on the Thorsvoe, nor at Lyness in Hoy, site of an impressive collection of artefacts tracing Scapa Flow's history as a naval base.
But they're waiting for him at the telecottage, a converted school which is due to run out of HIE and BT funding soon and is aiming to become a profitable business, specialising in desk-top publishing, graphic design and printing.
Special biscuits have been bought.
Lydia Hardcastle is in charge.
‘The reception of the telecottage has been brilliant on the island,’ enthuses Hardcastle, a Mancunian whose Hoy holidays gradually became permanent.
Faxing and photocopying are made available to locals such as composer Peter Maxwell Davies, as well as computer training, consultancy work and the burgeoning design activity.
Jude Callister is a former archaeologist who now knits for a living, and designs part-time for the telecottage.
Work has come in from all over the UK, and even the charity Farm Africa uses the Hoy facility.
‘We have a part-time rep on the Orkney mainland, and we are getting more and more work from there,’ says Hardcastle, a part-time clerkess at the local school.
T-shirt printing is a successful sideline, and the former school's second classroom is to be converted into a gallery.
At Lyness, the Thorsvoe noses in on the low tide.
Off steps a brusque and bristling figure, carrying a kitbag and casual in a crew-neck sweater.
The telecottage's aged Fiat Strada whisks Paddy Ashdown away before seven journalists can swoop on him.
He has gone to meet ordinary people.
Nobody has told him that he need not have come.
Orkney is one of the venues for BT's video conferencing system, providing face-to-face communication without the pain of travel or risk of journalistic interference.
The ordinary people of Hoy could have been a lot closer with a videophone call.
John Ruscoe: an ICL consultant who moved to his Orkney telefarm six years ago
Rebuilt Croatian church appeals for furnishings
By Marcello Mega
A CHARITY has been asked to help furnish a church in a Croatian village which was damaged in the war with the Serbs but has been painstakingly rebuilt by the villagers.
Kevin Earnshaw, of the Flanders Scottish Alliance, a war charity which took more than £1 million of aid to Romania three years ago and has since taken hundreds of thousands of pounds of supplies to the former Yugoslavia, said he agreed to the request but he needs help to keep his word.
He said: ‘A contact I made when I was in Croatia got in touch to tell me about the efforts of the villagers of Sumet, which is between Split and Mostar.
They have spent months rebuilding Kraljicamira church but it is completely bare.
They are desperate to furnish it in time for their Easter service.
‘He asked me if I could help and I said I could but, to be honest, I don't know how easy it will be to get the things they need.
They are looking for everything — an organ, crucifix , statues of the saints, candles, incense, altar decorations, you name it.’
A Croatian businessman, Ante Lasic, who is based in Kirkcaldy, has agreed to transport the goods if the alliance can gather them together.
Mr Lasic left his Fife home several times during the war in Croatia to take up arms in his homeland.
Mr Earnshaw is contributing by making 3ft candles in his home in Academy Street, Edinburgh.
He can be contacted on 031-554 4529.
He would be delighted to hear from anyone else who can help.
Wang Zhen: hardline Chinese vice-president
CHINA'S hardline vice-president Wang Zhen died yesterday, just days before a meeting of parliament that would have retired him from his post.
Wang, who died in Canton, southern China, was 85.
He had long been reported ill with kidney problems and was rumoured to have had throat cancer.
Wang, vice-president since 1988, was a vehement and unrelenting critic of China's intellectuals and a virulent opponent of western ideas.
He was one of the small band of ageing revolutionaries who control China's politics through their prestige and web of personal relationships.
State radio and television announced his death by playing a dirge and reading his official obituary which lauded Wang as ‘a great proletarian revolutionary, statesman and soldier, a staunch Marxist, and an outstanding leader of the party and the state.’
The death of another of China's band of powerful octogenarian ‘immortals’ marks an important step towards the end of their era, which has spanned the birth of the communist revolution in China to the death of socialism in the Soviet Union.
Wang's official obituary stressed that he, like Deng Xiaoping who, at 88, is still China's paramount leader, saw economic reforms as the means to keep the Communist Party in power in China.
‘Even during the days when he was critically ill, he was unable to distract his mind from the on-going reforms and economic development,’ the obituary, issued through Xinhua news agency, said.
‘On many occasions, he expressed his full confidence in the future of the Communist Party of China and the cause of socialism and communism.’
Wang had close links to Deng, but was a fierce critic of the western influences that crept into China along with Deng's economic reforms.
Ironically, Wang's sons have been major beneficiaries of those reforms.
One, Wang Jun, is tipped to become head of CITIC (China International Trust and Investment Corp), the Chinese state's leading capitalist-style company.
Another, Wang Zhi, runs Great Wall Computer Corp, one of China's new-style business conglomerates.
Wang played a major role behind the scenes in purging the first two of Deng's chosen successors: Hu Yaobang, who lost his job as Communist Party General Secretary in 1987, and Zhao Ziyang, thrown out of the party's top job in 1989 after student-led pro-democracy demonstrations were crushed by the army.
‘Wang Zhen was the most troublesome of all the old men,’ a Chinese analyst said.
‘He was strong willed and always trying to assert his opinions.’
An Asian diplomat said Wang's death would seriously weaken the hands of hardline ideologues in the Communist Party.
‘He was a very important hardliner with a lot of influence,’ the diplomat said.
Wang made several public statements strongly supportive of Deng's current designated successor, the Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin, and his obituary stressed that he ‘actively supported and upheld’ the collective leadership by Jiang.
Jiang is widely expected to be named China's president in addition to his current post during the annual meeting of the National People's Congress that begins on Monday.
Wang would certainly have been retired from the vice-presidency at the congress.
As the Soviet Union began to break up in August 1991, Wang led China's hardline brigade, travelling to the troubled border region of Xinjiang, which he had ruled as military commander four decades before, to demand socialist unity and issue veiled warnings against unrest.
Most ordinary Chinese had little love for the veteran military man.
He was especially disliked by intellectuals who detested his hardline policies.
Wang Zhen: fierce critic of western influences
Neurologist killed in Cairngorm accident
By Graeme Wilson
COLLEAGUES paid tribute last night to a Scottish neurologist who died after being seriously injured in a climbing accident at the weekend.
Angus MacInnes, 47, sustained head injuries after he was caught in an icefall as he and three friends were about to start a climb in the Cairngorms.
A Royal Air Force Sea King helicopter from Lossiemouth battled against strong winds to airlift him to Raigmore Hospital in Inverness, but he died there at about 6:30pm on Saturday.
Mr MacInnes, who was married and lived in Bo'ness, was a consultant in clinical neuro-  physiology at the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh.
He also worked in other hospitals in the city and in Fife.
The accident happened on Hell's Lum Crag, in the Loch Avon area of the Cairngorms about ten miles from Aviemore.
Members of Leuchars mountain rescue team, who were on an exercise in the area, went to his aid and moved him to an area accessible for the helicopter.
Last night, one of Mr MacInnes's colleagues at the Western General, Prof Douglas Miller, said: ‘Everyone is really stunned by what has happened.
Angus was very much his own man and was a very keen outdoors enthusiast.
‘His was a very difficult job as he was helping large numbers of people in a number of different locations.’
Challenge to Salmond as three resign from key SNP posts
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
A DIRECT challenge to Alex Salmond, which could split the Scottish National Party wide open, will be made by the three senior members who dramatically quit their SNP cabinet posts at the weekend.
The economic spokesman, Alex Neil, the industry spokesman, Roger Mullin, and the transport spokesman, Kenny MacAskill, resigned after the party leadership won a critical vote of confidence by just two votes — 13 votes to 11 with two members abstaining — over the controversial decision of the three SNP MPs to vote with the Government on the Maastricht Bill last week.
Yesterday, the former cabinet members promised to campaign at party meetings across Scotland to try to overturn the motion supporting the MPs' actions, at the party's next national council in June.
While the prospect of a challenge to Mr Salmond as leader was briefly raised in the aftermath of the highly charged meeting of the party executive in Glasgow on Saturday, party insiders believe a more realistic prospect will be challenges for senior party positions in the run-up to the SNP national conference next September.
Mr MacAskill commented: ‘It became clear the vote was a confidence issue in the party convener and I felt it was no longer appropriate that I should remain in his cabinet.’
Mr Salmond rejected claims that he had made the issue a question of confidence and said he was ‘relaxed’ at the prospect of a challenge, adding: ‘I think that is a rather far fetched possibility, but obviously in a democratic party everyone has the right to stand for national convener.’
Commenting on the resignations, he said: ‘I regret that certain people were unable to accept the majority decision of the executive.
Perhaps when they have had time to cool down and think about it, they will reconsider.’
The only concession allowed by the party leadership was the acceptance of an amendment calling for the development of emergency procedures for greater consultation between the MPs and the national executive committee after complaints that its members had no knowledge of the deal with the Government until the Commons vote had taken place.
The disunity among Scotland's opposition parties on the constitutional issue was vividly demonstrated last night at a conference called by home-rule pressure groups to restart the constitutional campaign.
The leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, Jim Wallace, and Mr Salmond both pointedly reaffirmed their support for last year's democracy declaration which called for the reconvening of the Scottish parliament.
However, the chairwoman of the Scottish Labour Party, Johann Lamont, ruled out support for a Scottish parliamentary council and was heckled when criticising the SNP's action in voting with the Government last week.
Mr Salmond argued that each of the three opposition parties would vote with the Government during the passage of the Maastricht Bill, and warned against ‘walking out in the huff’ at every disagreement.
He again pledged his support for a one-off meeting of MPs.
Mr Wallace repeated the call for unity which was a constant demand made during the Sunday night conference in Glasgow in response to the Government's taking stock announcement.
The conference formally announced the setting up of a Coalition for Scottish Democracy which will bring together all the civic organisations favouring constitutional change.
One of the first acts of the coalition was to issue a challenge to the Prime Minister, John Major, to meet them.
Two detained over £15m drugs haul
CUSTOMS officers yesterday announced their biggest single seizure of amphetamine sulphate tablets — more than 100 kilos with a street value of about £15 million.
Two British men were being questioned after being arrested when the tablets were found on Saturday concealed in holdalls in a Peugeot estate that had arrived in Dover by ferry from Calais.
A Customs spokesman said: ‘This is our biggest ever seizure of amphetamines, nearly as big as the 122 kilos we seized during the whole of last year.’
— PA
98 die as ‘storm of century’ sweeps US
ONE of the worst storms of the century hit the east coast of the United States over the weekend, killing at least 98 people and forcing tens of thousands to flee their homes for emergency shelters.
Emergencies were declared in 12 states and transport links thrown into chaos.
Motorways and airports were closed and millions of people were left without electricity.
‘It's not too much to say it's the storm of the century,’ said Joe Friday, director of the National Weather Service.
The weathermen said the storm had rivalled summer hurricanes in its intensity.
Though it packed a stronger punch in the north-eastern states, it wreaked greater havoc in the south.
About two million people were left without power in Florida, where the storm touched off about 50 tornadoes believed to have been responsible for at least 18 deaths.
A 36-year-old woman died when a tornado swept through her mobile home.
She and her husband had only moved to a government-sponsored caravan park south of Miami after Hurricane Andrew destroyed their home last August.
There were heavy snowfalls in areas which never expect to see such wintry conditions.
Birmingham, Alabama, reported 13 inches while Chattanooga, Tennessee had 21 inches.
Freezing temperatures were forecast in the area last night which could devastate crops.
A spokesman for President Clinton said federal teams were still assessing the damage.
The president may visit the hardest-hit areas.
In the New York borough of Queens a policeman rescued 13 children from a van trapped on a flooded road.
‘The water was moving like it was a river,’ said police sergeant John McKee.
‘There were whitecaps and the wind was very, very strong.
It was mass hysteria.’
In the Boston area up to 2ft of snow fell and the storm was compared to a 1978 blizzard which paralysed the city for four days.
Fears of large-scale coastal flooding were averted as the fierce winds shifted at the last minute.
However, 15 homes toppled into the sea on Long Island, New York.
Thousands of air travellers were left stranded all along the eastern seaboard and in the Caribbean nations as hurricane-force winds closed airports in Boston, New York, Washington and Atlanta.
In Cuba at least five people were killed and 28 injured as the powerful winds, rainstorms and freak waves battered western and central parts of the country.
Several thousand people, including tourists who left seafront hotels in Havana flooded by sea water, were evacuated to emergency accommodation.
— Reuter 
Picture, Page 6
A boy picks up souvenirs from a wrecked car in Florida
Police investigate new horse attack
ANOTHER attack on a horse was yesterday being investigated by police in south-west England.
In the latest in a series of incidents, an animal grazing on Mithian Downs, near St Agnes, Cornwall, was wounded on its forehead by what appeared to have been a sharp instrument.
Earlier this month, a pregnant mare was killed and mutilated in fields near St Austell, Cornwall, and 16 colts had their manes and tails cut in an attack near Weymouth, Dorset.
— PA
Police investigate new horse attacks
TWO attacks on horses in Cornwall were being investigated by police yesterday.
The incidents, the latest in a series in south-west England, both occurred near St Agnes and each animal was wounded on the forehead.
The first attack, which happened at Mithian Downs, was discovered on Saturday evening, when the horse suffered a wound which appeared to have been made with a sharp instrument.
Yesterday morning, at Mithian, another horse was found injured.
— PA
Top BBC leaders rally to defence of Birt
THE BBC's board of management is rallying round its director-general, John Birt, amid a stream of calls for him to resign over revelations about his special tax arrangements.
In a letter of ‘unanimous support’ published in the Times today, the ten board members said he was the best person to lead the corporation.
Their strong support came after a top BBC manager also backed Mr Birt, while admitting that the corporation and Mr Birt were damaged by the row over his tax deal which enabled him to be treated as self-employed and his pay to go to his private company.
Will Wyatt, managing director of network television, said Mr Birt should not lose his job over the dispute and insisted he had the full support of his senior colleagues.
In the letter to the Times, the board members say: ‘The controversy surrounding the employment arrangements of John Birt has obscured the major issue in British broadcasting — the future of the BBC beyond 1996 when its current Charter expires.
‘The broadcasting environment will change dramatically in the next few years as new channels and broadcasters emerge in the commercial sector.
The BBC must therefore have a clear vision if it is to retain its role as the cornerstone of British broadcasting and continue to command respect and admiration in Britain and throughout the world.
In January, John Birt laid out that vision of a wide range of high-quality programmes, greater efficiency and accountability with value for money for licence payers.
‘We, the ten members of the board of management, believe that John Birt is the best person to lead the BBC and he has our unanimous support.’
The letter is signed: James Arnold-Baker, Bill Dennay, Liz Forgan, Tony Hall, David Hatch, Patricia Hodgson, Ronald Neil, Margaret Salmon, Pamela Taylor and Will Wyatt.
Mr Wyatt — a key member of the board of management responsible for the day-to-day running of the BBC — conceded on BBC Radio 4's The World This Weekend programme that Mr Birt's battered reputation would need time to recover.
‘He has clearly been damaged by it.
John knows he's been damaged by it.
He will need the support of his colleagues — which he'll get — to get over this but we believe it is get-overable,’ he said.
He added that disaffected factions within the BBC opposed to Mr Birt's programme of reforms may have been behind some of the attempts to destabilise him.
However, a string of Sunday newspapers lined up to call for Mr Birt to go.
Among them the editor of the Observer, Donald Trelford, attacked BBC chairman Marmaduke Hussey's role in bringing Mr Birt into the Corporation without telling most of the governors about his special tax arrangements which he dubbed a ‘scandal’.
The Independent on Sunday, calling for both men to go, said ‘smoke obscures a battlefield called John Birt’.
The BBC gave him tax advantages not allowed to the majority of staff and the ‘many genuine freelances’ it employs.
— PA
Sun-power toilets saving pennies
BRITAIN's first solar-powered lavatories have switched on the National Trust to cutting its £2.5 million power bill by using more ‘green energy’.
Solar-powered pumps draw water from a lake to flush the lavatories at the Cragside estate in Northumberland.
The toilets are lit with electricity from a wind turbine.
Now the trust is investigating other renewable energy schemes, including the burning of straw, coppiced timber and other products from its many estates.
Two held over £15m drugs haul
CUSTOMS officers yesterday announced their biggest single seizure of amphetamine sulphate tablets — more than 100 kilos with a street value of about £15 million.
Two British men were being questioned after being arrested when the tablets were found on Saturday concealed in holdalls in a Peugeot estate that had arrived in Dover by ferry from Calais.
A Customs spokesman said: ‘This is our biggest ever seizure of amphetamines, nearly as big as the 122 kilos we seized during the whole of last year.’
— PA
Student dies week after cliff fall
A STUDENT at the University of Sussex in Brighton, has died in hospital in Swansea, a week after plunging from cliffs at Stackpole near Tenby, west Wales.
Mark Pinder, 22, from Brighton, one of a party of eight from the university on a climbing expedition, suffered severe head injuries in the fall.
— PA
Man accused of kidnap attempt
A YOUNG Frenchman will appear before Oxford Crown Court today charged with the attempted kidnap of the sister of the missing estate agent Suzy Lamplugh.
Antony Bourgois, 20, of no fixed address, faces three charges — the attempted  abduction of Lizzie Lamplugh, 22, a publishing assistant, falsely imprisoning her and carrying an offensive weapon.
All the charges relate to an incident outside Miss Lamplugh's home in Boulter Street, Oxford, on 13 December last year.
Damning reports make Lamont's task harder
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
AN ATTEMPT to lift confidence in the Government's control of the economy will be made tomorrow when the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, is expected to deliver an austerity Budget with a promise of recovery on the horizon.
In what is regarded as a make-or-break move for his political career, Mr Lamont will set out to demonstrate a clear route out of recession while underlining the Government's clamp on public spending.
But his aims of holding out hope for jobs and industry will come against a damning confidential Government report on the prospects for industry and an emphatic thumbs-down to Mr Lamont's continued tenure as Chancellor from the Scottish business community.
Labour yesterday demanded publication of the report, which warns that British industry is in a lamentable state and will take decades before being fit enough to compete internationally.
Three-quarters of Scotland's top companies believe the Government has no effective economic policy and the same proportion believe Mr Lamont should not stay as Chancellor, according to a poll by the accountancy firm Pannell Kerr Forster and BBC TV in Scotland.
It suggested that 65 per cent of the country's top 300 companies did not understand the Government's economic policies and only 29 per cent thought they understood them.
A total of 75 per cent said Mr Lamont should not remain as Chancellor.
However, half of the chief executives polled were optimistic about their companies' prospects, while only 35 per cent voiced concern.
Half expected their profits to rise while only 14 per cent predicted they would fall.
But a quarter still expect to cut jobs, and 48 per cent have postponed investment plans.
The Budget, which is likely to be a cautious ‘holding statement’ until a second December package, is expected to centre on a £2 billion rise in indirect taxes and sharp increases in excise duties on smoking, petrol and car tax.
A Downing Street co-ordinated series of ‘good news’ announcements is expected to follow the Budget, to sustain momentum behind the Government's message that recovery is on the way.
The aim is to instil confidence in the economy at the same time as lifting the Conservative Party morale — and public focus — on the Government's Maastricht troubles.
One ‘sweetener’, deliberately leaked beforehand, is likely to be the widening of the 20 per cent income tax, which currently applies only to the first £2,000 of taxable income.
But that would be more than offset by other tax increases as Mr Lamont looks for extra funds to tackle the ballooning PSBR deficit, likely to be about £45 billion next year.
However, there are predictions that he will be able to announce a lower out-turn on borrowing this year than the £7 billion forecast.
A windfall for the hard-pressed Scots whisky industry may come in the form of lower excise duty rises which for most other products could be set well above inflation.
An extension of VAT to cover newspapers, books, transport and some food — at a lower 5 per cent rate compared to the standard 17 per cent— has been widely mooted.
But resistance within the Treasury to what is seen as a potentially inflation-stoking measure could result in a delay allowing a consultative green paper before the December Budget.
Universal indexing of personal allowances is thought a likely casualty, with a freeze on most taxpayers' allowances, offering the Treasury a £1 billion saving.
But any radical changes to the relief on mortgage interest payments is expected to be left until December in order not to hamper the fragile recovery in the housing market.
Tory backbenchers are also keen for Mr Lamont to unveil a package to tackle unemployment.
Weekend reports suggest that the long-term unemployed — those out of work longer than 12 months — will benefit from a £300 million scheme aimed at bringing them back into the workforce.
The shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown, warned that the economy would suffer unless Mr Lamont tackled the young and longer-term unemployed.
‘It really needs the political will to do that.
It is not a question of resources at the end of the day.’
If we had a Chancellor prepared to do that, then I believe we could achieve it,’ said Mr Brown.
In response to demands from Robin Cook, the shadow trade secretary, for publication of the Government's gloomy industry survey, the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, said yesterday that the leaked document gave only a ‘very superficial impression’.
Norman Lamont: 75 per cent said he should not stay
Highland warning on holiday homes
By Tom Morton
A WEST COAST councillor has warned of a possible fire-bombing campaign against Highland holiday homes because of anger at council tax discounts.
Dr Michael Foxley, regional councillor for Mallaig, Ardnamurchan and the Small Isles, has written to the Scottish Office's local government finance group expressing ‘great concern’ at the effect the 50 per cent discount on second homes might have.
A unanimous vote by Highland Regional Council to surcharge holiday home owners was ruled out of order by the Scottish Office on 19 November last year.
In Wales, however, local authorities have been granted the discretion to limit any holiday home discount to 25 per cent or charge the full rate in certain circumstances.
‘We can only presume,’ wrote Dr Foxley ‘that this lesser or non-existent discount to be granted in Wales is as a result of the ‘fiery nature of the controversy’over holiday homes in Wales in the past’.
His letter continues: ‘They [the Government]are therefore conceivably encouraging this sort of action in the Highlands as the view within the Highlands is that holiday-home owners should be surcharged.’
Whale watchers could face legal action
By David Hartly
A PLEA was issued yesterday for people to stay away from the six sperm whales which appear to be trapped at Scapa Flow in Orkney.
Mike Lynch, of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, said whale watchers were posing a risk to the animals — and placing themselves in danger — by trying to track them from boats.
He added he would not hesitate to prosecute anyone found harassing the whales.
The six — each about 40ft long and weighing 45 tonnes — were first spotted in the enclosed natural harbour three weeks ago today.
It is only the second time this century that a school of sperm whales has been seen in the waters around Orkney.
Specialists from the Cambridge-based Sea Mammal Research Unit believe that they are unable to find a way out and that a rescue attempt may be needed.
Mr Lynch, the SSPCA's inspector for Orkney, said he was becoming concerned about the number of journalists, photographers, sight-seers and animal lovers using boats to try to see the whales.
‘At the moment, there is one boat out with ten people on board and another carrying an ITN film crew,’ he said.
‘And I had a call-out because there was the possibility that some people were going to use sonar in an attempt to find them.’
Mr Lynch said that could have had a disastrous effect on the whales, which use their own inbuilt sonar system to navigate.
‘If boats use sonar or get too close, it is likely to panic the whales and cause them to scatter, and if a whale weighing over 40 tonnes becomes totally disorientated and charges off in any direction, anything could happen.
‘Not only is there a risk of the whales beaching themselves.
They could also tip over a small boat — so these people are putting themselves in danger as well.’
Mr Lynch said he had taken legal advice on whether the 1912 Protection of Animals (Scotland) Act could be used against anyone found harassing the whales.
‘I've been told by my superiors that I could use it in the same way that I would to prosecute anyone found mistreating a dog.
It is not something I want to do.
But I would not hesitate if people are found harassing the whales or causing them to panic.’
He had also sought advice from authorities on whale behaviour.
Their message had been that boats should stay at least a quarter of a mile away from the whales and that sonar should never be used.
‘It is natural for people to want to see the whales,’ he added.
‘But I would prefer them to stay on land.
That is what I've been doing and I have had some marvellous views of them.’
Players fighting for life after head injuries
A SCOTTISH footballer and an English rugby player were on life-support machines last night after sustaining severe head injuries during weekend games.
Seamus Lavelle, 25, was fighting for his life after suffering brain damage following an altercation with an opposing player in a junior club rugby match at Hendon, north London, on Saturday.
His condition was described as ‘extremely critical’.
Meanwhile, John Buckley, striker for second-division Rotherham, was in a ‘stable’ condition at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, after undergoing emergency surgery to remove a blood clot on his brain.
Glasgow-born Buckley, 30, who began his career with Partick Thistle, fractured his skull during a league game against Plymouth on Saturday.
He was carried off unconscious after accidentally clashing heads with a Plymouth defender, Gary Poole, in the fifth minute of the game at Rotherham.
Buckley has also played for Doncaster, Leeds and Scunthorpe.
In a statement on Mr Lavelle, of Endsleigh Gardens, Edgware, north west London, police said he stopped breathing after collapsing following an altercation with a player from the opposing side.
He had been playing for Hendon against Centaur, from West Drayton, Middlesex, when he was injured.
He was flown by helicopter to the Royal London Hospital, in Whitechapel, east London, where he underwent emergency surgery.
A Centaur player was questioned by police before being released without charge on police bail.
The match was abandoned as a result of the incident.
John Buckley: suffered blood clot on brain after clash
Bottomley stops £20,000 image classes
VIRGINIA Bottomley yesterday called a halt to a plan to spend £20,000 on a course to show women hospital managers how to look good and dress well.
The Health Secretary served notice she would ‘haul people over the coals’ over the Department of Health plan.
‘We want good women in management.
I want good finance women and I want good information women.
I am not interested in what their faces look like.’
The classes would have been part of a £1 million image building programme.
Mrs Bottomley, who was plainly furious when she heard what was going on, said: ‘I am interested in management, not make-up.
I shall haul people over the coals and put an end to this.’
Tessa Jowell, Labour MP for Dulwich, who was proposing to table Commons motions about the plan, said later: ‘I am delighted that Mrs Bottomley has seen sense.
‘But this also raises some doubt over her control over the department in that a highly contentious initiative like this can apparently proceed without her knowing anything about it.’
Scot who has the right word for the big occasion
THERE are 107 two-letter words in the dictionary — and John Catto, an Aberdeen lorry driver, knows every one of them.
It's also handy, he explains, to know that zo, dzo and zho are three perfectly acceptable spellings for a cross between a yak and a cow.
These, and other normally useless nuggets of lexical information, have enabled John to win a place as Scotland's first ever representative at the World Scrabble Championships.
John secured his place at the world finals in New York in August by beating 33 other Scottish Scrabble fanatics at an elimination contest in Edinburgh.
‘I'm absolutely delighted to have won,’ he said yesterday.
‘I'm really looking forward to competing against the best from other parts of the world and I'll give my best for Scotland.
The British haven't done too well up until now but I'm hoping to change that.’
John, 30, only took up competitive Scrabble three years ago and became Scottish champion in 1991.
‘I spend up to five hours a week playing Scrabble and I never get tired of the game,’ he said.
‘I used to just swot up on learning the key words and churning them out computer fashion, but now I am more interested in what they mean.
‘It's amazing what you learn and basically it's good fun.
It's a fascination with words and that's all it is.’
DENIS STRAUGHAN
Demonstration greets Sinn Fein speaker in Edinburgh
AROUND 50 demonstrators gathered at Edinburgh's City Chambers yesterday to protest at the presence of a Sinn Fein speaker at a meeting inside.
One of the demonstrators, Jim MacLean, said: ‘We want to show this individual he is not welcome in Edinburgh.
Our protest is also against the use of the City Chambers by terrorist organisations.’
Police, who kept the crowd away from the entrance being used for the day-long meeting run by the James Connolly Association, said the demonstration passed peacefully.
The talks were held to discuss the situation in Northern Ireland and to commemorate Connolly, the Edinburgh-born socialist and Sinn Fein member executed for his part in the 1916 Easter Rising.
Edinburgh's Lord Provost Norman Irons was among the councillors who opposed their use of the City Chambers.
He said a line had to be drawn with groups like Sinn Fein who sympathised with the IRA.
After addressing the meeting, the Sinn Fein speaker, Michael McMullen, said people like the Lord Provost never mentioned British violence in Northern Ireland.
He said Sinn Fein had consistently pleaded for peace.
‘Everyone should get around the table and talk, it is the only way forward.’
The demonstrators, he said, sought to deny democracy and free speech.
Calm: Michael McMullen at the City Chambers yesterday
MoD had talks with Devonport year before cuts move at Rosyth
By Severin Carrell
SENIOR defence officials held private talks with Devonport dockyard on securing its future more than a year before the ministry unveiled plans to strip Rosyth of its nuclear refitting work.
The Plymouth yard's company accounts for the financial year 1989/90 reveal the talks began after its managers anticipated a substantial cut in their future workload months before the Government announced the size of the Options for Change defence cuts.
The disclosure will fuel suspicions among Opposition MPs and trades unionists that plans supported by the Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, to transfer nuclear refitting work promised to Rosyth to Devonport, are part of a hidden agenda to close the Fife yard.
Yesterday, Jack Dromey, national officer of the Transport and General Workers' Union, said it underlined his own belief that ‘ministers and DML managers conspired behind Rosyth's back to move to one dockyard by the year 2000.
That yard was Devonport.
‘Fierce public opposition, including from the workers at both yards, thwarted their plans and compelled both to pay at least lip service to keeping both dockyards open.
My suspicion remains that they still want to close Rosyth.’
Allan Smith, managing director of Babcock Thorn, operators of Rosyth dockyard, yesterday said that he ‘had no knowledge of any such discussions between the MoD and DML’.
It is widely believed that senior navy officials trying to live within increasingly stringent Treasury spending limits want to close Rosyth dockyard and the adjacent naval base, and centralise all naval refitting work at Devonport.
Up to 18,000 jobs in Fife would go.
In April 1991, DML submitted to the MoD and Treasury a plan to modernise its nuclear refitting docks and heavily cut refitting costs.
It was immediately picked up by the Government, which launched a competition in July 1991 between both yards to become Britain's sole nuclear yard.
After substantial delays in reaching a decision on the refitting competition, Jonathon Aitken, the defence procurement minister, announced this week that the MoD hoped to announce the outcome as soon as possible after the Easter parliamentary recess finishes in early April.
Devonport has claimed its original bid was provoked partly because it believed the navy intended to centralise nuclear refitting at Rosyth, thus undermining Devonport's future, and is insistent that its proposal was unsolicited.
But in DML's 1989/90 accounts, John Morris, DML's former chairman, said that after two submarine refits were cancelled in that year and the workforce cut by nearly 1,500 to 5,000, any further loss of work would threaten its entire viability.
He said: ‘Many of the costs of running the dockyard are fixed, and consequently a point is reached where we cannot make further savings without placing its feasibility in jeopardy.
We believe we are close to this point and we are working with the Ministry of Defence to obtain true value for money by providing a secure future workload.’
A DML spokesman denied a direct link between its submarine refit proposal and its talks with the MoD.
But he admitted: ‘I think the two issues are linked.
We obviously were in discussions with the MoD.
[We were]seeking to get clarity and confidence in our future workload.
‘But the Devonport proposals for nuclear submarine work are going in parallel to that, and that was put forward by ourselves really delinked from what the chairman was saying, as our initiative to attract and secure work.’
Clarke puts jobs at top of Labour's agenda Peter Jones finds the Scottish Labour conference shifting its campaigning focus away from constitutional issues
THE SCOTTISH Labour conference ended yesterday with a clear determination to turn to campaigning on unemployment.
During the Inverness conference, the party's neo-nationalist element had been marginalised and cross-party discussions on joint anti-Government campaigning put in cold storage.
Labour's intentions to shift the focus of campaigning were succinctly set out yesterday by the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, after a speech which surprised his supporters and confounded his critics by its professional, tough delivery.
‘Brilliant…best speech I have ever heard from a Scottish leader at conference,’ enthused one MP.
‘Not much originality in it, but an ideal conference speech,’ said another.
A buoyant Mr Clarke told reporters that no-one could doubt his commitment, and that of the leader John Smith, to the establishment of a Scottish parliament.
But he said: ‘We need not go on confirming that day after day.
The best way to capture the Scottish public imagination for a Scottish parliament is to remind them how much things can be improved on the jobs scene because the Scottish parliament will be taking the decisions presently taken by the Westminster Parliament.’
It was left to the Glasgow Hillhead MP, George Galloway, at a Scotland United fringe meeting to dissent with the euphoria over the severed links to the Scottish National Party and to question the leadership strategy.
The rupture over constitutional campaigning, he said, represented a ‘new nadir, new depths of disunity’.
Four times, he said, Scots had woken up the morning after an election to find a Tory government: ‘We cannot guarantee when they wake up the morning after the election in 1997 that we will have got rid of them.’
But Mr Clarke pledged: ‘We can deliver and we will deliver.’
Mr Galloway's less abrasive contribution on the floor of the conference in support of greater autonomy for the Scottish party brought him into conflict with the Aberdeen North MP, Bob Hughes.
Mr Galloway said it was an outrage that the Scottish general secretary, Jack McConnell, should have been appointed ‘in a hotel room in Preston by an obscure sub-committee of the national executive’ and demanded that the party should have the right to elect its own leader.
But his assertion that a Scottish parliament should have some say over the siting on Trident nuclear missiles in Scotland brought an angry Mr Hughes to the rostrum: ‘Let's not get dragged down the back alleys of stupid silly little constitutional issues which are doing this party no good whatsoever.’
An executive statement promised a full review of party structures and a strong role for the Scottish party in policy-making, with the question of electing a Scottish leader shelved until the establishment of a Scottish parliament.
The closest thing to a suggestion of further co-operation with the SNP was Dennis Canavan's argument that talks could be held on the narrow agenda of pushing for a multi-option referendum, and a reserved hearing the conference accorded to the Scottish Trades Union Congress general secretary, Campbell Christie.
Reporting on his efforts to get the three opposition parties to agree on a common agenda, Mr Christie said he feared the argument that 75 per cent of Scots had voted for constitutional change at the last election lost validity without some unifying factor, enhancing the Tories' claims of legitimacy.
The conference finished with a debate on the economy, pledging full support to the sacked Timex workers from Dundee and the workers from Rolls Royce at Hillington, the Leyland Daf Albion plant, the Gray Dunn factory, and Rosyth dockyard all of whom had sent delegations to Inverness.
The shadow trade and industry spokesman, Robin Cook, made a scathing attack on the Government for its lack of action, reminding delegates that the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, had termed the Albion workers whingers.
‘This is the Government that has been in touch with the SNP in order to save themselves, but has not been in touch with the Dutch government in order to save Albion,’ he said.
Asserting that the true level of unemployment measured in the same way as it was in 1979 was four million out of work, he said: ‘There are now only four and a half million people working in manufacturing industry in Britain, bringing us close to a new economic first — fewer people in work making things than we we will have out of work making nothing.’
Council finance chiefs query cost of reforms
By David Scott, Local Government Editor
AN INDEPENDENT investigation into the costs of the planned shake-up of local government is being sought by leading council finance officials, who are convinced that figures already provided for the Government are wrong.
The call for a new, rigorous study of the costs has been made by the influential Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA), which represents the directors of finance and senior finance staff of the majority of local authorities.
In a report on the cost implications of switching to single-tier councils, CIPFA claims that savings identified by the consultants, Touche Ross, have been overstated, while the potential costs involved are understated.
Touche Ross was engaged by the Scottish Office to investigate the short-term and longer-term costs of the planned local government changes.
Its findings have already been challenged by several regional councils and by Professor Arthur Midwinter, of the Department of Politics at Strathclyde University.
CIPFA, whose report to the Scottish Office is issued today, has now added its authority to allegations that errors have been made in the calculations.
It says that, in particular, calculations of the expected savings in central administration, financial services, libraries, planning and development and housing are unrealistically high.
According to the report, the proposed staffing structures for the projected new unitary authorities do not appear to be capable of maintaining the current level and quality of services and management practices.
John Lindsay, vice-chairman of CIPFA's Scottish branch, said that if cost was a factor which was driving local government reorganisation then it was important that ministers and officials of the Scottish Office had the best information available.
He added: ‘In common with many other directors of finance, I am concerned about some of the conclusions and calculations in the Touche Ross report.
Some of the findings are, in our opinion, misleading or incomplete given the research which the Scottish branch has undertaken.’
The Touche Ross study concluded that all but one of the four alternative plans for single-tier councils put forward by the Scottish Office in a consultation document would lead to savings.
The only option which would cost extra was the one for 51 councils — the biggest number proposed.
CIPFA maintains that a number of potentially significant costs, concerning changes in staff numbers and salaries, have not been taken into account.
SNP drowns sorrows in separate bars After the volatile weekend meeting, Joanne Robertson sees the Nationalists split into two camps
THE DRINKING arrangements in a Glasgow hotel on Saturday night after the fiery meeting of the Scottish National Party's executive committee graphically illustrated the deep divisions among its senior members.
In one bar, supporters of the SNP leader, Alex Salmond, were recovering from the highly charged atmosphere of the meeting, at the end of which the party's economy spokesman, Alex Neil, the industry spokesman, Roger Mullin, and the recently appointed transport spokesman, Kenny MacAskill, announced their resignations.
Along the corridor, the so-called ‘central belt activists’ and loyal guards of the legacy of the former Govan MP, Jim Sillars, were angrily reviewing the outcome of the 3-hour meeting, which had been prompted by a motion expressing full confidence in the SNP MPs being passed by 13 to 11 votes with two abstentions.
Earlier in the day, the SNP's water demo in Glasgow saw petitions being circulated censuring the MPs.
Although Alex Salmond was chided by party activists during the march, the turnout of around 5,000 buoyed up party managers who had been fearful of low attendance after the MPs' decision to vote with the Government last Monday night in the Commons in exchange for party representation on the Committee of the Regions.
During the afternoon meeting, several breaks were called to allow discussions between the various groupings to examine the three motions on the table: a strong attack on the MPs, calling on the executive not to endorse their actions; a motion regretting their action, and the successful statement welcoming the concession wrung out of the Westminster system and pledging support for the parliamentary group.
The party leadership's case — that the Scottish Secretary would be forced to select councillors to sit on the Committee of the Regions from a list supplied by the four parties, and this was a key concession which would pay off in the long term — was acknowledged by committee members.
A number accepted that the SNP would benefit from having a seat at the committee which is being discussed as a second chamber for the European Parliament and would open up avenues for new relationships with parties across Europe.
However, the centre-left grouping within the committee, who are usually identified as being pro-Salmond, remained severely critical of the leadership's failure to take account of the likely reaction in Scotland to the vote.
Key members accused the MPs of being so caught up in the technical arguments and the prospect of winning one concession from the Government after a barren frustrating decade that they lost sight of the big picture.
However, certain executive members stress that the decision by the three Cabinet members to resign was provoked by the strong views expressed by Mr Salmond when summing up the debate and the motion which still allowed the MPs to vote with the Tories again.
Opponents of the party leader say his criticism of the pre-meeting comments to the press as disloyal increased the political temperature which exploded when he pointed out to three executive members that collective responsibility had worked in their favour in past occasions and any comments should be made in private.
As the SNP reels from the resignations and the prospect of a concerted campaign which will deepen the divisions within the party in the coming months, many will reflect on whether the hoped-for foothold in Europe has cost the party too high a price at home.
Alex Salmond: chided by party activists at the water campaign march at the weekend
Edwina Currie to fight in Euro election
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
EDWINA CURRIE, the former health minister, is to quit Westminster and take her formidably forthright political style to the European Parliament.
She confirmed at the weekend that she is to try for election to Europe in next year's polls in the Conservative marginal Euro-constituency of Bedfordshire South.
The much-rumoured move was not seen as a surprise at Westminster where Mrs Currie, who entered the Commons vowing never to just ‘sit around adorning the backbenches’, had slim prospects of ministerial rehabilitation.
John Major is understood to have offered her a junior minister's job at the Home Office, but she turned it down on the grounds that it was not sufficiently senior.
Mrs Currie was appointed junior health minister just three years after entering the Commons for Bedford South in 1983.
Her swift rise to ministerial office — and public notoriety for blunt speaking — came to a sudden end when she was forced to resign in December 1988 after provoking a catastrophic slump in the British egg market by saying on television that ‘most’ egg production was infected by salmonella.
On Saturday she was chosen as the candidate by members of the Euro-constituency which the party held at the last election in 1990 by just 2,977 votes.
Mrs Currie says she does not agree with the ‘dual mandate’— politicians sitting both at Westminster and Strasbourg, and intends resigning her Westminster seat if she makes it to Strasbourg.
She is likely to be joined there by Glenys Kinnock, who is hoping to be selected to fight the South East Wales seat.
The former defence procurement minister, Alan Clark, 64, has confirmed that Newbury conservatives have rejected him as their candidate for the forthcoming by-election caused by the sudden death last month of the sitting MP, Judith Chaplin.
He has not been included on the shortlist of 18 hopefuls for this supposedly safe Tory seat.
Business looks up as cameras cut crime
SHOPS in Airdrie town centre, where a video camera surveillance system was introduced five months ago, are reporting booming business at the weekends, up 20-25 per cent in one case.
Shoppers who were increasingly being scared off by the threat of town-centre misbehaviour and the fear of visiting football crowds, are flocking back under the watchful gaze of the cameras, which are monitored 24 hours a day by an Airdrie police team.
Crime has decreased by 70 per cent since the cameras were installed and a local businessman, Chris Ormerod, managing director of Orrs of Airdrie, and vice-chairman of Airdrie Development Trust, which helped set up the surveillance system, said: ‘Saturday afternoon trade has improved quite dramatically.
We have done a number of things internally in the store which have also contributed to us going forward.
Customer flow has improved.
But a lot of the improvement is down to the cameras.
‘The increase in trade on a Saturday is 20-25 per cent.
From what I have gathered from talking to other business people they have also seen an increase in business.
‘The cameras have given the public the confidence that they will be safe.
That is the big plus which is influencing people.
And I think that has spread out over the rest of the week as well.’
Of public concern in the past about football crowds he said: ‘With the best will in the world, the centre of the town was affected every time there was a major home game at Airdrie, attracting a large travelling support.
People were literally afraid to come down town.
So what they did was they went elsewhere.
Now they are coming back.’
Mr  Ormerod added: ‘I have been contacted personally by five or six towns in Scotland who would like to follow our example so there is a tremendous activity on that front at the moment.’
The business success of the cameras was confirmed by Tom Allan, manager of the Airdrie branch of Stepek, the electrical store chain.
‘We have had a great reaction especially in the last four weeks.
Business has been been booming, especially on a Saturday.
It is not just the influx of customers, who feel safe, the cameras help to make the shops securer.
‘I don't think the recession has turned yet.
So for our business to keep going up and up is fantastic.
I put it down partly to the cameras.’
Other Scottish towns anxious to follow Airdrie's  pioneering success are Kilmarnock, Stirling and Falkirk, which have studied the scheme, and a meeting prompted by Ettrick and Lauderdale council is being held today for interested business people in the Borders.
Police figures show that the detection rate for crime in Airdrie has gone up from 30 to 70 per cent since the cameras were installed.
STRATHCLYDE New images for knife campaign
AN ADVERTISING campaign starts today in the latest phase of Strathclyde Police Force's crackdown on knife-carrying and knife assaults.
Metro Advertising Group is supplying 30 advertising hoardings free throughout Greater Glasgow and Glasgow's Alive and Safe Campaign is donating posters.
SOAY Man killed in fire at croft
A 24-YEAR-old stonemason, Jonathan Ratcliffe, of Bayswater Row, Leeds, died after a fire at a croft on the island of Soay, off the south coast of Skye, shortly after midnight on Saturday.
A woman escaped uninjured but another man was burned on the hand and taken to Broadford Hospital, Skye.
Because of the remote location, Stornoway Fire Brigade members were flown in by helicopter.
A tale of murder, guns, drugs and a bombing Graeme Stewart reports on the family misfortunes of a notorious Glasgow businessman, Arthur Thompson, sen.
THE FAMILY of Arthur Thompson, sen, has had to face up to many tragedies.
The death yesterday of the head of the family, a man known as the Godfather, is the latest sorrow to hit the ill-fated clan.
Murder, drugs, a bombing and shootings have all been part of a saga directly involving members of the family.
The murder of Arthur Thompson, jun, on 17 August, 1991, was the third violent episode in the list of heartbreak.
Four years ago, his sister Margaret died after taking a heroin overdose.
In 1966, Arthur Thompson, sen, escaped death in a bomb attack.
The bomb under his car in Blackhill, Glasgow, killed his mother-in-law, Maggie Harrison.
Mr Thompson, sen, had been receiving sickness and invalidity benefit — about £93 a week — for the effects of a 1988 gunshot wound to his side after he was shot in the street as he walked home.
In May 1990 he suffered a broken leg when a car was allegedly driven into him near his home in Provanmill where he lived with his wife Rita, son Billy, 25, and Arthur jun's daughter Amanda, 13, in converted council houses which have been nicknamed locally ‘Southfork’.
Billy remains as the sole surviving Thompson male.
In 1966, Arthur Thompson, sen, was at the centre of a High Court sensation when he was cleared of killing two men, Patrick Welsh and James Goldie, by reckless driving.
Just an hour later he was back in the same court to give evidence against three men accused of trying to murder him.
The men were the brothers of Patrick Welsh, one of the two men a jury had just cleared Mr Thompson of killing by using his Jaguar to force their van off the road and into a wall and lamp post.
In the second trial, the brothers — Martin, George and Henry — were accused of attempting to murder Mr Thompson and of killing his mother-in-law with a car bomb.
All were acquitted.
Mr Thompson always vehemently denied he was involved in criminal affairs.
He referred to himself as a Glasgow businessman.
Over the years his interests included a car showroom in Maryhill Road, another venture renovating buildings in the Gorbals and a similar business in the city's Shettleston Road.
A man of regular habits, he enjoyed nothing better than to down whiskies and reminisce with friends in the Provanmill Inn near the family home.
During the trial of Paul Ferris, accused of murdering Arthur Thompson, jun — shot dead in the street outside his home in Provanmill while on weekend leave from prison — Mr Thompson, sen, repeatedly denied any criminal activities.
Paul Ferris was acquitted, but Mr Thompson had told the court that he had no faith in the police to deal fairly with him or his family.
He said a suggestion that he was a criminal overlord in Glasgow was nonsense and that he could not understand why he had a reputation as the godfather.
He rejected claims that his son Arthur attempted to continue his drugs trade from inside prison and had tried to do so through him.
He vehemently denied that he had orchestrated the killings of Bobby Glover and Joe ‘Bananas’ Hanlon, the dead men whose names appeared on the murder indictment along with Paul Ferris.
Despite all the denials, Arthur Thompson, sen, was a man to be feared.
Senior police officers are convinced he had knowledge of who was  behind the gangland executions of Glover and Hanlon.
The way ahead would now seem to be clear for Mr Thompson's rivals to take over his business empire.
Arthur Thompson, sen, outside the High Court in Glasgow.
He always denied he was involved in criminal affairs
Doubts over murder conviction that refuse to go away A man soon to be freed from jail still protests his innocence, writes Denny Macgee
TWENTY years ago, the Lanarkshire town of Carluke was shocked by the murder of a 23-year-old woman.
In a quiet glen, Margaret McLaughlin was stabbed 17 times in an apparently motiveless crime.
Next month, the man jailed for life for the murder, Geordie Beattie, is expected to be released on licence from Edinburgh's Saughton Prison.
However, there are still many who feel that Beattie is the victim of a serious miscarriage of justice and that he has served almost 20 years for a crime he did not commit.
Even in Carluke, there are those who are far from convinced that Beattie, then only 19 and described by those who knew him as a train-daft ‘big softie’, was capable of such a violent act.
Others who are familiar with intimate details of the case, such as Peter Hill, producer of two BBC Rough Justice programmes on the case in the mid-Eighties, believe Beattie is the victim of suppressed forensic reports which did not fit in with the police view, particularly that of the man leading the investigation, Chief Supt William Muncie.
Mr Muncie, now dead, solved 53 Lanarkshire murders, including those by Peter Manuel.
Not to solve what would be his last murder investigation before leaving Lanarkshire CID would, according to Jimmy Hood, the Labour MP for Clydesdale, have been inconceivable for the Carluke-born detective.
In an adjournment debate in the Commons  earlier this month, Mr Hood claimed that Mr Muncie's ‘luck ran out’ for his favourite method of investigation — deciding who was guilty and then gathering evidence to prove it.
As a result, Mr Hood said, forensic evidence which would have proved Beattie innocent was suppressed.
He has now demanded that the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, releases those reports.
Anne Owers, director of Justice, a charity which investigates alleged miscarriages of justice, also says there are serious question marks over the conviction, which she describes as ‘dodgy’.
William Mullen, who worked with Beattie in the Lanarkshire Steel works, is as convinced today of Geordie's innocence as he was on the morning the police arrived there to arrest Beattie.
Mullen met Beattie in the Flemington Bar, Motherwell, only 45 minutes after it was claimed had he murdered Margaret McLaughlin five miles away.
The bar was a regular haunt for men going in to begin their night shift, and the two were on the same shunting team.
‘Geordie came strolling in about half past eight,’ Mr Mullen said.
‘I don't know how he is supposed to have made it from Carluke to the bar in Motherwell if he did kill the girl at the time it was said he did.
‘If he had stabbed someone 17 times less than an hour before, which I don't believe he did, he certainly showed not the slightest emotion.’
Nor, he says, did Beattie's clothes or his physical appearance show any signs of a struggle.
Margaret McLaughlin almost certainly scratched her attacker.
She had traces of blood and fibre under her finger nails.
The result of tests on them were not placed before the trial.
It is that forensic report and another on the comparison of blood samples from the victim and on a tissue found in one of Beattie's jackets, but not the one he was wearing on the night of the murder, which those trying to clear his name now want released.
Mr Mullen says: ‘Everyone knew Geordie was a big soft laddie, a bit of a mammy's boy.
I told the police at the time that he could not have done what they said he had.’
Ian McAllister, ‘first man’ on Beattie's shunting team on the night, is equally adamant.
‘He wouldn't have harmed a fly never mind murdering a young woman.’
The murder received wide press coverage.
However, Mr McAllister says that three days after Margaret McLaughlin's death Beattie did not know her name and thought it was someone else who had died.
‘I honestly believe he did not know who it was because he did not do it.
Margaret McLaughlin: found murdered in a glen 20 years ago
Islay pool awarded special ceremony
A SPECIAL visit will be made to Islay today to present a major architectural award for the conversion of an old whisky warehouse into a swimming pool.
The ceremony will mark the successful end to almost 20 years of community fundraising for a pool for the islands of Islay and Jura.
The Regeneration Award from the Royal  Institute of Architects in Scotland will be presented this evening to the volunteers who co-ordinated the fund-raising and who now run the £1 million pool.
‘We actually should have gone to Edinburgh in November to receive the award but as we are all volunteers none of us could make it,’ said Jean Reid, secretary of Islay and Jura Community Enterprise.
Instead, the architects, McKay and Forresters, of Glasgow, were presented with it at the Edinburgh reception.
The original ceremony will be re-enacted for the islanders tonight by Ms Joyce Deans, president of the Royal Institute of Architects in Scotland.
More than 52 buildings were put forward for the award for the imaginative redesign of old buildings.
The island pool was built inside an old distillery warehouse, gifted by Morrison Bowmore Distillers, which now houses a sauna, launderette and sunbed as well as the standard-sized pool.
Since the pool opened in June 1991 it has been used by 59,500 customers — twice the national average.
‘Everyone from infants to pensioners has been learning to swim.
It's very well-used,’ said Mrs Reid.
Rambler calls for right to roam laws
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
THE right to roam should be enshrined in Swedish-style legislation, Scottish ramblers were told at the weekend.
John Foster, who was the first director of the Countryside Commission for Scotland, said existing provisions would never secure public access over mountain areas.
Addressing the annual conference of the Ramblers' Association (Scotland) in Kinfauns, Perthshire, he criticised the consultation paper on access produced recently by Scottish Natural Heritage, the environmental agency formed last year from the CCS and the Nature Conservancy Council.
Mr Foster said he was disappointed the agency did not publish the original report on access prepared by the commission.
Instead, they set up an internal task force and produced a ‘bowdlerised’ version.
The SNH report stops short of recommending legislation to guarantee the right to roam.
Mr Foster recommended the Swedish law of allemansratt which gives the public a general right of access over uncultivated, unfenced land, subject to the protection of residential privacy and reasonable management needs.
‘There is no doubt that such a proposition would receive wide popular support.
The skill would be in framing legislation acceptable to landowning and related interests.’
Mr Foster also called for provisions to establish a national rights of way record.
He said that unless action was taken, particularly over enclosed land on low ground, the present mix of inaction, misunderstanding and acrimony would continue.
Student fights for life after cliff fall
A 21-YEAR-OLD Aberdeen University student was last night fighting for her life after falling from sea cliffs south of Aberdeen.
Karen Darke suffered serious head and spinal injuries after plunging 25ft while she and four friends were climbing the cliff at Cove Bay.
She was airlifted to Aberdeen Royal Infirmary by a Sea King from RAF Lossiemouth.
‘Naval bureaucrats’ blamed for Cowal land sale hold-up
NAVAL bureaucracy is delaying the industrial regeneration of the Cowal peninsula, it was claimed yesterday.
After the departure of the United States Navy 12 months ago, Ministry of Defence land at the former Holy Loch submarine base on the Clyde still remains unavailable for development.
Argyll and the Islands Enterprise executives are anxious to purchase the 44-acre site at Sandbank, near Dunoon, for industrial use.
They see it as essential in their programme of economic recovery.
Negotiations over the land, which includes a sports field, have taken place between the MoD and US naval authorities during the past year, but enterprise agency officials feel the delay in obtaining the land is hampering progress.
David McIntyre, AIE chief executive, said he was disappointed that negotiations were taking so long.
‘After an initial delay the MoD decided to put the property up for sale on the open market.
We have put in an offer but it seems there is a vacuum somewhere between the two naval ministries.’
A navy spokeswoman said later she could not explain the hold-up.
Since the US Navy pulled out a year ago, Dunoon and Cowal has suffered a £10 million drop in its economy and unemployment has soared to 18 per cent.
Mr McIntyre said: ‘Our plans for the regeneration of this part of Argyllshire include the development of former ministry land for factory units.
To date we have heard nothing.
It is holding up progress towards creating much-needed investment opportunities.’
He said AIE moves to attract companies to the area were progressing well.
‘The right type of facilities need to be built in the area before companies can be attracted to set up in business.
We have eight firms involved in hi-tech and data processing industries showing positive signs of wishing to come to Cowal and set up manufacturing bases.
But the land has to be available first.
We must pull out all the stops and shift the red tape.’
Artist finds her public after 20 years
AN ARTIST whose talents lay unused for 20 years headed an exhibition by five women at the weekend.
Patricia Sharp painted more than 30 new works for the occasion after an invitation by the gallery owner to lead the exhibition.
Within hours of the opening, Ms Sharp, of Uddingston, Lanarkshire, had sold six paintings, priced from £60 to £550.
The work of two Edinburgh artists is also in the exhibition, which runs for ten weeks at Briglands Gallery, Rumbling Bridge, near Kinross, until 31 May.
They are Pamela Murdoch and Barbara Brown.
An Alva artist, Liz Allan, has produced new Scottish landscapes for the exhibition and the fifth contributor is the local artist Lynn McGregor.
Going by the book to help Tanzania
By Nan Spowart
AN Ayrshire schoolboy's shock at conditions in an East African secondary school has sparked off a remarkable effort to help the pupils.
Alistair Cameron, from Irvine, was only 13 when he visited the school in 1991 while on a holiday to see his older brother.
He was so taken aback by the poverty of the Tanzanian secondary school that he determined to do something about it when he returned to his own school, St Aloysius College in Glasgow.
He thought he might be able to send back a few second-hand textbooks to add to the single science book used by the 250 pupils.
But with the help of Renfrew High School, 14 crates of books, pens and other equipment, including a computer, are being sent out to the African school.
‘I can hardly believe so much came from just two schools — I hate to think what is lying in basements around the country,’ Alistair said.
It was while he and his parents were visiting his brother, Ewan, 28, a poultry farm manager, that he went to see Sangiti Secondary School run by the Sisters of Kilimanjaro.
‘I was shocked by the conditions,’ said Alistair.
‘It wasn't just the lack of textbooks.
Many of the pupils have to walk up to two hours through the bush to get to a school with only one textbook and no pens.’
He hopes to go back to Tanzania at Christmas to see the donations in use.
The project has been supported by Caledonian Freight Forwarders, Algie's Tea Importers, P&O Shipping and Viscona which co-ordinates Tanzanian transport.
GREENOCK Man found dead in police cell
A MAN has been found dead in a police cell at Greenock, Strathclyde Police said last night.
The body of John O'Donnell, 34, of Paton Street, Greenock, was found at around 7pm in a cell of the town's police office in Rue End Street.
Officers could not reveal how he died, but said there did not appear to be any suspicious circumstances.
A report is to be sent to the procurator-fiscal.
Move to reduce King's Theatre losses Graeme Wilson looks at the way Edinburgh theatres are coping with recession and the threat of competition
THE King's Theatre in Edinburgh is undergoing a wide-ranging review to cope with both the recession and future competition from the capital's new £13 million Festival Theatre.
The King's is currently facing losses of up to £200,000 after audience figures fell by about 15 per cent during the last financial year.
The theatre, owned and run by Edinburgh District Council, was badly hit by the unexpected failure of the musical Annie Get Your Gun.
This year's pantomime Dick Whittington was also affected by the recession, and saw a 20 per cent fall in audience figures on the previous year.
The theatre, which caters for touring companies, had a budget of £390,000 to meet its costs during this financial year.
Over the coming weeks councillors will attempt to cover the £200,000 loss by finding other areas in this year's budget where there has been an underspend.
The theatre's position is also being reviewed because of the competition from the new Festival Theatre, which is being built on the site of the Empire on Nicholson Street.
The new theatre is currently £700,000 over its initial £12.4 million budget and the general manager, Paul Iles, estimates the project will need a further £1 million to complete.
Once it is finished, however, in June 1994, many of the larger musicals coming to Edinburgh are expected to use the new 1,900-capacity lyric-style theatre rather than the King's.
Leslie Evans, the council's assistant director for arts and entertainment, said: ‘The musicals we have had have always been on a quite tight financial squeeze because we have a fairly small theatre with about 1,300 seats.
Many of the bigger musicals prefer to be in theatres with about 1,800 to 1,900 seats.
‘We are currently looking at building a relationship with the Festival Theatre management so we have complementary programmes.’
It is understood that the King's will also be trying to attract more plays by the better touring companies as well as putting on more comedy.
There are also plans to create a more extensive theatre membership scheme, in common with many other theatres throughout Scotland.
Ms Evans added: ‘We are looking at trying to develop wider catering facilities within the King's, like luncheon entertaining.
‘We have also appointed a marketing officer to try to raise the theatre's profile in Edinburgh and further afield.’
Elsewhere in the capital, the Royal Lyceum claims it is recovering after last year's £1.2 million debt crisis and ticket sales which were 10 to 15 per cent below target.
The managing director, Roger Spence, said: ‘It has been a different sort of recession as traditionally the view is that theatre and leisure areas do better than others, but that has not been the case.
But we're now reasonably confident that we will continue to increase over the next few years and are budgeting for a modest growth.’
However the Lyceum, unlike the King's, depends on subsidy from the Scottish Arts Council which is planning to cut its funding in real terms over the next four years.
The brightest point for the capital has been the performance of the Traverse since it moved to its new £3.4 million home close to the Lyceum and Usher Hall.
In spite of having more than twice the capacity of the old Grassmarket theatre it has been recording 85 per cent audience capacity since opening last year.
Indeed in the first two months after opening the new Traverse made £10,000 more than the old venue's income for the whole of the previous year.
PENICUIK Man hunted after sex attack
A 33-YEAR-OLD woman was sexually assaulted by a man in Cairnbank Road, Penicuik, early yesterday.
Police, who have appealed for information, described her attacker as about 40, slim, with a thin face and close-shaved grey beard and moustache.
He may have been wearing a green bomber jacket.
COWDENBEATH Girl, 8, orphaned by house blaze
A eight-year-old girl has been orphaned after a fire swept through her home killing her parents and little brother.
Laura Robertson survived the blaze at the terraced house in Mossbank, Cowdenbeath, after she was sent to get help from a neighbour at about 1am on Saturday.
The bodies of her parents Christopher, 39, and Dawn, 29, were found upstairs along with her four-year-old brother Paul.
Monktonhall men seven weeks without pay
By Graeme Wilson
MINERS at Monktonhall colliery have not been paid any wages for the last seven weeks in an effort to ease the venture's cash-flow problems, it was revealed last night.
But the 160 men working at the Midlothian pit are now hoping that a series of meetings this week will secure both the future of the colliery and their jobs.
Leaders of the consortium are preparing for discussions with three potential partners in an effort to secure the colliery's financial position.
A statement on the outcome of the talks will be made at the end of the week but senior managers were last night bullish about their chance of success.
Bert Brown, the consortium's sales and marketing director, said: ‘It is true that the miners have not been paid for the last seven weeks.
But they agreed at a meeting on Saturday that they would take whatever steps were necessary to protect their colliery.
‘I cannot give any indication on which companies we are meeting but suffice it to say that one is trade and the other two venture.
‘We are optimistic about our chances and, hopefully, at the end of the week we will be able to announce a new chapter in Monktonhall's history.’
The pit's financial problems have stemmed from a delay in starting production at the main PC1 coalface.
It had been hoped to finish preparation work on it by last September but production did not start until the end of December.
As well as next week's meetings, there are plans to persuade the Government to help the colliery.
Christine Richard, Conservative group leader on Edinburgh District Council, said she hoped ministers would give some sort of recognition for the creation of 160 jobs in an area of high unemployment.
She said last night: ‘I'm actively looking to see if there is anything the Government can do to help.
‘If a company was coming in from Japan or America, they would probably get some sort of aid for creating jobs.’
Jumbo price tag for a trunk of livestock
AFRICAN elephants are being offered ‘for sale’ for £850 by an Inverness company.
The animals were saved from an elephant cull and are now part of a conservation project on a 25,000-acre wildlife estate in central Zimbabwe.
Sport in Scotland, an Inverness firm which organises shooting and fishing holidays and publishes two sporting gazettes, funded the purchase of 15 young elephants which would have been shot to reduce overpopulation in a Zimbabwean national park.
They have been relocated at the Iwaba wildlife estate, where they will be protected from poachers, and where they are needed to reduce the density of the bush, which is outgrowing the ability of the animals to eat it.
John Ormiston of Sport in Scotland said ten of the elephants had already been sold.
The buyers do not have any legal rights or obligations over the animals, but receive a certificate confirming their ownership and will receive regular newsletters on their elephant's progress.
‘It is really a unique way of attracting funding for game conservation,’ said Mr Ormiston.
Intact bomb yields clues in Bombay
POLICE hunting for bombers who killed at least 250 people in Bombay got their biggest break so far yesterday when they found an intact bomb inside a stolen motorbike.
Bombay's police chief, Amarjeet Singh Samra, said the bomb, planted on Friday when 13 others devastated buildings across India's commercial capital, was made of the plastic explosive Semtex and heat-generating RDX, as well as chemicals and grease.
Mr Samra said the brand-new motorbike was left near the crowded Dadar railway station in central Bombay.
It was reported to police yesterday morning.
Police cordoned off the area while they defused the bomb, made from 44 lbs of explosive.
‘Now we've got this explosive, we can find out from where it originated,’ the police chief said.
India called yesterday for international help in identifying those responsible for the bombings, after investigators said the trail pointed abroad, possibly towards Pakistan, or to Tamil Tiger guerrillas in Sri Lanka.
Pakistan and the guerrillas, however, have denied any involvement.
Mr Samra said yesterday that police had arrested two people, including one, Schultz Frankson. with a German-sounding name.
He said he would appear in court today charged with theft and forgery after he admitted changing £90,000 worth of forged travellers cheques.
The police chief said that the Bombay bombing was a carefully planned, and well-financed operation, but said there was no direct link yet between the arrest and the bombers.
— Reuter
Andorrans rejecting feudal era
THE tiny Pyrenean principality of Andorra appeared to be heading for a ‘yes’ vote yesterday on a new constitution to reform a rule run largely on feudal lines.
When polls closed, 75 per cent of the 9,000 native Andorrans eligible to vote among a population of 60,000 had cast their ballot.
Early results showed 2,009 for the changes and 617 against.
For 715 years Andorra has been a co-principality whose joint sovereigns are the French president and the bishop of the nearby Spanish town of Seu d'Urgell.
The new constitution will allow it to make its own foreign policy and join international organisations.
Andorrans would for the first time wield full sovereignty, be able to form and join unions and political parties and have an independent judiciary.
However, the changes will not affect foreigners unless they have lived more than 20 years in the principality.
— Reuter
The constitution, the product of 21 months of negotiations between representatives of Andorrans and the co-princes, maintains the principality's unique system of co-sovereignty, but with vastly reduced powers.
Yeltsin ponders next move at his countryside retreat
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin retreated to the country yesterday to consider his next move in a fierce battle with his supreme legislature which is threatening to divide Russia.
‘Nothing is planned for today: the president is out of Moscow at his dacha,’ his spokesman said.
Informed sources said it was likely that he would make a televised statement today.
His political troubles deepened at the weekend after conservatives had won a series of victories at an emergency session of the legislature, the Congress of People's Deputies, which had paved the way for his powers to be curbed.
The Congress ended a stormy debate on Saturday which appeared to give parliament the upper hand in the struggle over who rules Russia.
It denied Mr Yeltsin the right to hold a referendum and accused him of stirring confrontation.
The president now plans to hold a nationwide opinion poll on who should rule the country, although it will have no legal validity.
He can also try to impose emergency rule.
But the referendum plan could be swallowed up in a swamp of indifference — a Russian television opinion poll yesterday showed only 34 per cent of those questioned would take part.
Itar-Tass news agency said several hundred demonstrators in the Siberian city of Irkutsk had taken to the streets yesterday to demand Mr Yeltsin's resignation while his supporters had begun collecting signatures in favour of a referendum.
Both sides need the support of Russia's increasingly impatient regions if they are to triumph.
In Hong Kong yesterday the Group of Seven leading industrial nations said they wanted to give new help to Moscow's reforms, but both they and Russia's deputy premier stressed that future aid had to be tailored to win Russian hearts and minds.
Sources close to the meeting of G7 senior government ministers, who had invited the deputy prime minister, Boris Fyodorov, as a last-minute guest, said they had laid the groundwork for fresh aid but no promises had been made over cash.
‘There is something new coming…the G7 countries all want to help, but whether that means to give more money is something we are going to study further,’ said one source from the group, which includes Britain, the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and Japan.
At a press conference Mr Fyodorov stressed that any new aid should be delivered in a way that would leave a political impression on the Russian people.
‘The amount of aid is not so important,’ he said.
‘What is important is that international financial assistance is well-packaged and well-planned and that it is visible so that people feel that international aid really helps.’
Australia's links with Britain in doubt
THE surprise election victory of Australia's Labor prime minister, Paul Keating, at the weekend has cleared the way for Australia to remove Queen Elizabeth as head of state and become a republic, observers said yesterday.
While constitutional change was never a major election issue, it was cited by the Sydney Sunday Telegraph as the eventual outcome of the solid win by Mr Keating, an avowed republican.
The Labor leader's re-election ‘has guaranteed that the nation is on the way to becoming the Federal Republic of Australia under a new flag,’ the newspaper said.
‘The break from constitutional monarchy is almost certain to see Elizabeth II as the last Queen of Australia,’ it added.
‘The move will likely see the Governor-General [the Queen's representative]replaced by a president.’
Since replacing the former prime minister, Bob Hawke, in an inter-party challenge 14 months ago, Mr Keating has pledged to set up a panel of eminent Australians to study how the country could become a republic, with an Australian head of state, by 2001.
He has also supported a change of the Australian flag, a blue ensign which depicts the Southern Cross constellation and, in the top left-hand corner, the Union Jack.
‘Mr Keating believes the move to a republic under a new flag is vital for Australia to carve its identity in the Asia-Pacific region,’ the newspaper said.
Meanwhile the dejected opposition leader, John Hewson, reacted to his crushing defeat yesterday by abandoning key policies which he had trumpeted as essential for Australia.
His face stony and voice at times shaky, Mr Hewson said his Liberal-National conservative coalition would review proposals which only a day earlier he had fervently promoted.
He pledged to stay as opposition leader if his party would have him.
The former economics professor conceded that his plan to replace six indirect taxes with a 15 per cent goods and services tax (GST), which he had said was essential to make Australia competitive, had been unpopular.
‘If anything this election was a referendum…on the GST and…the people of Australia have spoken,’ he said.
‘They don't want it and so it will go.’
By last night, Labor appeared to have clinched 77 seats in the 147-member lower house, equalling its previous standing, after drawing a uniform swing in its favour of 1.98 per cent.
Five seats remained doubtful.
Two of them may fall to Labor.
A relaxed Mr Keating, his Dutch-born wife, Annita, and their three daughters, posed for photographers at the prime ministerial harbour-front Sydney residence a day after defying political gravity and triumphing in a poll widely thought unwinnable.
Tainted by the worst recession in 60 years, a record 1.05 million people out of work and a perception that Labor was fatigued after ten years in office, few had expected Mr Keating to scrape in.
Pact may mean new interest rates
GERMANY'S central bank policy makers are expected to consider lowering interest rates this week following political agreement at the weekend on a financial package to revitalise the former East Germany.
In a statement released yesterday the finance minister, Theo Waigel, said the agreement would have positive effects on the financial market, and he believed it would be judged positively by the Bundesbank.
After three days of negotiations, federal and state government leaders overcame party rivalries late on Saturday to agree on new measures to consolidate the budget and help pay the huge costs of German unification.
A key feature is a 7.5 per cent personal income tax surcharge, effective from 1 January, 1995.
Only wage earners at the lowest level will be exempt.
Private property taxes will also be increased.
Economists said the fact the economy would not be burdened by higher taxes in the immediate future was positive for the recession-bound German economy and for Europe as a whole.
The Bundesbank had said previously that agreement on sharing that financial burden was a precondition for easing monetary policy.
The policy-making Central Bank Council meets next Thursday to consider whether to lower key interest rates.
UN general stays in besieged town
THE commander of United Nations troops in Bosnia has vowed to stay in the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica until a stranded aid convoy arrives, a UN official said yesterday.
General Philippe Morillon has set up headquarters in the town, which has been under Serb siege for 11 months, according to Laurens Jolles, of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Mr Jolles, who had left Srebrenica earlier yesterday, said: ‘He has put up his headquarters there, there is a United Nations flag there.
He has his office there.’
A UN convoy which set off for Srebrenica yesterday was turned back by Serbian police backed up by an armoured car.
The convoy of 23 vehicles, including ten trucks carrying 125 tonnes of aid, had travelled just 12 miles before it was forced to return.
Some 60,000 people in Srebrenica, in eastern Bosnia, have received no aid at all by road since December, though the US air force did drop some supplies by parachute into the area on Saturday night.
The plight of the town's population was graphically described yesterday by Simon Mardell, the former Aberdeen Royal Infirmary specialist in accident and emergency treatment who recently joined the World Health Organisation.
Dr Mardell told reporters at a press conference in Zagreb that the torment and carnage he had seen in a week in Srebrenica and the nearby town of Konjevic Polje surpassed his previous experiences in Ethiopia, Liberia and Afghanistan.
‘We were traumatised by what we saw,’ he told a news conference.
‘The number of casualties arriving wherever I worked was overwhelming.’
He described local people dropping dead from starvation or being torn apart by Serb shelling as they sought shelter or scoured the snowy terrain for anything edible.
In one place, he said, he had seen a foetus of about eight months old lying spilled on the road beside its dead mother.
He also said US airdrops so far had been grossly lacking in penicillin and anaesthetics vital for surgery.
Residents of the two towns he had visited were suffering from severe malnutrition, Dr Mardell said.
They would look for food by sending someone to a relative in a nearby village with a farm, usually entailing a trek of several days through deep snow.
Some who had tried to steal food from farms behind the Serb lines less than half a mile away had been shot dead.
Many residents were reduced to eating a crude bread made from grinding down the cores of corn cobs, mixed with buds from tree branches and berries from which tea was brewed.
But the corn cores caused abdominal pain and some patients said people had died from it.
Dr Mardell said the last distribution of aid in  Srebrenica before his arrival had been on 12 December and had provided four kilos of flour per family — enough for about one week.
During his stay US planes had dropped 64 bundles of rations — enough for one person in four to eat once a day.
‘I came across families who hadn't eaten for four days.
One family was living in a shed.
The children were lying motionless, parents lethargic, typical of starving people,’ he said.
‘I saw one 30-year-old man collapse dead as he was looking for (US aid) parachutes.’
Ancient oil fields may ensure Azeri future The oil wealth of Azerbaijan has been a mixed blessing, reports James Meek in Baku, but there are hopes that will change
THERE are some odd T-shirts to be seen in Baku these days.
‘Runrig’, said one: ‘Edinburgh Castle Esplanade’.
The wearer disappeared swiftly into the lift of the Old Intourist Hotel before I had a chance to speak.
The predominant accent of the foreigners in the hotel corridors and restaurants is American, though English voices are sometimes heard and, it is said, the occasional Aberdonian.
These are oilmen talking, on the make.
Baku, capital of the newly independent republic of Azerbaijan, can fairly lay claim to being the father of all oil towns.
Back in the 10th century they would scoop out holes in the sand to get at the crude for medicinal purposes.
Flammable petroleum gas escaping through rock vents created the sacred pillars of fire worshipped by Zoroastrians.
Passing Baku in the 13th century, Marco Polo noted that the black oil burned well but was not good with food.
The demand for kerosene for lighting led to an oil rush in the 19th century, when Azerbaijan was part of the Russian Empire.
The Baku boom was accelerated when transnational capitalists such as the Nobels and the Rothschilds became involved.
Stalin dated his revolutionary skills from his experiences among the disaffected oil workers there.
The legacy of 150 years of frenzied exploitation, first by capitalism, then by Soviet power, is the hideous wasteland covering hundreds of square miles around the city.
Blackened derricks and ‘nodding donkey’ pumps crowd thickly across the rocky landscape, bleeding crude into the soil.
A few sad, oily sheep pick their way through the debris of rusting pipework and discarded machinery, laced with a sulphurous stink.
It could be another planet; our own, perhaps, a century hence, after the death of the Oil Age.
There is another legacy — poverty.
The capitalists left elegant buildings in Baku, the communists promoted literacy and education, but they have taken more out than they have put back in.
Azerbaijan does not want it to happen again.
The country was briefly independent once before in the 20th century, after the Bolshevik revolution.
‘The first opera theatre in the East was in Azerbaijan,’ said Valekh Aleskerov, senior vice-president of the state oil company, SOCAR.
‘If the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic hadn't been crushed in 1920 by the Bolsheviks, it's not yet clear who would be helping who now.
These western companies us — or we them.’
The new frontier for firms like BP, Statoil, Amoco and Pennzoil lies not on land but under the Caspian Sea.
Beneath this huge salt lake, lie reserves of oil that may rival those of the North Sea — 7.5 billion barrels is one estimate.
Soviet oilmen have been tapping into these supplies since the 1940s, when they created Oil Rocks, a gigantic production centre with 200 kilometres of causeway, built on concrete piles and landfill offshore.
The Azeris now have yards steadily churning out mobile production platforms, and have built piles for one of BP's North Sea platforms.
But without western investment their already degraded energy complex would grind to a halt.
Tom Hickox — no relation to Wild Bill — is a tall, paunchy oilman from Texon, Texas, a vice-president of the new Pennzoil Caspian Corporation.
Understandably his view of oil exploitation in Azerbaijan is benign.
Even the onshore pollution seems normal.
‘The town where I was born looked much like the outskirts of this city.
It still does.
‘Certainly we want to improve the Azerbaijanis’ standard of living.
We want to see their country benefit from all of this.
I'd be very disappointed if it didn't become a wealthy country within five or ten years, as opposed to other oil-producing countrie s I've lived in, Nigeria or Libya.
I'm very optimistic.’
There is, however, a catch: the war.
The police in Baku carry automatic rifles.
Here and there you see a black-bereted soldier chewing a fag on a street corner.
Apart from that, it is not obvious this is the capital of a country at war.
But the conflict with Armenia over the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh is never far from anyone's mind.
Everyone knows the war has to end before Azerbaijan achieves genuine prosperity, but no-one supports a compromise which would involve the slightest concession to Armenia.
The conflict has already dragged on for five years; thousands have died.
For now, Azerbaijan is losing.
Western observers in Baku say this is because the Armenians are better organised, rather than that Azerbaijan lacks arms and equipment.
But it would be fatuous not to conclude that a flow of petro-dollars could help Baku fight the war.
Spokesmen for western oil companies do not like to discuss Nagorno-Karabakh: it is ‘politics’.
Mr Aleskerov seems to have reason to be sure Azerbaijan can receive western investment and fight the war if it chooses.
‘Agreements will be signed anyway,’ he said.
‘Azerbaijan will prosper regardless.
Azerbaijan will not give a single square metre of its land to anybody.’
Andorrans reject feudalism
THE Pyrenean principality of Andorra yesterday voted overwhelmingly in favour of a new democratic constitution which will change the destiny of a territory still run largely on feudal lines.
The final result of a referendum showed that of the 9,123 native Andorrans eligible to vote 74.2 per cent had said ‘yes’ to the changes and only 25.8 per cent‘no’.
For 715 years Andorra has been a co-principality whose joint sovereigns are the French president and the bishop of the nearby Spanish town of Seu d'Urgell.
The new constitution will allow it to make its own foreign policy and join international organisations.
Andorrans will for the first time wield full sovereignty, be able to form and join unions and political parties and have an independent judiciary.
A Mile wide of the mark
THE overwhelming feeling one got of the exhibition on the Royal Mile Traffic Calming (Phase One) Project was one of disappointment — not because the problem is easy or unimportant but because the analyses are so shallow and the solutions so insignificant.
The scheme aims to reduce traffic in the Royal Mile through the introduction of a meandering road consisting of one lane each way.
Curbs in front of John Knox House and St Giles are to be eliminated and bollards planted in their place in order to allow the space in front of these landmarks to become significant.
One other proposal is to reinforce Hunter Square behind Tron Kirk as an urban node by closing down car access from Blair Street and by sinking the existing public toilet below ground.
Meandering roads, cul-de-sacs and dead ends are of course popular with traffic engineers but nearly always they simply increase our car dependence, lengthen walking distances and make it too difficult for buses to circulate.
At least part of the traffic problem in the High Street is caused by the lure of convenient car parking and the proposals hardly recognise this.
In fact, they explicitly state that there will be no reduction in the number of car parks.
Presumably, this is a politically expedient decision; but how long can this car dependence be sustained?
The aim to improve the quality of space in front of John Knox House and St Giles is also fraught with difficulties.
Throughout the Royal Mile there is a certain relationship between the width of the road and the pattern of buildings on either side.
The present pavement is to some extent gauged to enhance that relationship, which will be savaged by the proposed reconstruction of pavements.
It takes visual sensitivity to realise that a meandering medieval street is quite different from the traffic engineers' meandering street and this is why the consultants' perspective drawings look so horribly wrong.
If implemented, we face the danger of replacing what little uniqueness is left of the Royal Mile with a commonplace traffic engineers' solution that can be found all over the world.
The great 16th century Venetian architect San Savino said that ‘a city should be built to the convenience and satisfaction of those that live in it, and to the great surprise of strangers’.
It is symptomatic of our age that we wish to declare the existence of everything in the loudest possible way.
Does John Knox House need a great urban gesture in front of it?
Is it not better off as a hidden surprise to be discovered by the interested tourist?
The space in front of St Giles may well be a different matter, but is the ubiquitous British bollard all we can think of for making the space more significant?
Surely there are more ways of making a dignified urban space.
It is a well known fact that designers plant a line of bollards when they do not know what to do.
As for Hunter Square, there is no way one can design that space before putting the Tron Kirk to an appropriate re-use.
Some major city spaces become foci for activity generated not by buildings surrounding them but by their special sense of identity (good examples are the Piazza San Marco in Venice and indeed the space in front of our own National Gallery).
Hunter Square cannot possibly be this type of space — it has to generate activity as a result of life spilling into it from buildings around, rather like what happens in Covent Garden.
The most successful of all proposals in the exhibition is to leave the existing building-mounted street lighting alone.
It is indeed unobtrusive and of a reasonable quality.
Unfortunately the same cannot be said of the decision to persevere with the existing range of street furniture.
Every architect is disappointed with the range of street furniture available in the market, but the tooling and jigging costs for items like litter bins, street signs and the like are not that prohibitive.
There is no reason why Edinburgh should not develop its own range of street furniture designed by some of our young talents.
The most influential of 20th century architects, Le Corbusier, perpetuated the notion that modern city planning will not materialise until ‘we have killed the street’.
Fortunately for Edinburgh we destroyed only part of the Royal Mile.
In attempting to repair it however, we seem to be in danger of fixing the wrong thing.
The final message for the politicians and consultants ought to be ‘back to the drawing board’.
Stepping on the gas
FACED with the need for a quick method of raising revenue, the Chancellor must have been tempted to look closely at the energy sector in finalising plans for tomorrow's Budget.
Adding new levies to fuel and power bills could be justified as environmentally friendly following the trend set in the US by President Clinton, and European Community plans to tax consumption that contributes towards global warming.
With some innovative thinking on the way new energy taxes are applied, Mr Lamont might even give a helping hand to Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, who is struggling to find a way out of the controversy over plans for pit closures.
As we have argued before, a levy on coal imported to power stations would probably provide the most effective and flexible means of giving the industry breathing space to adjust to changes in the energy market.
Mr Lamont might also look at the threat to coal jobs from the new generation of power stations burning North Sea gas.
This could be another potential target in any strategy designed to influence the energy mix in favour of coal.
But penalising gas — the ‘greenest’ of the hydrocarbon fuels because of its low level of carbon dioxide emission — would run counter to EC plans to base taxation on carbon content.
Perhaps the Chancellor will decide to encourage energy conservation generally by adding VAT to household gas and electricity bills — in addition to any increased burden on the motorist who already pays VAT on top of the excise duty applied to petrol.
Apart from the inflationary impact of such measures, the global trend towards higher taxation on fuel consumption is souring relations with leading oil-producing states which yesterday threatened to retaliate with levies on imports from Europe and the US.
Because Britain is largely self-sufficient in its main sources of energy, the Government can perhaps claim immunity from the charge that it is exploiting deliveries from oil-exporting states to swell national tax coffers.
But it is doubtful if this argument will lead to any exceptions being made in an orchestrated campaign which could hit projects such as the proposals for a power plant which British Gas said yesterday it had negotiated with Bahrain.
Longer-term trading considerations may be far from the Chancellor's mind as he tackles the more urgent problems of balancing the books by squeezing maximum contributions from energy supply, but a quick tax fix is no substitute for a well-defined investment strategy to ensure the best balance is struck between available supply and demand.
Green shoots from Labour
A YEAR can be a short time in politics, especially in the case of the Labour Party whose internal workings are often slow to react to external stimuli.
It is a year since the General Election, and as the chairman of the Scottish executive, Anne McGuire, observed at Labour's conference in Inverness, the party has not fully realised the implications of that defeat.
It was not only the blow of failing to win power, and with it all hopes of a Scottish parliament, but also the fact that Labour lost votes and a seat in Scotland — facts which are conveniently forgotten when home-rulers and guardians of the party's traditional totems blame failure in the south for Labour's lack of achievement in the north.
Some, contemplating that north-south gap, would hold that the answer is to use whatever autonomy Labour has in the north to retreat into the past and reaffirm the public ownership tenets of Clause IV of its constitution.
They forget that the Scottish National Party's support for renationalising what was then left of the Scottish steel industry proved of declining electoral value the closer it went to Motherwell.
Others wish to cut the umbilical cord between the Scottish party and the rest of the UK in an attempt to emphasise Scottish autonomy, and the autonomy of a future Scottish parliament.
But in seeking the right to renationalise the Scottish water industry, should that be privatised, they have failed to address the implications of that policy.
For example, would a Scottish Parliament want to spend its limited resources on renationalisation, rather than on the pressing problems of homelessness, joblessness, or lawlessness?
While Labour needs to think hard about a coherent and realistic policy, to give substance to what is otherwise simply a slogan, there were signs in Inverness of regeneration — and a recognition that Labour has for too long taken its political dominance in Scotland for granted.
There were youth speakers on the platform for the first time in a decade.
Attention is being given to grass-roots structures, which the election revealed as over-grown rather than bearing the green shoots of healthy activity.
The conference also benefited from the unexpected gifts provided by the Nationalists, who now face as serious an internal crisis as the one in 1982 which crippled them for years.
The Labour leader, John Smith, took full advantage of their discomfiture, and the conference demonstrated that whatever its doubts over Smith's modernising intentions, there are none concerning his home rule credentials.
Another who rose to the occasion was the shadow Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, whose speech, while a little lacking in vision, was delivered with a verve which must surely silence his critics.
The enthusiastic response of the delegates certainly enhanced his authority, which he should now seek to use to lead campaigns on poverty and unemployment which the conference asserted was its priority.
Lord Underhill: key Labour Party worker
LORD Underhill, one of the stalwarts of the Labour Party over the past 30 years, has died aged 78 in St Margaret's Hospital, Epping, Essex.
Reg Underhill was Labour's national agent, an unspectacular but key appointment in the movement, from 1972 to 1979.
He became a life peer when he retired from that post and was appointed deputy leader of the Labour Party in the Lords in 1982, an office he relinquished only two years ago.
He was an active figure in the Lords until only a week ago.
It is widely believed that if Labour's national executive had acted on his report in the mid-1970s about the need to root out Militant Tendency from within the party, then the movement would have been saved all the subsequent turmoil in the 1980s, by which time Militant had gained a grip.
He concentrated in the Lords on local government and transport issues.
He was president of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities until last year.
Lord Underhill was regarded as one of the most knowledgeable people about the internal workings of the Labour Party.
As his title Lord Underhill of Leyton indicated, he was a lifelong supporter of Leyton Orient FC.
Lord Underhill is survived by his wife Flora, two sons and one daughter.
The Labour leader, John Smith, in a tribute, said: ‘Reg Underhill was a great servant of the Labour Party who devoted most of his life to the vital organisational work without which no political party can succeed.
‘In the House of Lords he went on to make an outstanding contribution on Labour's front-bench.
He gave a lifetime of service to British public life and I know he will be greatly missed by his many friends and admirers both in the Labour Party and outside politics.’
Lord Underhill: Important figure behind the scenes
Cost cuts lose Shell large part of oil find
SHELL has passed up potential profits of hundreds of millions of pounds and revenue of about £1 billion over the next few years after deciding not to take up its full rights in a major oil find west of Shetland.
The giant Anglo-Dutch company and BP each had a 50 per cent stake in the crucial exploration block, but Shell decided to scale down its share to 20 per cent before drilling started last summer.
Earlier this year it was announced that the block contained an oilfield with recoverable reserves of 250 million to 500 million barrels of oil, putting it in the so-called ‘elephant field’ category and the largest oil find off the British coast for five years.
Like other oil companies, Shell is under pressure to trim costs and by cutting back its contribution to the exploration drilling costs it will have saved £3 million.
But that figure is dwarfed by the loss of the revenue and profits stream over the life of the field.
Last night a Shell spokesman said the company never commented on partnerships in any wells.
However, Shell has kept its 50 per cent stake in neighbouring exploration blocks.
Full report, Page 19
Bedtime office ban leaves academic out in cold
By John Smith
AN academic has been banned from sleeping or eating in her office at Stirling University after being told it was so cluttered with papers and food that it constituted a health and fire hazard.
Dr Enid Marshall, editor of the Scottish Law Gazette, has been threatened with being locked out of the office if she does not accept the rulings of the university authorities.
She has also been told that she must not remain in the room after 11:30pm and that the campus is off limits for her 18-month-old miniature dachshund.
Dr Marshall has admitted that the office was ‘a bit untidy’ but has made an effort to clean it.
A note on her office door explains that shifting heavy loads without the help of porters brought on muscular back spasms.
The note blames this problem for her temporary inability to undertake lectures and tutorials.
At midday yesterday, Dr Marshall, reader in the department of accountancy and finance, was not at her office or her home near the university.
She was asleep in her small Fiat car outside her detached bungalow, her dachshund at her side.
Dr Marshall, whose 18 cats occupy an outhouse, explained that with major damp-proofing repairs being carried out, she could not live in the house.
She said she was spending nights at a local bed-and-breakfast establishment which did not mind her dog.
Dr Marshall, 60, said it was disgraceful that she had been given little more than 48 hours to tidy her office.
She said she slept in it because she worked on a computer that was only available to her at night and there was no point in going home after 2am.
Dr Marshall, who as a vegan eats no animal products, agreed that she had eaten in her room, but said that she did no cooking.
Blaming a personality clash within the department for her ultimatum, she said she would resume work when her back was better.
Dr Marshall was unrepentant at having posted two confidential letters from the university secretary, Robert Bomont, on her office door.
The first, after referring to a ‘health and fire hazard’, continues: ‘It is difficult to see how you can properly carry out your duties as a university teacher, given the state of your room.’
A second letter records Mr Bomont's pleasure on being told by union representatives of progress in tidying the room and that Dr Marshall had agreed to abide with the university's requirements.
Mr Bomont said yesterday that the university had been extremely sympathetic and understanding.
He conceded that the prestige which Dr Marshall — author of several widely-read reference books on Scots law — brought to the university had probably delayed action against her.
Several years ago, the university was unsuccessful in a legal action to force Dr Marshall to stop bringing three other dachshunds with her to work.
Fears of ice-cream war after van fire-bombed
By Denny Macgee
AN ice-cream van driver and his assistant escaped when their vehicle was fire-bombed as they served customers in the Ballieston area of Glasgow.
The attack has raised the spectre of another war between ice-cream operators in Glasgow.
Ten years ago, violence between rival organisations came to a head with the deaths of six members of one family in a fire-bomb attack on their house.
The latest attack by two masked men on an ice-cream van on Sunday night forced the 48-year-old driver and his 24-year-old assistant to jump to safety as the vehicle was engulfed in flames.
The incident, which happened while several people including children were milling around the van, is being treated by police as attempted murder.
After their escape, the driver, William McPhee, who also owns the van, and his assistant Caroline Campbell were helped into a nearby house before police, ambulance and fire services arrived.
Ms Campbell was taken to the city's Royal Infirmary suffering from shock.
She was released after treatment.
Last night Mr McPhee of Derwent Drive, Coatbridge, ‘I have not had trouble before.
I don't know why this has happened.’
Witnesses in Berridale Avenue in Baillieston, where the attack happened said the two men, both wearing balaclavas, hurled the flaming bottles through one of the van's windows.
The van burst into flames, giving the two occupants only seconds to get out before it was engulfed.
Forensic experts yesterday carried out detailed tests on the charred shell of the ice-cream van, as police appealed for information.
It is understood police believe it may have been an isolated incident.
However, the attack has brought back memories of the last battle between rival operators.
That violent struggle led to the deaths of six members of the Doyle family whose house in the Ruchazie area of Glasgow was fire-bombed as they slept.
Members of the Doyle family had worked for a company operating a fleet of ice-cream vans in the city.
However, it was claimed that criminals saw the vans operating in the city's large housing schemes as an ideal front from which to sell drugs and stolen goods, and threatened the legitimate operators into giving up their runs to let them move into the area.
Two men, Thomas ‘TC’ Campbell and Joseph Steele were jailed for life for the murder of the six members of the Doyle family.
The charred shell of the ice-cream after Sunday's attack
Top award for VS Naipaul
THE novelist VS Naipaul last night became the first winner of Britain's biggest literary prize, worth £30,000.
The David Cohen British Literature Prize is presented to a living British writer in recognition of a lifetime's achievement.
VS Naipaul, 60, born in Trinidad, was knighted in 1990.
His award-winning work includes In A Free State, The Mimic Men, A Bend In The River and A House For Mr Biswas.
In addition to the £30,000 prize, the Arts Council has provided £10,000 for the winner to commission new work which will encourage young writers.
VS Naipaul has asked that it be given to the Society of Authors for a writer under 40 working in either biography, cultural history or art history.
Ice-cream war fear after van fire-bomb
By Denny Macgee
AN ICE-CREAM van driver and his assistant escaped when their vehicle was fire-bombed as they served customers in the Ballieston area of Glasgow.
The attack has raised the spectre of another war between ice-cream operators in Glasgow.
Ten years ago, violence between rival organisations came to a head with the deaths of six members of one family in a fire-bomb attack on their house.
The latest attack by two masked men on an ice-cream van on Sunday night forced the 48-year-old driver and his 24-year-old assistant to jump to safety as the vehicle was engulfed in flames.
The incident, which happened while several people including children were milling around the van, is being treated by police as attempted murder.
After their escape, the driver, William McPhee, who owns the van, and his assistant Caroline Campbell were helped into a nearby house before police, ambulance and fire services arrived.
Ms Campbell was taken to the city's Royal Infirmary suffering from shock.
She was released after treatment.
Last night Mr McPhee of Derwent Drive, Coatbridge, ‘I have not had trouble before.
I don't know why this has happened.’
Witnesses in Berridale Avenue, Baillieston, where the attack happened, said the two men, who were both wearing balaclavas, hurled the flaming bottles through one of the van's windows, giving the two occupants only seconds to get out before it was engulfed.
A fire-bombing in 1983 led to the deaths of six members of the Doyle family, whose house in the Ruchazie area of Glasgow was attacked as they slept.
Members of the Doyle family had worked for a company operating a fleet of ice-cream vans in the city.
It was claimed that criminals saw the vans operating in the city's large housing schemes as an ideal front from which to sell drugs and stolen goods, and threatened the legitimate operators.
Two men, Thomas ‘TC’ Campbell and Joseph Steele were jailed for life for the Doyle murders.
Sillars mauls SNP leaders for ‘tragedy’ of Tory vote
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
A DAMNING attack on the political judgment of the leadership of the Scottish National Party, coupled with a call to limit Alex Salmond's power as leader, has been made by the party's former deputy leader, Jim Sillars.
In a direct snub to the SNP's three MPs, the former Govan MP praised the three cabinet spokesmen, Alex Neil, Kenny MacAskill and Roger Mullin, who resigned at the weekend, for defending the party's left-wing credentials.
Mr Sillars, calling for the retention of the party's principles, implicitly sanctioned the campaign to overturn the executive's statement in support of the MPs' decision to vote with the Government in the Commons last week.
In his column in the Scottish edition of the Sun newspaper today, Mr Sillars says: ‘It is that position of political integrity the party must build on, even if it means a new collective leadership sooner rather than later.’
Mr Salmond last night dismissed his former deputy's language as ‘way over the top’ and claimed the party's impressive campaigning record on key issues underpinned its identity as vehemently anti-Tory.
Mr Salmond underlined the SNP's aim of advancing Scotland's case at Westminster and extracting any concessions from the system.
In a pointed reference to criticism of his refusal to rule out voting with the Government in the future, he said: ‘Jim of all people should know that there are occasions when Labour as well as the Tories can act against the Scottish interest and therefore must be opposed.’
However, Mr Sillars's description of his former parliamentary colleagues' action as a ‘tragedy’ and a ‘costly mistake’will undoubtedly put further strain on the party's fragile unity.
He said: ‘That our MPs should soil the party's soul for a place on a committee which is a unionist invention to be used against independence, is staggering.
‘Tears of rage and despair have been shed by SNP workers and our voters are stunned.
It never crossed our minds that with the Tory Government in serious trouble, our MPs would hold out a lifeline.’
Deriding the value of the committee of the regions, he tried to demolish Mr Salmond's case for entering the Government lobby in exchange for SNP representation on the European committee, by repeating the comments he made on it when he was the party's foreign affairs spokesman: ‘I remember saying, with the approval of my leader, that it is merely an advisory body, advising another advisory body and has no powers of any kind.’
He also urged party members not to resign over the issue, pointing out that nothing would be gained from such action.
The party's headquarters in Edinburgh said yesterday that only four people had resigned over the decision to support the Government.
Mr Sillars accused the leadership of unravelling ten years of work by party activists — a reference to the SNP decision to vote with the Tories to bring down the Labour government in 1979 which led to the taunt ‘Tartan Tories’.
Authority identifies the doctor who died of AIDS
A HEALTH authority last night officially named the doctor who died from AIDS after working in a group practice and in hospitals.
It was revealed earlier that Dr Yarab Almahawi, 33, who was born in Saudi Arabia, was first identified as HIV positive while working in the casualty department of a Northern Ireland hospital.
Dr Almahawi also worked for several months at the Unsworth group practice in Westhoughton, near Bolton, Greater Manchester, and as a locum at a local hospital, before his death in May, 1992.
The Bolton area health authority was forced to reveal his identity after he was named in local newspapers, and its chief executive, Richard Sutherland, said last night: ‘Our first concern has been for the patients involved.
We feel we have done everything possible to identify them and provide counselling and advice.
‘Equally, we have a duty to the doctor and his family to maintain confidentiality, as set out in the national guidelines.
That has not been possible.’
Mr Sutherland said that the partners at the practice made sure that Dr Almahawi followed safe procedures so that none of his patients was put at risk.
They did not know that he had worked as a locum at Bolton Royal Infirmary and the doctor did not tell the infirmary that he was HIV positive before or after he was employed for six shifts in the casualty department.
Dr Wirin Bhatiani, a senior partner with the Unsworth practice, said Dr Almahawi worked in the practice as a GP trainee from August 1991 to March 1992.
He added: ‘At the outset he was aware of his HIV status and informed the partners of this.
Before he started work advice was taken from his specialists.’
It was confirmed that in the field of general practice there was no risk to patients.
Dr Almahawi had earlier worked as a junior doctor assisting in operations in the South Tyrone Hospital, Dungannon, during periods of employment from 1988 to 1990.
After being diagnosed as HIV positive he was transferred to the Craigavon Hospital, Craigavon, Armagh, where he was not involved in any surgical practice.
A year later he worked for six months in the Belfast area.
A health board spokesman said during that period the doctor worked under supervision and was not involved in any ‘invasive practices’.
Dr Almahawi died at his luxury, four-bedroom detached house in Bolton cared for by his family.
— PA
Two deny murder during routine police check
A SPECIAL constable was shot dead at point-blank range and his colleague gunned down at a routine police check, an Old Bailey court heard yesterday.
They had become suspicious after two men with Irish accents said they had spent the night in a pub that did not exist.
The shooting started when the police radioed to make further checks, said John Nutting, prosecuting.
One man got out of the car, walked up to Special Constable Glenn Goodman, 37, assumed the combat position and fired two shots from a handgun into the officer's chest.
He swivelled round and fired into the police car, wounding PC Alexander Kelly, 32, the court heard.
They later opened fire with a sawn-off Kalashnikov rifle at a pursuing police car before abandoning their Sierra car in a field and disappearing into the countryside, Mr Nutting said.
Bullets ‘danced off the road’ and nine were found embedded in the police car.
Paul Magee, 42, and Michael O'Brien, 32, from Belfast, deny murdering Special Constable Goodman and the attempted murder of constables Kelly, Susan Larkin and Mark Whitehouse on 7 June.
They also deny possessing a rifle with intent to endanger life.
Mr Nutting said Magee and O'Brien were stopped by PC Goodman and PC Kelly on the A64 between York and Leeds.
‘PC Kelly noticed the passenger door of the Sierra open suddenly.
Magee got out and took a step towards the bank at the side of the road,’ he said.
‘As he looked at him, PC Kelly thought he was about to urinate.
But instead Magee turned…and walked towards Goodman who was facing him.
‘Two yards from the special, Magee raised his two arms together holding them out in front of him in the combat position, and to his horror PC Kelly saw a handgun protruding from Magee's clenched fists.
Magee fired twice at point-blank range into Goodman's chest and the special staggered towards the centre of the road, dying.’
Magee pointed the gun through the police car window at PC Kelly and fired twice.
He threw himself across the passenger seat, still holding the handset which was on the open line to his control at Selby and shouted ‘ten nine, ten nine, ten nine’— the police equivalent of SOS requesting immediate help.
As other police cars arrived at the scene the two men raced across the central reservation and drove off at high speed to be chased later by PC Whitehouse and WPC Larkin.
One of them stepped from the Sierra with the Kalashnikov and aimed it at the police car.
‘PC Whitehouse put his car in reverse and shoved WPC Larkin's head below the dashboard to protect her.
He heard a rifle fire and the police car shake as it absorbed the bullets.
‘The car's passenger ran forward and fired again.
Whitehouse reversed again to maintain speed,’ Mr Nutting said.
‘The gunman fired another burst on the retreating police car.
Bullets danced on the surface of the road and the windscreen cracked.’
Nine bullets were embedded into the police vehicle, ‘but both officers miraculously escaped injury’, said Mr Nutting.
The alleged killers finally drove to a field near Burton Salmon, North Yorks, where they set fire to their car and escaped on foot.
They then lived rough for four days before they were arrested in Pontefract, West Yorks, it was alleged.
The trial continues.
Allitt's illness may bring trial to halt
THE trial of a nurse accused of murdering four children may have to be stopped after a sudden deterioration in her health, it emerged yesterday.
Beverley Allitt's weight dropped from 13st to 7st before the start of her trial at Nottingham Crown Court and a defence barrister, James Hunt, QC, told the jury she was suffering from severe anorexia.
‘She has been in Rampton Hospital.
On Friday her condition deteriorated and she was admitted to another hospital,’ he said.
Mr Hunt said the defence would be visiting her today ‘to see if it's possible to continue with the trial, whether she is able to continue attending or not’.
The trial was adjourned until tomorrow and the jury was told it would not be needed until Thursday.
Mr Hunt said it was hoped that Allitt would be either transferred to another hospital or returned to Rampton.
He added that the defence also needed more time to examine and obtain documents relating to the case after fresh evidence came to light last week.
Mr Justice Latham, adjourning the trial last Wednesday until yesterday, told the jury the fresh evidence could be of great significance.
He said: ‘The situation is difficult…and we're going to have to tread very carefully about how we proceed, and it's important that we do so with all the information that we can possibly have.’
Allitt, 24, of Corby Glen, near Grantham, Lincs, denies murdering four children and attempting to murder and causing grievous bodily harm to nine other children, all patients at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital.
She also denies attempting to murder and causing grievous bodily harm to the 15-year-old brother of her flatmate and to a 79-year-old woman.
Channel 4 edits out naked princess cartoons
CARTOONS showing the Princess of Wales naked are no longer being considered for use in a Channel 4 programme today, it emerged last night.
Channel 4 said a top-level decision had been taken that the illustrations were ‘inappropriate and unnecessary to get over the message of the programme’.
But a spokesman said one picture — part of a ‘striptease’ sequence — showing the princess dressed in sexy underwear would be included in the programme, Diana Unclothed, part of the Without Walls series.
The cartoons caused outrage when they were leaked to the press last week.
The princess was said to be furious and Channel 4 came under fierce attack from MPs who said the drawings were highly insulting.
Channel 4 said the three illustrations which caused all the upset would never have been transmitted in any case without further editing.
During the final edit the TV company's commissioning editor for arts, Waldemar Januszczak decided not to use them at all.
One of the cartoons showed a full-length view of the princess from the side, with one leg extended in a ‘typical glamorous pose’.
Another showed her topless and wearing a tiara outside Buckingham Palace.
In the third picture, part of a ‘striptease’ title sequence, the princess was depicted in a union flag G-String with royal crests on her nipples.
The programme, presented by an American cultural critic, Camille Paglia, examines the princess's status as a sex-symbol.
Paglia asks why the British refuse to acknowledge her sexuality and the drawings were intended to illustrate the point.
The spokesman denied Channel 4 had been forced by the controversy to cut the most provocative cartoons.
‘It was an overall balance of the elements of the programme.
The pictures were going to have a final edit anyway it certainly was not simply a question of the controversy which started late last week.’
But the programme was keeping most of the ‘striptease’ that forms the title sequence.
Now the cartoon Princess stops at the point where she is clad in sexy underwear, instead of stripping down further to the G-string.
He said: ‘In the sequence the Princess of Wales has a ball gown of some kind which is whipped off and she's seen standing in sexy underwear, but not naked.
It's naughty, but nice.’
Bank governor's son dies in Africa
THE SON of the Bank of England governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, has been killed in a car crash in Zimbabwe, it was disclosed yesterday.
Thomas, 30, the fourth of five sons, was manager of a company which organised safaris in the African country.
His father was on his way to visit banks and politicians in Hong Kong when news of Saturday's accident came through.
— PA
Prince Charles to visit troops in Bosnia
THE PRINCE of Wales will fly in to the war-torn former Yugoslavia today for a morale-boosting visit to British troops.
During his one-day trip the prince will meet representatives of all British units serving as part of Operation Grapple, army spokesmen in Croatia said.
Security advisers are confident the prince will be relatively safe from hostile forces.
Prince Charles is due to visit two of the four main bases used by the 2,500 British troops serving as peacekeepers with the United Nations Protection Force, arriving this morning at the Divulje barracks near Split on the Croatian coast and travelling on, weather permitting, to a camp known as The Redoubt, near Tomislavgrad in south-west Bosnia.
The British commander, Brigadier Andrew Cumming, 45, said: ‘This is a great boost for morale as we enter the last few furlongs of the first Operation Grapple tour.’
— PA
Birt row moves from tax to his style of management
By David Wallen
THE WAR of words over the John Birt affair intensified yesterday when the former managing director of the BBC, Bill Cotton, criticised six senior journalists within the corporation for writing to the Times backing Mr Birt.
Mr Cotton claimed they were breaking the organisation's rules by displaying partiality on what was, he said, a news story.
The attack came as pressure also started to mount on the chairman of the BBC governors, Marmaduke Hussey, the man who appointed Mr Birt as director general of the BBC and agreed his tax-avoiding freelance contract.
Mr Hussey arrived from Hong Kong refusing to discuss the affair which is increasingly raising questions over the way in which the corporation is run.
The 12-strong board of governors meets on Thursday, and although most have diplomatically refused to comment on the row, estimates are that in the absence of any further evidence against Mr Birt in the next few days, he will survive any vote on his future.
But Mr Hussey is under fire for agreeing Mr Birt's terms of appointment and freelance contract — his salary paid into his own company with his wife as secretary and therefore offset against tax.
Some of Britain's most highly acclaimed broadcasters are planning a boycott of a dinner hosted by Mr Hussey tomorrow night for Sir Michael Checkland, Mr Birt's predecessor, whom Mr Hussey squeezed out.
Sir David Attenborough and two former managing directors of the BBC, Sir Paul Fox and Mr Cotton, believe it is hypocritical of the chairman of the governors to consider hosting the dinner.
Mr Hussey was said to be defending himself aggressively.
One governor  commented that he was trying to pick off some of the weaker governors who had no sense of what their role was meant to be.
Meanwhile, matters seemed to be improving a little for Mr Birt himself.
Yesterday's letters to the Times from both the senior journalists and managers at the BBC indicate it is now safe for leading figures within the corporation to show their head above the parapet in a combined campaign to retain the director general.
Liz Forgan, head of BBC Radio and a Birt appointee, commented in his defence: ‘It is a huge task to move the BBC from a form of efficiency and accountability appropriate for the 1930s to a form of efficiency and accountability appropriate for the 1990s.
John Birt is absolutely the key to that strategy.’
While he has his backers the nature of Mr Birt's shake-up at the corporation, introducing distinctly Thatcherite market-forces into an organisation at least as set in its ways as the civil service, but many times more internally political, means there are many ready to use the episode to raise other questions against him.
The criticism has moved on from his tax details to the way in which the corporation is run.
But if BBC top brass are overtly supporting their director general then there was is the same viewpoint from lower down in the BBC from those concerned over their jobs and those with scores to settle.
It was also  notable that large areas of the BBC's activities were not apparently included in the efforts to defend Mr Birt.
Three months into his posting, he has given the BBC a sense of direction — but not everybody likes the way it is going.
The tone of his detractors is modified, however, by those who fear that without Birt the right wing of the Conservative party would bring in a regime even less to their taste.
Many of his radical moves, breaking the BBC down into business units instructed to make money or be closed and buying in services from the private sector if it is cheaper, are either in force or due to be so by the beginning of next month — so if he went they would continue anyway.
Roy sent off in a blazing helicopter
ROY of the Rovers, who has thrilled young football fans for almost 40 years, is to crash out of his own comic in a blazing helicopter.
In a dramatic final episode, Roy's devotees will watch their hero vainly wrestle the controls as his helicopter plunges to the ground and explodes in a ball of flames.
But Roy's fate is left unclear in the final issue — on sale tomorrow.
Readers see him motionless in the wreckage as rescue services battle the flames.
‘We leave a large question mark over Roy's future,’ said editor Dave Hunt, who hinted that the accident could see Roy's 16-year-old son Rocky sprint to stardom as the main character in a new comic.
Roy won fame in 1954 when he signed for Tiger comic and starred in his own publication from 1976.
But publishers decided to send him off after circulation, once 200,000, fell to 30,000.
Girl, 14, dies in stolen car crash
A 14-YEAR-OLD girl died yesterday after the stolen high performance car she was driving somersaulted and crossed a dual carriageway after a police chase, police said.
Two teenage boys in the Rover car escaped uninjured and were helping police inquiries.
The girl was named as Sally Ann Cattell of St John's Children's Home at Erdington, Birmingham.
— PA
Loyalists admit Belfast murder
THE outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters last night claimed responsibility for the murder of a Catholic man as he sat in a van on the outskirts of north Belfast.
They claimed Robert Shaw, 56, had been an election worker for the Irish Republican Army's political wing, Sinn Fein, but the party said that was not true and branded the killing sectarian murder.
Mr Shaw was believed to have been waiting to collect fishbait near the shores of Belfast Lough at Quay Road, Newtownabbey as he did daily when a car pulled alongside and a gunman opened fire at point-blank range.
Girl, 14, killed in joyride crash
A 14-YEAR-OLD girl was killed yesterday when the stolen high performance car she was driving somersaulted and crossed a dual carriageway during a police chase.
Two boys, aged 16 and 17, in the Rover Metro escaped without injury.
The girl was named as Sally Ann Cattell of St John's Children's Home, Birmingham.
Two youths are due in court today in connection with the incident.
— PA
Fiona Armstrong leaving GMTV
THE television presenter Fiona Armstrong has resigned from GMTV, it was disclosed last night.
Her decision was said to follow demands from station heads that she increase her appearances from four to five mornings a week.
Miss Armstrong, 35, felt the extra work would mean too much time away from her family in Scotland, a GMTV statement said.
Newall in third try at suicide From Tim Brown, Madrid
RODERICK Newall, the former army officer accused of murdering his wealthy Scottish parents in the Channel Islands five years ago, has made a third attempt to kill himself in prison in Gibraltar, it was revealed yesterday.
The 27-year-old one-time Royal Green Jackets officer was taken to hospital after being found unconscious in his cell at the colony's Moorish Castle jail at 3am on Sunday, prison authorities confirmed yesterday.
He quickly regained  consciousness but was kept under observation for 12 hours before being returned to the prison where he has been held in solitary confinement since his arrest off the Moroccan coast by the Royal Navy last August.
Yesterday an investigation was under way into how a syringe came into Newall's possession in spite of his being kept alone and under special surveillance.
It was believed it may have been smuggled into the prison among some oranges.
The attempt on his life, in which he is understood to have injected himself with a drug overdose, was his third since his arrest.
Last autumn he came within a few minutes of death when he slashed his wrists with a razor blade.
Just before Christmas he took an overdose of pills.
After months of legal wrangling in the effort to have him extradited to Jersey to face trial on charges of murdering his parents, whose bodies have never been found, his case is due to be heard at Gibraltar's Court of Appeal on 24 March.
The defence is appealing against a ruling by the colony's Supreme Court that a tape recording made by Scottish police at a Perthshire hotel of an alleged confession was admissible as evidence by the Crown.
Sun, sand, and sex, it's Britain on holiday
THERE is nothing like a holiday to rekindle the flames of passion.
Couples not only make love more often than at home, they also talk more often to each other.
And only a fraction over one in ten said they even fancied someone else, a survey for TV Times and ITV's Wish You Were Here programme found.
The survey also found that Britons:
Regard Greece as the sexiest holiday spot.
Choose the Caribbean or Seychelles for their dream holiday.
Travel most to Spain.
While 11 per cent were worried about flying, 90 per cent said they felt better and refreshed after a holiday.
More than four in five said they would still holiday abroad even if hot summers could be guaranteed in Britain.
The average holiday cost £370 a week and nine out of 10 thought their holiday had been good value.
— PA
Rugby player dies after incident during match
A RUGBY player injured in a clash during a weekend junior club match died yesterday, Scotland Yard said.
Seamus Lavelle, 30, of Endsleigh Gardens, Edgware, north-west London, died at noon in hospital after sustaining severe head injuries.
Dudley Wood, the secretary of the Rugby Union, said: ‘This will shock and distress all people connected with rugby.
‘We express our sympathy to the player's family.
I have heard of three deaths during rugby matches in the seven years I have been secretary, but nothing like this.
All the other deaths were of players who had a history of heart trouble.
‘This is bound to raise questions about the level of violence in the game.’
Police said Mr Lavelle collapsed and stopped breathing after an altercation with a player from the opposing side during a match on Saturday at Hendon, north London.
He was flown by helicopter to the Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel, east London, where surgeons ruled out emergency surgery after initial investigations.
He was put on a life support machine in intensive care.
The machine was not switched off, but Mr Lavelle died of natural causes, police said.
A post-mortem will take place tomorrow at Poplar mortuary in east London.
A police spokeswoman said an incident room had been set up at West Hendon police station but that the investigation had not become a murder inquiry.
‘Police are keeping an open mind in connection with this inquiry,’ she said.
‘The post-mortem will reveal how he died.
It would be inappropriate to speculate beforehand on how the inquiry will proceed.’
Mr Lavelle, a carpenter who was married without children, was playing as a forward for Hendon against Centaur, from West Drayton in Middlesex, when he was injured.
A 23-year-old Centaur player was questioned by police after the match and released without charge on police bail.
He is due to report to West Hendon police station in two weeks' time.
The match at Hendon's Great North Way ground was abandoned as a result of the incident.
Reports have alleged that a punch was thrown during the altercation, but police are questioning players and spectators to discover exactly how Mr Lavelle sustained his injuries.
Mr Lavelle had been a member of Hendon RFC since he was a teenager, said club officials.
A professional footballer was yesterday in a critical but stable condition after suffering a fractured skull in an accidental clash of heads during a game.
 Rotherham United striker John Buckley, 30, underwent surgery to remove a brain blood clot after the clash with Plymouth defender Gary Poole at the start of Saturday's Second Division home match.
He was on a life support machine at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, yesterday.
The Glasgow-born player began his career with Partick Thistle and has also played for Doncaster, Leeds and Scunthorpe.
Anorexic women run risk of bone disease
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
TEENAGE girls are ending up with the bones of old women because of eating disorders which are producing ‘horrifying results’, a doctor said yesterday.
Now, the world's most intensive investigation into the effects of disorders such as anorexia nervosa is about to begin in Scotland in an attempt to find out what can be done to help.
Chris Freeman, who is heading the study, said anorexics could suffer from severe calcium loss resulting in their bones becoming very fragile.
‘I have had patients who literally just laughed out loud and ended up cracking a rib.
There are women of 18 or 19 with the bones of an 80-year-old.’
Brittle bone disease, or  osteoporosis , which is usually only seen in the elderly, is now appearing in these young women, of whom there are several thousand in Scotland.
Loss of bone mass results in a decrease in height, hunched shoulders and an increased risk of hip and wrist fractures.
‘These (anorexic) women will suffer fractures in their 40s and 50s,’ Dr Freeman said.
At the moment, no-one knows what will happen after that.
Dr Freeman, of the Eating Disorders Research Group at Edinburgh University, said severe weight loss results in women's periods stopping and oestrogen levels going down.
‘To all intents and purposes, they are like post-menopausal women.’
The Scottish Office has provided a £120,000 grant to examine a problem which Dr Freeman said has never been been studied systematically anywhere in the world.
‘We want to find out in more detail how severe the bone loss is, what factors protect against it, and what factors make it worse.’
The study will involve 250 women including past, current and recovering anorexics as well as 50 others suffering from another eating disorder, bulimia.
It is not clear at the moment if bone loss occurs among people with bulimia.
Recruitment has started and the group would like to hear from any woman under 35 who suffered from anorexia in the past but has since recovered.
Participants will be given a bone scan and the condition of their spine will be checked.
Advice will be given if any problems are detected.
Dr Freeman said bone loss does not appear to occur in every anorexic woman.
Some may have stronger bones to start with or there may be a protective effect from exercise or other factors.
The study is aimed at discovering more about such matters.
‘On the basis of that we can plan more rational treatment,’ said Dr Freeman.
Meanwhile, there is a strong health message to be delivered, he added.
‘Many of the young girls who are starving themselves have no idea what they are doing to their bodies.
They think they can be thin for a few years and get away with it.’
Fire-bomb attack on ice-cream van
By Denny Macgee
THE CREW of a Glasgow ice-cream van escaped serious injury when their vehicle was fire-bombed as they served in a quiet street in the Ballieston area of the city.
The attack has raised the spectre of another war between ice-cream operators in Glasgow.
Ten years ago, violence between rival organisations came to a tragic head with deaths of six members of the one family in a fire-bomb attack on their house.
The latest attack by two masked men on an ice-cream van on Sunday night forced the 48-year-old driver and his 24-year-old assistant to jump to safety as the vehicle was engulfed in flames.
The incident, which took place while several people, including children, were milling around the van, is being treated by police as attempted murder.
Both the driver, William McPhee, who also owns the van, and his assistant Caroline Campbell managed to clamber out of the burning vehicle without injury.
They were helped into a house nearby before police, ambulance and fire services arrived.
Ms Campbell was taken to the city's Royal Infirmary suffering from shock.
She was released after treatment.
Last night Mr McPhee, of Derwent Drive, Coatbridge, said: ‘I have not had trouble before.
I don't know why this has happened.’
Witnesses in Berridale Avenue in Baillieston, where the attack took place, said the two men, both wearing balaclavas, hurled flaming bottles through one of the van's windows.
The van burst into flames, giving the two occupants only seconds to get out before it was engulfed.
Forensic  specialists carried out detailed tests on the charred shell of the ice-cream van, as police appealed for information.
It is understood police believe it may have been an isolated incident.
However, the attack has brought back memories of the last battle between rival operators.
That violent struggle led to the deaths of six members of the Doyle family whose house in the Ruchazie area of Glasgow was fire-bombed as they slept.
Members of the Doyle family had worked for a company operating a fleet of ice-cream vans in the city.
However, it was claimed that criminals saw the vans operating in the city's large housing schemes as an ideal front from which to sell drugs and stolen goods, and threatened the legitimate operators into giving up their runs to let them move into the area.
Two men, Thomas ‘TC’ Campbell and Joseph Steele were jailed for life for the murder of the six members of the Doyle family.
Lord Kincraig recommended that Campbell serve at least 20 years for his part in the crime.
Transylvania sets the trend as Kossack meets Highlander From John Davidson, Paris
THE discreet charm of Galerie Vivienne was invaded by the Cognoscenti Noirs — the hoards of black-clad fashion folk in Paris this week for the hectic timetable of runway shows, previewing designers' ready-to-wear collections for next winter.
This antique arcade was the setting for a presentation by Jean-Paul Gaultier, perhaps no longer the enfant but still determined to be the terrible of French fashion.
Gypsy violins cast their eerie spell as a host of models and popular personalities camped and cavorted their way along an interminable red-carpeted runway on Sunday evening.
The collection was a Transylvanian fantasy in (quelle surprise) black.
There were cape-backed trench coats, elegant frockcoats, and stiff white collars so reminiscent of the costume detail which stifled Keanu Reeves's performance in Bram Stoker's Dracula.
Perched on almost every nose were those now familiar little round glasses.
as if referring to very different events now taking place in eastern Europe, many jackets were criss-crossed with heavy webbing belts, more reminiscent of aid-workers than vampire attire.
Kossack met Highlander in combinations of tunic, kilt and breeches, with a touch of monkey fur or fake chinchilla thrown in.
But beneath the cascading ringlets and whacky fur hats, there was undiluted vintage Gaultier tailoring.
It was all frolicking good entertainment for which the aficionados accorded the designer (appearing in a navy serge kilt with his customary striped Breton top) an enthusiastic standing ovation.
Gaultier's shapely double-breasted jacket was one of the most coveted and copied garments of the Eighties.
Even women who would be terrified by this designer's visual incontinence happily snapped up the chain-store derivatives.
But the direction of fashion is not currently decided by the great tailors, no matter how well they cut their cloth.
Designers who are skilled in offering softer alternatives have a rather greater influence for the present.
Gaultier has remained true to himself, and must therefore mark time until fashion comes back around to his idiosyncratic viewpoint.
Call for inquiry into dual role of Orkney official
ORKNEY'S highest ranked council official was last night facing an inquiry into his dual role as chief executive and finance director, after official criticism of his involvement in plans for the rival ferry service across the Pentland Firth.
A majority of the islands' councillors — 11 out of the 21 with seats on the local authority — have signed a letter calling for Ron Gilbert's position to be fully examined.
Earlier this year the council accepted the bulk of the criticism contained in a report from the local authority Accounts Commission.
The commission had found the islands' council's management of the Caithness-South Ronaldsay short-sea ferry project to be deficient and its decision-making inadequate.
To date £6.7 million has been spent on two incomplete ferry terminals at Gills Bay and Burwick.
According to council estimates, it would now cost £21.3 million to complete the scheme.
The report singled out Mr Gilbert for criticism.
But when it was discussed by councillors, a move to censure him was ruled out of order by the convener, Jackie Tait.
Councillor Tait has now been handed a letter which expresses concern over Mr Gilbert's dual role.
It adds: ‘It is felt following the findings of the Accounts Commission that this role should be fully examined.’
Last night one of the signatories, Councillor Ian MacDonald, said: ‘We have accepted the criticism contained in the report, but Mr Gilbert disagrees with what's been said about him.
‘We want to give him the chance to tell us how this strong criticism of him is not justified.
And if we are not satisfied with his answers we may have to take things further, possibly with a disciplinary hearing.’
He said Mr Gilbert's twin role had never been a satisfactory arrangement.
In his view, the two jobs would now have to be split.
Mr Gilbert was last night outwith Orkney and unavailable to comment.
But Mr Tait described the row as a storm in a teacup.
He said he had been right to prevent the earlier attempt to censure Mr Gilbert.
‘He strongly disagrees with what was said about him by the Accounts Commission,’ Mr Tait added.
‘I feel he should have the chance to sort things out with the Accounts Commission before we discuss anything.’
Three soldiers will testify at inquest on IRA deaths
AN INQUEST into the deaths of three IRA men shot by undercover soldiers in Co Tyrone almost five years ago opened yesterday.
The hearing, expected to last up to a fortnight, is into the deaths of brothers Michael Gerard Hart, 29, and Martin Joseph Hart, 23, and their brother-in-law Brian Mullin, 26, all from the Sixmilecross area of Co Tyrone.
The coroner, John Leckey, outlined the case to the jury at Enniskillen court, Co Fermanagh, and said that of 13 soldiers involved in the shoot-out only three would be giving evidence.
A Public Interest Immunity, signed by the Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, would prevent identification of the soldiers whose evidence would be restricted and be given from behind screens.
Ten soldiers had not been compelled to give evidence and had indicated they would not attend the inquest.
Statements they had made to the police would be submitted.
Mr Leckey said the shoot-out in which the IRA men died was a result of actions by the security forces over a threat to the life of a former UDR soldier in August 1988.
The inquest continues.
Gene defect found as cancer link
FAMILIES with a history of both breast and ovarian cancer have the same inherited gene defect, scientists announced yesterday.
Specialists believe the discovery could eventually allow the use of drugs to correct the fault and reduce the risks for women who by the age of 50 have a 60 per cent chance of developing one of those cancers if they carry the defective gene.
The project comes after four years' work involving Cancer Research Campaign scientists at the Institute of Cancer Research, in Sutton, Surrey, and a team at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund genetics laboratory in Leeds.
Many of those from the UK who volunteered to help were recruited after answering an advertisement in the national press and women's magazines.
All had two or more close relatives who had been treated for the disease.
The gene defect link affects about 5 per cent of breast or ovarian cancers, resulting in about 2,000 deaths each year.
Dr Douglas Easton, who leads the CRC team, said the next task is to find the precise gene and identify its function.
‘We believe that in tumours this particular gene, which is located on chromosome 17, is faulty, so that it cannot function normally and a cancer develops.
‘We are hopeful that the gene itself will be identified within a year or so.
It may then be possible to determine which women in these families have the defective gene.’
Dr Tim Bishop, for the ICRF in Leeds, added: ‘We looked at dozens of case studies, from as far apart as America, Holland, Iceland, Germany, France, Sweden and the UK — in fact, almost all the known families with  chromosome 17 linkage data and we were amazed to see that all of the families seemed to have the same genetic defect.’
Professor Bruce Ponder, of the CRC Human Cancer Genetics Group at Cambridge and chairman of the  committee which co-ordinated the study, said: ‘This is another piece in the jigsaw which will help us understand the biology of two cancers which currently affect tens of thousands of women in this country and claim the lives of 20,000 every year.’
— PA
Power deal boost for Monktonhall
By Allan McLean
MINERS who have gone without pay for seven weeks to ease the cash-flow problems of their consortium at Monktonhall colliery were given a huge confidence boost yesterday when ScottishPower announced a five-year contract to buy coal.
Grace Buckley, fuel and by-products manager of the electricity company, said it had agreed that the Midlothian pit should supply 100,000 tonnes annually from next month because of the success of a trial order.
Tests on an initial delivery of 12,000 tonnes earlier this year had proved satisfactory.
The trial had been arranged to allow the quality of the coal to be analysed and the commitment of the consortium to be assessed.
‘I am pleased that the test results allowed us to proceed with this new contract which will benefit both ScottishPower and Monktonhall.’
She added: ‘This purchase of coal from Monktonhall emphasises our well-documented policy of choosing Scottish coal, providing the price is competitive and the quality is acceptable to the company.’
A spokesman at Monkton-hall said that coal was continuing to be produced in spite of current financial problems, which followed a delay in starting production at the main coal face.
He added that a statement was expected later this week on moves to secure the colliery's financial position.
At the weekend senior managers expressed optimism about the future.
Talks are taking place between leaders of the consortium and potential business partners.
Last year ScottishPower was criticised over its decision to order foreign coal.
Monktonhall was opened in the 1960s to supply its power station at Cockenzie, East Lothian.
Grimethorpe ‘only pit on hitlist worth saving'
MINING engineers appointed by the Government to review the prospects for the ten most threatened pits on British Coal's original closure list reported yesterday that only one was economically viable.
John T Boyd, a group of United States mining engineers, concluded that Grimethorpe colliery, near Barnsley in South Yorkshire, failed to meet the corporation's closure criteria.
The pit could reasonably be projected to be profitable, although performance would have to be improved by 20 per cent over the next three years.
The consultants, appointed after a High Court ruling last December that the closure programme was unlawful, concluded that the fabric of all ten pits was being preserved, as claimed by British Coal but disputed by unions.
Another Yorkshire pit, Markham Main, could be economically viable with weekend working and longer shifts, but the colliery would require extensive development and substantial improvement in the work ethos.
Boyd's team visited the ten pits after being told by the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, to establish whether British Coal had met the prescribed criteria for closure.
British Coal said: ‘While we will be giving detailed consideration to the report, it is apparent the independent assessment conducted by Boyd substantially supports our view that these mines are not viable in a market which is being squeezed both on volume and price.’
— PA
Grimethorpe lost £1.8 million in the six months to last September, said British Coal, even though it was sharing the cost of the coal preparation plant with neighbouring Houghton Main.
Losses would be double if Grimethorpe had to bear the full cost.
Millan rules out devolution plea
By Joy Copley, Parliamentary Correspondent
CAMPAIGNERS for Scottish devolution received little comfort from Bruce Millan, the European commissioner for regional policy, yesterday in their fight for subsidiarity to apply to Scotland.
Mr Millan, Scottish Secretary in the last Labour government, told the foreign affairs select committee that there was no mechanism for an appeal to the EC or the European Court about alleged failures of member states to apply subsidiarity downwards to regions and countries within their borders.
Mr Millan was pressed by Dennis Canavan (Lab, Falkirk W), who wanted to know if he saw any scope in the campaign for a Scottish parliament for EC intervention on subsidiarity — devolving decision-making powers from Brussels to national governments.
Mr Millan said: ‘Not at the moment, and I do not think the Maastricht treaty will really change that.
At the end of the day, how a member state organises itself is entirely up to the member state itself.
It is not for me to say what the states should do although I have a personal view.
‘Similarly, a region which felt hard done by a national government does not really have a remedy within the commission or the Court of Justice.’
Mr Millan personally was in favour of a large degree of devolution and said it helped European regional policy to work more effectively.
He warned that failure by the UK to ratify the Maastricht treaty would inflict an ‘immense political blow’ on the community.
‘There is exasperation that it is taking so long.
I would not disguise from you that there is concern as to what the ultimate result will be.
There is a feeling that it is damaging to the community if the uncertainty carries on too long.’
The Government was defeated in the Commons last week over a Labour move requiring Britain's 24 full representatives and 24 alternate representatives on the committee of the regions, an EC advisory body, to be elected councillors.
Mr Millan disclosed that the EC wanted the committee to be composed of 150 elected local representatives but had been overruled by the European leaders at the Maastricht summit.
Mr Millan joked: ‘It is usually the commission that is accused of excessive bureaucracy.’
But ‘for some extraordinary reason’ it was decided at Maastricht to have 189, plus 189 alternates, a total of 378.
Labour sets Lang Budget test
THE BUDGET was said yesterday to present the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, with a crucial test of his commitment to reviving the Scottish economy.
Labour's Scottish affairs spokesman, Henry McLeish, made the claim in Glasgow, writes Alan Dron.
With unemployment spiralling upwards, Mr McLeish said, it was particularly important for Mr Lang to take a grip on training policy, to improve people's skills and make industry more competitive.
In a briefing paper, Labour focused on unemployment, noting that 19 people are chasing every job in Scotland, compared with 14 two years ago.
Labour would again be putting forward its 1992 manifesto plan for a training investment contribution, said Mr McLeish.
Good companies knew the value of training and built in funding for that to their budgets; those that did not should have to pay a levy.
‘What depresses me about the whole position is that skills are so important and the lack of them now is undermining our whole competitive position.
This is a national need which is being ignored.’
He predicted the Chancellor would ‘throw a few million at the issue’ in the Budget, whereas what was required was a new skills strategy.
DAVID GILES Shadow line: Gordon Brown announces Labour's alternative budget in London yesterday
Councils in line for 9.5% spending rise
By David Scott, Local Government Editor
COUNCILS are likely to be given the go-ahead to spend 9.5 per cent extra on capital projects in the coming year, according to planned allocations announced yesterday by Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary.
The increase, taking the total to £628 million, depends on the amount that councils will receive in European Community grants.
For the first time, estimates of those have been excluded from the initial allocations after changes in the rules on additionality, requiring additional sums from the EC to be identified separately.
The allocations issued give councils initial borrowing consent for expenditure of up to £553 million on services like roads, education, police and water and sewerage.
Mr Lang, however, expects to issue £75 million more throughout 1993-94, taking the total to £628 million, a 9.5 per cent increase on last year's figure.
Council representatives immediately criticised the allocations as wholly inadequate.
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities claimed that the Government had failed to acknowledge the overwhelming case for more investment.
It reckons that the figures are about £487 million short of the sum needed.
The effect of the net spending allocations for 1993-94 is a 3.6 per cent reduction when those are compared with final figures for last year.
However, the allocations are yet to be topped up to allow extra spending covered by the cash given in European Regional Development Fund grants.
The system is intended to allow greater transparency by making clear the extra spending that will follow the awarding of the ERDF grants.
Mr Lang gave an assurance yesterday that the further allocations will be equal to the amount of grant received.
The level of supplementary allocations would be dictated by the success of councils in obtaining grant from the various EC programmes operating in Scotland.
‘Under the new arrangements we have forecast total ERDF receipts in Scotland of £120 million and, on past experience, we expect local authorities to obtain around £75 million,’ Mr Lang said.
Local authority general services — mainly district functions like refuse collection and disposal, recreation, tourism and the countryside, as well as functions shared with regions like industrial development — are expected to be the main beneficiaries of the extra money from the EC.
Mr Lang said that the allocations were only part of the story since authorities could also spend their capital receipts and use revenue to fund capital expenditure.
Regional council allocations for 1993-94, excluding the money to come from the EC, will vary from £13.6 million in Borders Region to almost £209 million in Strathclyde.
Among the districts, Glasgow will be allowed to spend £2.4 million; Aberdeen, £1.6 million; Dundee, £1.4 million; and Edinburgh, £500,000.
Charles Gray, the COSLA president, said that local authorities required total investment of £1.1 billion.
But they were being given permission to borrow up to £628 million provided £75 million were raised by way of ERDF grants.
He voiced scepticism about Government statements, saying that the total consents in the past had always included an estimate of grants that would be received.
Mr Gray said: ‘On that basis, it is very alarming that £75 million is being top-sliced from the level of consents and only if these sums are achieved will local government be able to spend up to the figure of £628 million.’
Archie Gillespie, Strathclyde's director of finance, welcomed the move towards greater transparency in the way that the spending allocations are made.
Hurd tries to heal split with China over Hong Kong
By David Wallen, Diplomatic Editor
AN ATTEMPT to defuse the increasingly hostile dispute with China over democracy in Hong Kong was made last night by the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd.
He insisted that democratic reforms for the colony would go ahead in spite of China's opposition and an angry outburst from the Chinese premier, Li Peng, who has accused Britain of trying to wreck the colony.
Mr Li used the normally staid platform of the National People's Congress in Beijing yesterday to make an unprecedented attack on the colony's governor, Chris Patten, who last Friday published proposed democracy laws when China refused talks or negotiations.
Mr Li accused Mr Patten of perfidiously and unilaterally designing his proposals to alter Hong Kong's election system in violation of the agreement on the 1997 handover.
They were designed to create disorder and to impede the smooth transfer of power.
Britain had created obstacles to co-operation.
He said Beijing would ‘never barter away principles…
The only solution for the British Government is to change its course’.
Relations between Britain and China are at their lowest since the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 and there are fears that Beijing may carry out threats to foment disturbances among its many sympathisers in the territory.
Polls had until recently shown support for Mr Patten but now a majority wants him to back down.
The Hong Kong stock market fell by 5 per cent after Mr Li's attack.
Mr Hurd told MPs that Mr Li's comments were not particularly dramatic, but ‘it does represent the continuation of a stalemate’.
British officials understand China's concern at Mr Patten's plans — but he has to come up with arrangement for elections in 1995 and although the colony's business community is cool towards them there are growing demands for democracy.
But with ever closer links between Hong Kong and southern China, those demands are spreading to nearby cities like Guangzhou (Canton), to the communist regime's concern.
‘We remain ready for talks at any time and I hope the Chinese side will be prepared to settle quickly on the arrangements for such talks,’ Mr Hurd said.
‘The key point is that is electoral arrangements in Hong Kong should be fair, open and acceptable to the people of Hong Kong.’
He repeated the Government's support for Mr Patten, who embarked on his reforms last October, and said that publication of the plans was only a first step which should not be an obstacle to talks with Beijing.
‘We will continue…to pursue steadily the path of co-operation with China and we look to the Chinese side to do the same.
We are open to alternative ideas from people of Hong Kong or from the Chinese side.’
The British ambassador to China, Sir Robin MacLaren, said he was disappointed with Mr Li's remarks.
British diplomats, who had been in contact with the Chinese foreign ministry for weeks trying to get them to resume talks, had expected a stormy ride yesterday.
They believe it will be weeks before any reasoned dialogue can return.
China has hinted at setting up a ‘shadow government’ for Hong Kong to undermine the colonial government's authority before 1997.
It also has threatened to void all business contracts signed by Hong Kong without China's blessing.
Normal bi-annual talks between Mr Hurd and his opposite number have failed to materialise and there are no plans for the regular three-monthly meetings on the handover to take place.
University steps up pressure over dental hospital
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
EDINBURGH University is to press the Scottish Office to foot the bill for forced redundancies resulting from the alleged broken promise of a replacement for the city's dental hospital.
The principal, Sir David Smith, yesterday stepped up the pressure in the row over ministerial pledges, as the university court agreed to go ahead with up to 28 sackings.
‘We have had endless fair words for 20 years, finally succeeded by stony-faced inactivity,’ said Sir David.
‘I am not sure if Scottish Office ministers fully appreciate not only the outrage felt by the university, but the potential feelings of the wider community.
I give notice that I have no intention of letting the matter drop until we have satisfactory action.’
The likely job-losses result from the withdrawal of Government grant for the Chambers Street dental hospital and school in two tranches, from this autumn and September next year.
Some of the 40 staff are expected to retire or be relocated.
Four years ago, the then Scottish Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, overturned an independent recommendation that the centre remain open, and promised instead that a new hospital would be built and a post-graduate dental institute funded at the university.
Neither promise has been met, forcing the university to shed staff.
Most are on tenured contracts — which ought to protect employment until retirement.
Ignoring the tenure could leave Edinburgh open to a costly legal challenge, although it has stressed that it is consulting unions.
The Scottish Office last week argued its promises stood, and that redundancies were a matter for the university.
Sir David treated that with scorn yesterday.
He pointed to the university's successful three-year programme to steer it out of serious financial problems without compulsory redundancies.
He argued that the institution was now facing financial penalties not of its own making.
The court backed him in pursuing payment of redundancy and legal costs by the Scottish Office and in taking the campaign to the public, which has benefited from the dental hospital with 45,000 patient consultations a year.
Homeless ‘Cathy’ returns to screen
THE controversial film Cathy Come Home is to be screened on British television for the first time in 17 years in as attempt to highlight the plight of the homeless.
The film will be shown on Channel 4 on March 31 as part of a season of programmes called Gimme Shelter which includes specially-commissioned dramas and documentaries.
The season also includes a game show — Come On Down And Out — hosted by Andrew O'Connor and Annabel Giles in which homeless people can compete to win a ‘dream’ house.
The idea was criticised by pressure groups earlier this year when it was first suggested but Channel 4 has decided to go ahead.
The original Cathy Come Home was a BBC1 Wednesday Play in 1966 starring Ray Brooks and the late Carol White as a young couple who fall foul of red tape in their search for a home.
It was given a documentary style by the director, Ken Loach, and the writer, Jeremy Sandford.
John Willis, Channel 4 director of programmes, said of the game show: ‘It may offer contestants a dream home, but it poses the audience fundamental questions about society's attitude to the homeless and the problems they face.’
He added: ‘Despite the national outcries that Cathy and other films engendered, the scale of the problem today seems to be greater than ever — if only by the sight of the homeless we see camped in the streets of our cities.’
The season opens with an episode of the newsroom comedy Drop The Dead Donkey in which reporter Damien goes under cover to spend a week as a down-and-out. — PA
Man denies killing alleged accomplice
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
THE owner of a derelict boarding house was accused yesterday of killing a friend who had allegedly helped him to set fire to the building in an ‘insurance job’.
Bernard Buckley had been trapped under rubble after an explosion destroyed the house, but James Sutherland had pretended to the emergency services that there was no-one inside, it was claimed in court.
Sutherland, 50, of Gilmore Place, Edinburgh, denied the culpable homicide of Mr Buckley on 10 April last year.
The charge stated that with intent to defraud the Sun Alliance Insurance Group, and while acting with the dead man, Sutherland set fire to the eight-roomed house at Pilton Drive North, Edinburgh.
The indictment added that Mr Buckley, 44, of Prince Regent Street, Leith, had been severely injured in the blast and covered with debris and although Sutherland knew he was trapped, he had told rescuers that no-one was inside.
Sutherland also pled not guilty to setting fire to the house, again allegedly with Mr Buckley, some two weeks earlier, on 30 March.
The High Court in Edinburgh heard that Sutherland had bought the property, known locally as the White House, for £68,000 in 1989 and rented out the rooms to Department of Social Security tenants.
However, after changes in the housing benefit regulations, his substantial income had dropped, and he had fallen into arrears with mortgage payments and had been unable to sell the house.
Joyce Strand, 50, of Prince Regent Street, Leith, said she had lived with Mr Buckley for about five years before his death.
He had come home on 30 March and, referring to Sutherland, had told her: ‘That bastard had the cheek to lose the head with me because it did not work.
I nearly lost my life.
I am not going to do it ever again.’
He had gone out on 10 April without saying anything about where he was going.
‘That was the last I saw of him,’ added Mrs Strand.
Andrew Muir, 14, of Royston Mains Gardens, Edinburgh, said he and some friends had run down the street after hearing what they thought was a lorry crashing.
They had seen that the house was on fire and there was a man running about, wanting to go back in.
‘He said: ‘My mate's in there’ and ran in, but two guys grabbed him.
When a police car arrived, he got into the back of the car.’
The teenager was asked to look around the court and he said he thought he recognised Sutherland as the man.
He added that youths from the area, including himself, had been in the house before the night of the fire.
Once, someone had thrown a piece of lighted paper in a bottle at the house but it had not gone through the window.
The trial continues.
Campaign to help find released offenders decent places to live Audrey Gillan speaks to a former convict and drunk back on the right track now he has his own home.
STEWART McDonald can't remember what age he is but knows he was born in 1947.
He says the drink has eaten away not only his pancreas but his memory.
What he does recall is the years he spent as a violent drunk, his frequent periods in Saughton prison and life in hostels for the single homeless.
He says that most of those years are just a blur but he finds it hard to forget that he was locked in a secure ward for the seriously mentally ill for two weeks.
Mr McDonald no longer drinks but has been an alcoholic for more than a decade.
He's on the mend because, unlike many former offenders, Mr McDonald has a home.
‘Having a home again has changed my life.
There's hardly any chance that I'll reoffend.
I've got something to lose now.
If you've got nothing you've got nothing to lose,’ he explains.
‘If you've got a guy that's homeless the jail's not a punishment to that person.
What are you taking off of him.
He's lying in the street with nowhere to go and no life.’
Now the Scottish Prison Service and the Scottish Council for Single Homeless have come up with a package that attempts to address the problem.
Working together, they have produced guidelines for people working with prisoners in an attempt to help with accommodation problems and prevent homelessness and insecurity.
Two booklets, illustrated by a current prisoner, have been circulated to every prisoner in Scottish jails.
Titled What Should I Do? and Where Next? they advise prisoners on how to keep a tenancy if they have one, how to find accommodation and get income support.
The package has been devised by Colin McShannon, principal prison officer at Noranside, who hopes it will free social workers to spend more time with prisoners.
‘Housing problems take up a lot of the time in prison,’ he said.
Mr McShannon explained that there are a lot of hidden homeless who come out of prison to an address.
‘They stay with a friend for two or three weeks but they usually fall out and the ex-offender becomes homeless.’
The chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, Eddie Frizzell, said the project would help communication between his staff and his prisoners.
‘Improving communication is another arrow in the quiver that prison officers and staff have,’ he said.
‘Lack of information is a big problem because of stress and worrying among prisoners.’
Scottish prisons process roughly 19,000 people a year who are either going in or coming out.
Seventy per cent of them are worried about where they are going to stay on release.
Mr Frizzell explained that there are three key things that bring down reoffending.
‘Prisoners can maintain family connections and a stable environment.
Also if they have a job to go to and some place to live.’
The recidivism rate for homeless former offenders is very high.
Stewart McDonald will tell you that it's not that easy to achieve those three things.
‘It is very difficult for somebody coming out of prison to get accommodation.
You have got two choices in Edinburgh — it's either the Salvation Army or Greyfriars hostel and that's it.
You know you've got nowhere to go — you are constantly aware of it.
When you come out of prison you need somewhere to go that day,’ he said.
‘You can't expect people to come out of prison and go dashing to the social security — not on the day of their release.’
Mr McDonald had a wife and two children, a building firm and an Edinburgh pub.
When he went to Saughton for a three-year stretch for assault he had nothing.
He had also nothing when he came out.
Just the name of a hostel.
Then he had a grubby bedsit.
Now he has a home.
‘I've never really lived normally before,’ he said.
‘I had never really grown up.’
He now hopes that the housing guidelines will help others grow up too.
Stewart McDonald: ‘I've got something to lose now.’
Legal moves turn up heat on Timex strike James Rougvie reports on action which could push a Dundee dispute into the political arena
A FLURRY of legal proceedings will this week turn up the heat in the already simmering Timex dispute in Dundee.
Today four engineering union officials will attend the Court of Session to hear the details of the latest application for a legal order sought against them by management.
Its terms will not be known until today's hearing.
On Thursday, two of the four will return to Edinburgh to answer charges that they breached an earlier interdict banning them from inciting or organising mass pickets at the factory gates.
If found guilty, they could face heavy fines, or even jail and some kind of martyrdom.
One member of the strike committee forecast yesterday: ‘If this happens, there will be nationwide outrage.
It will escalate the dispute into a more politicised arena.
It is difficult to see what will happen then, but no trade unionist has been jailed for taking part in trade union activities for 20 years.’
The extent of the protest will be seen on Saturday, when a major demonstration and rally in Dundee is planned to support the 340 dismissed Timex workers.
Speakers include Campbell Christie, general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, and trades unionists from England.
Four former workers are awaiting trial at Dundee Sheriff Court on charges of breach of the peace arising out of incidents at the factory gates.
Harry McLevy, Scottish organiser of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, is in no doubt Timex is determined to strangle what he sees as the union's legitimate activities.
Production is said to be continuing after the company recruited more than 100 employees.
‘It is using the legislation to stop the union working, at the same time turning ordinary men and women who want to work, but who have been locked out, into criminals,’ Mr McLevy said.
Each day of the dispute, at 7:45 am, amicable banter among a handful of pickets and what the union jokingly calls its ‘gallery’ stops.
There is a ritual in the way in which the pickets rise from the shelter of their lean-to and manoeuvre for position with a handful of police kitted out in fluorescent bibs.
The pickets shout: ‘Scabs’ at the Timex recruits.
The buses crawling through the gates seem empty, but curled up on the seats, on the floor are the recruits, some with plastic bags over their heads, others muffled incognito in scarves.
All the while a new security camera mounted high above the perimeter fence records every moment.
The divisional organiser, John Kydd, one of the four men named in today's proceedings, is convinced the company is using the electronic camera to monitor the union's activities.
The 340 hourly-paid workers would not accept a wages freeze and cuts in their benefits and were sacked.
Hugh and Joyce Gardiner have been with Timex for a total of 44 years and never believed that their fight could have reached such a pitch.
Hugh was at the Milton sit-in, where the workers won a fight to stop compulsory redundancies but lost the war.
That factory site is now a superstore, burger emporium and DIY outlet.
‘We had no hesitation in coming out, none whatsoever.
We were given our books at Milton but we got back.
We will get back here too, one way or another.’
‘It's a human tragedy,’ says a full-time union official, Gordon Samson, a Timex sit-in veteran and another of the officials scheduled for a court appearance, but he is referring not to the sacked workers but to the recruits.
‘They were out of work and underprivileged and now they are working for cut rates.’
The current dispute, he said, stepped up when people selected for lay-off included shop stewards and workers who spoke out.
He believed that ultimately, Timex would have to sit down, negotiate, and take the workers back.
Monojit Chatterji, Dundee University professor of economics, has a more sombre assessment.
‘This strike is a throwback and reflects the desperation of the workforce.
With three million unemployed, what can they do?
Management is far away in the States and what do they care what happens in Scotland?’
DORNOCH Shin restaurant plan for revision
THE developers of a new restaurant at the popular Falls of Shin, where more than 50,000 tourists a year go to watching salmon leaping over the rocks, are to be asked to amend their planning application.
The divisional planning officer, David Polson, told Sutherland planning committee at Dornoch yesterday that the proposed log-cabin structure was ‘functional to the point of blandness.’
He said he had made several attempts to persuade the developers, Peter and Reay Campbell, to alter it.
ABERDEEN Man charged with murdering father
A MAN made a second appearance in private at Aberdeen Sheriff Court yesterday accused of murdering his father.
Brian Thomson, 43, of Placemill Cottage, Forgue, Huntly, was charged with murdering Henry Thomson, 69, a retired farmer, at their home on 7 March.
He made no plea and was remanded in custody.
Boy sues council over finger injury
A 12-YEAR-OLD boy who injured a finger in a heavy door when he and a classmate made a late-night visit to a girls' dormitory during an educational outing, is suing Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council for £5,250.
The boy was one of six boys and six girls from the Annandale and Eskdale district on an overnight stay at the Carlingwark Outdoor Centre at Castle Douglas.
He said at Dumfries Sheriff Court that he and his friend had gone to the upstairs lavatory in the dormitory building about half-an-hour after going to bed when they had been called over to the girls' room.
He said the other boy had gone into the dormitory and he had had his fingers on the door surround when the door, which had a power unit attached to it, had started to swing shut.
He told the court: ‘It shut slowly and then slammed on my finger…it cut off the top of my ring finger.’
The youngster had been taken to hospital, where he had spent two days after an operation.
He denied in cross-examination that he and the other boy had gone from their downstairs dormitory for horseplay.
He did acknowledge that he had won an award for his rugby since the incident in September, 1991.
The boy, with the consent of his father, claims that the accident arose through the fault of the regional council in allowing children to use a room having a heavy door with a power unit attached which could close abruptly, and in failing to show any warning.
He claimed that after being taken for a walk in the evening the children had gone to their beds while the teachers remained in an annexe.
The centre is owned by the Stewartry District Council, but controlled by the regional council.
The case was continued to a date to be fixed.
Life for man who murdered watchman
A 29-YEAR-OLD Kilmarnock man who beat a nightwatchman to death in Dumfries was jailed for life yesterday.
The High Court at Kilmarnock had heard how William Scott Currie had attacked and robbed Robert McMurtie, 54, on 4 October last year.
Currie, formerly of Mauchline Terrace, Kilmarnock, had admitted assaulting Mr McMurtie, jumping on him, striking him repeatedly on the head and body, kicking and stamping on his head.
The nightwatchman died as a result of his injuries.
The court had heard that Currie had known his victim, a popular ‘loner’ in the town, had known the guard dog, Flood, which he had taken for walks, and had known the premises, Rogan's Indoor Market in central Dumfries, where he had worked.
After the attack, Currie had made off with £85.
He had left the money with his sister but had been caught after she had handed it into the police.
Closure of outdoor education units confirmed The Faskally outdoor centre, opened to give slum children fresh air, is, as was feared, a victim of cost-cutting.
Alan Forbes reports
STRATHCLYDE youngsters will lose more than 23,000 days of outdoor education each year after a decision yesterday to shut four centres.
The regional council's ruling Labour group said that the closures must go ahead to achieve £600,000 savings in a hard-pressed education budget.
The closures will also allow £483,000 extra to be spent on the region's remaining ten centres.
The centres to close are Faskally and Fornethy, both in Perthshire, St Columba's in the Borders, and Seafield, beside Ardrossan in Strathclyde.
Seafield will be retained for another use and outdoor education staff will be redeployed to remaining centres.
The closure of Faskally in particular is controversial because the centre was bought about 20 years ago by the old Glasgow Corporation to give slum children a taste of adventure in the open air.
Strathclyde says that although the number of bed nights at its remaining centres will be reduced by 17 per cent to 110,600, the range and quality of education will be improved.
The decision to close the centres coincided with news of the sudden death of a head teacher whose school is one of four secondaries on the south side of Glasgow that have been threatened with closure.
Ronald Morgan, 61, head of Bellarmine Roman Catholic secondary in Pollok since 1980, collapsed and died on Sunday.
Mr Morgan, who was married with three grown-up children, had returned briefly to school after a period of illness.
A senior staff member said that Mr Morgan had been under pressure because of the uncertainty facing the school's future: ‘Ronald Morgan was very popular with staff and pupils but he was under pressure because of what will happen here.
Every day there is rumour and counter-rumour.’
Strathclyde has had to halt its closure plans for Glasgow's south side while two of the threatened schools, St Gerard's and Queen's Park, try to stall the region by holding opt-out ballots.
The attempt by the schools to use opt-out law to prevent closure has led to a row between Strathclyde and the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
The council has been involved in a separate row over Bellarmine because it is insisting that staff must apply for jobs at the school to which their pupils would transfer.
The Educational Institute of Scotland has organised industrial action because it argues that the new school is still basically Bellarmine in a different building.
Strathclyde's Labour group also agreed to press on with the closure of two primary schools, Castlehill in Prestwick, and Dalmuir in Clydebank.
An attempt by Dalmuir parents to take the school out of council control was rejected recently by the Scottish Office.
Yesterday, the parents renewed their campaign to save the school when they protested outside Strathclyde's headquarters in Glasgow.
The parents said their children would risk their health by being transferred to Kilbowie  Primary School because the building contains asbestos.
Robert Gould, Strathclyde's leader, said the building posed no danger to pupils because the asbestos was totally secure.
Conoco plans jobs losses to save on costs
A SERIES of job cuts is planned by one of the North Sea's leading operators as part of a worldwide reorganisation, writes Frank Urquhart.
The restructuring plans were announced yesterday to Conoco's exploration and production staff at a meeting in Aberdeen.
They were told no target figure had been set but that job losses were inevitable under the review, due to be finished by September.
Conoco employs a total of 812 staff and contract employees.
A company spokesman said Conoco was reorganising its UK exploration and production business as part of a worldwide programme.
Changes to be made in the coming months included a reduction in the organisation's size, he said.
‘The extent of this will not be known until the exercise is completed.
There is no pre-determined jobs reduction target.
We have to reduce costs and that is the primary factor.’
Bob Irelan, managing director of Conoco UK, said partnership arrangements were becoming the norm in North Sea projects.
SHETLAND Council tenants owe £210,000 rent
MORE than one-third of Shetland council house tenants are behind with rent, it was revealed yesterday.
Among them, the 809 tenants owe Shetland Islands Council almost £210,000, with arrears ranging from four weeks to more than one year.
Now the council's finance, housing and legal staff are reviewing procedures in an effort to collect the cash.
The finance divisional manager, Stephen Hughes, said 246 tenants had agreed to pay off the arrears in instalments, and it was hoped more would follow suit.
Employers told benefits of hiring the disabled
By Susan Dean
EWAN Whiteside reckons he is one of the lucky ones.
He had his first taste of unemployment in more than ten years of working life when he was made redundant six months ago.
Not bad going for most in modern industrial times, but even more so for people like 28-year-old Ewan, from Hamilton, who has found a new job as a salesman.
He is disabled, with a slightly handicapped right arm, and statistics show that jobless disabled people remain unemployed for twice as long as their able-bodied counterparts.
Neil Macdonald, from Beith, Ayrshire, has been blind since 1976.
He has not only remained in his job as a chemical engineer but has also been promoted twice and is now principal chemical engineer with Ciba, in Paisley.
Yet in spite of the drive to encourage employers to recruit more people with physical or mental difficulties — or retain them in the wake of ill-health — too many are still backing off from taking on such staff, according to the Department of Employment.
In Scotland the track record is better than the rest of Britain, with Employment Service staff maintaining its target of ensuring that 3 per cent of its job placements are for disabled people, according to its Scottish director, Alan Brown.
Ewan's new company, Accolade Business Systems, of Govan, Glasgow, are among the exemplars of employment practice and yesterday received an award for their efforts in the field of hiring disabled people.
Ewan is the 2,000th disabled person to find a job in the area of Glasgow, Renfrew and Dumbarton since the Employment Service set up a committee to spearhead  initiatives in this field more than a year ago.
Accolade — which received a similar award in 1984 — now has a total of three disabled people on its 14-strong staff and makes a positive effort to recruit handicapped people, according to the marketing manager, Irene McAlaney, who is one of the three and has a walking difficulty as a result of childhood polio.
But she fears her company is an exception.
‘I think employers look at the disabilities rather than abilities — and they are being very unfair to themselves.
They are missing out on a lot of talent in people who I think put more into their job.’
A plea for employers to consider hiring disabled staff — and capitalising on the wide range of Government help to assist placements — was made yesterday by the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart.
‘Disability does not mean inability, and failure to consider people with disabilities for a job may lead a company to failure in obtaining the best person for a position,’ he said.
According to Ewan and Neil, workplace problems tend to be in the minds of others rather than a reality.
‘If you let people use their abilities, they will normally walk their way around their difficulties and come up with a straightforward solution,’ says Neil.
Placing, assessment and counselling teams (PACTS) are ‘one-stop shops’ to give advice and cross-match employers with disabled jobseekers, while the Job Introduction Scheme gives a £45 weekly Government grant towards the wages of a disabled worker during a trial hiring period.
Ewan Whiteside: found a new job as a salesman
Thank God it's 130 jobs for Glasgow or if that's too flippant: Projects bring 130 jobs to Glasgow
TWO schemes bringing 130 jobs to Glasgow were announced yesterday, writes Alan Dron.
The Whitbread brewing and leisure company will provide 100 jobs as part of its £2 million investment in the first Scottish outlet for its American-style Thank God It's Friday bistro chain.
The restaurant, in the former Royal Bank of Scotland building on the corner of Buchanan Street and Gordon Street, will open in June.
Parcelforce is providing 30 jobs at its Clydeside delivery depot on Dixon's Blazes industrial estate in the city, which will officially open next Monday.
The depot will serve an area stretching from Dumbarton to Cumbernauld.
ARGYLL Computer link for further education
ADULTS and school leavers in remote parts of Argyll and Bute will soon have access to further education colleges without having to travel.
With the help of £150,000 European Community funding, a computerised distant learning system ABLE (Argyll and Bute Link to Education) is to be installed, linking all nine secondary schools in the area with each other and also with Clydebank College and James Watt College in Greenock.
The system will also be available for the use of school pupils.
Sex case man out of office at Eastwood Young Tories
By Denny Macgee
THE vice-chairman of Eastwood Young Conservatives, who was convicted of sex offences involving a young boy, has been replaced as an office-bearer of the organisation.
Ronald Chalmers, former vice-chairman, was at the centre of a row last year which brought calls for his resignation.
They followed his three-year sentence for sexually abusing a 12-year-old boy.
The then chairman, Neil Deerey, called on Chalmers to resign.
If he did not, said Mr Deerey, he would move to sever all links between Chalmers and the party.
However, it was Mr Deerey who resigned after his calls failed to gain the support of the local YC executive, which included Chalmers's brother and brother-in-law.
At the Eastwood YC annual meeting last week, Ronald Chalmers's brother, Iain, was elected to take over from Mr Deerey as chairman.
Brian Jardin, a Paisley University student, who is believed to have been one of the executive committee who did not support moves to expel Ronald Chalmers, was elected vice-chairman.
Andrea Glass, who is believed to be a close friend of Iain Chalmers, is the new treasurer.
The new secretary is Debbie Harrison.
Last night, the recently re-elected chairman of the Eastwood Conservative Association, Cliff Hargreaves, confirmed the appointments.
Ronald Chalmers's term of office as vice-chairman had been a year only, he said, and he had made it know that he did not want to be considered for an office-bearer's position.
In any event, said Mr Hargreaves, Ronald Chalmers had not paid his subscriptions, and therefore was not a paid-up member of the association.
Mr Hargreaves confirmed that Chalmers's brother Iain was the new chairman of the YC in Eastwood.
Chalmers, 29, was convicted of the offences after a 16-day trial at Belfast Crown Court in December.
The court had heard that Chalmers, who was training for the ministry with the Rev Ian Paisley's Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, had lured the boy into a church in South Belfast and abused him.
Chalmers's family has maintained that he is innocent of the charges of which he has been convicted, and say they will continue to fight to prove it.
Yesterday, Chalmers solicitor in Belfast, Ian Kerr, told The Scotsman that several matters, including an appeal against the conviction and moves for a re-trial, were under consideration.
He believed some movement in the case would be made by the end of this month.
‘Greek’ Thomson buildings alert
By Graeme Wilson
THE LEGACY of one of Glasgow's greatest architects is at risk after years of neglect and deterioration, a report by the Scottish Civic Trust has claimed.
Alexander ‘Greek’ Thomson has an international reputation for the buildings he designed during the last century.
Glasgow District Council plans an exhibition in 1996 to mark his achievements.
However the report by the trust — Buildings at Risk — highlights the threats to 11 prime examples of Thomson's work in Glasgow and says the situation is an ‘embarrassment which we can no longer ignore’.
The buildings referred to include Holmwood at Cathcart, which was built between 1857 and 1859 and has been described as a priceless national treasure.
Efforts are being made to allow the National Trust for Scotland, with support from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, to buy the building, which has been a convent since 1958.
The Scottish Civic Trust's call for action was welcomed last night by Gavin Stamp of the Alexander Thomson Society, formed two years ago, which has about 500 members.
He said: ‘I'm obviously delighted that they have drawn attention to the situation.
He was one of Glasgow's two great architects but his work has been badly neglected, which is something the city should be ashamed of.
‘However, recently the council has started to act strongly on work like the Great Western Terrace and Holmwood.’
The report also looks at a wide variety of other Scottish buildings which have been allowed to deteriorate or may be destroyed by development.
These include nine castles, 23 country houses and lodges and 16 churches.
PETER DEVLIN Botanist who is stuck on beautiful blooms
A SCOTTISH botanist who has devoted his life to cultivating rare South Sea orchids in Britain has won public recognition for his work — thanks to the Royal Mail.
Two of a series of five stamps issued today to mark the 14th World Orchid Conference depict Papua and New Guinea orchids Dendrobium hellwigianum, on the 18p stamp, and Dendrobium vexillarius on the 39p stamp, that Paddy Woods has spent 30 years investigating.
Yesterday, Paddy and the artist Pandora Sellars, who drew the illustrations for the stamps, were at the Botanic Gardens in Glasgow to publicise the issue, which celebrates the conference being held in the city-based Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre at the end of the month.
Paddy, made an honorary associate of the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh in 1992 in recognition of his contribution to the world of botany, said: ‘I brought back these rare species of the Dendrobium from a field trip to Papua in the 1960s.
‘Part of my life's work since has been to research this group of orchids and encourage their cultivation.
With the help of the Royal Mail now everyone can enjoy their beauty.’
There are 25,000 species in the orchid family and around 50 native orchids in Britain.
Extra cash for foreign languages in primaries
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT has moved to defuse a growing row over its plan to introduce foreign language teaching for all Scottish primary pupils.
More cash for teacher training and reassurances about the policy came yesterday from the Scottish education minister, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, in an attempt to quell growing concern about the costs and effects of a rapid change.
Criticism has come mainly from local authorities, which reckon that the funding so far promised falls far short of that required.
There has also been criticism of the Government's shifting from a pilot scheme it has been running since 1989, in which secondary teachers have been linking with primary staff in 76 schools to provide their specialist input.
The new plan, announced in January by Lord James, aims to rely entirely on non-specialist staff in primary schools to teach four European languages; French, German, Spanish and Italian.
The minister yesterday announced £100,000 extra for teacher training to support the initiative, in addition to the £1.35 million allocated earlier.
By contrast, local authorities have calculated that full training costs, including time spent abroad by staff, would cost around £5,000 per teacher, or almost £12 million in total.
Lord James said the funding would grow in subsequent years, and pointed to the constructive support and welcome the policy had received.
‘This modern language initiative is challenging,’ he said.
‘That is because we are working to introduce modern language teaching quickly into primary schools.
‘But I must stress it is being carefully prepared and that the training programme will be substantial, vigorous and supportive of teachers’ needs.
All the costs associated with training primary teachers to participate have been taken into account.’
The minister also defended the decision not to use secondary teachers.
‘There are many advantages of using primary teachers.
They will know the children, and will be fully aware of other aspects of what pupils are learning.
They can use, for instance, links between the foreign language and English language or drama to spread their language teaching across different parts of the curriculum.’
Elizabeth Maginnis, education convener of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, said the extra cash was welcome but did not answer the main objection that non-specialist staff were being relied on.
She claimed the decision not to use secondary teachers was because that would take longer than the Scottish Office was prepared to wait.
‘That is a model we tried in the 1960s, and it failed,’ she said.
‘It's like asking the school secretary to become a physics expert overnight.
The minister seems to have gone sadly wrong on this.’
The Government promised in last year's election to have foreign languages being taught in every upper primary school in Scotland by the end of the current Parliament.
Man jailed for series of child sex offences
A KITCHEN porter was yesterday jailed at Edinburgh Sheriff Court for two years after he was convicted of sex offences with young children.
Sentencing, Sheriff Gordon Shiach told David Frame: ‘I take a serious view of these offences.’
Frame, 25, of Fountainbridge, Edinburgh, was convicted of four charges at the end of a four-day jury trial.
He had denied committing the offences involving children between the ages of four and 14 between January 1989 and June 1992.
He had lodged special defences of alibi.
The trial made legal history when child witnesses gave evidence using closed circuit television cameras.
It was the first time the cameras had been used since they were installed last year.
Defending, Graham Robertson, advocate, claimed his client had himself been a victim of child sex abuse.
Frame's mother had committed suicide when he was nine, the court heard.
Frame was convicted of a similar offence in 1987, the court was told.
Bank raiders ‘fled after tools find’
By William Chisholm
AN EARLY morning raid on a Borders bank had been foiled when gas cylinders and a collection of tools were found in Jedburgh bus station, a jury heard yesterday.
Hours later, a farmer feeding cattle three miles south of the town had discovered two men hiding in his barn.
One of the men had even helped to shift bales of hay before police arrived and detained the pair.
Peter Middleton, 36, described as a prisoner, denies breaking into the Trustee Savings Bank, Jedburgh, in December last year together with others, with intent to steal.
Witnesses told the court how they had discovered the cylinders and two holdalls early on Sunday 6 December in the bus station car park near the bank.
When two policemen arrived, one man had run away and the other had made his escape in a car.
Detectives had found the back door of the bank forced and telephone wires cut.
Det Sgt David Girdwood said he had found tubes, a burner, masks, goggles, gloves, and a spanner in one bag.
The other had contained a jemmy, cans of spray paint, wire cutters, a brace and bit, and shears.
A car matching police descriptions had been found in Jedforest rugby club car park.
When Middleton's companion had been apprehended later, car keys in his possession had fitted the vehicle.
John Gibson, 28, a farmer, said he had come upon the two men in his barn eight hours after the alleged bank raid.
He identified one of them as Middleton.
He had told Mr Gibson they had been walking past the barn and had gone in for shelter.
Mr Gibson had telephoned the police.
Two men had made off as the police arrived.
Pc James Crane, one of six officers who had searched for the alleged raiders, said both men had been trying to hide in bushes and ferns.
The case before Sheriff John Young continues today.
Help for those hooked on addiction
Can't stop that lovin' feelin'?
Maybe you are a sex and love addict.
Susan Nickalls investigates
NEXT time you have a craving for yet another chocolate bar or long for a stream of passionate sexual encounters, be careful you're not nursing a potential addiction.
Most people immediately associate addictions with drugs, alcohol and cigarettes, and if you're health conscious you would probably add coffee, tea and sugar to the list.
However in America, where addictions are almost as mandatory as seeing the ‘shrink’, a new wave of ‘can't do withouts’ has unleashed itself on society.
Joining the ranks of Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous and Gamblers Anonymous are organisations like Co-dependents Anonymous and even Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous.
The American-based psychiatrist and process worker Jan Dworkin is in Edinburgh for a series of workshops and a public lecture on addiction.
She puts the American syndrome of being addicted to addictions down to the growing influence of many of the New Age therapies.
‘With an increase in personal growth and self-help movements, there's a lot more awareness around,’ she says.
‘But while this has helped many people to ‘wake up’, some of the solutions are a ‘quick fix’ and only of short-term value.
On the whole the self-help movement is not a substitute for long-term psychotherapy.’
Although Dworkin admits that addictions to personal growth are on the increase, she maintains they form only a small minority — about 5 per cent— of overall addictions and are not necessarily unhealthy.
‘The literature for sex and love addicts asks questions like, ‘do you have romantic fantasies’ and ‘are you preoccupied with sex’.
Most people would probably answer yes, which is quite normal.
‘Problems occur when sex, or any other addiction starts to have a negative effect on the rest of a person's life.
They lose friends, they can't work and in many cases, particularly sexual, with the risk of AIDS, the addiction can be life threatening.
‘The key to recognising an addiction is when it starts to have power and control over you and the rest of your life suffers as a consequence.’
To help addicts back to health, many of the ‘anonymous’ organisations use a 12-step plan pioneered by Alcoholics Anonymous.
One of the 12 steps is to acknowledge the existence of a ‘higher power’.
Others include the cathartic process of making amends to the people you have hurt through your addiction.
The 12-step method is being increasingly criticised for its extreme focus on individuals and their problems while ignoring wider issues.
‘There are so many problems in the world like war, starvation and sexism that need to be dealt with.
In process work, not only do we talk about addictions, we also help people to go out and do things in the world.’
Dworkin uses the process work approach, which operates on the theory that a predilection for certain substances and behaviours might not necessarily mean addiction.
‘Most addictions come from a need for wholeness, and alcohol, cigarettes, chocolate, sex, love or whatever are used to get access to these parts of ourselves we need.
We try and help a person to get in touch with these desires through a more positive and non-threatening approach.’
The other good news with process work, is that you're not always encouraged to give up your addiction.
In many cases giving up could lead to substituting one addiction for another more damaging addiction — for instance resorting to drugs to appease a craving for alcohol, cigarettes or sugar.
Dworkin says addiction substitution is also one of the pitfalls of the 12-step approach.
An underlying problem with many so-called ‘mainstream’ addictions such as alcohol, caffeine and sugar is that they are culturally acceptable.
‘We live in a culture which actually supports and creates these addictions.
If it didn't our culture would change, as we wouldn't have the energy and drive to be as busy as we are without coffee and alcohol.’
Addictions appear to be a growth industry, particularly in America where the penchant for navel-gazing has no equal; but whether we see branches of Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous or  Codependents Anonymous appearing in Edinburgh remains to be seen.
Indian government defeats censure over bomb blasts
THE Indian government defeated an opposition censure motion in parliament yesterday and said it had vital evidence to identify those responsible for a series of bomb explosions in Bombay.
A few hours earlier two more big bombs were found as the country's commercial capital went determinedly back to work three days after the blasts that killed at least 250 people.
Bomb disposal experts defused two 44lb devices packed in  motorcycles which had been parked in a crowded bullion and precious stone bazaar.
‘These would have blown up the entire gold and diamond market,’ the bomb squad chief, Nandkumar Chowgule, told reporters after the area had been cleared.
It was not clear whether the two latest bombs had been set to go off on Friday, like one discovered and defused on Sunday, or whether they were freshly planted.
In the lower house of parliament the home minister, Shankarrao Chavan, told members: ‘The Maharashtra (state) government has…gathered evidence of vital importance which I cannot reveal now.’
The minister was speaking in before the defeat of the opposition-sponsored censure motion against the prime minister, PV Narasimha Rao.
The motion accused the government of failing to protect the lives of citizens.
The Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) said Mr Rao was too busy fighting a factional war in his Congress Party to read intelligence reports about the attack days before it took place.
The BJP accused Pakistan's intelligence service of being involved in the blasts and Mr Chavan called on the party to disclose its evidence of Pakistani involvement.
He said he did not rule out the involvement of foreign agencies but cautioned: ‘It is too early to pinpoint a particular agency or country.’
There has been no credible claim of responsibility so far for the blasts, many of which were caused by car bombs not previously used in India.
This is one reason there has been rampant speculation about foreign involvement in the bombings.
Relief and guilt of the deserters from someone else's war From Adam LeBor, Szeged, Hungary
FREEDOM was just a few short steps away, but the walk would change Tamas's life for ever.
His heart thumped as he stood on the Yugoslav border and stared through the night at the nearby fields in Hungary.
As soon as Tamas, an ethnic Hungarian recruit in the Yugoslav National Army (JNA), stepped into Hungary he became a deserter.
He can probably never return to his family in Novi Sad, at least as long as the Milosevic regime endures.
Now an engineering student at Szeged University, he is one of dozens of deserters and draft dodgers from the JNA who must endure a life of exile in this pretty town, just a few miles from the Serbian border.
By deserting Tamas risked a trial and probable immediate dispatch to the front if he was caught, but he says the risk was worth it.
‘I thought it couldn't be worse than being made to fight in a war that is nothing to do with me.
I felt free that I would never have to go back.’
This view, that the wars in Croatia and Bosnia are no concern of the 400,000-odd ethnic Hungarians in Yugoslavia, mostly concentrated in the Serbian province of Vojvodina, has been repeatedly expressed both by ethnic Hungarian organisations in Yugoslavia and by the Budapest government.
But nothing is that simple, especially in the Balkans.
Deserters like Tamas know they have exchanged one kind of prison, the JNA, for, at best, a kind of quasi-freedom.
Tamas left his garrison in Bosnia after serving in Croatia, at the end of 1991.
He escaped with the help of Bosnians, who gave him civilian clothes to replace his army uniform, and a network of ethnic Hungarians, dodging military police across the country until he made it over the border to Szeged.
Now nobody can make him fight, but he cannot leave his new homeland as he has no passport.
Nor can he return home.
Like Tamas, most draft dodgers are barely in their twenties, but already they exhibit classic symptoms of exile's syndrome: relief at getting out, guilt at leaving their family and friends behind and an unbreakable addiction to the news about the wars in former Yugoslavia.
By leaving they know they have renounced the country where they were born, grew up and went to school.
‘I can't explain how I feel in words and I don't know what the future holds,’ said Tamas, who has been granted political asylum and has applied for Hungarian citizenship.
‘Everybody regrets what has happened.
I lost my friends because I cannot see them now and they don't have the money to come here.’
But other Yugoslavs do.
Many draft dodgers say that bars and restaurants in Szeged, plenty of which are owned and run by Yugoslavs, are frequented by secret service agents keeping track of them.
All of those interviewed requested that their names and some personal details be changed.
Several buses a day run from Vojvodina to Szeged, packed with visiting mothers and girlfriends.
‘I don't want to go back to fight in the war,’ said Laslzo, 21, from Becej, as he waved his mother goodbye.
‘I was born in Yugoslavia and lived there, but the Croats are now my enemy.’
Laslzo, an ex-communications technician in the JNA, said he had no fear of the Yugoslav police now he was in Hungary.
‘I've heard they are here but they cannot do anything,’ he said, pulling out and brandishing a pistol stuffed down his trouser waistband.
‘I'm not afraid.’
Six die as Iran raid hits Kurd hospital
THE wife of President François Mitterrand said yesterday that at least six Kurdish civilians died and many were hurt when Iranian planes bombed a French-run hospital on the Iran-Iraq border at the weekend.
Danielle Mitterrand, head of the privately-funded human rights group France-Libertes, told reporters searches were under way for more bodies in the debris of the hospital at Raniya after the air raids on Saturday and Sunday.
Mrs Mitterrand said the hospital was on Iraqi soil, in an area controlled by the rebel Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan (PDKI) and inside the air exclusion zone set up by Western allies to protect Iraqi Kurds.
‘We protest against this  aggression in the allied protection zone,’ she said.
The hospital is jointly run by the French humanitarian groups Aide Medicale Internationale and Medecins du Monde.
Mrs Mitterrand has long been a defender of the Kurdish cause and last July toured the area where the weekend air raids took place.
She was the target of a bomb attack during her visit and French officials said they suspected Iraqi government agents.
The PDKI said on Saturday that four of its guerrillas had been killed when six Iranian jets had bombed its headquarters in the area.
There was no immediate mention of any such attack in Iran's official media.
A PDKI official said Iranian planes had on several previous occasions attacked the building housing its political bureau.
The party is the biggest of the rebel groups which controlled most of Iran's Kurdish-populated areas after the 1979 Islamic revolution, but government offensives in the early 1980s left them greatly weakened.
Germans launch first ‘clean’ fridge
MASS production of the world's first refrigerator that works without damaging earth's vital ozone layer began yesterday at a small eastern German firm praised by environmentalists.
The FORON Hausgeraete GmbH company said it planned to build some 270,000 ‘Clean Cooler’ fridges this year and 300,000 in 1994 in the eastern town of Niederschmiedeberg.
As major appliance makers gear up for an expected world market for ‘green’ refrigerators, FORON is the first to offer a fridge completely free of so-called  chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The gases have been used to cool most types of fridges for decades but are now headed for a world-wide ban in 1996 after being blamed for causing holes in the ozone layer, which shields the earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays.
FORON was rescued from liquidation last year by the environmental group Greenpeace, which collected enough advance orders for the Clean Cooler to interest a British-Kuwaiti-German investment group in the firm.
FORON uses a mix of butane and propane gases to cool its fridges, rather than CFCs.
It also uses no CFCs in insulation, unlike most rival appliance makers planning to launch ozone-friendly fridges on the European market this year.
Major international manufacturers have chosen to use a gas called R-134a, a chemical relative of the CFCs that does not harm the ozone layer.
But R-134a has one drawback compared to propane and butane — it adds to the so-called greenhouse effect of  pollution which may be heating up the earth's climate.
Scientists say the depletion of the ozone layer could lead to increased skin cancers and cataracts in humans and to crop damage.
— Reuter
Cult comes under spotlight
US AGENTS have turned up the pressure on the besieged Texas cult by using glaring floodlights on the compound and cutting off electricity, and those inside are trying to communicate with banners and Morse code.
Powerful stadium-style lights were turned onto the buildings where 105 followers of cult leader David Koresh have been barricaded since a shootout with men of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms on 28 February in which four federal agents were killed.
Yesterday an FBI agent, Richard Swensen, said the lights, mounted on Sunday night, were a defensive measure to blind the cult members to the whereabouts of the more than 400 law enforcement officers around the compound.
The action was taken after two weeks of sighting cult members poking guns out of doors and windows, Mr Swensen told reporters.
— Reuter
He disclosed that electricity supplies to the compound had been turned off on Friday.
The 16-day-old stand-off appeared no closer to being resolved, and negotiations on Sunday were described by the FBI as ‘less by far than any other day’.
Yeltsin set for ‘resolute’ action against enemies
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin, stung by a humiliating rebuff from Russia's supreme legislature, accused it yesterday of seeking to restore Communist rule and his spokesman said the president was poised for decisive action.
‘Boris Nikolayevich…intends to act as resolutely as he showed himself capable of acting in the fateful days of August 1991,’ said spokesman Vyacheslav Kostikov, referring to Mr Yeltsin's role in thwarting a Communist coup.
The parliament chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov, Mr Yeltsin's main rival, denied the assembly was concentrating power in its hands.
A statement issued by his spokesman, Konstantin Zlobin, said democracy was guaranteed by operating within the constitution, not by issuing presidential decrees.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl lined up behind President Bill Clinton in declaring support for Mr Yeltsin, seen by the West as the driving force behind market reforms.
In a statement issued in Bonn, he stressed ‘the importance that Western countries lend to the continuation of the reform process that President Yeltsin has represented for the past one and a half years’.
President François Mitterrand will offer support in person during an eight-hour visit to Moscow today.
Mr Yeltsin, 62, returned to the Kremlin yesterday after a weekend spent contemplating his humiliation last week by the mainly conservative Congress of People's Deputies, which rejected virtually every one of his proposals.
The legislature voted itself sweeping powers to remove Mr Yeltsin if he deviated from the constitution and cancelled a referendum on whether the parliament or president should have the primacy in Russia.
Mr Yeltsin snapped back yesterday in a biting statement signed by Mr Kostikov.
‘Having denied the people the right to express its will by a referendum, Congress has embarked on the path of violating the constitution,’ it said.
‘We are talking about the return to power of the Communist nomenklatura (party elite),’ Mr Kostikov said later in an interview with Russian and Reuter television, ‘…that very nomenklatura which fell with such a thunderous crash in August 1991.’
Mr Khasbulatov, who like Mr Yeltsin played a prominent role in foiling the coup, says Congress is a bulwark against dictatorship and described the four-day session as a triumph for stability and democracy in Russia.
Mr Yeltsin's aides have hinted that he might try to impose presidential rule — a risky path that would require military backing — if Congress continued to undermine his power.
Mr Kostikov said the president would announce his plans in the next few days.
‘There is no easy decision because to let everything stay as it is means to let the Communist explosion which took place at the Congress spread across Russia.’
Mr Yeltsin says he will challenge the ban on a referendum in the constitutional court.
But the court chairman, Valery Zorkin, left yesterday for a two-week trip to the United States.
Mr Kostikov hinted that the president may drop plans to hold a plebiscite — a non-binding version of the banned referendum — as local councils which support Mr Khasbulatov might sabotage it.
‘To a certain extent there is already an answer to the question which form of power the people support,’ he said, adding that opinion polls showed most Russians favoured a presidential system.
Mr Khasbulatov meanwhile reiterated that the Supreme Soviet — the smaller standing parliament chosen from the ranks of Congress — would do no more than pass legislation and monitor observance of the constitution and the law.
‘We have no intention of interfering in government,’ Itar-Tass news agency quoted him as telling a visiting Thai princess.
‘We are counting on positive developments, that things will get better and the federal government will work effectively.’
His spokesman Mr Zlobin said Mr Khasbulatov was receiving numerous telegrams of support for the results of the Congress session.
Parliament is due to meet this week.
It will at some stage debate moves to take control of television and radio and whether to call early presidential and parliamentary elections.
The crisis has unsettled financial markets and brought dire predictions of revolution or civil war from some politicians.
Mr Kostikov played down these fears, saying Western analysts were getting ‘over-emotional’.
‘I do not see any evidence of civil war breaking out,’ he said.
Police track down bomb suspects to Bombay hideout
INDIAN police surrounded a housing estate in a Bombay suburb yesterday to flush out two gunmen wanted for last Friday's series of bombings in the city in which at least 250 people died.
Earlier police had defused two more motor scooter bombs found in central Bombay's crowded gold and diamond market, and arrested two other men believed to have sold the motor scooters to the bombers.
The hunt for those responsible for the bombs appeared to link criminal gangs in the city with an overseas mastermind.
‘It's a case with international links,’ said Bombay's police chief Amarjeet Singh Samra.
‘The hand which carried out the explosions may be Indian, but the brains were elsewhere.’
He did not indicate who the mastermind might be, but police have linked the bombings to groups in Pakistan or Sri Lanka.
Mr Samra said that two suspected gunmen had escaped in the Bombay suburb of Juhu after a shootout with police and had taken refuge in a large housing complex.
Police said they had surrounded the area.
Mr Samra said both men were wanted for involvement with criminal gangs in Bombay.
Earlier yesterday the government had defeated an opposition censure motion in the lower house of parliament.
Before the vote, the home minister, Shankarrao Chavan, told members: ‘The Maharashtra (state) government has…gathered evidence of vital importance which I cannot reveal now.’
The defeated opposition motion accused the government of failing to protect the lives of citizens.
The Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party said the prime minister, PV Narasimha Rao, was too busy fighting a factional war in his Congress Party to read intelligence reports about the attack before it occurred.
Checks and balances required for South Africa's power-sharing process
Stanley Macleod (Points of View, 6 March) misses the point.
We are talking about governing and developing South Africa today, not tomorrow.
No country can allow a government a learning curve and survive.
I believe that any multi-racial government in South Africa must develop gradually; it cannot come overnight, like the Swedes changing from the left-hand side of the road to the right.
The track record of multi-racial governments being given power overnight speaks for itself.
There is not one successful government and there is not one successful country.
With reference to Mr Macleod's comments concerning equal access to education and other services, it is on record that there is positive discrimination in favour of blacks when applying for university places.
Blacks are given places when they have fewer qualifications than white candidates.
In addition, there is a multiplicity of grants available to them to allow full-time education; no such grants are available to the whites, poor or otherwise, who have to pay for their education themselves.
In conclusion, I ask is it sensible needlessly to destroy a system which provides the best standard of living for all its citizens on the African continent and replace it with a system which will bring misery in the short-term and has little proof that it will ever attain today's standard of living in the long term?
There must be checks and balances while power-sharing is being implemented to ensure the minimum of disturbance and that the interest of all is being served.
South Africa needs pragmatism, not cataclysm.
Keating's Australia
THE unexpected electoral success of Paul Keating and the Labor party in Australia has caused consternation and shock in the conservative Liberal/National party opposition.
Its impact can be compared to the way in which the Tories in Scotland managed to turn a predicted disaster into an additional two seats at the last UK elections.
Far from losing, Keating has manage to increase his majority in parliament.
The Labor prime minister managed this feat, despite record unemployment and a recession, by concentrating his fire largely on his opponents' proposal to levy a 15 per cent goods and services tax (similar to VAT)— a strategy which clearly paid off.
(One of the few politicians so far to have mentioned raising taxes in an election campaign and still have won is Bill Clinton.)
Fear of worsening labour relations under the conservative coalition also played its part, helped by the harsh policies and job cuts under the coalition government which replaced Labor in the state of Victoria.
Keating has promised to push ahead with economic reform.
He also wants to create jobs through promoting trade and investment with Australia's Asian neighbours and stimulating small and medium-sized businesses through tax cuts.
However, whether the prime minister's enhanced authority after this election result will make Labor any more successful in tackling issues like unemployment than it was before, remains to be seen.
Although the economy was at the centre of people's concern in these elections, Keating spiced up his campaign by announcing his plan to abolish the Queen as head of state by the year 2001 — the centenary of Australia's conversion from a group of colonies to a federation of states — and turn the country into a federal republic.
Whether that will arouse great controversy among any but the most convinced monarchists is doubtful.
It does seem an anachronism that the Australian government could in theory be sacked by the Queen in London, particularly as both countries are devoting much greater attention to their regional interests.
Australia's natural partners are the booming south-east Asian economies while Britain is heavily occupied with matters European.
If Australians, therefore, feel it is time to cut free from Britain constitutionally it is probably not before time — and who better to set the ball rolling than the man who provoked a diplomatic incident by daring to put his arm round the Queen during her visit last year?
History may come to see that embrace as a gesture of fond farewell.
Falkland retreat to open next month
By James Johnston
PROGRESS in setting up a new retreat centre in Falkland in Fife which was initiated by Church of Scotland deaconess Lynda Wright has been much swifter than anticipated with the result that it will welcome its first guests from the beginning of April.
The Tabor Retreat Centre will offer breaks for individuals and groups, respite care for those with special needs and care for carers.
Holidays for inner city groups are also to be provided.
Lynda, a former teacher who has worked as a deaconess in Ayrshire, Edinburgh and Fort William and whose most recent church appointment was a centre warden at Iona Abbey, had been due to take over the lease of Key House, next to Falkland Palace, in July but the property became vacant sooner than expected.
She said: ‘Things have progressed so quickly since the initial idea last year that we are now seeking bookings a good bit earlier than expected.’
Bookings are being sought from the end of March onwards and three weekend events have already been planned.
Lynda said that getting ready for the first visitors was proving quite a challenge.
Decoration work in the house still had to be done and about £2,000 still had to be raised to meet annual running costs.
Almost £9,000 in donations have come in so far and Lynda hopes that when charitable status is granted to the Tabor Trust, more people will be encouraged to help.
The name Tabor comes from the mountain mentioned in the Bible where Jesus chose to be apart for a while.
The retreat will open from Tuesdays to Sundays and bookings are invited for up five nights.
Price guidelines have been established, but rates will be negotiable according to the means of individuals and groups.
Lynda said: ‘I hope the centre will be welcomed as a valuable ecumenical resource by the whole Church community in Scotland.
The retreat movement is only just beginning to establish itself north of the Border and I feel strongly that a quiet space can be of real benefit in today's hectic and stressful lifestyle.’‘
Honorary professors
TWO honorary professors have been appointed by Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh.
Dr Susan Walker, water resources manager for the north-west of England region of the National Rivers Authority, and president-elect of the British Hydrological Society, is honoured for her support of the activities of the university's department of civil and offshore engineering.
For his assistance to Heriot-Watt's development of educational multi-media technology, an honorary professorship also goes to Ian Ritchie, founder and chairman of Office Workstations Ltd (OWL) and board member of the Scottish Software Federation since its inception.
Bulgarian visitors help Scots' training
By Liz McGowan
AS PART of the Scottish women's squad training, a Bulgarian national ladies' team is visiting Scotland this week.
They played against a team of east of Scotland women in Edinburgh last night, and will pit themselves against a Scottish team select in Glasgow tonight and a West of Scotland select in Glasgow tomorrow.
Such friendly matches should be useful training for the Scottish team and this is the first visit of its kind.
The Bulgarians are one of the stronger European nations and will provide excellent opposition.
One Scottish Cup semi-final was played on Sunday and the greater experience of Les Steel (Barnet Shenkin, Victor Goldberg and John Matheson) told against Liz McGowan (Ken Baxter, Malcolm Cuthbertson and Andrew McIntosh) in a match which was close for 24 boards then decided in the third set of 12 boards.
The other semi-final has been delayed by difficulties in arranging the quarter-final between Charles Outred and K MacDonald of Stornoway.
The Eastern District Leagues are nearly completed but only the first of the six divisions has been decided.
Craigleith have produced a perfect card, winning all nine matches by more than the 2 per cent required — a very rare achievement, especially at the highest level.‘
Nestle seeks milk deal with 8,000 dairymen
THE CHOCOLATE maker, Nestle, yesterday invited 8,000 dairy farmers to supply it direct when the Milk Marketing Board's statutory monopoly is removed next year.
The company hopes the farmers will be able to supply its annual requirement of up to 700 million litres, worth about £150 million.
But it did not rule out taking milk from Milk Marque, the proposed replacement for the English and Welsh Milk Marketing Board, or from other co-operatives.
Nestle is offering contracts to dairy farmers working within reasonable supply distance of its factories at Omagh, Co Tyrone, Ashbourne, Derbyshire, Dalston, Cumbria and Girvan, Ayrshire.
It said the contract would give the farmers a guaranteed market for at least three years ahead while allowing them to sell their milk elsewhere once three months’ notice was given.
The price would depend generally on milk quality and also the cost of collecting it from farms.
The Nestle chief milk buyer, John Ross, said: ‘Our proposal is that we do business together, as working partners with a common interest — a long and profitable joint future within a thriving UK dairy industry.’
John Ross: invitation to do business together
Bomb kills at least 45 in Calcutta
A HUGE bomb explosion rocked the centre of the Indian city of Calcutta late last night, bringing down two apartment blocks and killing at least 45 people.
Most people were in their beds when the bomb exploded in the middle-class district of Bowbazaar soon after midnight, police said.
The number of casualties was expected to rise because many people were still trapped in the rubble of damaged buildings.
The blast follows a series of bomb attacks that killed at least 250 people and injured about 1,200 four days ago in Bombay, India's commercial and banking centre.
No one has claimed responsibility for the Bombay blasts.
VAT on domestic heating will hit Scots hardest
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
HUNDREDS OF thousands of Scots face potentially crippling increases in their heating bills as a result of Norman Lamont's decision yesterday to extend VAT to domestic fuel and power.
With Scottish homes believed to be 50 per cent more expensive to heat than those in the south of England, the Chancellor's move drew an angry response from opposition MPs and pressure groups.
Among those worst affected will be low-income families and pensioners living on the poverty line, the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, said.
The extension of VAT to fuel was the ‘meanest part of the Budget’, he said.
‘For the hundreds of thousands of Scottish families living in poverty it will mean fuel bills they cannot afford, or the prospect of disconnection.
And yet the Chancellor had the cheek to describe this as a measure to improve energy efficiency.’
Mr Lamont tried to present the addition of VAT to fuel as an environmental initiative meeting the Government's international commitment to reduce global warming.
But his ‘green’ Budget was condemned as half a figleaf to hide his party's environmental shame.
He stood accused of trying to disguise a crude revenue-raising measure.
Consumers in Scotland, where the heating season is the longest in the UK, are expected to suffer most from the change.
The Highlands and Islands, with the largest fuel use, will not receive any recognition of the fact that 40 per cent of its power comes from clean hydro-electric schemes.
Scottish HydroElectric estimates that average home bills will rise by 60p a week in 1994 and £1.25 in 1995.
Dr John Twidell, of the energy studies unit at Strathclyde University, welcomed an extra tax on polluting fuels, but said the VAT measure looked ‘last-minute and heavy-handed’.
With more than 20 per cent of Scottish housing suffering from damp, there was concern that those least able to pay — the elderly and those in poor housing and on poor incomes — would be penalised unfairly.
Mr Lamont said that the effect on low-income households would be taken into account in assessing benefits, but details were not spelled out.
Age Concern Scotland claimed that the VAT decision was irresponsible and said that income support was already inadequate to maintain tolerable conditions.
Mr Lamont said the move would take the Government two-thirds of the way down the road to the Rio commitment on global warming, signed at the Earth Summit last June by the Prime Minister.
It will raise £950 million in 1994-95, £2.3 billion in 1995-96 and £2.8 billion in 1996-97.
The decision was also seen as an attempt to head off the European Community's plans for a carbon tax, which would increase the cost of fossil fuels at source.
Lamont's tax jolt to economy
Tough £10.5bn package hits household bills
By Ewen MacAskill, Political Editor
THE toughest Budget for a decade, aimed at bringing under control a £50 billion public debt and boosting economic recovery, was produced yesterday by the Chancellor, Norman Lamont.
In a controversial tax package, spread over three years, he plans to raise £10.5 billion by increasing national insurance contributions and putting VAT on domestic fuel bills.
The moves were immediately attacked as reneging on election promises by John Major not to raise VAT.
In an unusual departure, the rises will not begin to take effect until next year, but petrol and cigarette prices are to go up immediately.
The postponement of the most painful tax increases — intended to raise £6.5 billion extra next year and a further £10.5 billion the year after — is in order not to knock off course the fragile economic recovery.
Although Mr Lamont received the customary ovations from Tory MPs, there was little cheer on their faces during the Budget speech and Cabinet ministers fidgeted nervously throughout.
As expected there were measures to help the long-term unemployed, small businesses and the construction industry, including transport links with the Channel Tunnel and London's Heathrow airport.
British Rail's planned route to Scotland via King's Cross station has been rejected in favour of a slower one using the neighbouring St Pancras station.
The biggest political hot potato is the decision to put VAT on domestic fuel bills — 8 per cent in April 1994 and rising to 17.5 per cent in 1995.
There was concern among Conservative back-benchers that this was reneging on a election promise last year by the Prime Minister not to extend VAT.
Mr Lamont, when pressed on this last night at a meeting of the Conservative back-bench 1922 committee, justified it on environmental grounds, saying that the election pledge had been overtaken by a commitment at the Rio conference in June to cut Britain's fuel consumption.
The Labour leader, John Smith, described the Budget speech as a ruthless betrayal of election pledges.
Mr Smith, who smelt blood, accused the Government of the biggest tax hike ever and said people would be shocked beyond belief at the cynicism of the Government.
The verdict of the City on whether Mr Lamont has done enough to curb public spending will be delivered when the markets open today.
The verdict on whether Mr Lamont will remain as Chancellor remained open last night, with many Tories seeing it as an electoral mistake to raise fuel bills in the run up the next election, while others praised him for tackling the public deficit.
Immediately after Mr Lamont sat down, the Prime Minister took the rare step of issuing a brief statement aimed at countering speculation that his days as Chancellor are numbered.
‘It's the right Budget at the right time from the right Chancellor,’ said Mr Major.
Mr Lamont, who spoke for almost two hours in what will be the last spring Budget, dwelled on the spiralling public spending debt.
He said: ‘Just as a business cannot go on year after year ignoring a fall in cash flow caused by a downturn in the economy, so too the Government cannot keep on running up debt in the hope that recovery will solve our problems.’
To tackle this, Mr Lamont brought in the most stringent proposals since Lord Howe under Baroness Thatcher in the early 1980s.
He described his proposals for the coming year as neutral because he did not want to hamper recovery.
But his proposals for high rises in the following year were intended to send an unambiguous message to the City that the public debt will be curbed.
In what amounts to direct taxation, national insurance contributions for employees and the self-employed will rise by 1 per cent.
This is the equivalent of a 1p rise in income tax but is postponed until April 1994, as is VAT on fuel.
Postponing taxes is an unusual departure for a Chancellor and ties in any successor, should Mr Lamont be moved in a Cabinet reshuffle.
It also sent a signal that Mr Lamont sees his long-term future at the  Treasury .
Other stringent measures included a freeze on tax allowances this year.
There was a punishing 10 per cent on petrol duties to add 15p to a gallon of four-star and 10p on a packet of 20 cigarettes.
Drinkers escaped comparatively lightly with 1.5p on a pint of beer and 5.5p on a bottle of wine.
But there will be no increase for spirits, a move welcomed by the Scottish whisky industry which has always argued that it is unfairly dealt with.
Mr Lamont teased the press on the subject of VAT.
Sewage and newspapers, he said, had been considered together.
But in the end he had decided against imposing VAT on them.
He claimed the housing market was showing signs of revival but he gave it a prod anyway by raising the threshold on stamp duty from £30,000 to £60,000, move that will help mainly first-time buyers.
As has been widely predicted, he included a £200 million package of job measures designed to take 100,000 long-term unemployed out of the dole queues though community action projects, vocational coursees and business start-up schemes.
He described it as a ‘Budget for sustained recovery and a Budget for jobs — not just for this year or for next year — but right through the decade.’
He believes the best way to bring unemployment down is through helping industry and provided measures to help exporters, what he termed entrepreneurs and small businessmen.
But it will be the big increases in tax, spread over the next three years, by which this Budget will be remembered.
Whether that will achieve its aim of tackling the deficit, boosting recovery — and saving Mr Lamont's job — was the dominant topic at Westminster last night.
Youths remanded after car death
TWO youths appeared in court yesterday after the death of a schoolgirl in a stolen car.
The youths, aged 15 and 16, were remanded by magistrates at Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands, on charges of aggravated vehicle taking, allowing themselves to be carried in a stolen vehicle and having no insurance.
Sally Ann Cattell, 14, of Birmingham, was killed after the stolen car she was driving crashed during a police chase.
Magistrates at Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands remanded the 16-year-old in custody until 24 March.
The other boy was remanded in the care of the local authority and is due to appear before Sutton Youth Court today.
Leading West End director dies
THE original musical director of many of the early hits of Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice has died of an AIDS-related illness, it was announced yesterday.
Anthony Bowles, 61, known as Ant to his friends, was a familiar face in London's West End for more than 25 years.
He died at his home in Islington, north London, on Monday night.
He was the original director of many big hits, including Evita and Jesus Christ Superstar.
Publicist Marie Clements said: ‘He was instrumental in the initial success of the original productions of Lloyd Webber and Rice musicals.
‘The West End will be a different place without him.’
Actress Sheila Hancock, a long time friend, paid tribute to Mr Bowles.
‘I am desolate that Anthony has died.
He was a dear friend,’ she said.
‘He was a hugely talented musician.
He was a great rouser of people and could engender delight in students and musicians alike.’
Thaw and Strachan take the honours
THE ACTOR John Thaw responded defiantly to criticism of his series, A Year in Provence, yesterday as he collected CBE insignia from Buckingham Palace.
Mr Thaw said that the Queen had commented on how different his role was as a genial Englishman abroad after his work as Inspector Morse.
The series began three weeks ago with an audience of 13 million but that is believed to have dropped to about eight million.
The series has been panned by the critics.
Mr Thaw said: ‘Obviously I would like more people to watch it, but I don't give a damn what the press say about it.’
He said he was delighted with the award.
Asked how Morse might have reacted to it, he said: ‘I think he would have been rather chuffed like I am.
He might not admit it but he would be.’
The radio broadcaster Jimmy Young also collected CBE insignia.
Mr Young, 69, said: ‘It is a great honour and a wonderful occasion.’
He laughed off thoughts of retirement, saying: ‘I enjoy the job too much.
The programme has never done better than it is doing now, it is going great guns.’
The Scotland international player Gordon Strachan, of Leeds United, was made an OBE for his services to football.
He led Leeds to the English championship last season but the team's fortunes have taken a dive this year.
Mr Strachan said: ‘This will definitely be the only medal I win this year.
‘This is really for the whole family, everybody who knows me and the people of Leeds.
If it was not for the Leeds fans and manager Howard Wilkinson I would not have got anywhere near this.
It's a great pleasure.’
The film actor Richard Todd also was made OBE, as was an ITN cameraman, Nigel Thomson, twice wounded while working last year, and a former England cricket manager, Micky Stewart.
— PA
Solicitor gets life for murdering his wife
A CROWN Prosecution Service solicitor was sentenced to life imprisonment yesterday for murdering his wife, a student nurse, with a hammer.
A jury at Liverpool Crown Court took nearly four hours to find Warren Green, 27, guilty by a unanimous verdict.
He had denied killing his wife Julie, 24.
Mr Justice Ognall told him after the verdict at the end of the three-week trial: ‘You have been convicted on the most clear and compelling evidence of the murder of your wife.
‘Probably prompted by sex and money, you wanted rid of her.
You killed her in a fashion marked by a chilling degree of control and concentration.’
When the jury's foreman announced the verdict, Green, of Gidlow Lane, Wigan, Greater Manchester, slumped forward in his seat, supporting his arms on his knees.
He then stood up for the sentence, his hands on the dock rail.
Mr Justice Ognall said that after carrying out the killing, Green ‘took determined and sophisticated steps in an effort to mislead the police’.
He added: ‘These steps included maligning your dead wife as a criminal drugs dealer.
‘It should be recorded that whatever her failings disclosed by the evidence in this trial, she deserves to be remembered as a vivacious, caring and decent young woman.’
Green had also pointed the finger at his wife's lover, Stuwart Skett.
He had pled not guilty to the murder at the couple's home in October 1991.
Mrs Green had been bludgeoned to death with 16 blows of a lump hammer soon after she returned from working a night shift at a local hospital.
The court had heard she had been having an affair with Mr Skett, a family friend.
Green had developed a passion for a university law student he had met at work in Salford, Greater Manchester.
Green could have drawn £120,000 in life insurance on his wife, the court heard.
He had constructed a bogus defence claiming that his wife was murdered by someone to whom she was supplying drugs.
Green had claimed he was asleep in bed when his wife returned home.
He had made a search of the house but eventually had found her body in a garage which was locked from the inside.
As Green was led to the cells, his mother, Lynn, burst into tears and sobbed loudly.
She was comforted by another son, Martin.
Julie Green's mother, Mrs Dilys Sillitoe, said after the verdict: ‘I am glad it is all over.
Julie was a really lovely girl, the kind any mother would be proud of.’
Detectives involved in the murder inquiry had not been fooled by Green's charade of wanting to help them — he had even appeared on TV with a tearful plea for aid in finding the killer.
Supt Norman Collinson, who jointly led the investigation, said after the verdict: ‘Warren Green was an arrogant man full of his own self-importance.
‘He has a very detached manner and will stop at nothing to achieve his aim as events have shown.
‘It was a cold, calculated execution rather than an out-of-control attack — and probably the most premeditated murder in decades.’
— PA
Three IRA men were killed in hail of bullets, inquest told
UNDERCOVER soldiers fired more than 200 rounds at a hijacked car during a shoot-out in which three Irish Republican Army men died, an inquest at Enniskillen, Co Fermanagh, heard yesterday.
No warning had been given by the soldiers because they believed their comrades' lives were in danger and they were under fire from the hijacked car, the hearing was told.
The inquest is into the deaths of brothers Michael Gerard Hart, 29, and Martin Joseph Hart, 23, and their brother-in-law, Brian Mullin, 26, all from the Sixmilecross area of Co Tyrone.
They died almost five years ago in the undercover operation near Omagh, Co Tyrone.
Statements from ten soldiers, who cannot be compelled to appear, were read to the jury.
They revealed that they fired more than 200 rounds at the hijacked car, killing the three men inside, who were wearing boilersuits and balaclava helmets.
On Monday, the coroner, John Leckey, said that of 13 soldiers involved in the shoot-out, only three would be giving evidence.
A Public Interest Immunity signed by the Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, would prevent identification of the soldiers, whose evidence would be restricted and be given from behind screens.
The inquest heard that on 30 August, 1988, the security forces had become aware of a threat to the life of a former Ulster Defence Regiment soldier, and the shoot-out had been a result of the actions taken by the security forces because of the threat.
Mr Leckey said three weapons, two assault rifles and a handgun, had been recovered from the scene.
Evidence would be given, he said, that 16 rounds had been fired from one of the rifles.
After the shooting, the IRA had acknowledged that all three men were members of its mid-Ulster brigade and had been killed on ‘active service’.
The IRA men died ten miles from the spot where ten days earlier eight soldiers had been killed and 27 injured in the Ballygawley bus bombing by the IRA.
According to the security forces, Michael Hart had been involved in numerous IRA attacks and had been rumoured to have triggered the Ballygawley bomb.
The inquest was adjourned until tomorrow.
IRA man jailed for 20 years
A MEMBER of the Irish Republican Army who was caught with bomb-making equipment in his home was jailed for 20 years at Belfast Crown Court yesterday.
Sean Connolly, 31, was found guilty of three charges of possessing explosives and arms with intent to endanger life.
Connolly denied the charges but the court heard that swabs taken from his hands indicated he had been in contact with explosives and that he was found in possession of a key to the front door of the second house.
During the trial the court heard that Connelly was arrested on January 10 1992 after a quantity of explosives, a timer power unit and detonators were found in the kitchen of his home at Westrock Drive in west Belfast.
He was also convicted of having possession with intent to endanger life of a cache of explosives and arms found at another house five doors away during a simultaneous police search.
This find included three rifles, a pistol, ammunition, explosives, and components for booby-trap bombs, incendiary devices, rocket launchers, grenades and mortars.
He was also told that Connolly was believed to be a member of the Provisional IRA.
In a reserved judgment, the judge said he was satisfied Connolly had been in the process of making the bomb, and that he had been in control of the munitions found at the other house, some of which were devices only used by the IRA.
Governors ruminate over Birt decision
D-DAY is looming for the BBC chiefs John Birt and Marmaduke Hussey.
Mr Birt and Mr Hussey are at the centre of a deepening row over the way in which the corporation is run.
The arguments for and against their management styles seem likely to be won or lost over the brandy and cigars at dinners before tomorrow's monthly meeting of the BBC board.
The row, which has prompted calls from some staff for both to resign, began when it was disclosed that the £140,000-a-year director general Birt had been employed as a freelance to gain tax advantages.
Others say that the chairman, Mr Hussey, 69, should resign because he appointed Mr Birt and agreed to the tax arrangements.
Some of the corporation's governors were expected to attend a dinner at Broadcasting House last night, with the Birt issue the main topic of conversation.
It was also discussed at a farewell dinner last night for the former BBC director general, Sir Michael Checkland, hosted by the Royal Television Society.
Speakers there included former managing directors of BBC-TV, Sir Paul Fox and Bill Cotton, and Sir Michael, who is due to attend another farewell dinner tonight, hosted by the BBC.
One of the men tipped as a possible successor to Mr Birt, the Channel 4 chief executive, Michael Grade, said he would not be interested in the job if it were offered.
‘This is a moment for the governors to take hold of things and show they are running the BBC.
They have got to put this row to bed,’ he said.
He said he was surprised journalists could compromise their impartiality in covering a matter of public interest by declaring their support for one side or the other.
Mr Birt said yesterday he had been ‘enormously heartened’ by the strong support he had received in from colleagues at the BBC.
DYLAND MARTINEZ/Reuter
Bold face: John Birt tells reporters outside Broadcasting House of the support he has received from colleagues
Policeman cries as he tells court of fatal gun attack
A POLICE officer wept yesterday as he told a jury at the Old Bailey, in London, of the night his colleague was shot dead at point-blank range.
PC Alexander Kelly, 32, had been asked what happened when he was making routine checks on a red Sierra car which he and Special Constable Glenn Goodman, 37, had stopped on the A64 between York and Leeds last June.
He told the jury that he had questioned the driver and passenger about their identities and noticed they had Irish accents.
He had gone to his car to make further checks by radio while Special Constable Goodman stood outside.
He had seen the passenger get out and walk to the side of the road.
‘I presumed he was going to urinate.
Then he turned to face me.
The next thing I saw, he was standing holding a gun with both hands in what I can only describe as a combat position.’
PC Kelly went on: ‘I did not hear anything but I saw two flashes from the barrel of the gun and I presumed he had shot Goodman twice.’
The gunman then had turned to him.
‘I saw two holes appear in the windscreen in front of me and I felt pain in my chest.
I looked up, I do not know why, to see the passenger pointing the gun at me again.
He shot me again in the right-hand side of my body.’
His life had almost certainly been saved by the fact that one bullet had hit a radio handset he had been holding to his ear.
The prosecution allege that the men in the Sierra were Michael O'Brien, 42, and Paul Magee, 32, from Belfast.
Magee and O'Brien deny murdering Special Constable Goodman and attempting to murder PC Kelly.
They also deny attempting to murder two other officers, Mark Whitehouse and Susan Larkin, later that night.
Although badly injured with four bullets inside him, PC Kelly had been able to call up the SOS code number, ‘ten nine, ten nine’.
He told the jury: ‘I did not move until I was sure the car had gone away.
I did not want to show any sign of life.’
PC Kelly looked across the courtroom at Magee and said: ‘He shot Special Constable Goodman and myself.
The expression on his face was committed to my memory.’
The jury has heard that after Magee and O'Brien had driven off, they were chased by PC Whitehouse and WPC Larkin.
At a road junction one of them had stepped out and opened fire on the police car with a sawn-off Kalashnikov rifle but the two officers had not been injured.
The trial continues.
Killer is to be bridesmaid at jail wedding
SUSAN Christie, the soldier imprisoned last year for killing the wife of her army officer lover, will be bridesmaid at a prison wedding next Thursday for a convicted terrorist who killed 17 people — 11 of them soldiers.
Christie will be bridesmaid when Anna Moore, who has served ten years of a life sentence, marries a loyalist killer, Bobby Corry, who is serving life for killing three people in a pub bombing in 1972.
Moore was sentenced for her part in the 1982 bombing of the Droppin' Well pub at Ballykelly, Co Londonderry.
The wedding, inside the top security Maghaberry Prison in Co Antrim, is understood to be the first between loyalist and nationalist inmates.
Christie is serving a nine-year sentenced for killing Penny McAllister, the wife of her lover, Captain Duncan McAllister.
New files on Cheetah probe sent to DPP
NEW files concerned with the Operation Cheetah probe into allegations of corrupt land deals have been sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The news came four days after Derek Hatton, the 45-year-old former Labour deputy leader of Liverpool city council, was cleared of charges of conspiring to defraud the council over two car park sites in the city.
Mr Hatton's solicitor, Peter Quinn, said the DPP should act in the public interest and bring the matter to a conclusion.
— PA
Checkland calls for Hussey to quit
THE BBC's former director general, Sir Michael Checkland, last night called for the resignation of the BBC chairman, Marmaduke Hussey, in the wake of the row over John Birt's tax arrangements.
Sir Michael, who left the BBC at Christmas, told a farewell dinner that Mr Birt's failure to abandon the advantages of self-employed status was ‘a gross error of judgment’.
‘But it was more wrong that the chairman and vice-chairman (Lord Barnett), representing the wider public interest, did not insist on that change in contractual arrangements,’ he said.
However, the BBC's governors last night gave their full backing to Mr Birt, who succeeded Sir Michael as director general, in the tax row.
The board admitted responsibility for the affair and apologised for any ‘errors’ in accepting Mr Birt's freelance status which gave him tax advantages.
They had examined all aspects of his previous contractual arrangements ‘and were satisfied with the explanations given’, said a joint statement.
Mr Hussey's current term as a governor does not expire until 1996.
However, observers believe the attack by Sir Michael over Mr Birt's contract arrangement, means his position as chairman of the governors comes under increased pressure.
Sir Michael made his attack when speaking to 200 guests at a retirement dinner in his honour given by the Royal Television Society in London.
‘Duke Hussey and I have often discussed how ten years would be too long in any top job and many staff at all levels in the BBC have heard his pleas for the BBC to bring forward younger men and women.
‘It should not be so difficult a decision for him in the best interests of an organisation in which he believes and for which I know he has worked so hard.’
It was not the first time that Sir Michael had indicated his view that Mr Hussey should leave his post as chairman.
Last October he criticised the governors' decision to extend Mr Hussey's term of office by five years.
‘Ten years is too long in the job,’ he said.
‘I think that puts the chairman in too powerful a position.
‘I do believe that when you are leading the BBC into the next century at the age of 73, it is bizarre.’
Three weeks later, it was announced that Sir Michael would be leaving at the end of the year, two months earlier than planned.
The BBC governors issued their statement after meeting in private to discuss the Birt affair.
Mr Hussey was at the meeting.
The statement said: ‘The BBC board of governors met this evening.
‘They decided that it was in the best interests of the BBC and its future that John Birt should remain as director general, and gave him their full support.’
It went on: ‘The board of governors acknowledges the widespread public and staff concern that John Birt was not employed on a staff basis and accepts full responsibility for the errors made and apologises for them.’
A fuller statement setting out the board's findings will be issued after its scheduled meeting on Thursday, it said.
Checkland hits out as governors back Birt
THE BBC's former director general, Sir Michael Checkland, last night called for the resignation of the BBC chairman, Marmaduke Hussey, in the wake of the row over John Birt's tax arrangements.
His call came as the BBC governors confirmed that Mr Birt would remain in his post as Sir Michael's successor.
Sir Michael, who left the BBC at Christmas, told a farewell dinner that Mr Birt's failure to abandon the advantages of self-employed status was ‘a gross error of judgment’.
‘But it was more wrong that the chairman and vice-chairman, Lord Barnett, representing the wider public interest, did not insist on that change in contractual arrangements,’ he said.
In his speech Sir Michael backed Mr Birt but said he should effectively be placed on probation for 12 months.
However, the BBC's governors last night gave their full backing to Mr Birt.
The board admitted responsibility for the affair and apologised for any ‘errors’ in accepting Mr Birt's freelance status which gave him tax advantages.
They had examined all aspects of his previous contractual arrangements ‘and were satisfied with the explanations given’, said a joint statement.
The BBC governors issued their statement after meeting in private to discuss the Birt affair.
Mr Hussey was at the meeting.
The statement said: ‘The BBC board of governors met this evening.
They decided that it was in the best interests of the BBC and its future that John Birt should remain as director general, and gave him their full support.’
A fuller statement setting out the board's findings will be issued after its scheduled meeting tomorrow, it said.
Mr Hussey's current term as a governor does not expire until 1996.
However, some observers believe the attack by Sir Michael over Mr Birt's contract arrangement, means his position as chairman of the governors comes under increased pressure.
Sir Michael made his attack when speaking to 200 guests at a retirement dinner in his honour given by the Royal Television Society in London.
‘Duke Hussey and I have often discussed how ten years would be too long in any top job and many staff at all levels in the BBC have heard his pleas for the BBC to bring forward younger men and women.
‘It should not be so difficult a decision for him in the best interests of an organisation in which he believes and for which I know he has worked so hard.’
Sir Michael added: ‘If John Birt were to offer his resignation, the board of governors should refuse to accept it.
‘A vacuum of executive leadership now would be foolish for the BBC and for broadcasting as a whole.
‘The board should, however, make clear that his position would be reviewed in 12 months time by the board, led by a new chairman and vice-chairman.’
It was not the first time that Sir Michael had indicated his view that Mr Hussey should leave his post as chairman.
Last October he criticised the governors' decision to extend Mr Hussey's term of office by five years.
‘Ten years is too long in the job,’ he said.
‘I think that puts the chairman in too powerful a position.
‘I do believe that when you are leading the BBC into the next century at the age of 73, it is bizarre.’
Sexual temptation may save whales
By David Hartley
SEXUAL attraction is to be used in an attempt to draw the six male whales trapped at Scapa Flow in Orkney back out into the Atlantic.
Specialists believe that the clicking and popping sounds made by a school of females may be the best way to rescue the six sperm whales before they starve to death in the enclosed natural harbour.
John Gould, a research student at the University College of North Wales in Bangor, has travelled to Orkney after hearing of the plight of the whales.
He took with him a recording of the female whales at play which he made off the Azores as part of his post-graduate efforts to analyse sperm whale sounds.
Yesterday it was played at a meeting of wildlife agencies called in Kirkwall to discuss the best way to move the whales out of Scapa Flow.
‘The recording is of a large group of females which meet up every day to socialise,’ he said.
‘We're hoping that these pings and pops will prove to be sexually attractive to this group of males.
‘It's never been tried before.
But they might be drawn to the sound of a group of females socialising — think that this is something worth investigating — and help us to lure them out again.’
Tony Martin, a whale biologist at the Cambridge-based Sea Mammal Research Unit, told the meeting that a rescue attempt would need to be made soon.
‘It's a complete mystery as to why they're in Scapa Flow,’ he said.
‘They've now been there for more than three weeks and in my view they just can't find their way out again.
‘They're confused and disorientated and as time goes on, the risk is going to grow that they will strand themselves on land because they won't be feeding and will become progressively weaker.’
He said a rescue attempt should be made soon once suitable equipment could be found and the sound of the females should be played to the males.
If that failed, a group of ships and boats would have to be used in an effort to drive the whales out into the Pentland Firth.
Both options were agreed at the meeting, which was co-ordinated by the  Government environmental agency, Scottish Natural Heritage.
‘We are fast approaching the point when the risk of attempting a rescue — and there is the risk that we could force them to beach — will be less than simply leaving leaving them alone,’ Dr Martin added.
Scots records help scientists trace cancer gene
Bryan Christie reports how excellent family records have helped vital international research
FAMILY records in Scotland dating back to the early 1800s have played an important role in an international effort to learn more about an inherited form of breast and ovarian cancer.
The announcement this week by the Cancer Research Campaign that scientists are close to discovering the gene responsible owes much to research carried out among a group of high-risk Scottish families.
They are among 214 families worldwide whose medical history has been analysed to narrow the hunt for the gene, which can lead to cancer among women in their 30s and 40s.
Michael Steel, assistant director of Medical Research Council's human genetics unit in Edinburgh, said the Scottish data had proved important for a number of reasons.
‘We tend to have very large families and very good record systems.
We were able to confirm the histories of families going back to the 19th century.
It is easier for us to do this than it is for the English or Americans.’
Scotland's registrations of births, marriages and deaths, including certified cause of death are complete from 1855.
That has allowed medical genealogists to draw up family trees, showing how breast and ovarian cancer has been inherited from one generation to the next.
Families from Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh were included in the study after they were referred by medical practitioners who knew of a strong family history of the disease.
Tests on existing family members have helped locate the gene to a region of chromosome 17.
Dr Steel said the Scottish findings showed the same linkage and located the gene in exactly the same position as similar work carried out in England, the United States, Germany, France, Sweden, the Netherlands and Iceland.
Such international collaboration is now continuing to locate the gene itself, opening up the prospect of devising a test to find out which women are at risk of developing the disease.
Dr Steel said it was difficult to estimate when the gene would be located but he thought it would be months rather than years.
In the longer term, drugs could be developed to correct the genetic fault and reduce the risk to the estimated 250,000 women in  Britain who carry the faulty gene.
The Scottish work tracked 250 individual family members and found a total of 75 cases of breast cancer and ten of ovarian cancer.
Dr Steel said 53 other cancers were found in those families, suggesting a wider inherited predisposition to the disease.
Tartans society man admits indecency over kilt photos
A FORMER curator of the Scottish Tartans Society's museum encouraged junior members to be ‘true Scotsman’ by wearing nothing under their kilts.
Then he took indecent photographs of some of them.
Perth Sheriff Court was told that yesterday when David Herschell, 48, of Ancaster Lane, Comrie, admitted committing breaches of the peace on a number of occasions by inducing a total of 13 kilted boys aged between five and 16 to expose themselves while posing for his camera.
He also admitted keeping indecent photographs of youngsters in the society's files.
The offences were committed over six years at the society's museum at Comrie, initially when the accused was a trustee of the society and latterly when he was curator.
James Dinsmore, defending, said that Herschell, and his wife, who have two children, had both been made redundant by the society.
‘The terrible stress and strain of his job and the society's problems were factors which sadly led him to behave in the way he did.’
Sheriff John McInnes deferred sentence until 5 April for background reports and a report by a clinical psychologist.
Last post sounded for half the army's bands
By David Wallen
THE NUMBER of army bands is to be cut by half over the next two years — but all Scottish regimental pipes and drums have escaped the axe.
The announcement yesterday sounds the last post for many traditional military bands with cornet and trumpet, euphonium, clarinet, oboe and flute.
It will mean fewer but larger bands for the army, with the State bands of the Household Division and the Royal Artillery, strong tourism revenue earners described by the Defence Ministry as an essential part of the national fabric, again surviving.
Scotland has seven pipe and drum bands, each normally 25 or 30 strong, whose members form integral machine gun platoons when they are not playing.
They have survived because the way in which they are organised meant they were never included in the two-year Defence Ministry study which has led to the cuts.
The seven full military bands of the Scottish regiments will be cut to just two, which will serve all units north of the border.
The lament is being played for the old military musical structure after the study found many could not even meet the required level of 20 men each and their music was suffering.
The MoD denies cash savings caused the move — stressing that the bands charge full Musicians' Union rates when playing at outside venues and that the money each brings in is placed in a national pot.
The number of military band musicians will be cut from the current level of 2,000 to 1,100 as the bands are reduced from 63 to 29 by April 1995.
There was considerable anger in some parts of the army yesterday that the move was announced on Budget day when there would be potentially less of a stir.
Most of the military bandsmen double as medical orderlies in their wartime role and although no decision has been made about how that will continue an MoD spokesman insisted there would be no compulsory redundancies.
Announcing the move in a Commons written reply, yesterday the Armed Forces Minister, Archie Hamilton, said: ‘The organisation of army bands has been reviewed in order to ensure that the right numbers of bandsmen, providing music to the high standard expected, are employed in proportion to the army's total size, and that the important contribution that bands make to the regimental system is retained.’
In future all military bands will have either 35 or 49 musicians.
The army insists the smaller bands ‘are not musically viable’.
The new bands will be at a divisional level to ensure that a substantial link is maintained between an infantry or cavalry regiment and an allocated band.
The Parachute Regiment will retain one band with the merger of the Falkland and Pegasus Bands and the Army Air Corps will have its own band for the first time.
Much of the reorganisation has still to be decided in talks among the regiments.
The plan is to set up a Central Music Authority for the army, similar to that already operated by the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force, which will agree on bookings for each band.
Four workmen burned in explosion at school
FOUR workmen were burned, three of them seriously, in an explosion at an electricity substation in the grounds of an Airdrie school yesterday, writes Alan Dron.
The men had been working on 415 volt switchgear at Caldervale High School.
A problem had occurred with the equipment on Monday and ScottishPower had been asked by Strathclyde Regional Council to help.
After the explosion, about 500 consumers in the surrounding area were without power for an hour.
The four workers were taken to Monklands District General Hospital.
Three of them had serious face and hand burns and were transferred to the burns unit of Glasgow Royal Infirmary.
They are Thomas Berrie, 34, of Blairdennan Avenue, Robert Todd, 33, of Eastwood Road, both Moodiesburn, and Andrew Carr, 52, of Riverbank Drive, Bellshill.
The fourth man, James Johnstone, 38, of Swinton Gardens, Baillieston, went home after treatment for slight face burns at Monklands.
Mr Carr works for Strathclyde Region, the others for ScottishPower.
The company said last night that the cause of the accident had not been established.
Court told of tyre depot's Hogmanay heroin party
By Frank Urquhart
WORKERS at a tyre fitting depot had closed early for a Hogmanay heroin party, the High Court in Aberdeen heard yesterday.
The manager, Alexander Murray, had produced a quantity of heroin in the back office of the Kenway Tyres depot in the city, it was claimed.
After preparing the drug, Murray had gone on to inject three men waiting in the bothy.
The Kenway depot, the court was told, had been a ‘happy place’ where a few employees had gone about beaming from ear to ear, high on drugs, and where they ‘did a better dance than the Kwik-Fit fitters’.
The allegations of drug-taking sessions came on the first day of Murray's trial before Lord Kirkwood.
Murray, who was employed at the time as the works manager at the premises in Broadfold Road, Bridge of Don, has denied a total of 13 charges, including four allegations that he assaulted a number of men on various occasions by injecting them with either heroin or Temgesic.
Murray, of Bethlin Mews, Kingswells, has also denied using the depot as a base to supply heroin and Temgesic on various occasions between December 1989, and December 1991.
He has lodged a special defence of incrimination in relation to three of the charges.
Colin Mackie, 26, a self-confessed former heroin addict, told the court that Murray had injected him with heroin during drug-taking sessions while he was working as a tyre fitter with Kenway.
Mr Mackie, who now lives in Inverurie, said he had dabbled with soft drugs as a teenager in London and had been introduced to them again by Murray and his brother, David Murray, when he went to work at Kenway.
He had started by ‘snorting’ Temgesic tablets and had then allowed Murray to inject him with the drug.
Mr Mackie claimed he had later progressed to heroin and that Murray had again injected the drug to him.
On Hogmanay, 1991, Murray had produced some heroin in the back office and the depot had been closed early, the court heard.
Mr Mackie claimed Murray had heated up some heroin in a spoon and injected himself before giving him enough heroin for his own injection.
Murray, he alleged, then had gone to the bothy next door where he had injected three men with heroin.
Mr Mackie agreed that all three men had been quite happy to have the injection administered by Murray and that he had also consented whenever Murray had injected him with drugs.
Cross-examined by Bert Kerrigan, QC, for Murray, Mr Mackie denied that he had made up a pack of lies because he held a grudge against his former boss.
Asked if he blamed Murray for his heroin addiction, Mr Mackie replied: ‘I don't blame anyone.’
Mr Kerrigan then questioned Mr Mackie about what it had been like working at the Kenway depot at the time he alleged drugs were being taken.
Mr Kerrigan asked: ‘Were there a lot of happy beaming employees high on drugs, greeting customers in the most amicable fashion, grinning from one ear to the other because they were so relaxed with the drugs?’
Mr Mackie replied: ‘There were a few, yes.’
Mr Kerrigan: ‘They did a better dance than the Kwik-Fit fitters — is that your position?
This was a happy place, a drugs euphoria?’
Mr Mackie: ‘Yes.’
Mr Kerrigan commented he was surprised that the exhausts had not been fitted back to front.
The trial continues.
Colin Mackie: agreed the depot was a ‘drugs euphoria’
Leading Scottish historian dies
PROFESSOR Gordon Donaldson, Historiographer to the Queen in Scotland since 1979, died yesterday in hospital at the age of 79.
He had been ill for some time.
Prof Donaldson, who was regarded as the doyen of Scottish historians, was the author of a wide variety of important historical studies, many relating to the Reformation period.
In 1990 he published a major history of Christianity in Scotland.
The son of a post office worker in Edinburgh, he was educated at the Royal High School and at Edinburgh and London Universities.
He held the posts of assistant keeper at General Register House in Edinburgh and lecturer in Scottish history at Edinburgh University before becoming professor of Scottish history and palaeography at the university in 1963, a position he held until his retirement in 1979.
Prof Donaldson was a member of a number of bodies including the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland; the Scottish Records Advisory Council; Scottish Church History Society; Scottish Record Society and the Stair Society.
He was editor of the Scottish Historical Review from 1972-77.
His publications included: The Making of the Scottish Prayer Book; Shetland Life under Earl Patrick; Scotland: Church and Nation through Sixteen Centuries; The Scottish Reformation; The Scots Overseas; Scottish Kings; The First Trial of Mary, Queen of Scots; Who's Who in Scottish History and Scotland: The Shaping of a Nation.
His appointment as Royal Historiographer in Scotland was announced in March 1979.
The appointment is an honorary title which has been in force since 1681.
It is an advisory post to the Scottish Office, involving the giving of statements of historical fact, when necessary.
A full appreciation of Professor Donaldson's life and work will be published in The Scotsman tomorrow.
Prof Donaldson: specialised in Reformation history
Priest defiant after murder claim fails
A ROMAN Catholic priest vowed yesterday to continue his fight to bring a private prosecution for murder against the doctor involved in the Tony Bland case, even though magistrates threw out his first attempt by refusing to issue a summons.
Father James Morrow, a campaigner from Braemar, emerged from the 50-minute hearing of his application by magistrates at Bingley, west Yorkshire, and said: ‘It is up to me now to pursue the matter in the next court.’
Fr Morrow, 58, had made the application alleging that Dr James Howe murdered Mr Bland, 22, a victim of the Hillsborough disaster, at the nearby Airedale General Hospital.
Afterwards he said: ‘The magistrates have refused to issue a summons so I will have to go to a higher court.
Dr Howe is the culprit and we must have a conviction on this matter.
I will do everything in the power of the private citizen.’
Fr Morrow said he would soon be lodging the same application at Keighley County Court in Mr Bland's home town.
Mr Bland, whose funeral was held a week ago, had been in an irreversible coma since the disaster in 1989.
He was allowed to die after the Law Lords confirmed an English High Court ruling that doctors could cease feeding him.
He died on 3 March.
Fr Morrow said he had acted ‘in an attempt to prevent future comatose, disabled and elderly patients from sharing the fate of Tony Bland’.
His action was not connected with the decision to cease Mr Bland's feeding taken by his parents ‘for whom we pray’.
After the hearing the magistrates issued a brief statement saying they had considered information laid by Fr Morrow that a summons should be issued against Dr Howe because on or about 3 March at Keighley he murdered Mr Bland.
The statement said that, having considered the application, the magistrates had refused to issue the summons.
They did not give their reasons, but Fr Morrow said that they had told him they had carefully studied the Law Lords' decision to allow feeding tubes to be removed from Mr Bland and felt that they could not serve the summons.
Fr Morrow was accompanied by about a dozen supporters.
He said that if the second stage of his fight to prosecute Dr Howe failed, he would take it to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Dr Howe shrugged off Fr Morrow's threat of a private prosecution.
He said: ‘This was discussed during the hearing at the House of Lords and it was said that if a case was brought the Attorney-General would quash it and that has been confirmed by lawyers.
I am not in the least concerned.
‘Letters of support have outnumbered any critical or questioning letters by more than 10-1.
The protesters are in a very, very small minority.’
A spokesman for the Roman Catholic diocese of Leeds said: ‘Those who criticise or accuse do so as private individuals.
Their allegations are not supported by the Church.’
JOHN HOULIHAN
Fr James Morrow after magistrates threw out his attempt to bring a private prosecution against a doctor for murdering Tony Bland, a victim of Hillsborough
Entering the real world
CHRIS MCLAUGHLIN sees the Budget as a major U-turn forced on the Government by harsh economic reality
NORMAN Lamont delivered a double whammy yesterday that the Government would have been proud to hang round the necks of its opponents.
In fact, that is just what it did at the last election.
Then, Labour was accused of holding the tax timebomb, with secret plans to raise taxes and put up national insurance contributions.
Yesterday, it went off under an uncomfortable-looking Government bench as the Chancellor delivered an austerity package that raised taxes directly and indirectly and carried a message for the times.
It was not spend now, pay later, but spend now, pain later.
As the Government sought to balance the books in a nation where the chances of finding a job are equal to that of winning the pools, the unthinkable became the unavoidable.
Taxes had to go up; thrift, if not already learned by a recession-weary public, had to be enforced if borrowing were to come down.
The personal effect of the Budget, cautiously welcomed by industry and the City as broadly the correct recipe without upsetting the fragile recovery, will be to make millions worse off.
The Chancellor hopes that by delaying the worst aspects of the Budget — value added tax on domestic fuel, national insurance increases — and stimulating the housing market and industry, recovery will be helped.
The Budget also marked a head-on collision between Conservative Party election promises and the real world, however.
Read their lips.
A year ago, John Major, fighting to retain the premiership, was categorical.
‘We have no need, and no plans to extend the scope of VAT.’
So was Mr Lamont in last year's, pre-election, Budget: ‘I have no need, no proposals and no plans either to raise or to extend the scope of VAT.’
Labour would raise taxes, the Conservatives would lower them.
Labour would throw money at industry.
Or as Mr Major said during an election television interview: ‘Labour say they've got a recovery package of £1 billion.
I've never heard such ludicrous nonsense in the whole of my life.
‘£1 billion on industry as a recovery package, any economist will tell you, that will make no impact whatsoever, it's a sticking plaster over a lack of policy.’
A Treasury official, asked to cost yesterday's Government boost for industry, did not hesitate in his answer: ‘£1 billion.’
The list could go on.
Chris Patten, then Tory Party chairman, on national insurance for example: ‘Raising national insurance contributions would be a back-door stealth tax.’
That was then and this is now was the message from ministers and harassed officials yesterday.
The broken promises which littered the first of Mr Lamont's three-part adaptation of Hard Times is testimony to the depth of crisis which grips both Government and country.
Mr Major and Mr Lamont did not eat their words out of a cavalier regard for the truth and a penchant for duplicity at election times.
They did it because the scale of Government borrowing, forecast officially to rise to £50 billion next year, and with industry racked in despair, forced them.
To back-benchers who expressed alarm at VAT on domestic fuel, Mr Lamont and Mr Major simply invited them to step into the real world.
Yet this is the same real world derided by Michael Heseltine, Board of Trade President, as ‘Labour's twilight zone of gloom and doom’.
Mr Major attacked Labour again in Commons questions for ‘talking Britain down’, prompting Mr Smith later to suggest that it was not a question of who is talking the country down, but pulling it down.
Mr Lamont aimed to give a boost to business and recovery this year while sending a clear message to the markets of the measures he — or his successor — will take to claw back borrowing.
Confidence-building was the primary intention, to show that the Government was aware of the scale of the problem and determined to stick to its commitment of sound public finances, low inflation and sustainable economic growth.
Whether Mr Lamont's chances of continued tenure in his post have been enhanced remains to be seen.
Indeed, there are moans from some businessmen that his continued tenure in the post is axiomatically linked with the lack of confidence in the Government's economic strategy.
One of his cleverest tricks yesterday was to throw a bridge across a potential Cabinet reshuffle by laying down a Budget not just for this year — when the effect will be fiscally neutral — but for next, and for the year after too.
The imposition of 8 per cent VAT on domestic fuel and a 1 per cent increase in employees' NI contribution to 10 per cent will come in from next April, with a further hefty rise in the fuel VAT rate to 17 per cent planned for 1995.
It is the sort of proposal that sends a chill down the spine of a Tory MP in a marginal seat.
It means that the ghost of Mr Lamont will have a cold hand on the reins of the economy whether he remains Chancellor or not.
And it is both a warning to the public and an acknowledgment of the long climb out of recession which still lies ahead.
Labour reckon that the belt-tightening will hit an average family next year by £454 a year once the NI increase, the freezing of married couples allowance, VAT on fuel, above-inflation rises in car tax discs and smoking are taken into account.
According to Donald Dewar, the shadow social security secretary, those on benefit and low pay are being ‘asked to bail out a Tory chancellor’.
He claims that about 200,000 people will be brought into the tax net for the first time and that the NI increase will, for the majority, be the equivalent of an increase of a penny on the standard tax rate.
The British Chambers of Commerce, on the other hand, welcomed the various adjustments to simplify and enhance tax for small businesses, not least the rationalisation of VAT.
The £230 million package to provide more than 100,000 new opportunities for the long-term unemployed and the, widely expected, go-ahead for joint Government/private sector involvement in the three huge capital projects were also seen as underlining Mr Lamont's commitment to a Budget for Jobs.
Doubling of the stamp duty threshold to £60,000 was also viewed as the right sort of nudge for the depressed housing market, while the exemption of whisky from excise duty increases was a desperately-sought boon for the industry.
It was a Labour MP who painted the most graphic picture of what it is like to be out of work in Britain.
There are, he quoted from official statistics, 39 people chasing every job.
Littlewoods, the pools promoter, calculates each punter has a 1:39 chance of a win.
Therefore, finding a job is akin to winning the pools.
But the Budget itself sketched a quirky country too.
A land where 17 per cent tax is put on fuel and dressed up as Britain's contribution to ‘green’ objectives, where a national lottery is about to yield a 12 per cent rake-off for the Exchequer, where charities are booming, blessed with a Budget tax bonus of £30 million a year and where a job in future may actually mean ‘community service’.
Non-taxing moment: the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, sips from a glass of whisky as he announces no rise in excise duty for spirits
Rival pulls out of talks on Monktonhall partnership
ONE of the firms approached by Monktonhall Colliery about forming a partnership to stave off the pit's financial problems has pulled out of talks with the consortium, writes Graeme Wilson.
Colin MacLeod, chairman and owner of Nottinghamshire-based Caledonian Mining, which competed against the consortium for the pit, said: ‘There has been far too much in the press about the poor miners being done and that we were the big bad boys coming up to take over.
‘We do not need that kind of publicity and do not want to be involved in that sort of thing.
However we do wish the consortium well.’
At a meeting with the consortium more than a week ago, Caledonian directors said they would help only if they were given a controlling interest in the pit.
That offer was rejected by Monktonhall's 160 miners on Saturday.
Management at Monkton-hall last night played down the significance of Caledonian Mining's decision, saying they were greatly encouraged by the talks they are having this week with at least three other potential partners.
Jackie Aitchison, chairman of Monktonhall Mineworkers, said: ‘This move will not in any way interfere with the men's enthusiasm and confidence.’
Staff in schools face complete ban on smoking
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
LOTHIAN schools may become the first in the country to introduce a blanket ban on staffroom smoking.
A committee is to consider a recommendation from the region's education director, David Semple, which is thought to be the first in Scotland to reject even special smoking areas within schools.
His proposal has the support of the education convener, Elizabeth Maginnis.
‘It seems a bit limp for us to be discouraging children from smoking, when their teachers appear in the classroom after break stinking of nicotine.’
Mary-Rose Caden, a smoker and teachers' representative on Lothian education committee, forecast it may be impracticable: ‘If it's a complete ban, then they'll have to police it in some way.
There will still be those people who try and find a quiet corner, as they discovered with similar bans in hospitals.’
She said the ban would affect janitors and cleaners.
It would pose a particular problem, though, for stressed teachers, who take to the staffroom in great need of something to relax them.
Alex Stanley, general secretary of the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association, said: ‘There will obviously be an adverse reaction from staff who find it impossible to stop.
Even in hospitals, they find it almost impossible to enforce.
What will happen is that staff will go behind the bike sheds.’
The likely ban follows a recent court action in England, in which a local authority employee won damages from the council for the effect of passive smoking on a medical condition.
Statutory workplace regulations introduced this year require separate accommodation for those choosing to have smoke-free breaks.
‘The cost involved in ensuring that such a provision is available in every school would be prohibitive,’ Mr Semple advised.
His report recommends a total ban, without alternative provision for smokers, followed by a smoke-free zone in all other Lothian education establishments and offices.
That would follow consultation with teacher unions.
Several other Scottish education authorities — including Dumfries and Galloway, Highland, Tayside and Strathclyde — have already developed strong anti-smoking policies, though none is thought to have rejected the case for smokers' areas.
Poland clamps down on abortion
A STRICT anti-abortion law came into effect in Poland yesterday.
The law, the result of years of lobbying by the Roman Catholic church, bans abortions in private clinics and puts strict limits on them in public hospitals.
For decades abortion was available virtually on demand, due to the liberal interpretation of a law drawn up in 1956 by Poland's then Communist rulers.
Now the operation may only be carried out if a foetus is badly damaged or if a pregnancy threatens a woman's life or health or is the result of a crime.
Those who break the law face up to two years in jail, although a pregnant women herself is exempt, even if she carries out an abortion on herself.
Prosecutors interviewed by the Polish daily Zycie Warszawy said they would not know how to deal with a case of illegal abortion as they had not yet received copies of the new law.
A spokesman for the regional prosecutor in the central city of Lodz said all officials there knew about the law was what they had read in the papers.
‘Will there be gynaecological police?’ asked another prosecutor, who declined to be named.
Yesterday's newspapers contained the usual number of advertisements for abortions in private clinics.
But gynaecologists contacted by telephone said they had stopped doing the operation.
‘We do not carry out abortions.
Definitely,’ said a spokeswoman for one Warsaw clinic.
‘We simply paid for a month's advertising which has not run out.’
Teachers who are supposed to provide sex education in schools under the new law will not receive directions from the education ministry until August.
A  Government programme of help for single mothers has not yet been drawn up, although church groups say they have centres ready to take in anyone needing help.
Women's groups running helplines are not sure what to tell people who ring because of the vagueness of the law — a compromise from the virtual ban sought by the Catholic church.
They don't know, for instance, if they could get into trouble for recommending the various clinics offering ‘abortion tourism’ to neighbouring countries?
The only thing that everybody seems to be sure about is that abortions will continue to be performed despite the new law.
‘It's the power of the market,’ said Warsaw gynaecologist Eugeniusz Brodowicz.
REUTER PSF JLF
STORNOWAY Woman killed in house blaze
A WOMAN died last night in a fire at her home at Newmarket, near Stornoway.
Firefighters were called but the two-storey house was destroyed.
Police have yet to release the victim's name.
Poor lose out in tough balancing act My View: Gavin McCrone gives his view of the Budget
THE Chancellor had to deal with two major issues in framing yesterday's Budget.
He had to decide what to do about the serious state of the Government's own finances — the spiralling budget deficit estimated at £50 billion for next year — and he had to try to help the country to get out of the exceptionally severe recession which has bought both company failures and exceptionally high unemployment.
Seldom can a chancellor have been given so much advice, some of it sought, some of it gratuitous — and, as is the way with this subject, much of it conflicting.
Six of his seven recently appointed panel of economic advisers, the ‘wise men’ advised against tax increases for fear of imperilling the recovery.
The same line was taken by the independent National Institute of Economic and Social Research and the CBI.
On the other hand, the OECD, the Institute of Fiscal Studies, the financial institutions in the City and two of his Tory predecessors, Lord Howe and Lord Lawson, called for immediate tax increases.
Lord Lawson, in a speech on Monday night, the timing of which can hardly have been welcome to the Government, called for stringent public expenditure cuts and immediate tax increases to a total of £6 billion.
The measures Mr Lamont has announced perform the difficult task of attempting to meet both points of view.
They amount to no net tax increase in the coming year, but thereafter very substantial tax increases: £6.5 billion in 1994/5 and £1O.5 billion in 1995/6 financed mainly by a combination of freezing income tax allowances, a 1 per cent increase in National Insurance contributions for employees (in reality a form of income tax) and extension tax of value-added tax to domestic fuel.
However disguised they may be, those are very big tax increases, of a kind which governments can normally introduce early in a parliamentary term only.
The problem which the Chancellor faced was that failure to tackle the fiscal deficit could not only leave him having to borrow nearly £1 billion a week in the coming year.
That still applies and it may prove difficult to finance.
In addition, if there were a lack of confidence in the Government's strategy for getting the deficit under control, it could require a rise in interest rates with very damaging effects on business confidence.
And if a deficit on that scale were allowed to persist Italian-style, the  accumulation in outstanding debt would inevitably means higher taxes in the longer run to meet the burden of interest payments.
But to act too soon on the fiscal deficit, when the economic upturn is so fragile and unemployment already at such unacceptable levels, could risk stopping it in its tracks.
Economic recovery is as much about confidence as it is about deficit financing, as the resolute measures recently announced by President Clinton have demonstrated.
Obviously Mr Lamont accepts this view and the overall balance he has struck would seem to be right.
If conditions subsequently permit some slackening of the measures, that can easily be done, especially as the major tax changes do not take effect for a year.
As regards the measures themselves, an unqualified welcome can be given to the various tax reliefs for business, particularly the changes to ACT, export credits and the steps to help small business.
All of these should help firms in the present difficult climate.
It is perhaps surprising that Mr Lamont did not do something to stop the iniquitous practice of large firms delaying due  payments to small firms, which has put may of the latter into serious difficulty.
It is also perhaps surprising that he did not adopt a more radical approach to the housing market, given the effect that falling house prices and the burden of debt have had on consumer expenditure.
Mortgage interest tax relief, though reduced to 20 per cent, will still be universally available whether needed or not.
I would have preferred to see its replacement with a fixed housing allowance of limited term, and possibly on a more generous scale, for first time buyers only and those who have bought their houses in the last few years; that should be coupled with the extension of housing benefit, which is limited to the rented sector, to low income home owners who have difficulty in meeting their mortgage payments.
Perhaps the most striking and most controversial aspect of the proposals introduced yesterday is the effect they will have on the low paid.
The better off have escaped an increase in higher income tax rates, the upper limit on employees' National Insurance contributions remains as does  mortgage tax relief.
All of those could have been candidates to provide extra revenue.
But the freezing of allowances and the extension of VAT to domestic fuel will bear hard on the low paid.
Those on social security will be protected by an uprating of their benefits.
But the poverty trap for those who go from unemployment to a low paid job is already severe and yesterday's measures seem likely to make it worse.
Apart from the obvious inequity, that is bad for the economy.
It is to be hoped that it is properly tackled in the next Budget.
Economic recovery is as much about confidence as it is about deficit financing, as the resolute measures recently announced by President Clinton have demonstrated
A balancing act being practised on both sides of the Atlantic
CLIFFORD GERMAN, City Editor, analyses the Chancellor's attempt to raise revenue without halting the recovery
THE Chancellor yesterday adopted President Bill Clinton's policy of balancing rather modest immediate measures to reduce the budget deficit with a promise of progressive corrective measures in the longer term.
The Labour leader, John Smith, and his colleagues will certainly be grinding their teeth over a strategy which pre-empts their own promise to draw up longer-term plans for the economy.
Mr Lamont has also put his mark on Tory budgets for the next three years, regardless of whether he remains Chancellor.
The Chancellor also made a deliberate effort to show that while he recognises the dangers of a rising public sector borrowing requirement, his first priority is to avoid blighting the economic recovery by raising taxes too far and too fast.
He can, of course, introduce more taxes in his combined revenue and spending exercise in November.
But on yesterday's proposals the Chancellor's measures take only about £500 million out of the economy in 1993-94.
He has not done enough to satisfy the hardliners in the City who wanted him to take at least £2.5 billion out of the economy in 1993-94.
He has certainly not done enough to meet the pre-emptive judgment of the likes of Lord Lawson, who this week, when it was too late to change anything, asked for £6 billion worth of extra taxes more or less immediately.
He has, however introduced a significant shift in the burden of taxes away from business on to individuals.
In the coming year, consumers will have to pay an extra £1.1 billion, and business will recoup around £600 million.
In particular those earning between £20,000 and £30,000 will feel the impact of the freezing of tax allowances and the married couples' allowance, the reduction of MIRAS relief to 20p in the pound and the increased tax on dividend income.
Playing games with the 20p band could turn out to be a piece of personal folly by the Chancellor.
If pay settlements in the private sector continue to decelerate to 2 per cent and the underlying rate of inflation edges up to around 3.75 per cent by the end of this year when the effects of cheaper mortgages start working their way out of consumer budgets, there is little doubt that many individuals will find their real disposable incomes squeezed.
Businesses will enjoy some immediate concessions on ACT and business rates.
But whether all that is enough to sustain a recovery in consumer demand remains to be seen.
In 12 months time, however, the emphasis shifts to deficit reduction.
He has built an estimated £6.7 billion worth of extra taxes into the economy for 1994-95 rising to more than £10 billion in 1995-96.
In 1994-95 the vast bulk of the extra tax burden, more than £6 billion, also falls on the personal sector, including more than £2 billion in lost income tax allowances, £1.75 billion in higher National Insurance contributions and £1.25 billion in higher excise duties.
If all goes according to plan he will hold the public sector borrowing requirement to £35 billion in the current year, rising to £50 billion in 1993-94, but the proportion of gross domestic product should stabilise at no more than 8 per cent, and fall slowly back to around 4 per cent by 1997 — still an alarmingly large figure in the eyes of some City analysts.
It spells out categorically that the golden days when the Government could cut taxes and repay debt while financing its economic policies by taxing North Sea oil and selling state assets have gone for ever.
Harsh reality has arrived, or is due to arrive next year.
In the meantime, the decision to allow purchases of gilts by banks and building societies to count as part of the funding programme will ease the monetary squeeze for the time being.
The Chancellor is assuming growth will pick up to 1.25 per cent this year, rising to 1.75 per cent by the second half of the year and 3 per cent in the first half of 1994.
The deficit on the current account meanwhile will grow to £17.5 billion as the effects of devaluation flow through.
Monetary targets have been extended with the narrow money supply target remaining at zero to 4 per cent while the broad money target range has been widened a point on either side to between 3 and 9 per cent.
The Government remains committed to fight against inflation but the objective of zero inflation has been quietly dropped for the foreseeable future, which now extends to April 1998.
Everything depends on the economy's continuing to grow out of the recession, and exporters taking full advantage of a competitive exchange rate and finding markets in the face of a recession throughout Europe.
Huge bomb kills at least 45 in Calcutta
A HUGE bomb killed at least 45 people in the eastern Indian city of Calcutta early today, four days after a series of explosions tore through Bombay on the west coast.
Two apartment blocks collapsed shortly after midnight when a powerful explosion ripped through the crowded Bowbazaar district of central Calcutta, police said.
At least 125 people who lived in the two buildings were either dead or critically injured.
Many people in neighbouring buildings were also hurt as were a number of beggars sleeping rough on the pavement.
Scores of people were rushed to hospitals in the city and at least 45 were dead on arrival, police and hospital sources said.
Many were still feared trapped in the rubble.
At least ten fire engines fought for two hours to  extinguish fires in the two buildings.
They had both burst into flames after the explosion, police said.
The area was cordoned off and reporters were barred from approaching.
A huge pall of dust and smoke hung over the district, residents said.
‘We were shaken out of our beds,’ said Shambhu Pal, a middle-aged man who lived about 100 yards from the two devastated buildings.
‘The whole area was rocked.’
In Calcutta, most residents of the middle-class trading and residential district appeared to be out on the street.
Many helped firemen remove debris and others were ferrying the injured to hospitals.
Bowbazaar is in the centre of Calcutta, surrounded by the city's main gold market and furniture market.
The city's police headquarters and Writers' Building, the headquarters of the West Bengal state government, of which Calcutta is the capital, are close to the district.
One police officer said he suspected a vast amount of explosive was stockpiled inside one of the buildings and that it exploded due to careless handling.
He said the explosion appeared not to have been deliberately set off because of the timing.
Bowbazaar links Calcutta's business district with the hugely-crowded Sealdah suburban railway terminus and an explosion of this intensity during daytime would have killed hundreds of people, he said.
‘That gives us the initial impression that the explosion was of an accidental nature rather than a purposeful one, although there can be no doubt that the explosives were stockpiled there for killing people,’ the officer said.
His comments suggested a co-ordinated effort to plant explosives in India's two largest cities.
On Friday, 13 powerful explosions ripped through Bombay, India's commercial and business capital, killing 250 people and injuring at least 1,200.
There have been no claims of  responsibility for the Bombay or Calcutta blasts.
Police and government officials have said the Bombay explosions were most probably the work of an overseas group operating in tandem with local criminals and drug smugglers.
The ruling Congress party said yesterday that the blasts were probably connected to Pakistan's intelligence agency.
‘All indications suggest the involvement of ISI (Inter Services Intelligence) of Pakistan in Bombay's blasts,’ party spokesman Vithal Gadgil said.
Islamabad has said reports linking it to the explosions and ‘wild and unfounded’.
The two nations have history of hostility and have fought three wars since they both gained independence from Britain in 1947.
On Monday, the United States warned India that New Delhi could be the target of a guerrilla attack and advised American citizens to avoid visiting the capital.
Lamont leaves room to manoeuvre GAVIN McCRONE gives his view of the Budget
THE Chancellor had to deal with two major issues in framing yesterday's Budget.
He had to decide what to do about the serious state of the Government's own finances — the spiralling budget deficit estimated at £50 billion for next year — and he had to try to help the country to get out of the exceptionally severe recession which has bought both company failures and exceptionally high unemployment.
Seldom can a chancellor have been given so much advice, some of it sought, some of it gratuitous — and, as is the way with this subject, much of it conflicting.
Six of his seven recently-appointed panel of economic advisers — the ‘wise men’— advised against tax increases for fear of imperilling the recovery.
The same line was taken by the independent National Institute of Economic and Social Research and the CBI.
On the other hand, the OECD, the Institute of Fiscal Studies, the financial institutions in the City and two of his Tory predecessors, Lord Howe and Lord Lawson, called for immediate tax increases.
Lord Lawson, in a speech on Monday night, the timing of which can hardly have been welcome to the Government, called for stringent public expenditure cuts and immediate tax increases to a total of £6 billion.
The measures Mr Lamont has announced perform the difficult task of attempting to meet both points of view.
They amount to no net tax increase in the coming year, but thereafter very substantial tax increases: £6.5 billion in 1994/5 and £1O.5 billion in 1995/6, financed mainly by a combination of freezing income tax allowances, a 1 per cent increase in National Insurance contributions for employees (in reality a form of income tax) and extension of value-added tax to domestic fuel.
However disguised they may be, those are very big tax increases, of a kind which governments can normally introduce early in a parliamentary term only.
The problem which the Chancellor faced was that failure to tackle the fiscal deficit could not only leave him having to borrow nearly £1 billion a week in the coming year.
That still applies and it may prove difficult to finance.
In addition, if there were a lack of confidence in the Government's strategy for getting the deficit under control, it could require a rise in interest rates with very damaging effects on business confidence.
And if a deficit on that scale were allowed to persist Italian-style, the accumulation in outstanding debt would inevitably mean higher taxes in the longer run to meet the burden of interest payments.
But to act too soon on the fiscal deficit, when the economic upturn is so fragile and unemployment already at such unacceptable levels, could risk stopping it in its tracks.
Economic recovery is as much about confidence as it is about deficit financing, as the resolute measures recently announced by President Clinton have demonstrated.
Obviously, Mr Lamont accepts this view and the overall balance he has struck would seem to be right.
If conditions subsequently permit some slackening of the measures, that can easily be done, especially as the major tax changes do not take effect for a year.
As regards the measures themselves, an unqualified welcome can be given to the various tax reliefs for business, particularly the changes to ACT, export credits and the steps to help small business.
All of these should help firms in the present difficult climate.
It is perhaps surprising that Mr Lamont did not do something to stop the iniquitous practice of large firms delaying due  payments to small firms, which has put many of the latter into serious difficulty.
It is also perhaps surprising that he did not adopt a more radical approach to the housing market, given the effect that falling house prices and the burden of debt have had on consumer expenditure.
Mortgage interest tax relief, though reduced to 20 per cent, will still be universally available whether needed or not.
I would have preferred to see its replacement with a fixed housing allowance of limited term, and possibly on a more generous scale, for first time buyers only and those who have bought their houses in the last few years; that should be coupled with the extension of housing benefit, which is limited to the rented sector, to low-income home owners who have difficulty in meeting their mortgage payments.
Perhaps the most striking and most controversial aspect of the proposals introduced yesterday is the effect they will have on the low paid.
The better off have escaped an increase in higher income tax rates; the upper limit on employees' National Insurance contributions remains as does  mortgage tax relief.
All of those could have been candidates to provide extra revenue.
But the freezing of allowances and the extension of VAT to domestic fuel will bear hard on the low paid.
Those on social security will be protected by an uprating of their benefits.
But the poverty trap for those who go from unemployment to a low-paid job is already severe and yesterday's measures seem likely to make it worse.
Apart from the obvious inequity, that is bad for the economy.
It is to be hoped that it is properly tackled in the next Budget.
‘Economic recovery is as much about confidence as it is about deficit financing'
How France's election fight finally lost its fizz
‘CAMPAIGN?
What campaign?’ a Parisian friend asked.
French election campaigns are rarely particularly colourful affairs but the present one must beat them all for its lack of fizz.
It is as if everyone had decided to follow to the letter the advice sent out to UDF candidates by Jean-Pierre Raffarin, the centre-right party's expert on political marketing.
‘The change in the political climate requires new attitudes and behaviour,’ he wrote.
‘A short time ago, being well known helped a candidate's image — today, it often provokes suspicion…
Political marketing is no longer suited to the present situation.’
This is probably just as well, as France's new electoral law imposes strict limits on a candidate's campaign expenditure (maximum £60,000) and bans all publicity outside the official quotas during the six months preceding an election.
Gone are all the huge, colourful posters which used to brighten city walls and inject a bit of humour at election time.
Gone are the roving gangs of party militants who would sneak round in the dead of night replacing other parties' posters with their own and often clashing violently with rival gangs.
If it were not for the uninspiring mug-shots of individual candidates on the bleak official hoardings and the mercifully brief (maximum one minute) party political broadcasts on radio and television, one would hardly know that an election was on.
There has been nothing to fire the voters' imagination — no spectacular clashes over policy, no exciting face to face confrontations between leading personalities, no suspense even as to the outcome, for that has been a foregone conclusion for months: the Right will win, and in all probability with a thumping landslide majority.
The only major event of the campaign, the call by Michel Rocard for a political ‘big bang’ on the Left to allow the creation of a new, broad based, social democratic party, appears to have fizzled out for the time being.
It has had little impact on voting intentions.
The French have never indulged in all the razzmatazz of an American campaign.
Their political candidates tend to do their traditional rounds of local shops, market places and cafes almost incognito, with no party rosette to show who they are.
This poses no problem for the national celebrities, like Jacques Chirac, the neo-Gaullist RPR leader.
He charges in and out of shops with the same patter: ‘Bonjour, a va?
What a nice place you have here!’; poses for photos with old ladies; signs autographs; and grasps hundreds of eagerly outstretched hands, without ever needing to introduce himself.
But it is not so easy for the new or little known candidates.
British-style door-stepping is not acceptable in France, where it would be regarded as an invasion of individual privacy.
So, in order to get his views across, such a candidate has to content himself with stuffing letter boxes, distributing tracts, and holding poorly attended public meetings in bare, underheated school assembly halls.
If he is lucky, he may get one of the party heavyweights to come and support him, in which case he will probably attract a bigger crowd.
But they will still usually be only the party faithful, so he will find himself preaching to the converted.
Heckling is virtually unknown in France.
The French have a reputation for being one of the most ‘politicised’ nations in the world.
But they like to keep their political preferences to themselves.
Asking a Frenchman how he votes is like asking him how much money he earns.
Both are considered totally private affairs, the secret of which is often not even shared between man and wife.
No one would dream of putting a ‘Vote Socialist’ poster in a front window or an ‘I back Chirac’sticker on a car bumper.
To do so would be to invite having a brick thrown through the window or the car's tyres slashed.
No opinion polls are allowed to be published in the final week before an election in France.
The last public polls, published last weekend, showed the alliance of the two main Right Wing parties with 38-39 per cent of the vote and the Socialists with 18-21 per cent— almost exactly the same as their respective positions at the beginning of January.
Two and a half months of a ‘non-campaign’ had changed nothing, and few expect much to change after the election either.
Timex to seek new interdict
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
MANAGEMENT of Timex Electronics in Dundee will tomorrow seek a new court order on union officials in the continuing dispute which has seen 340 workers dismissed.
The company has already obtained an interim interdict at the Court of Session banning the inciting or organising of mass picketing.
Yesterday, John Wright, counsel for Timex, told Lord Hope, the Lord President, sitting with Lords Allanbridge and Brand, that it was now intended that another interdict would be sought against two officials of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union and two shop stewards.
The second order relates to the banning of meetings in the vicinity of the factory gates.
The appeal court decided that the case should be heard tomorrow by a single judge.
An appeal against the original interdict has still to be heard, as has an allegation that the two shop stewards breached the order.
Super shamrock salutes St Patrick
By Alison Daniels
IT MIGHT not be Ireland's biggest or most lucrative export but thousands of shamrocks, carefully sealed in air-tight bags immediately after being picked, have been flown from the Emerald Isle to the Irish in Britain in time for St Patrick's Day celebrations today.
What is at present a modest trade could well become a boom industry, with the ordinary shamrock from the greenhouses of County Dublin shrinking before a new, superior ‘super shamrock’.
The ‘advanced’ shamrock has been developed by the professor of horticulture at University College, Dublin, Joe Morgan.
Unlike its plainer cousin, it will not bring shame to the wearer by wilting or drooping on the crucial day.
It will continue to grow on the patriot's lapel and can even be transferred to a pot, ‘providing very good value for money’, the promoters boast.
The secret behind the super shamrock's extended life is simple.
The plants are grown in small plastic vials filled with a clear jelly-like substance called hydrogel.
They are worn with their roots intact and if the hydrogel is watered, the shamrock will continue growing.
Enthusing about his prodigy, Prof Morgan has visions of dominating the American market.
‘With more than 40 million Americans of Irish extraction, there would appear to be a very large potential market for St Patrick's Day sales.
‘This has been the dream of many an entrepreneur and researcher for years.
The very strict US plant health regulations effectively prohibit the entry of soil or solid media-grown plants.
Only plants grown in water-culture or clear agar-like media may be allowed access and this shamrock product conforms to these regulations.’
The project has received Irish Government funding.
A company, Indigenous Plants of Ireland, has been set up which will test the market with some 40,000 plants over this year's St Patrick's Day season.
Doctors fault Tory drive to improve Scots' health
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
DOCTORS' leaders have criticised the commitment shown by the Scottish Office to improving the country's appalling health record.
Targets for reducing the death toll from heart disease, cancer and other illnesses were set for the first time last year, yet little has happened since then, the British Medical Association said yesterday.
The chairman of its Scottish council, Dr Mac Armstrong, told a press conference in Edinburgh: ‘This should be one of the most exciting enterprises the NHS has ever engaged in but the enthusiasm for this initiative — which is there — may turn to scepticism because of the Government's commitment to it.’
He said that a constant stream of information was flowing out in England indicating how the targets are to be achieved south of the Border.
By comparison, doctors in Scotland know little of what is going on.
‘This is not the way we believe it should be going forward at all,’ Dr Armstrong said.
‘As a result, we believe we are going to be missing opportunities.’
The BMA's Scottish secretary, Dr Vivienne Nathanson, questioned why the drive to improve health appeared to be stopping at Hadrian's Wall.
She said that doctors had offered to participate in developing the programme but had been told they were not needed.
‘Presumably they did not think we could add anything.
It may also be that they did not want to listen to difficult questions we wanted to put.’
One of these involved the links between poverty and ill health, she said.
The Government report Scotland's Health: A Challenge to us All had nothing to say about the Government's pivotal role in alleviating poverty and deprivation by increasing employment, providing adequate benefits and tackling homelessness, she added.
The BMA wrote to Scotland's health minister, Lord Fraser, in December detailing its concerns.
Dr Nathanson said that a reply had been received only on the eve of the press conference and did not alleviate all its concerns.
The Scottish Office issued the letter yesterday in a reply to the criticisms.
In it, Lord Fraser wrote that measures are being taken to ensure that health boards are developing and implementing well targeted, well planned and well evaluated health promotion programmes.
Meetings have been held with employers, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, local authorities and the Scottish Sports Council to discuss health promotion and a report on improvements to Scotland's diet is under consideration.
Lord Fraser lists other developments and concludes: ‘I hope I have demonstrated that there is in fact a great deal of activity.’
Woman to be head of social work
By Hilary Brown
THE next social work director in Strathclyde was named yesterday as Mary Hartnoll.
Miss Hartnoll, 53, the social work director in Grampian, takes over from Prof Fred Edwards, who retires next month after 15 years in the job.
She beat five male candidates to secure the £82,000-a-year post.
It is the second time that Miss Hartnoll has succeeded Prof Edwards in a director's job.
She took over from him when he left Grampian for Strathclyde in 1978.
She said one of the main problems facing her would be the reorganisation of local government.
‘The challenge will be to maintain morale among the staff because what really matters is to make sure that services to people who need them are not disrupted during a period of change.’
Miss Hartnoll is the third woman director in Strathclyde, joining the head of Cleaning Direct, Gail Pain, and Catering Direct's boss, Avril Robertson.
Orcadian mother pleads for children's return
By Sarah Wilson
THE MOTHER of seven Orkney children whose allegations of sex abuse led to nine others being taken into care, has called for an inquiry into their case.
The woman, who cannot be named for legal reasons, wants the circumstances of her children's care proceedings examined.
In a letter to The Scotsman today, the woman calls for the children to be returned home immediately and unconditionally.
The seven children have been in care since November 1990 after their father was convicted of sexually abusing them.
Social workers suspected their older siblings of doing the same.
Nine children from other Orkney families were taken into care in February 1991, but returned home after a sheriff ruled that they could no longer be held.
A public inquiry headed by Lord Clyde published its report on the issues involved last year.
In her letter, the mother contrasts her children's experiences with those of the other nine.
She said: ‘The other children were questioned for five weeks.
My children were interrogated for five months.
Children who have been victims of abuse should not be further abused by the system.’
She believes her children made up the allegations that sexual abuse was going on in other families because of the constant questioning.
She adds: ‘You wouldn't castigate the British servicemen who appeared on the television during the Gulf war and said that whatever Saddam Hussein did was good and whatever the Allies did was bad.
My children were in that position.’
The mother feels her older children must be exonerated from the allegations of abusing their younger siblings and calls for written apologies from all those involved in the affair.
She endorses the work of the Orkney Seven Action Group, formed to campaign on behalf of her children.
She has only one of her sons staying at home in South Ronaldsay and is concerned that she may never be allowed to care for the others.
She adds: ‘I think it's unlikely that the children will be allowed to come home.’
Since Lord Clyde said in his inquiry report that the social workers had acted in good faith, the social workers would have to keep her children to prove they did the right thing in the first place, she said.
Paul Lee, the director of the Orkney Islands Council social work department, said that was untrue.
‘The seven children are in care as a result of a children's panel decision.
Throughout the period of their being in care there have been regular appeals to the sheriff court.
‘The truth of the matter is that the children remain in care after all the evidence has been considered by the children's panel and the courts.’
Revamp plan for Playhouse
By Allen Wright
THE PLAYHOUSE in Edinburgh, which is the biggest theatre in the United Kingdom and can seat an audience of 3,000, is to be renovated at a cost of £4million.
The redevelopment announced yesterday by Paul Gregg, managing director of Apollo Leisure, coincides with the £20 million reconstruction of the Empire as the Edinburgh Festival Theatre.
In the first phase of the Playhouse renovation, new seating will be installed and the foyer and front of house will be improved, with a restaurant for 200 being created in the present Liberty Suite.
The facade will be changed by the removal of the old canopy and the installation of an illuminated screen above the entrance.
Next year the stage and flytower will be extended — heightening the grid by 3.4 metres to 21 metres, and making the stage 3 metres deeper to 15.25 metres.
A scene dock and scenery truck lift will be constructed which will simplify the ‘get in’ arrangements for the big musical productions which tour to the Playhouse.
Mr Gregg said that after the success of shows like Cats and the recent record-breaking Me and My Girl, Apollo was planning to present musicals at the Playhouse for even longer runs.
Cameron Mackintosh's production of Les Miserables which is scheduled for September, is expected to run in Edinburgh for about five months and attract more than half of its audience from outside Lothian Region.
It has been playing for more than a year at the group's Palace Theatre in Manchester, and the Playhouse has taken more than £1 million in advance bookings for it since the box office opened last week.
Tax puts petrol over 250p
By Gary Duncan
SHARP increases in the price of petrol and car tax discs were greeted with anger last night by Britain's motoring organisations.
The changes made by the Chancellor mean an extra 15p on a gallon of four-star petrol and 12p on a gallon of unleaded — representing a 10 per cent rise in the rate of duty from midnight.
The rise sends maximum four-star prices over the 250p mark for the first time.
Vehicle excise duty — the tax disc — paid by the owners of 23 million cars, was increased by £15 a year to £125 for licences taken out in Post Offices and vehicle registration offices from today.
The increases were widely expected after the abolition of tax on new car purchases in last year's Autumn Statement but were nonetheless condemned by the Automobile Association and the Royal Automobile Club.
Mr Lamont said he had made clear he would recoup the cost when he abolished car tax.
Taken with that, the increase in petrol and vehicle excise duty would raise a net £400 million in 1993/4, he said.
In a move that won support from environmentalists, the Chancellor also signalled further pain ahead for motorists when he announced plans to raise petrol duty by at least 3 per cent over the rate of inflation in future Budgets.
The AA said Mr Lamont had delivered a ‘below the bonnet blow’ to the motorist, while the RAC said the petrol price rise coupled with the excise duty increase was an excessive combination.
The impact of the changes on people living in rural areas and dependent on cars for travel was highlighted by the RAC and by several Scottish MPs.
‘With the vast geographical areas covered by drivers in Scotland, cars are an essential part of business, professional and private life,’ said the RAC.
‘This is a billion pound bruising for the motorist as today's Budget will bring the Chancellor more than that figure in general revenue.’
Sir Russell Johnston, MP for one of the UK's largest constituencies, Inverness, Nairn and Lochaber, said the Chancellor had once again failed to make any differentiation between the situation of urban and rural car owners.
‘Particularly after the privatisation of the buses, people are even more dependent on their cars than they were before,’ he said.
Sir Russell added that he expected the Chancellor's action would provoke a strong response from his constituents.
There was less concern about the impact of the increases on the wider economy.
The Chancellor said that together with changes in tobacco and alcohol duty, the changes would produce only a quarter of a percentage point increase in inflation compared with indexation.
The Retail Motor Industry Federation said the rises in duty would have a neutral effect on the recovery of the motor industry.
Topping up: an extra 15p on a gallon of four-star petrol and 12p on a gallon of unleaded
Company car users to pay more
TWO MILLION employees and directors of British firms will face higher bills for the privilege of using their company cars following the Chancellor's decision to tax this perk at its true value.
Mr Lamont increased the scales for company car taxation by 8 per cent, costing drivers an extra £100 million in total in 1993/4.
For the average driver of a company Ford Sierra or Vauxhall Cavalier this means an additional £1.06 a week in tax.
An executive driving a Jaguar XJ12 will have to pay nearly £8 a week more.
But the Chancellor also announced a reform in the way the tax for company car use is applied.
The scales will be based on the price of a car rather than engine size.
In future, drivers will be charged at their normal income tax rate on 35 per cent of the list price for their car.
There will be a one-third discount for those driving more than 2,500 miles a year on business and two-thirds off for those driving more than 18,000 miles.
Mr Lamont said the changes would allow manufacturers and fleet managers to plan production and purchasing in a more rational and stable way.
The overhaul of the company car regime was cautiously supported by the Scottish Motor Trade Association.
In other moves, the Chancellor increased by a fifth the duty charged on free fuel supplied to company car users for private use and abolished the 50 per cent discount on this for drivers doing more than 18,000 business miles a year.
He also scrapped what he called the complex existing arrangements for taxing employees' private use of company vans, introducing a simple scale charge of £500 covering both the van and any fuel provided.
Increases light a fuse for smokers Cigarettes, beer and wine all go up.
MARCELLO MEGA tests the reactions
SMOKERS and beer drinkers reacted angrily last night to the increases in excise duties on products they say are already over-taxed.
The Chancellor announced a rise of around 6.5 per cent for all tobacco products, pushing the price of 20 cigarettes up by about 10p.
Duty on spirits was unchanged but rose by 5 per cent on other alcoholic drinks, putting 5.5p on a bottle of wine and 1.5p on the price of a pint of beer.
Christopher Bullock, of the Tobacco Advisory Council, which represents the UK industry, said the country's 17 million smokers had ‘again’ been unfairly hit.
He said that many people who could do so would be more likely to shop on the continent.
Anne Moody, Scottish spokeswoman for the Freedom Organisation for the Right to Enjoy Smoking Tobacco, said the increase was diabolical.
‘The price of a pack of cigarettes is already 76 per cent tax.
‘There is no recognition of the remarkable contribution made to the Exchequer by smokers.
‘We keep hearing that it costs the health service more than £400 million to treat smoking-related illnesses each year, but we provide £7.5 billion in duty.’
Alison Hillhouse, Scottish director of Action on Smoking and Health, said the 10p rise was not enough to encourage smokers to stop and deter youngsters from starting.
She said: ‘The Government says it wants to reduce tobacco consumption by 40 per cent by the year 2000, but it has refused to ban tobacco advertising and is not making the most of its other weapon.’
The Brewers Association of Scotland said that the real price increase across the bar would be 3p to 4p a pint as the 1.5p related to a pint of weak beer in the brewery.
The association's president, Angus Meldrum, said that beer drinkers in this country already paid about 35p more in excise duty and value added tax than in France.
He warned the increase would put a further strain on pubs which are already feeling the recession's bite and would encourage drinkers to shop abroad.
Alcohol Concern's director, Eric Appleby, said the rise in duty was so small that there would be few benefits, either in financial or health terms.
Increases light a fuse for smokers
By Marcello Mega
SMOKERS and beer drinkers reacted angrily last night to the increases in excise duties on products they say are already over-taxed.
The Chancellor announced a rise of around 6.5 per cent for all tobacco products, pushing the price of 20 cigarettes up by about 10p.
Duty on spirits was unchanged but rose by 5 per cent on other alcoholic drinks, putting 5.5p on a bottle of wine and 1.5p on the price of a pint of beer.
Christopher Bullock, of the Tobacco Advisory Council, which represents the UK industry, said the country's 17 million smokers had ‘again’ been unfairly hit.
He said that many people who could do so would be more likely to shop on the continent.
Anne Moody, Scottish spokeswoman for the Freedom Organisation for the Right to Enjoy Smoking Tobacco, said the increase was diabolical.
‘The price of a pack of cigarettes is already 76 per cent tax.
‘There is no recognition of the remarkable contribution made to the Exchequer by smokers.
‘We keep hearing that it costs the health service more than £400 million to treat smoking-related illnesses each year, but we provide £7.5 billion in duty.’
Alison Hillhouse, Scottish director of Action on Smoking and Health, said the 10p rise was not enough to encourage smokers to stop and deter youngsters from starting.
She said: ‘The Government says it wants to reduce tobacco consumption by 40 per cent by the year 2000, but it has refused to ban tobacco advertising and is not making the most of its other weapon.’
The Brewers Association of Scotland said that the real price increase across the bar would be 3p to 4p a pint as the 1.5p related to a pint of weak beer in the brewery.
The association's president, Angus Meldrum, said that beer drinkers in this country already paid about 35p more in excise duty and value added tax than in France.
He warned the increase would put a further strain on pubs which are already feeling the recession's bite and would encourage drinkers to shop abroad.
Alcohol Concern's director, Eric Appleby, said the rise in duty was so small that there would be few benefits, either in financial or health terms.
Chancellor edges nearer 20p income tax rate for all
By Richard Shackleton DEPUTY CITY EDITOR
THE Chancellor of the Exchequer yesterday made ‘a 20p basic rate for everyone’ the cornerstone of the Government's income tax policy after he outlined modest extensions to the lowest band.
He also outlined offsetting increases in National Insurance contributions, a freezing of tax allowances in 1993/4 and savings from a tightening of the regulations surrounding the married couple's tax allowance.
Those, he said, would help provide ‘a wedge of steadily rising revenue from 1994’ to help cover the deterioration in the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement.
Income Tax:
Last year, the Chancellor broke from the simplified two-tier tax rate by introducing a 20p rate to be levied on the first £2,000 of taxable income.
From 17 May, the 20p band will be increased by £500 to cover the first £2,500 of taxable income in the 1993/4 tax year.
In 1994/5 the band will be widened to cover the first £3,000.
A total of 4.9 million low-paid — an increase of one million over the original 1992/3 beneficiaries — would pay the 20p rate of tax only in 1993/4.
Mr Lamont has also attempted to set the 20p tax rate as the ‘norm’ against which other benefits and allowances are set.
He included measures to restrict MIRAS for homeowners to the new low rate instead of the current 25p level as well as limiting the tax credit on company dividends to the 20p rate.
The move to a universal 20p rate band has been accompanied by the freezing of personal allowances, the married couples allowance, the widow's bereavement allowances and blind persons allowance.
Under the Rooker-Wise-Lawson Amendment these are supposed to rise annually in line with inflation to prevent the automatic advance of taxpayers into higher tax bands.
Parliamentary approval will be needed.
In addition, the Chancellor plans to restrict the married couple's allowance to the new low rate.
In the past, the move towards independent taxation for married women allowed couples to place the allowance where it was the most advantageous — with the partner on the highest marginal tax rate.
In addition, the Government plans a partial offset with the raising of the lowest rate band for the allowance from £2,500 to £3,000.
Overall, the effect of the suspension of indexation will raise an additional £730 million in 1993/4, although against this must be set the cost of the extension of the 20p band which will cost £370 million, leaving the Treasury £360 million better off in the coming year.
The restriction on the married couples allowance will raise a further £900 million in 1994/5 with savings of £1.2 billion annually after that.
But various offsetting changes will have the effect of leaving the Treasury a net £940 million to the good in 1994-5.
National Insurance:
Further increases in revenue will also be generated with the rise in employees' National Insurance contribution rates from 1 April 1994.
The class 1 rate, covering employees earning up to £21,060 would rise by 1 per cent to 10 per cent while self-employed class 4 contributors would increase by 1 per cent to 7.3 per cent.
Give and take on housing
IAN HARPER reports on a package to encourage first-time buyers
THE Budget provided mixed blessings for homeowners, but it has generally been well received by lenders and housebuilders.
The key announcement was that mortgage interest tax relief is to be cut to 20 per cent from 25 per cent on 6 April, 1994.
But with the more urgent need to get the property market moving, the Chancellor of the Exchequer said that with immediate effect, the threshold for stamp duty on houses is to be doubled from £30,000 to £60,000 — which will save home buyers up to £600.
Announcing the cut in tax relief, the Chancellor — in defiance of calls from some MPs to abolish mortgage interest relief altogether — said there were no plans to change the £30,000 MIRAS ceiling.
The move was described by the UK's largest lender, the Halifax Building Society, as: ‘Not unexpected.’
A spokesman said the effect on borrowers will be marginal and amount to an extra £10 a month on mortgages of £30,000 and above at the typical interest rate of 8 per cent.
For loans between £20,000 and £25,000 the average increase in repayments will be £7.80 a month and for loans less than £10,000 it will be £2.10 a month.
Mortgage tax relief is expected to cost the Exchequer £4.3 billion next year but the cut in tax relief will reduce the bill by £900 million in 1994/95 and £960 million in the following year.
However, the cut in tax relief will not affect people aged over 65 who have used a mortgage loan as part of a ‘home income plan’ to buy an annuity.
They will still get relief at 25 per cent.
While there was disappointment that the Chancellor had not taken the opportunity to roll up tax relief for first time buyers into the first few years of a mortgage, the doubling of the stamp duty threshold has been widely welcomed.
The move will be particularly helpful to first time buyers, a Halifax spokesman said, and the impact could be far more wide ranging in Scotland, where the average price paid by a first-time buyers is considerably less than the £51,500 paid by their counterparts in south-east England.
A spokesman for the National Housebuilding Council said: ‘Every housing chain begins with a first time buyer and we are hopeful that this vital part of the market will be encouraged by the Chancellor's additional concession.’
The Chancellor said the reduction in stamp duty will cost £220 million in 1993/94 and £270 million in the following year.
For homeowners who have negative equity — where the value of their house is less than the mortgage — the Chancellor ratified earlier proposals to make it easier for them to trade down.
In future, it will be possible for borrowers to transfer the mortgage interest relief on the loan used to buy the original home to the mortgage on the new home.
The Chancellor has also cut back tax relief on relocation packages for employees.
From 6 April this year, relief will be restricted to payments of up to £8,000, although in future, the existing home need no longer be sold to qualify.
This is expected to yield about £200 million in both 1994-95 and 1995-96.
FE colleges aim higher with university links
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
THE University of New Lanarkshire comes a step closer today with an agreement on partnership between a local college and Strathclyde University.
The push towards university status by Bell College at Hamilton is mirrored by a move in Fife this week, which could see another further education centre breaking into the higher education field.
Fife College of Technology in Kirkcaldy signed a partnership agreement with Dundee University, which it argues has far-reaching implications for Scottish higher education.
The aim is to create a ‘university without walls’, with entrance and degree qualifications made more accessible.
It is also expected to lead to student transfers between the two centres, distance learning through new technologies and Kirkcaldy running franchised courses for at least the early years of Dundee's courses.
Fife College has been seen as one of the further education colleges most likely to break through the barrier which separates the sector from higher education, and there have been suggestions that it could become Fife's second university, after St Andrews.
Bell College is more open about the aim of enhanced status, with the principal, John Reid, favouring ‘The University of New Lanarkshire’ as a key education resource to support the re-generation of the area and provide opportunities for its 600,000 people.
The agreement he is to sign today with John Arbuthnott, principal of Strathclyde University, will allow the 21-year-old Bell College to teach entire courses for validation as university degrees.
Those include the BSc in architectural technology and in chemistry with instrumental analysis.
There are also to be joint degree courses, joint research and exchange of staff for the 4,000-student college.
‘The people of Lanarkshire must be helped to overcome the devastating effects of industrial depression, and one way of doing this is to increase educational opportunities and access to universities,’ said Mr Reid.
‘Lanarkshire has always been the boilerhouse of manufacturing, and maybe they were too busy digging coal and making steel to worry about education.
Bringing higher education closer to industry and the people here would make a tremendous difference economically, socially and psychologically.’
Universities have found a marked increase in students applying for financial help from hardship funds.
A survey by the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals found that a fifth of eligible students applied for help from the government-funded Access Fund last academic year.
The year saw an increase of 15 per cent in such applications, while the fund rose by only 4 per cent.
Universities found that the students in most financial trouble have dependants, and received most help from the funds.
The Access Fund was introduced in 1990 to support students after social security and housing benefit rights had been withdrawn, but students reckon the fund received less than half of the amount withdrawn.
INVERNESS Man jailed after £1,000 drug find
WHEN police stopped to help a driver whose car had broken down outside Inverness they found 28 packages of herbal cannabis in a carrier bag.
At Inverness Sheriff Court yesterday, George Simpson, 30, of Holland Street, Aberdeen, was jailed for 18 months after admitting illegal possession of the drug, valued about £1,000, with intent to supply.
Simpson also admitted driving while disqualified and without insurance and was banned for three years.
NAIRN Police inquiry into woman's death
POLICE were yesterday investigating the death of a woman whose body was found on Monday in a house at Peter Street, Nairn.
They confirmed that the death was being treated as suspicious but would not give the woman's identity or say how she died.
A post-mortem examination was carried out yesterday.
Bomb damages Egyptian tourist buses
A BOMB damaged five tourist buses outside the Egyptian Museum in central Cairo yesterday in what appeared to be a new attack by Muslim militants fighting to overthrow the government.
The bomb, which caused no casualties, had been planted in or under the luggage compartment of one of the buses.
It shattered windows in all five buses and blew a hole in the car park.
No group immediately claimed responsibility and an interior ministry statement on the blast made no accusations.
But the bomb matched a pattern of attacks by Muslim militants which have devastated the country's vital tourist industry since last July.
The militants of el-Gama'a el-Islamiya (the Islamic Group) are fighting to overthrow the government and turn Egypt into a purist Islamic state.
People in the square outside the museum panicked and ran when the bomb exploded at about 1 pm, shortly before the afternoon rush hour.
James O'Neill, 66, on holiday from Dundee with his wife Jessie, said: ‘We were inside the museum when we heard a bang.
We came out and there was a lot of smoke.
I think our bus was hit.’
Another Scot, John Traynor, said: ‘We heard a bang.
First we thought something fell, but then 15 minutes later we came out and saw the crowds and police and realised it was a bomb.’
A diplomat who rushed to the scene from the nearby headquarters of the Arab League said: ‘It was a small thing.
It caused panic among the people and a big noise but no casualties.’
Visitors to the museum, which stayed open despite the attack, included 172 Canadian navy servicemen on leave after protecting famine relief operations in gun-crazy Somalia.
Last October, in their most serious attack on tourists, Gama'a militants shot dead a British woman when they ambushed a bus in southern Egypt.
In another incident they injured five Germans when they shot at another bus in the town of Qena.
But a series of gun and bomb attacks on buses since then in Upper Egypt and Cairo has caused no casualties and the Gama'a says its aim is to undermine the government by damaging the tourist industry, not to hurt tourists.
Egyptian security forces have cracked down with increasing force on the group, and a week ago 23 people were killed a week ago when police stormed a mosque crowded with militants in Aswan and raided eight apartments in Cairo.
A force of 830 police with speedboats and three helicopters spent 12 hours on Monday sweeping through an island in the Nile 300 km (190 miles) south of Cairo where eight militant leaders were believed to be based.
But police could not say the men had been captured.
Farther south in Aswan, security sources said militants had hit back for the storming of the mosque with at least three bomb attacks on police and the fire brigade.
They said nobody had been hurt.
But the attacks proved continuing militant activity in a town which was untouched by Egypt's year-long surge of political violence until gunmen shot dead a policeman outside a church 10 days ago.
Iranian dissident murdered in Rome
TWO gunmen shot dead a leading opponent of the Iranian government in Rome yesterday and other Iranian opposition figures called on the Italian authorities to close Iran's embassy and arrest its ambassador.
The embassy denied any involvement in the murder of Mohammed Hussein Nagdi, a former diplomat who had headed the Rome office of Iran's main opposition group for the last 11 years.
Mr Nagdi was ambushed and shot by two men riding a scooter on a busy street.
The attackers then vanished in rush hour traffic.
Mr Nagdi died in a police car on his way to hospital.
Later, police said they had found an Israeli-made submachine gun in a rubbish bin near the scene of the crime.
Other reports said Mr Nagdi had been shot with a Beretta pistol equipped with a silencer.
The Iranian embassy issued a statement saying the murder was probably the result of a settling of old scores within the Iranian opposition.
It denied denying what it called groundless accusations about embassy involvement in the attack.
Italy is one of Iran's main trading partners and had until now been largely spared the violence that has led to the deaths of dozens of opponents of the Tehran government opponents in other European cities since the 1979 revolution.
‘They would never have dared to do this here if our country was not in such a mess at present,’ an Italian security source said after the murder, referring to country's the growing political crisis.
Rome police chiefs met after the killing and ordered intensified checks throughout the capital.
Security was stepped up at the city's Fiumicino international airport.
Mr Nagdi had been carrying a gun when he left for work yesterday but he did not get a chance to use it.
His wife and his secretary said he had told them he knew he was on Tehran's ‘hit list.’
Italian police guarded both Mr Nagdi's house and office.
The killers apparently knew this and shot him while he was travelling between the two sites without a police escort.
Mohammed Hussein Nagdi: travelled without escort
Western Isles urges tanker ban in Minch
CALLS for a ban on tanker traffic through the Minch except in severe weather and for a deep water route west of the Hebrides are among 42 submissions by the Western Isles Council to the Donaldson Inquiry into the prevention of pollution from merchant shipping.
A covering letter also expresses concern that a government agency had shipped 500 litres of plutonium nitrate through the Minch recently and that the pollution caused by such a cargo would be much worse than the 85,000 tonnes of light oil spilt by the Braer off Shetland.
The council says it would welcome the chance to expand on the submission when the inquiry takes oral evidence.
£750,000 ferry will make Foula less remote
THE remote Shetland island of Foula is about to be brought closer with a £750,000 ferry package.
The community has had to rely on occasional ferry trips in fine weather and flights on tiny Islander planes, operated by Loganair, for four years.
A custom-built Shetland Islands Council ferry, Westering Homewards, is lying unused on the mainland after she was found to be unsafe for the exposed 22-mile Atlantic crossing.
Since she was rejected last year, the council has been trying to find an alternative service for the island.
The transport committee yesterday approved plans to build another boat.
The £750,000 required is being sought from special council budgets, so that a rolling programme of ferry replacement is not affected.
In the meantime, the council is trying to provide a boat for the summer season, either by chartering a vessel, or juggling their fleet of inter-island ferries.
Jim Gear, the councillor for the island, urged the council to move as quickly as possible on the project: ‘I don't know how much more the economy can stand.’
It is essential we address this in a very short time scale.’
Councillor Magnus Flaws added: ‘I cannot see any reason why this will not work this time.’
Prisoners praised for anti-drink work with youngsters
INMATES at Penninghame Open Prison near Newton Stewart, Wigtownshire, have been praised for helping to combat under-age drinking in the area.
A report, published yesterday by Alan Bishop, chief inspector of prisons for Scotland, says members of a prisoners' alcohol abuse group have given talks at secondary schools and have attended meetings of parent-teacher associations and community education committees.
The report says: ‘Involvement in all these areas has met with great success and has been greatly appreciated by the recipients.
The group has received a number of letters in appreciation of their efforts.
‘We were extremely impressed with the sincerity of the members, who have clearly come to realise that many of their problems in the past were alcohol-related and who are now making a determined effort to come to terms with their problem.
‘They have also to be congratulated for their willingness to talk openly to outsiders such as school pupils about the problems caused by alcohol dependency in an attempt to help reduce the problem within the community.’
The prison inspectorate gives the project full support and urges the governor to continue to develop it as far as possible within the constraints of the Penninghame regime.
The report highlights another issue raised by the prison officers — the wearing of uniforms.
They say the majority of the staff group they met considered they were able to foster better relations when prisoners wore civilian clothes.
The inspectorate states that while it sympathises with that view, the compulsory wearing of uniform has become a service-wide decision.
‘We believe that it is unlikely now to be reversed and in our opinion this issue should now be regarded as closed.’
The report highlights as a major problem the fact that only three of the works staff were in post at the time of the inspection.
The remaining five had all been on suspension for about 12 months following an incident which resulted in police and internal disciplinary inquiries.
It states that morale in the prison was high and relationships between staff and prisoners were good.
‘Business was conducted in a relaxed and friendly atmosphere.’
Woman killed in ‘horrific’ lorry accident
A WOMAN, said to be in her twenties, died yesterday in what an eyewitness described as a horrific accident on the M876 near Denny when a lorry struck a car.
Police said it was a miracle that no one else had been killed.
The accident happened at about 7:40am when the lorry, travelling towards Stirling, crossed the central reservation and hit the car, which was heading towards Glasgow, before plunging off the motorway and careering down an embankment and landing on the A883 Denny-Falkirk road.
The woman was trapped in the car and found to be dead by emergency teams.
Her name was being withheld.
The lorry driver was taken to Falkirk and District Royal Infirmary with slight injuries.
Lottery ticket tax angers charities
By Severin Carrell
THE DECISION to levy a 12 per cent tax on tickets for the national lottery for charities, the arts and sport drew an angry response from a national charities group.
The Chancellor said that the tax rate followed clear indications from the Government that a levy on the lottery would be imposed, but, he added, there would be no tax on winnings.
Dave Simmonds, head of economic policy at the National Council for Voluntary Organisations, said that other European governments levied only 5 per cent on national lotteries.
British charities could now expect only 5 pence in the pound.
‘The taxman will get more than double that.
The public will be bitterly disappointed that the Treasury is manipulating the national lottery as a milch-cow at the expense of ‘good causes’.’
Norman Lamont said he had accounted for tax levels imposed on other kinds of gambling and the extent to which the lottery, which is to begin next year, would reduce spending on other types of gambling.
Mr Lamont said that the national lottery's success would be kept under review, with the 12 per cent tax rate maintained only for its first year.
Tax-relief extended on charitable donations
By Severin Carrell
THE BENEFITS of charitable giving for individuals and businesses were increased with two initiatives which extend schemes offering tax relief on donations.
It is expected the two incentives will result in £30 million extra for Britain's trusts and charities.
That is in addition to the £1 billion in tax relief already earned annually.
The Chancellor announced that from 6 April, the annual limit on charitable gifts given income tax relief through the pay-roll giving scheme will be increased by 50 per cent from £600 to £900.
And, with immediate effect, the minimum sum under the Government's Gift Aid scheme which also allows individuals and companies to reclaim some income tax on charitable donations will be reduced from £400 to £250.
Norman Lamont told MPs: ‘These measures build on the principle that tax relief for charity should focus on what individuals themselves give rather than what charities themselves see.’
In a further move, Mr Lamont said legislation will be introduced to allow tax relief for employers who voluntarily contribute towards a charitable agency's costs in running the payroll-giving scheme.
The regulations, which will be back-dated to cover money spent from yesterday, will replace a tax concession.
VAT deal on yearling sales
By Isobel Cunningham
THE decline in racehorse ownership will be halted by the Chancellor's decision to help the racing industry, the Marquess of Hartington, senior steward of the Jockey Club, said as the champagne corks popped at Cheltenham yesterday.
Under a new scheme announced by Mr Lamont, registered owners will be entitled to reclaim value added tax on yearling purchases in this country.
The decision depends on the introduction of a framework allowing owners to have their horses sponsored, and the payment of appearance money.
Owners were previously more likely to head for auctions in Ireland or France, where the rates of VAT charged to the buyers of yearlings are 2.5 per cent and 5.5 per cent respectively, compared with 17.5 per cent in Britain.
A joint memorandum of understanding has been prepared by the Customs and Excise department and the breeding and racing industries.
‘I have one further announcement on VAT which I hope will offer some consolation to those honourable members who would rather be at Cheltenham today watching the champion hurdle,’ the Chancellor announced in a teasing introduction.
‘No Government has done more for racing than this one.
It is an important industry and a vital part of our national life.
‘For some time the bloodstock industry has been concerned about competition from our EC counterparts, and this was threatening 30,000 jobs.’
His words were the signal for Lord Hartington to send champagne in to the press room at Cheltenham, acknowledging the role of journalists in drawing attention to the problem.
Lord Hartington said: ‘This highly successful campaign to find a fair solution to the VAT problems besetting the breeding industry has also resulted in a tremendous boost for racing.
‘It is exactly the sort of vital encouragement which owners needed at this very difficult time.’
Nick Musgrave, secretary and chief executive of the Thoroughbred Breeders' Association said: ‘This is a very positive move in the right direction.’
There now has to be more meetings to see how it's going to work in practice.’
Crowds in the bookies: punters may soon be backing sponsored horses as a result of the new tax deal
Police assault charge quashed
JUDGES have decided that a Glasgow man had the right to resist arrest when stopped by police during a stroll in the park.
At the Court of Appeal in Edinburgh yesterday Andrew Wolfenden, 22, of Revoch Drive, Knightswood, had his Glasgow police court conviction for assaulting a police officer quashed.
He had been admonished over the incident, which happened in August 1991 near his home.
The conviction was wiped out after the Advocate-Depute, Roderick Macdonald, QC, did not oppose the appeal.
Mr Macdonald said that Wolfenden was walking through a park when police started to ‘gallop’ after him and then took hold of him.
There had been car break-ins in the area but there was nothing to connect Wolfenden with them.
‘He was set upon by a police officer who simply wanted to speak to him but had no right in law and the  appellant had the right to resist him,’ said Mr Macdonald.
In Mr Wolfenden's case, Lord Ross, the Lord Justice-Clerk, sitting with Lords Murray and Kincraig, decided that the stipendiary magistrate at Glasgow should not have found him guilty.
Toy store's anger as £30m plan in doubt
By Hilary Brown
A TOY company's plans to invest £30 million in four Scottish superstores have been mothballed after a planning application by the American firm Toys R Us was thrown out by Renfrew District Council.
The council's planning committee refused to consider the application for a £7 million store at Hillington Industrial Estate on the outskirts of Glasgow.
The Hillington plan would have created 800 jobs, bringing the company's Scottish total to 1,000.
Toys R Us already employs 200 staff at its Edinburgh store.
Similar proposals from the company for Hillington were turned down by the Scottish Secretary last March, after a public inquiry, on the grounds that the site is zoned for strategic industrial use.
Under the Land and Compensation Act, Renfrew District Council does not have to entertain a further application within two years unless it differs substantially from the original.
Yesterday David Rurka, managing director of Toys R Us, said that the council's decision had put £30 million plans for Hillington and further stores at Stirling, Dundee and Aberdeen in jeopardy.
He said: ‘Our future expansion programme is frozen, because without a Glasgow bridgehead sites further north would be too isolated from the central hub of our business.
‘I have never in my entire business life experienced such a ridiculous state of affairs.
This application was a major change from the previous proposal and included a regional training centre for Scotland and the north of England.’
The company plans have been put on ice until it decided what its next move might be.
The council leader, Owen Taylor, said: ‘We are being used as a scapegoat and that distresses me.
Toys R Us have been offered an alternative site at Linwood and all the help we can give them.’
Safety plan for nuclear convoy under fire
CONTINGENCY plans to cope with a serious accident to a nuclear weapon being taken over the Kingston Bridge in Glasgow are flawed, councillors heard yesterday.
Thousands of people would be affected, but the authorities would not be able to cope properly, the report, in the name of Strathclyde chief executive, Neil McIntosh, asserted.
Weapon convoys regularly use the M8 motorway through central Glasgow.
A serious accident on the Kingston Bridge would mean evacuating not only hotels and other buildings, but the region's office complex and Strathclyde police headquarters.
Councillors decided to press for alternative routes by sea, to get the weapons to Faslane and Coulport.
Stolen bus crushed girl, court hears
A 13-YEAR-OLD girl suffered two fractures to her pelvis, had a leg broken in two places and a broken ankle after being crushed against railings by a stolen bus.
Glasgow Sheriff Court heard yesterday that the single-decker was being chased by police, another bus from the same depot, and a police helicopter fitted with special searchlights.
The chase ended with Julian Cook, 23, who had stolen the bus, crashing into a car.
Cook admitted stealing the bus from Kelvin Central Bus depot in Kirkintilloch on 20 March last year and driving without a licence or insurance.
He also admitted driving recklessly, at excessive speed and with 79 micrograms of alcohol on his breath, 39 over the limit.
Cook also admitted that at Birdston Road, Milton of Campsie, he mounted the pavement, crushed the girl, now 14, against railings to her severe injury and collided with a car in nearby Kilsyth Road.
Thomas Smyth, prosecuting, said Cook had walked into the depot at 8 pm and been seen by a bus driver  manoeuvring the bus out.
The bus driver had given chase, had managed to signal to a police car and the chase had gone on through Kirkintilloch and Milton of Campsie before Cook lost control in Birdston Road.
‘The girl was walking on the pavement when the bus crashed into railings damaging them badly and the side of the bus hit her a glancing blow,’ he said.
The force of the crash tore several panels of the side of the bus.
Sheriff Laura Duncan called for background reports and adjourned the case for three weeks.
She ordered Cook to be held in custody for three weeks.
Quarry risk ‘was not known'
A FATAL accident inquiry at Ayr into the deaths of two schoolboy friends who drowned in a flooded quarry yesterday heard that the boys’ parents had not known of the dangers.
Two Prestwick Academy pupils, Allan McKay, 13, of Oswald Road, and Iain Allan, 12, of Prestwick Road, both Ayr, died in Bellrock Quarry on St Nicholas Golf Course, Prestwick, on 5 September last year.
The boys disappeared after leaving home to play football after tea.
Allan McKay's body was recovered by police frogmen on 10 September.
Iain Allan's body was found two days later.
Iain's father, Fireman John Allan, 36, said he remembered being told ‘years ago’ that there was a quarry in the area.
He knew from his work with the emergency services that there were particular dangers in flooded quarries but had not known that Bellrock Quarry was flooded.
On visits to the golf course since his son's death, Mr Allan said, he had not been impressed by the new safety fence or by the position of two new lifebelts near the quarry.
He had found some fence posts slack and claimed that it was impossible to reach the lifebelts from outside the fence.
He believed that if nothing were done about filling in the quarry, another tragedy would happen there.
The inquiry heard that only one suicide and no accidental drownings had happened at Bellrock Quarry before last year's double tragedy.
Margaret Allan, 35, a student, told Margaret Paton, the depute fiscal, that her son had had permission to stay out until 9 pm on the evening he disappeared.
She said that she had walked past the quarry previously and had not been concerned about it.
‘It looked just like a puddle,’ she said.
She had not told her son to keep away from the course because she had not been aware that he had gone that way.
Allan McKay's father, a gas engineer, Ian McKay, 40, told Mrs Paton that at the time his son disappeared he had not known of the existence of the quarry.
His wife Janet said that she had not seen the quarry after a fence was put round it after the deaths.
The inquiry continues today.
Accused blames three others for bank raid
By William Chisholm
BANK robbers said to have staged a bungled raid on the Jedburgh branch of the TSB, were named from the witness box yesterday by the man on trial for the crime.
Peter Middleton, 36, of Monkchester Road, Walker, Newcastle upon Tyne, changed his evidence after lunch on the second day of his trial before a jury at Jedburgh Sheriff Court.
He said he had been scared to tell the truth after a series of threats from one of the gang.
On realising that he was the only person charged with breaking into the bank, Middleton said, he had decided to stop protecting the ‘real criminals’.
After giving the names of three men from Newcastle, Middleton told the jury: ‘They were the men who broke into the bank.
Threats were made against me, my wife, my children.
I was told to shut my mouth or there would be serious repercussions.’
Middleton denies breaking into the Jedburgh TSB on 6 December last year with others, with intent to steal.
The court had heard how the raid had been abandoned after a cache of tools and equipment commonly used in bank raids was discovered in a bus shelter.
Middleton said he had not arrived in Jedburgh until after the crime had been committed and was being made the scapegoat.
Cross-examined by his solicitor, Nigel Bruce, Middleton said: ‘I am shaking in case someone goes back to Newcastle and says something.
Maybe I'd be better off in jail.
I was warned if I said anything there would broken windows: I would be assaulted and my children too.’
Middleton said his friend David had called for him at 10pm on the night the bank was broken into and asked him to drive a car to Jedburgh.
He had not been aware of anything ‘iffy’ until they arrived in the Borders.
When someone shouted an instruction to run, he had panicked.
He could not explain why he ran or why he and David abandoned a car a few minutes later a mile from the town centre.
Earlier, Det Sgt John Clark had said he had been involved in meetings with other police forces all over the country after a number of raids on TSB branches in which cash dispensers were forced open using oxy-acetylene equipment.
He examined Crown productions, including oxygen and acetylene cylinders, burners, a tarpaulin and cans of black spray paint found in the bus shelter.
Mr Clark said: ‘The tarpaulin is erected like a tent around the cash dispenser inside the bank so that burning is disguised from members of the public passing by.
The cans of paint would have been sprayed on the windows, also to conceal the burning.’
The case continues today.
Trial told of repeated denial
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
AN INJURED man had repeatedly told police that there was no-one in a derelict boarding house which had been destroyed in an explosion, a jury heard yesterday.
However, minutes earlier, James Sutherland had approached a woman in the street to have an ambulance called for his friend who was inside, the High Court in Edinburgh was told.
Sutherland, 50, of Gilmore Place, Edinburgh, denies the culpable homicide of Bernard Buckley, 44, on 10 April last year.
It is claimed that with intent to defraud the Sun Alliance Insurance Group and while acting with the dead man, Sutherland set fire to the house at Pilton Drive North, Edinburgh.
The charge alleges that although he knew Mr Buckley, of Prince Regent Street, Leith, had been trapped after the blast, Sutherland pretended to the emergency services that there was no-one in the house.
Sutherland also denies setting fire to the house, again allegedly with Mr Buckley, about two weeks earlier.
PC Alan Fraser, 33, told the court that he had seen Sutherland at the scene of the explosion.
His face was blackened, he was bleeding from the head and was possibly suffering from shock.
Sutherland had said that he was the owner of the house and had received a phone call to say that youngsters had broken in and were vandalising it.
He had said: ‘I just opened the door and the house exploded.’
PC Fraser said Sutherland had added that there was nobody inside.
However, the constable learned from a woman in the street that just after the explosion Sutherland had approached her to get an ambulance for his friend who was still in the house.
PC Fraser said he again had asked Sutherland whether there was anyone in the house and Sutherland had replied that there was not.
He had maintained that position when asked for a third time after being put into an ambulance.
The defence QC, Robert Henderson, asked PC Fraser whether there was room for misunderstanding over what Sutherland had said.
The constable replied that he had specifically asked: ‘Is there anyone inside?’ and Sutherland had said: ‘There is nobody inside.’
The trial continues.
NORTH BERWICK Pensioner dies in house blaze
A PENSIONER, Daniel Kenny, 71, died when a house at Kirkports, North Berwick, was engulfed by fire early yesterday.
Police said cause had not been established but there were not thought to have been suspicious circumstances.
SNP obtained sensible and important concession
My SNP membership card, which I have signed annually since 1960, commits me to ‘the furtherance of all Scottish interests’.
The three SNP MPs who voted with the Government this week, and by so doing exerted pressure for increased Scottish representation on the proposed European committee of the regions, acted correctly and in accord with that principle.
I am perfectly at ease with their decision to do so.
More importantly, in return for supporting the Government they also extracted a promise that Scotland's representation on this potentially very powerful body will comprise at least one representative of each of Scotland's four major parties.
The Tories, of course, wanted Scotland's representatives ‘appointed’, ie four unelected Tory friends of the Government.
The Labour Party wanted them elected by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, ie four Labour councillors.
Alex Salmond, Margaret Ewing and Andrew Welsh, you can be sure, will have weighed up carefully the predictable uproar and have decided that the obtaining, with only three votes, of such a sensible and important concession for Scotland from the Government is, in fact, a considerable achievement.
It will in the longer term be recognised as such and very much in ‘the furtherance of all Scottish interests’.
I rather think the Liberals, who stand to benefit greatly from the SNP initiative, should have supported it.
House sales
I refer to recent letters about the cost of house sales and also to an article today in your Property section.
I hope the public will not be fooled by the professed concern by David Alves and REAL estate agents with regard to the cost of house sales.
The reality is that REAL members themselves operate a system of scale charges.
Estate agency fees are based on the value of the property, eg 1 per cent of a £30,000 flat would be £300, plus VAT, whereas on the sale of a £90,000 house it would be £900 plus VAT.
If the value of the property is to be taken into account with regard to estate agency fees, then there is no reason why it should not be taken into account in conveyancing fees, particularly since there is a larger element of responsibility and accountability in relation to the legal process of the sale as opposed to the estate agency.
If REAL estate agents are genuinely concerned about the cost to the public, then I look forward to the introduction by the estate agents of a fixed fee of £250 for estate agency, regardless of the value of the property!
Corrupted
By all means let advertisers bring in history to help to sell their wares, but why is it that they so often mangle and corrupt it in the process?
In today's Property issue referring to flats in North Meggetland in Edinburgh, we are told, first, that the site was part of the Burgh Muir, whereas the nearest part of the muir is at Tipperlinn, almost a mile away.
Secondly, we are told that David I gave the town the muir in 1128, whereas to the best of our knowledge he did nothing of the sort.
What is likely is that the royal burgh and its muir were set up by David's brother, Alexander I, in about 1120, but what is certain is that when David founded Holyrood Abbey in 1128, or soon after, his charter makes it clear that Edinburgh was by then a going concern.
Thirdly, the copy-writer tells us that the flats overlook the open ground where the Scots army mustered in the English wars, whereas the fact is that any mustering was at, or over, the distant sky line at Bruntsfield or Morningside.
The Meggetland example is but one of many.
There is so much of this careless and misleading stuff around that our awareness of history — which is the living part of heritage — is being corrupted.
Can't some code of conduct be devised to restrain it?
Submarine in trouble during west coast trials
By Alan Dron
THE newest submarine for the Royal Navy had to make an emergency ascent during trials off the west coast of Scotland yesterday after fears of contamination to her air supplies.
Last night, the Unicorn — she does not become HMS Unicorn until acceptance into the fleet later this summer — was sheltering in Loch Ewe after suffering a serious problem with onboard equipment.
The diesel-electric submarine was on contractors' sea trials some 40 miles northwest of Lewis when the incident occurred.
The navy yesterday said only that ‘a minor mechanical failure’ had led to the 2,400-ton vessel ‘operating on reduced power’.
However, The Scotsman understands that the vessel had to make an emergency ascent to the surface in order to avoid a possible contamination of her crew's air supply.
In efforts to get fresh air circulating through the boat quickly, her conning tower hatch and possibly one on her casing were opened before full buoyancy had been achieved.
At that moment, a 30-foot wave crashed down on her.
As a torrent gushed inside, it knocked out much of her electrical system.
The Scotsman also understands that Unicorn suffered a similar problem earlier during her trials programme.
Nobody was injured in yesterday's incident, and she was able to limp to shelter, but there will be an internal investigation into events.
As a precaution, the Royal Maritime Auxiliary Service tug Roysterer stood by Unicorn as she headed for the Butt of Lewis.
A Nimrod from RAF Kinloss also kept a watch on the situation.
Unicorn is still the responsibility of her builders, Cammell Laird of Birkenhead, some of whose staff were among the 40-plus on board yesterday, and any defects should be rectified by the shipyard.
The Upholder-class submarines, of which Unicorn is the fourth and last, have had a difficult development period.
During her trials off the west coast of Scotland in 1989, Upholder lost power when her propulsion control system failed to cope with a sudden switch from full ahead to full astern power, a problem which contributed seven months to the three-year delay in her becoming operational.
The vessels have also have lengthy problems with their torpedo tubes.
More hoax bombs found in Aberdeen
POLICE investigating a series of elaborate bomb hoaxes in Aberdeen reported last night that two more suspect devices had been found near oil company offices in the city.
Earlier, two other fake bombs were discovered close to Shell's Seafield House offices at Hill of Rubislaw and BP Expro's headquarters at Dyce.
Police received a warning there would be explosions at those offices and those of Shell Expro at Altens and Elf Caledonia at Bridge of Don.
Nothing was found at the latter two yesterday morning.
Police said the devices found last night were similar to the others and were also harmless.
The deputy chief constable, David Garbutt, said police were satisfied the four were all linked.
‘It would appear the intention was to cause maximum disruption to those working in the city.’
Video hope, Page 3
Disposal experts prepare to unload a remote-control vehicle
Scot may be fourth victim of IRA sniper
A SCOTTISH soldier killed by a single shot while on foot patrol in south Armagh yesterday is thought to have been the fourth victim of an Irish Republican Army assassin.
L-Cpl Lawrence Dickson, 26, of the 1st Battalion The Royal Scots, was from Edinburgh and lived in the Inverness area with his German-born wife, Silke, and their daughter Roxanne, who will be two in July.
He was due to leave the province within a few days.
L-Cpl Dickson was on foot patrol with other troops and police officers just outside the village of  Forkhill when the shot was fired.
He is thought to have been killed with a high-powered long-range rifle, possibly an American-made Barrett (Light Fifty) which has a range of up to 1,800 metres and fires half-inch rounds.
Anyone hit in the upper part of the body has little chance of surviving.
A soldier killed in Crossmaglen, also in south Armagh, last August was the first to be hit by a single shot in a long-range attack.
A Royal Ulster Constabulary officer on traffic duty in Belcoo, Co Fermanagh, last November and another policeman near Crossmaglen last month, also died the same way.
L-Cpl Dickson's death came as thousands gathered for St Patrick's Day parades and after Irish Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds, met President Clinton in Washington.
The all-Ireland Catholic Primate, Dr Cahal Daly, said the shooting had shamed the national celebrations.
— PA 
Lawrence Dickson
Splashy testy heady CRE investigates Strathclyde policy over
By Severin Carrell
AN INVESTIGATION into allegations that dozens of black and Asian children may have been wrongly sent to special schools in Strathclyde region has been initiated by the Commission for Racial Equality.
The formal investigation, in which the CRE has the power to interview staff and examine confidential files, is into possibly unlawful failures by the region to assess properly the intelligence of children who speak English poorly and are judged to have learning difficulties.
The inquiry is the first by the CRE into a single local authority or organisation in Scotland since the commission was set up in 1976.
Observers believe that if the claims are upheld, the results could force council education departments throughout the United Kingdom to reassess their working practices with bilingual children with learning difficulties.
A CRE spokesman confirmed to The Scotsman that it had begun an official investigation ‘which arises from our view that there may have been discrimination in some of the things being done by the education department of Strathclyde Regional Council.’
He said the inquiry, carried out under terms unique to it and the Equal Opportunities Commission, had been formally initiated last month and could last up to a year.
Its findings would be made public.
Although he said he could not release any details about the inquiry's scope, in general, if the CRE found there had been unlawful practices it would issue a ‘non-discrimination notice’ listing the changes to working methods a respondent must make.
It is understood the investigation will focus on alleged breaches of education and race relations laws in the region's assessment of children who are believed to have learning difficulties and whose first language is not English.
It will also investigate the apparent widespread lack of involvement by Asian and black parents in the official assessment of their children's special needs.
This has already been highlighted in a report commissioned by the Scottish Office which found serious alleged failures in the region's practices.
The report, published in April 1991 by a group of educational psychologists employed by Strathclyde, examined the working methods of the Glasgow division of the region's education department, which contains Scotland's largest ethnic minority populations.
The report's findings indicated that black and Asian children judged to have learning difficulties were rarely assessed in their mother tongue and did not have their different cultural backgrounds taken into account.
Between 1984 and 1988, the period examined in the report, a yearly average of 70 children with English as a second language were in special needs education.
But in the two most acute categories of learning difficulties, severe and profound, these children were found to be over-represented by more than 300 per cent and just under 200 per cent respectively compared to native English speakers.
Detailed examination of the assessment forms used for all the bilingual children found that in 75 per cent to 90 per cent of cases, no special account was taken of the child's bilingual and cultural background.
Despite a requirement for full involvement by parents in the assessment process, described as essential in a Scottish Office circular, the survey found that an interpreter was used by psychologists with only one family in ten — and never by schools.
The report's authors said: ‘The data reflects a continuing and concerning lack of evidence of partnership of parents in this process.’
They said that although Strathclyde had advanced and innovative policies in many areas of race equality, their research findings gave ‘a clear signal’ that far greater resources needed to be allocated to this area.
Frank Pignatelli, Strathclyde's director of education, was unavailable for comment yesterday, but a spokesman said: ‘We're aware of the investigation and will cooperate fully with their inquiries.’
The Scottish Office said it knew of the inquiry but had not yet been officially approached by the CRE.
By Severin Carrell
ALLEGATIONS that Strathclyde Region may have wrongly sent dozens of black and Asian children to special schools are to be investigated by the Commission for Racial Equality.
The formal investigation is into possibly unlawful failures by the region to assess properly the intelligence of children who speak English poorly and are judged to have learning difficulties.
The CRE has the power to interview staff and examine confidential files.
The inquiry is the first by the CRE into a single local authority or organisation in Scotland since the commission was set up in 1976.
Observers believe that if the claims are upheld, the results could force council education departments throughout the United Kingdom to reassess their working practices with bilingual children with learning difficulties.
A CRE spokesman confirmed to The Scotsman that it had begun an official investigation ‘which arises from our view that there may have been discrimination in some of the things being done by the education department of Strathclyde Regional Council.’
He said the inquiry had been formally initiated last month and could last up to a year.
Its findings would be made public.
Although he said he could not release any details about the inquiry's scope, in general, if the CRE found there had been unlawful practices it would issue a ‘non-discrimination notice’ listing the changes to working methods a respondent must make.
It is understood the investigation will focus on alleged breaches of education and race relations laws in the region's assessment of children who are believed to have learning difficulties and whose first language is not English.
It will also investigate the apparent widespread lack of involvement by Asian and black parents in the official assessment of their children's special needs.
This has already been highlighted in a report commissioned by the Scottish Office which found serious alleged failures in the region's practices.
The report, published in April 1991 by a group of educational psychologists employed by Strathclyde, examined the working methods of the Glasgow division of the region's education department, which contains Scotland's largest ethnic minority populations.
The report's findings indicated that black and Asian children judged to have learning difficulties were rarely assessed in their mother tongue and did not have their different cultural backgrounds taken into account.
Between 1984 and 1988, the period examined in the report, a yearly average of 70 children with English as a second language were in special needs education.
But in the two most acute categories of learning difficulties, severe and profound, these children were found to be over-represented by more than 300 per cent and just under 200 per cent respectively compared to native English speakers.
Examination of the assessment forms used for all the bilingual children found that in 75 per cent to 90 per cent of cases, no special account was taken of the child's bilingual and cultural background.
Despite of a requirement for full involvement by parents in the assessment process the survey found that an interpreter was used by psychologists with only one family in ten — and never by schools.
The report's authors said: ‘The data reflects a continuing and concerning lack of evidence of partnership of parents in this process.’
They said that although Strathclyde had advanced and innovative policies in many areas of race equality, their research findings gave ‘a clear signal’ that far greater resources needed to be allocated.
Frank Pignatelli, Strathclyde's director of education, said last night: ‘We will be lending our fullest support to the CRE and will be very keen to take forward any of the suggestions that arise from their investigation.
‘Clearly it's a matter of serious concern to us that there can be any suggestion of discriminatory behaviour.’
Doubts on grading, Page 5
Video hope in hunt for office bomb hoaxer
By Frank Urquhart
VIDEO film taken by security cameras at the offices of major oil companies may provide detectives with a vital lead in their hunt for the bomb hoaxer who brought chaos to Aberdeen yesterday.
Four elaborate fake bombs were found near offices used by oil businesses.
Two devices were discovered in the morning and the others were found last night.
The first two were placed in shrubbery only yards from the main buildings of Shell's Seafield House offices at Hill of Rubislaw and BP Expro's main headquarters at Dyce on the outskirts of the city.
Both areas are monitored round the clock by surveillance cameras and detectives are hoping that the hoaxer has been captured on tape.
Shell Expro's main office at Altens and the head office of Elf Caledonia at Bridge of Don also had to be cleared after a warning to the police that bombs would go off at the four sites at 9am.
Nothing was found at the Alten and Bridge of Don buildings after an initial, detailed search, but the other objects were uncovered much later.
The hoax devices were destroyed in controlled explosions by army bomb disposal experts, using remote-controlled vehicles.
Police said they were elaborate devices, of similar construction, designed to give the impression they were bombs.
David Garbutt, Grampian's depute chief constable, said: ‘Mounting an elaborate hoax such as this is a serious criminal act and our investigation will use all available methods to track down the offender.
‘It is despicable for someone to play on the fears of ordinary people in this way.
‘We really want to get our hands on the person who is responsible so we can bring him before the court and have him dealt with properly.’
Mr Garbutt said after the other two devices were found that police were satisfied the four were linked.
‘It would appear the intention was to cause maximum disruption to those working in the city.’
The hoax call caused widespread traffic chaos and more than 5,000 employees were involved in the evacuation of the buildings.
Work at the four offices involved was seriously disrupted for the day, although North Sea operations continued without interruption.
Det Supt Ron Coutts, depute head of Grampian CID, who is leading the investigation, said police were keeping an open mind as to who was responsible.
Detectives are still investigating a hoax call which led to the evacuation of Mobil's Aberdeen offices near Union Street last Wednesday.
Aberdeen bombs hoax BOMB disposal experts unload a remote-control vehicle after a series of suspect devices were found outside oil offices in Aberdeen yesterday.
All four devices, destroyed by controlled explosions, were harmless.
Report, Page 3
Emergency pit talks
CRUCIAL talks will be held today over the future of Monktonhall Colliery in Midlothian which is fighting for survival.
The pit's dilemma will be raised as an emergency item at this morning's meeting of Lothian's economic development committee.
Councillors will discuss the possibility of funding an independent study into the mine's viability.
The colliery is struggling to fulfil its contracts and is burdened by £1.7 million in debts.
Sources close to the regional council said yesterday that a study — which could cost about of £25,000 — could restore the business community's confidence in the pit and in the consortium which is operating it.
Strike in fire service looms over pay
A NATIONAL strike by Britain's 50,000 firefighters looked inevitable yesterday, their union leader stated after talks with the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke.
Ken Cameron, general secretary of the Fire Brigades Union, urged the Government to ‘see sense’ between now and May, when the union's annual conference will be urged to sanction a stoppage.
Union officials held an hour-long meeting with Mr Clarke at the Home Office, urging him to retain the pay formula set up after the bitter nine-week strike in 1977/78.
The formula links firefighters' pay to the top quarter of male manual earnings but the Government is insisting all public sectors workers are given rises of no more than 1.5 per cent this year.
Mr Clarke told the FBU leaders there was no extra money available.
Mr Cameron warned Mr Clarke that firefighters were angry over the scrapping of their pay formula.
He said after the meeting: ‘If the Government does not change its mind a strike looks inevitable, which would be terrible for the people of Britain.
‘There will now be a recommendation to strike put before our annual conference in May but I hope that between now and then the Government sees sense.’
Several hundred firefighters from throughout the country stopped traffic outside the Home Office when they staged an impromptu demonstration in support of their leaders.
Mr Clarke told the FBU leaders that industrial action was premature because firefighters were not due to settle their claim until November.
‘He said it would be the silliest strike in history,’ Mr Cameron told a news conference later.
‘I think the public understands the question of giving firefighters a decent living wage and we will hope to take the public with us if there is industrial action.’
Mr Cameron said the Home Secretary appeared ‘mystified’ about the pay formula but made it clear that 1.5 per cent was the maximum rise available.
Mr Clarke said later that no decision had been taken to do away with the pay formula, but he added: ‘However I cannot agree that firefighters should be an exception to the Government's policy that in the current pay round the rises of all public sector employees should not exceed 1.5 per cent and that there could not be any catching up settlement thereafter.’
The amount of any pay rise this year was a matter for local authorities, he said.
The basic weekly pay for a recruit to the fire service is £243 — rising to £305 for qualified staff.
Six to stand trial over burns murder
SIX people, including two women and a 16-year-old boy, were yesterday sent for trial at Manchester Crown Court, charged with the murder of the teenage burns victim Suzanne Capper.
A charge that they kidnapped 16-year-old Suzanne, of Moston, Manchester, in the week before her death was replaced by one of false imprisonment when they appeared before a city magistrate.
Suzanne died of severe burns a week before Christmas after being found wandering naked near a Stockport golf course.
— PA
Nurse's murder trial in absence
THE MURDER trial of the nurse Beverley Allitt will continue, in spite of weight loss having made her too weak to attend court.
Mr Justice Latham said the case at Nottingham Crown Court could continue in her absence.
Allitt, formerly a nurse at Grantham Hospital in Lincolnshire, denies murdering four children, the attempted murder of 10 children and a woman of 79 and alternative charges of grievous bodily harm.
Allitt has suffered from anorexia nervosa since her arrest.
Bottomley warns of ‘pernicious’ TV
A TELEVISION diet of sex and violence can have a ‘pernicious’ effect on children, the Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, warned yesterday.
She said problems for parents came in all shapes and sizes, adding that perhaps too many of them emanated from ‘that flickering box in the corner of the living room’.
Mrs Bottomley criticised the ‘so-called marvels of modern communications technology’ which made scenes of sex and violence increasingly accessible to children.
She stressed that the ‘pernicious effect’ of such a TV diet ‘is a problem we ignore at our peril.
‘There is undoubtedly a role for the Government to regulate what is broadcast — an increasingly complex but also pressing issue with satellite television leaping across national boundaries.’
But parents also had a responsibility and it was too easy to direct demanding children towards the TV screen.
Such action ‘simply does not wash if it means children exposed to wholly unsuitable material.
‘Parents have to establish the limits beyond which their children should not tread,’ Mrs Bottomley told a news conference organised by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
She urged parents to instil in their children the three ‘Rs’— responsibility, respect and right from wrong.
Whatever their circumstances and pressures, parents had to strive to raise children to live with the normal ups and downs of family life.
‘This is the way to prepare for the demands of adulthood.
Parents need to provide a nurturing and benign experience for their children.
‘But — with help and support where necessary — parents must also provide boundaries.
They must provide a sense of order and predictability for children.’
If these principles were not part of the staple diet of home life, the battle was ‘already half lost’, no matter how skilled teachers, social workers or other professionals might be in making up the deficiency.
Vets have highest rate of suicide
THE experience of putting down sick animals may make veterinarians more likely to consider taking their own lives, a Government report suggested yesterday.
Suicides by vets are more than three and a half times the average for all groups, says the latest issue of Population Trends from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
Pharmacists and dental practitioners come next, with around double the national average, followed closely by farmers and medical practitioners.
Easy access to drugs is likely to be an important factor for all of those groups, the report says.
‘They may also be high stress occupations.
Farmers may have easy access to chemicals, drugs and firearms.
There is also evidence that in recent years this group has experienced particular financial problems.
Farmers and vets are part of a culture where very sick or distressed animals are killed.
This may lead them to consider suicide more readily than other people.’
The lowest risk of suicide — a sixth of the average — goes with jobs such as school inspectors and other education officers.
Others happier with life than vets are glass and ceramics furnacemen and machine tool setters, with a third of the average suicide risk, train drivers and civil service administrators and managers (less than half).
The report examines published statistics showing that for the first time since 1911, suicide rates are increasing for men, particularly those under 45, while those for women have been dropping.
For all age groups of men over 24, widowers and the single and divorced have suicide rates about three times greater than married men.
It says it is difficult to explain why the rising divorce rate seems to have affected men's suicide rate but not women's.
Player hurt during match out of coma
THE footballer John Buckley, who was seriously injured during a league match, was last night off a life-support machine and out of his coma.
The 30-year-old winger with second division Rotherham United was able to move his arm and leg in response to commands from doctors at Sheffield's Royal Hallamshire Hospital, although he was still heavily sedated.
Buckley was admitted to the hospital with a badly fractured skull following an accidental clash of heads with an opponent, Gary Poole, in last Saturday's home game with Plymouth Argyle.
A club spokesman said: ‘The doctors have given him another scan and he was taken off the life-support machine.’
— PA
Emergency talks over Monktonhall
By Marcello Mega
EMERGENCY talks will be held today over the future of Monktonhall Colliery as it struggles to fulfil its contracts while carrying £1.7  million in debts.
The pit's dilemma will be raised as an emergency item at this morning's meeting of Lothian's economic development committee.
Councillors will discuss the possibility of funding an independent study into the mine's viability.
Sources close to the regional council said yesterday that one purpose of such a study — which could cost about of £25,000 — would be to restore the business community's confidence in the pit and in the consortium which is operating it.
One source said: ‘Their credibility has suffered lately and the business community has lost confidence.
A survey would establish once and for all whether the coal they are taking out is paying its way and whether the pit has a future.’
Another source said a study would assess the viability of the pit and the qualities of those operating it separately.
‘There is no doubt about the quality of the coal, but two questions need to be answered — can it be brought out at a price which allows a profit and can the consortium attract the investment required to run the place?’
Although the consortium will not discuss its present financial position, the Bank of Scotland has expressed its concern, in private, to the local enterprise company, Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Ltd.
But it is believed that the bank will not pull the plug in haste as its image would take a knock and the money it is owed would be unlikely to be recovered.
The Monktonhall miners have secured a number of lucrative deals, including one with ScottishPower which is for five years and believed to be worth £10 million.
It also has a multi-million pound contract to supply British Coal with up to 90,000 tonnes of domestic coal, but production problems have meant the consortium has fallen well behind with those orders.
Further investment is needed at the colliery, which reopened last year when 160 miners invested £10,000 each to form the consortium.
That was to allow a second face to be opened to help speed up production.
Jackie Aitchison, chairman of the consortium, has spent much of the last few weeks in talks with potential partners.
For a while it looked as though Caledonian Mining, the Nottinghamshire-based firm which the consortium beat for the pit, would be involved.
Talks broke down on Tuesday night with the firm accusing the Montonhall miners of misleading the media and presenting the affair as a hostile takeover bid.
Later, it emerged that Caledonian Mining had sought a controlling interest rather than an outright takeover, but had been turned down by the consortium.
Mr Aitchison said last night that the consortium was still speaking to ‘a number of interested parties demonstrating a willingness to help us’.
He added: ‘We are confident we will still be operating for a long time to come.
This colliery will survive for our children and our grandchildren.’
Those who invested in the pit will be hoping he is right.
Many of them used their homes as collateral for their loans and stand to lose more than just their jobs if Monktonhall fails.
Constable tells jury of escape from gunman after car chase
A POSTMAN who saw a murdered special constable, Glenn Goodman, lying on a road initially thought he was ‘a shredded tyre from a vehicle’, an Old Bailey jury was told yesterday.
Only when Charles Hedley drew opposite on his way to work in York had he realised it was a body.
‘I bent down and asked him if he was all right.
He moved his head.’
Mr Hedley, 43, in a statement read to the jury trying Paul Magee, 42, and Michael O'Brien, 32, who deny murdering Mr Goodman and trying to murder three other policemen last June, described what happened next.
A police car driven by a woman police sergeant had arrived.
‘The woman initially said: ‘He has been shot, there is another around somewhere’.’
She had asked Mr Hedley to look in the police car on the verge.
‘I saw another policeman lying across the front seat.
He was bleeding from the lower body and moaning.’
That was Mr Goodman's partner, PC Alexander Kelly, who survived.
The prosecutor has alleged that the police were shot when they stopped the men's car for a routine check.
Magee and O'Brien were arrested in Pontefract.
PC Mark Whitehouse, on patrol with WPC Susan Larkin, had heard PC Kelly's radio call for help.
Soon after he had learned another police car giving chase had lost the men's Ford Sierra nearby.
He and the WPC had seen a red Ford Orion and followed it.
The car had pulled over, then he had heard another car.
‘Out of instinct, I knew what was coming round the corner.
I knew it was going to be the red Sierra.’
PC Whitehouse had told the Orion occupants to stay down.
He had run back to his patrol car and followed the Sierra, containing two men, catching it near the village of Burton Salmon.
PC Whitehouse, 24, had felt the car was allowing the police car to draw close.
The Sierra's passenger door had opened, a man had emerged and put a rifle to his shoulder.
‘I heard a crack and felt an impact in the front of our vehicle.
‘I felt the bullet had almost stopped the car.’
As the gunman ran towards them, PC Whitehouse had put his car into reverse and pushed WPC Larkin's head down.
At that point in the evidence, Magee said from the dock: ‘You are a liar.’
PC Whitehouse continued.
He had reversed down the road as the gunman fired bursts of semi-automatic fire.
‘The bullets were hitting the road and I could see them coming towards me a lot faster than I was able to reverse.’
One bullet had hit the windscreen.
Then the police car had crashed into a fence.
PC Whitehouse had scrambled over the car roof to help his colleague.
As he did so, he had seen the approaching lights of another car — the Orion.
The gunman had turned and run to the Sierra.
The case continues today.
— PA
Woman kept body on sofa
A WOMAN kept the mummified body of her husband in their home for six months, police said yesterday.
Thomas Handley, 46, of West Bromwich, died from heart trouble last September but his 62-year-old wife Paula was unable to come to terms with it.
She left him fully dressed on the sofa at her home in Hateley Heath until police officers found the body after a call from worried relatives on Monday.
Mrs Handley was yesterday being cared for and counselled by social services.
New call for Hussey to resign from BBC
By David Wallen
THE BBC'S influential general advisory council will today urge Marmaduke Hussey to resign as chairman of the corporation over his role in the appointment of John Birt as director-general.
The board of governors is also due to meet today to vote on the future of Mr Birt, but there is every indication that the position of Mr Hussey will also be high on its agenda.
Meanwhile, the board and the previous director-general Sir Michael Checkland, met for a farewell dinner for Sir Michael last night.
It was hosted at Broadcasting House in London by Mr Hussey just 24 hours after Sir Michael urged him to quit.
The general advisory council, which helps the board of governors on policy, met yesterday and strongly criticised Mr Hussey for hiring Mr Birt under conditions which allowed him to be paid as a freelance, thus avoiding tax.
It said the decision was wrong and accused Mr Hussey of an error of judgment which had raised questions about the upper echelons of the BBC.
Sir Michael was the only person prepared to comment as 50 invited guests, including governors, top BBC management and close colleagues of Sir Michael, turned up for the dinner last night.
Asked if his call on Tuesday for Mr Hussey's resignation had overshadowed last night's proceedings, he replied: ‘We will have to wait and see — tonight is party night.
This is farewell.’
Lord Barnett, BBC vice-chairman, refused to comment when asked if he intended to resign.
A senior BBC source said those attending had agreed not to say anything.
Earlier, Lord Annan, a former chairman of the Committee on the Future of Broadcasting, said on BBC radio that the affair was not a resignation matter for the chairman.
Little girls raped, sex-abuse trial told
THREE little sisters had been raped, a child sex abuse specialist told the High Court in Glasgow yesterday.
Dr Margaret Drummond said the girls were aged three, five and six when she examined them.
The two youngest girls showed signs of ‘chronic penetrative sexual abuse’ and the oldest girl ‘forceful penetrative abuse’.
On trial are the children's father, grandfather and uncle, who deny sexually abusing and raping the children on various occasions between 28 May, 1989, and 4 October, 1991.
The alleged offences started when the girls were then aged four years, three years and the youngest 11 months.
The offences are alleged to have happened in various houses in Glasgow.
The men, aged 64, 38 and 23, deny tying the sisters to a bed before committing the offences.
The accused, who cannot be named for legal reasons, also deny taking nude photographs of the children while they themselves were naked and showing the pictures to the girl's mother.
Dr Drummond said she was medical director of the Achamore Centre in Glasgow which dealt with a wide range of children's problems, including sexual abuse.
In October 1991, she was asked to examine the three sisters and found them healthy in appearance and co-operative.
During her examinations she found signs of physical sexual abuse.
Questioned by Paul Cullen, prosecuting, she said that in her opinion the children had been injured by penile penetration.
The trial before Lord Morison continues.
Newall's brother held over murder
MARK NEWALL, the brother of Roderick Newall, who is accused of murdering his parents in Jersey more than five years ago, was arrested by police in Paris yesterday.
A States of Jersey police statement said Mark Newall, 26, had been arrested at the force's request.
The arrest came after a warrant was issued on Friday by Jersey's Chief Justice, Sir Peter Crill.
The warrant is over the murder of Nicholas and Elizabeth Newall on or about 10 October, 1987.
An application for Mark Newall's extradition to Jersey would be made in due course, the statement said.
Mark Newall's brother Roderick, 27, is in custody in Gibraltar awaiting an extradition hearing on the same charges.
Roderick Newall is due to appear before Gibraltar's Court of Appeal next week in an attempt to block a tape recording of an alleged confession being played at his extradition hearing.
It was confirmed on Monday that the former army officer had attempted suicide for a third time.
Prison authorities on the Rock said he was taken to hospital after guards spotted him about to make an attempt on his own life early on Sunday.
They refused to confirm reports that he used a syringe hidden in an orange.
Roderick Newall, who has been held in Gibraltar since being arrested at sea last August, was kept in hospital for three hours' observation before being returned to prison.
Last December, he took a drugs overdose and in September slashed his wrists and groin with a smuggled razor blade.
The brothers' parents, Nicholas, 57, and Elizabeth, 48, vanished from their home in Jersey in October 1987.
No bodies have ever been found.
After a week they were listed as missing and some months later traces of blood were found at their home at St Brelade.
In 1991, the brothers are believed to have inherited an estimated £500,000 when a Jersey court ruled that after three years the missing couple could be presumed dead.
Then came the dramatic arrest of Roderick last August when the Royal Navy frigate Argonaut intercepted his yacht 150 miles south west of Gibraltar.
Mark is a high-flying financier who works in Paris and New York.
Nicholas Turner, a director of the French bank where Mark Newall works as a derivatives trader, the Banque Arabe et Internationale d'Investissements, said: ‘Mark Newall has been employed by the BAII group since 1986.
‘BAII has no knowledge of the circumstances leading to his arrest, and accordingly can make no comments, other than to state that nothing in the course of his employment has given rise to any question.’
He confirmed that Mark Newall had worked for the bank in France, London, Jersey and New York.
Mark Newall: arrested by police in Paris
Daring data raider dependent on hacking fix Gillian Harris charts the decline of a popular boy who enjoyed a high-tech challenge to a reclusive man obsessed with computers
PAUL BEDWORTH is small and slightly built but he was strong enough to push his mother down a flight of attic stairs when she tried to stop him using his computer.
At their home in Ilkley, Yorkshire, Connie Bedworth fretted as her teenage son spent his days transfixed by his computer screen.
But her attempts to prise him away were met by violence and verbal aggression.
So great was Paul's obsession that the only way Mrs Bedworth could force him to take a break was by switching off the electricity supply at the mains, she told Southwark Crown Court.
Paul's parents separated when he was very young.
An only child, he grew up with his mother, an English teacher, in a neat, terraced house.
He ran around with a gang of schoolfriends and was a member of the local swimming club.
From an early age he displayed a precocious talent for computing.
For his 11th birthday his mother bought him a £200 BBC microcomputer.
‘I thought it would help with his education,’ she said in court.
At first, Paul and his friends swapped computer games.
Then he grew bored with the games and joined a computer club.
‘He began rejecting his friends and stopped doing any exercise.
His friends used to come round to our house and call for him, but Paul just ignored them,’ said his mother.
When he was 14, Paul was given a modem, a device used to send computer messages down telephone lines.
At night when his mother was asleep, he would creep back to the computer to send messages.
After Mrs Bedworth received a £700 phone bill, she had an electronic bar put on her phone so that anyone making outgoing calls had to dial a code.
Paul used his computer to crack the code and continued as before.
Having tutored himself at home, Paul received an A grade for A-level computer studies when he was 16.
He went on to obtain three more A-levels at school.
During that period, he was becoming increasingly uncommunicative and violent towards his mother.
He threw her to the ground when she stood between him and his computer terminal one morning at 3am.
Another time he shoved her out of his room and down the stairs.
‘He was always trying to get rid of me so that he could get back to his computer.
It was terrible.
There was nothing I could do,’ she said.
Paul received information from other hackers which he used to invade the confidential files of international institutions.
Only sheer exhaustion would force Paul to stop.
His mother would find him slumped across the keyboard or face down on the carpet where he had collapsed.
The thrill of discovering that he could break into secret files spurred Paul on to more daring data raids.
He later admitted deleting a Financial Times file.
For four years he hacked into data and ran rogue programmes.
But late one night in April 1991, Paul was arrested at his home and charged under the Computer Misuse Act 1990.
He says that was when he stopped hacking.
Last October Paul embarked on a computer science degree at Edinburgh University.
He lived in a hall of residence but spent most of his time in the computer laboratory, sometimes staying there all night.
His lawyer, Alistair Kelman, said: ‘He spent his life at the end of a terminal.
He has never had a girlfriend or been to a disco or a dance.’
James Griffith-Edwards, a professor at the Addiction Research Unit in London, examined Paul and concluded that he was suffering from ‘something very nasty and pathological’ which forced him to hack.
He said: ‘One is looking at a young man with monstrously abnormal behaviour.
I would classify him as suffering from a mental disorder, as distinct from a mental illness, but a very serious one.’
Prof Griffith-Edwards believes that Paul became addicted to hacking.
With his trial behind him, Paul is expected to return to his studies in Edinburgh.
Frank Stacey, his director of studies, who knows Paul as a quiet, slightly withdrawn student, said: ‘I do not think he will face any problems coming back.’
But Prof Griffith Edwards said: ‘I would still be  extremely worried about him.
He has little or no social life and has severe problems in evolving any kind of friendship.’
‘He was always trying to get rid of me so that he could get back to his computer.
It was terrible.
There was nothing I could do’
Frank Stacey, Paul Bedworth's director of studies at Edinburgh University, expects him to continue his degree course
Video hope in hunt for oil office bombs hoaxer
By Frank Urquhart
VIDEO film taken by security cameras at the offices of two major oil companies may provide detectives with a vital lead in their hunt for the bomb hoaxer who brought chaos to Aberdeen yesterday.
Two elaborate fake bombs were placed in shrubbery only yards from the main buildings of Shell's Seafield House offices at Hill of Rubislaw and BP Expro's main headquarters at Dyce on the outskirts of the city.
Both areas are monitored round the clock by surveillance cameras and detectives are hoping that the hoaxer has been captured on tape.
Shell Expro's main office at Altens and the head office of Elf Caledonia at Bridge of Don also had to be cleared yesterday after a warning to the police that bombs would go off at the four sites at 9am.
Nothing was found at the Alten and Bridge of Don buildings after a detailed search.
The hoax devices discovered close to Seafield House and BP Expro's offices were destroyed in controlled explosions by army bomb disposal experts, using remote controlled vehicles.
Police said they were elaborate devices, of similar construction, designed to give the impression they were bombs.
David Garbutt, Grampian's depute chief constable, said: ‘Mounting an elaborate hoax such as this is a serious criminal act and our investigation will use all available methods to track down the offender.
‘It is despicable for someone to play on the fears of ordinary people in this way.’
‘We really want to get our hands on the person who is responsible so we can bring him before the court and have him dealt with properly.’
The hoax call caused widespread traffic disruption to the city and more than 5,000 employees were involved in the evacuation of the buildings.
Work at the four offices involved was seriously disrupted for the day, although North Sea operations continued without interruption.
Det Supt Ron Coutts, depute head of Grampian CID, is leading the investigation.
He said police were keeping an open mind as to who was responsible.
No reason had been given by the male caller who claimed to have planted the ‘bombs’.
However, lines of inquiry would include, he said, someone with grievance against the oil industry and people at the ‘nutty’ end of the independence movement.
Mr Coutts said the police were concerned that the hoaxer could strike again or that the hoax could lead to a spate of copy-cat calls.
Detectives are still investigating a hoax call which led to the evacuation of Mobil's Aberdeen offices near Union Street last Wednesday.
Mr Coutts said: ‘The difficulty is that an individual such as this is fuelled by publicity.’
Security measures to thwart data access
THE idea of a computer whizz-kid gaining access to classified data by accidentally brushing against the right button is the stuff of fantasy, according to a security consultant at the National Computing Centre in Manchester.
Chris Hook claims that it takes expert knowledge and a great deal of patience to hack into a computer system.
‘It is not as easy as people imagine,’ he said.
‘There are a small number of people who have the sort of brain and understanding necessary.’
Computer hackers are helped in their quest for confidential information by bulletin boards which operate as electronic mailboxes available to subscribers.
They contain telephone numbers for classified computer systems.
Although determined hackers can breach the tightest computer security, Mr Hook insists that there are precautions organisations can take to lessen the risk.
He suggests using a dial-back modem which intercepts calls, asks for identification then calls back.
He also urges computer users to think up more imaginative passwords.
Another way to thwart a hacker is to get daily print-outs of calls to the computer which would quickly weed out any suspicious  activity , Mr Hook claimed.
But for the most sensitive material, Mr Hook suggests encrypting data files and scrambling information.
Clerk admits theft of £1,200 rent
AN embittered clerical officer stole rent collected from wheelchair-bound tenants of her employer when denied promotion.
Mary Lawrie, who worked with Edinburgh's Thistle Foundation, stole £1,200 over five months, the city's sheriff court heard yesterday.
The depute-fiscal, Alison Gibson, explained how Lawrie had collected rent from tenants at the housing estate run by the Thistle Foundation, but kept some of the cash for herself.
The tenants' rent books had been correctly marked up by her, but she had put different figures into the ledger and cash book.
When the administrative officer at the foundation, which works with the disabled, carried out a check, the discrepancies had come to light.
Lawrie, 34, of Broughton Road, Edinburgh, admitted stealing the cash while working at the Thistle Foundation's offices in Niddrie Mains Road between June and November 1991.
Defending, Robert Fairbairn, said his client, a first offender, was very ashamed of what she had done.
He claimed she had been in severe financial difficulties at the time.
Mr Fairbairn told the court how he believed Lawrie had ‘subconsciously’ become involved in the offence after she was denied promotion when the post of head cashier became vacant.
Lawrie had worked for the organisation for four years but had not been offered an interview, he claimed.
The court heard that Lawrie had found another job with a bus company, but had lost it when police told her employer about the pending court case.
Lawrie, who is unemployed, planned to put her home on the market to pay back her former bosses and pay off her own debts, the court was told.
Lawrie was ordered to carry out 100 hours' community service and to repay the £1,200 to the Thistle Foundation within a year.
Fiona tells why she fancies a change
THE TV presenter Fiona Armstrong yesterday spoke for the first time about why she has quit the breakfast station GMTV — and dismissed talk about the notorious ‘F (for fanciability) factor’.
She confirmed that she had resigned because she was expected to work five days a week instead of the three initially agreed.
She told reporters outside her home in Canonbie, Dumfriesshire: ‘This F-factor stuff leaves me baffled.
If you find out what it is, let me know.’
Ms Armstrong — who was once reportedly told by the TV station's management: ‘Put a coat hanger in your gob and smile more’— said she was not retiring,.
She said she intended to carry on with her TV work, but in jobs with less rigorous commuting schedules.
When asked about the F-factor, she said: ‘I think it was hyped up into something that it was never meant to be.
‘All this about the F-factor and sexual chemistry — if you are on screen you just try and be a good presenter, be a friendly face that people see when they watch TV.’
Fiona Armstrong: ‘This F-factor stuff leaves me baffled’
Baby dies in house fire on Lewis
A BABY died yesterday in a blaze on Lewis, the second fire death on the island within 24 hours.
The baby's name has not yet been released by police.
The fire at Broad Bay View, Back, was discovered at 8am by a neighbour.
John Angus Macrae, a fireman at Stornoway Airport, told his wife to telephone for the fire brigade and he went to offer assistance.
He said: ‘I was told by the parents that the baby was still in the house.
I tried three times to get in but was beaten back by flames.’
The parents and another three-year-old child were taken to the Western Isles Hospital suffering from smoke inhalation.
The firemen quickly extinguished the blaze and the body of the baby girl was discovered in the bedroom.
A woman who died in a fire on Tuesday was named yesterday as Mary Morrison Macleod, 32, of Bridge Cottages, Newmarket, on the outskirts of Stornoway.
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus found the woman in the kitchen.
She was taken to the Western Isles Hospital but was found to be dead on arrival.
PERTH Farm firm fined for safety breach
A FARMING company was fined £500 at Perth Sheriff Court yesterday for breaking health and safety at work regulations.
Robert Simpson and Son admitted that a wooden stairway in a poultry house at Duchlage farm, Crieff, broke during use.
As a result, an electrician, John Barclay, fell from the top step and was seriously injured.
COCKBURNSPATH Man dies in cliff fall
A MAN fell 150ft to his death from a cliff yesterday on the Berwickshire coast.
The accident happened beside the Pease Bay Caravan Park at Cockburnspath.
Police said later the name of the victim is being withheld until relatives have been informed.
IRVINE Housing transfer plans drawn up
IRVINE Development Corporation has drawn up plans to transfer of some houses to a housing association.
While it hopes to build 500 houses before winding up in 1999, the corporation said yesterday that it hoped to start transferring houses to the proposed Irvine Housing Association in 1993.
Estimates show that by the wind-up stage, the corporation would be left with just over 1,900 houses.
DENNY Motorway crash victim named
POLICE yesterday named a 22-year-old woman who was killed in an accident on the M876 near Denny on Monday as Paula Young, of Myre Terrace, Kinross.
Councillor claims proof of Monklands jobbery
By Susan Dean
A MONKLANDS regional Labour councillor said yesterday that he has proof to back up allegations of ‘jobs for the boys’ in Monklands District Council.
John Murphy, regional member for Coatbridge North and Glenboig, challenged the claim by the Monklands District Council leader, Jim Brooks, that allegations about the Labour-controlled authority's jobs practice are unfounded.
Cllr Murphy told The Scotsman: ‘Councillors have told me that they have been put under pressure when short-leeting.’
Cllr Murphy, who works for MDC as a caretaker for a block of flats in Coatbridge, says he can prove that there have been cases of patronage to ensure that certain jobs went to Labour Party members.
He says he joined the Labour Party in 1977, seven years after he began work with the forerunner to the present local authority.
Cllr Murphy said that he was speaking out because of Cllr Brooks' statements to the media after a Labour Party report into the running of the party at constituency, district and council group level.
The report effectively admitted flaws in the structure and proposed new machinery to avoid concentration of power in the hands of a few.
Cllr Murphy said he had been bitterly disappointed that the report had stepped back from investigating allegations on manipulation of personnel recruitment because it is under investigation by an independent management consultancy.
‘I am hoping that the Labour Group leader comes back and says: ‘Prove it.’
I am claiming I have got good proof about jobs not being advertised.’
He declined to give details of his proof.
His evidence, he says, is in relation to an alleged abuse of the internal promotion system.
He says there have been several instances in one council department where employees who are members of the Labour Party have been given temporary promotion.
The permanent vacancies have never been advertised and then the jobs ‘get lost in the system’, and the jobholder retains the post permanently.
‘I can names names but at this stage I don't want to,’ said Cllr Murphy, a shop steward for the National Union of Public Employees and a former chairman of the council's joint shop stewards' committee.
He also says that the committee had raised their concerns to the council about recruitment practice as far back as the late 1970s.
‘It is time for people to stand up and be counted.
There are people who know probably more than me and for one reason or another have been afraid to stand up and be counted,’ he said.
‘I am saying to these people…if they have got information they should come out now and speak publicly.’
Cllr Brooks was unavailable for comment but Elizabeth Leitch, Monklands housing convener, said it was regrettable that Cllr Murphy had seen fit to make allegations to the press instead of to the appropriate authorities.
‘If Cllr Murphy is aware of any specific incidence of malpractice or wrongdoing, he should detail the same in writing to either the chief executive or the independent consultants appointed to look into this matter,’ she said.
‘To make unsubstantiated claims in the local press is neither constructive nor helpful to this particular situation.’
John Murphy: ‘I can name names’
Tyre depot worker tells of making drugs trip for boss
A FORMER employee of an Aberdeen tyre depot said yesterday he acted as a drug courier for his boss.
Kenneth Taylor, who said he did not receive any extra payment other than his normal wages, was giving evidence at the High Court in Aberdeen on the second day of the trial of Alexander Murray.
Murray, of Bethlin Mews, Kingswells, Aberdeen, denies a total of 13 drugs-related charges in Aberdeenshire between December 1989 and January 1992.
He is alleged to have assaulted five named men at Kenway Tyres, Bridge of Don, by injecting them with heroin.
Three of the alleged assaults are said to have occurred on New Year's Eve 1991.
Murray also denies supplying heroin, offering to supply the class A drug and possessing it with intent to supply.
He has lodged a special defence naming another person in connection with three of the charges.
Taylor, 22, from Inverurie, said he first realised Murray was involved in drug-taking when he saw him stick a needle in his arm at the depot.
Murray later asked him if he wanted drugs, but he refused.
Mr Taylor claimed Murray asked him to go to Carlisle to get him some ‘gear’ and after some pestering, he agreed.
Murray gave him petrol money and a bundle of £20 notes amounting to several hundred pounds and Mr Taylor drove to Carlisle and then Liverpool, where he obtained two balls containing powder.
Mr Taylor travelled back to Aberdeen and gave them to Murray.
He claimed he used to hold a tie round Murray's arm as he injected himself.
Cross-examined by Herbert Kerrigan, QC, Mr Taylor denied making up his story or leaving his former job because of ill-feeling with the accused.
Stephen Gill, 19, a tyre-exhaust fitter, told the court he was injected by the accused in the tyre depot office on Hogmanay after he had been asked if he wanted to try it.
He was unaware of any ‘common kitty’ at Kenway Tyres for the purchase of drugs.
The trial continues.
One-day strike at university is called off
By Frank Urquhart
UNION leaders at Robert Gordon University last night called off strike action, planned for today, to pave the way for talks which could settle the dispute over the sacking of Sheena Falconer, a senior textiles lecturer at the institution.
Members of the University Lecturers Association had been due to take part in a second one-day strike at the university in Aberdeen.
It was called off after the principal, Dr David Kennedy sent a confidential letter to Mrs Falconer.
Union officials are now seeking an early meeting with Dr Kennedy to discuss its contents.
Last week more than 80 lecturers, members of the University Lecturers Association, staged a one-day strike in support of Mrs Falconer.
Forsyth slams Stirling over unwelcome tenant
By John Smith
THE Conservative-controlled Stirling District has been told by the local MP, Michael Forsyth, that he is horrified at the way in which the council has handled a housing matter.
The MP wrote a strongly-worded letter after hearing from worried residents in an area near Stirling Castle about their fears over the offer of a flat to an ‘anti-social tenant’.
Castle Square tenants association had submitted a petition calling on the council to withdraw the offer.
The woman is understood to have a background of drug addiction.
Mr Forsyth said that the tenants' association had tried hard to improve the quality of life for all concerned.
An insensitive allocation policy could only frustrate their efforts.
Mr Forsyth added: ‘I must ask you to look at this matter again with a view to finding a more suitable placement for this tenant in the light of the opposition expressed.’
Hugh McClung, chairman of the association, said that based on the evidence of tenants elsewhere with ‘anti-social tendencies’, locals feared for the safety of their children.
Mr McClung said: ‘We are not saying every prospective tenant should be vetted.
We are saying there should be a sensible policy which prevents this kind of thing  happening again.’
Provost Pat Greenhill said that Stirling District operated a responsible, non-discriminatory housing allocations policy that was regulated by law.
‘As an administration, we are extremely concerned about anti-social tenants and we are taking steps to address this national issue.
‘But we cannot back down every time a group of tenants get up a petition against another tenant.
Where are we going to house these people?’
A spokesman for the authority confirmed that the person offered the tenancy had accepted it.
The leader of the council, Keith Harding, said that allocations were a matter for housing officials.
‘Councillors cannot interfere in the professional duties of housing staff.’
Councillor Harding said Mr Forsyth had a duty to listen to the concerns of constituents, and convey them to the council.
Michael Forsyth: criticising ‘insensitive’ policy
Landowners protest at water board powers Denny Macgee reports on a campaign to control rights of access to land by water authorities
SCOTTISH farmers and landowners are seeking a review of the powerful legal rights vested in Scotland's water authorities.
Their concern is highlighted by the case of the farmer David Ralston, of Back o' Hill Farm at Balmore on the outskirts of Glasgow.
He points out that he has no powers to intervene in the laying of a pipeline on part of his farm.
There are fears that if the water industry is sold off, private companies with their principal interest in profit will have use of the same powerful law as the present publicly-accountable bodies to carry out work without having to seek the permission of the owner or occupier of the land, or pay for the right of access.
The National Farmers Union and the Scottish Landowners' Federation have included their concerns in submissions to the  Scottish Office in response to the Government's consultative document on the future of water and sewerage services in Scotland.
The legislative powers of the public water authorities have been highlighted by Mr Ralston's case and a proposal by the Central Scotland Water Development Board to lay a 12-mile mains from the treatment works at Balmore to Cumbernauld because of an increase in demand.
The two-year project, which, it is claimed, will involve massive disruption to farmers and landowners, is due to begin in May.
Mr Ralston says he has no powers to stop the project, which will disturb arable and grazing land and will go through a field where the annual agricultural show is due to be held in June.
Under the Water (Scotland) Act 1980, the board does not require a way-leave — the landowner's permission — to gain access to lay the pipeline.
That power goes far beyond that of water authorities in England and other utilities such as gas and electricity in Scotland, who must seek a way-leave and pay to cross private land if they want to lay pipes or erect pylons.
Other companies in sectors such as oil and communications must also have way-leaves for work they want to carry out on private land.
The Scottish Office has already told landowners in the path of the mains who complained that the Central Scotland Water Development Board had not followed the proper  procedures that the Secretary of the State was unable to intervene.
Under Section 23 of the Water (Scotland) Act 1980, water authorities may, for the purposes of their function, lay a main after giving reasonable notice to the owner and occupier of the land.
Compensation is available for any loss incurred as a result of the work.
However, the NFU and the SLF said their members were seriously concerned at the lack of a requirement for water authorities to seek a way-leave, particularly if the industry is privatised and any work carried out on private land would result in increased profits for the water company without its having to pay anything for the rights to gain access.
Dr Maurice Hankey, land use specialist with the Scottish Landowners' Federation, said: ‘Water services in Scotland are unique in Great Britain in that they have the right to come in and lay a water sewerage pipe without the landowner's consent.
We do not see why that should continue to be the case, especially if the industry is privatised.’
Eddie Harrison, a land agent representing landowners and farmers on the route of the pipeline said that while there was no objection in principle to it, there was concern at the extent of the water authority's powers.
Last night, a spokesman for the Central Scotland Water Development Board said that water required powerful law.
Otherwise, he said, the water authorities would never get anything done.
‘Water services in Scotland…have the right to come in and lay a water sewerage pipe without the landowner's consent.’
Powerless: David Ralston is furious that he has no say about a water main across his farm, next to the Balmore treatment plant seen in the background
Church threatens repossession if rectory is turned into nursery
By Alan Dron
ANCIENT feudal rights are blocking plans for a Paisley children's nursery and the jobs it would provide, though the local district council has given the project planning permission.
Solicitors for the feudal superiors — the Scottish Episcopal Church — have warned the man behind the plan that if he proceeds with his plan, the church has the power to repossess the building.
The church said yesterday its objections only reflected the wishes of nearby residents.
Donald Clark, a driver with British Airways in London, had planned to move to Scotland with his wife, Margaret, to look after a sick relative.
However, after the couple had bought the former episcopal rectory in Greenlaw Drive, Paisley, Mr Clark, 45, was unable to get a transfer north.
They decided to set up a nursery in the house and objections by Renfrew District Council were overcome.
Then, having spent £79,500 to buy the house and £40,000 to eradicate rot and rewire it, Mr and Mrs Clark were told by Shepherd & Wedderburn, Edinburgh solicitors to the Scottish Episcopal Church, that they could not proceed without its approval — which was being withheld.
As part of the procedure to gain planning permission, the Clarks had written to 40 houses surrounding the former rectory and nobody had objected.
The couple discovered that residents just outside the canvassed area had written to Shepherd & Wedderburn, complaining, though Mr Clark says he has never been told their identities.
The solicitors have warned Mr Clark of the consequences if he presses ahead: ‘Our clients have the option to irritate the feu on the basis of breach of conditions thereof, which would revoke the feudal grant and thus the property would revert to the church.’
Mr Clark told The Scotsman that the nursery would provide places for 20 children aged three to five plus eight full-time and two part-time jobs.
He found it odd that the church should block a nursery.
He has written to the local Labour MP, Irene Adams, the Labour Party's Scottish hierarchy and the Prime Minister on the matter, all without success.
He finds himself stymied, ‘unless we go to appeal, which would be the Lands Tribunal, which could take up to nine months…[and]I can't afford to.’
‘I would love [the nursery]to succeed, because I've had so many people writing and phoning, asking when it's opening, and if they can have jobs there.’
Kate Fenn-Tye, communications officer for the Scottish Episcopal Church, said yesterday it had taken its stance because of objections from nearby residents, whose objections included the narrowness of the road and the amount of traffic using it.
She said that the complaints had come from people on the same estate who were ‘really quite close’ to the former rectory.
‘Whether or not they objected at the time of the planning application we can't say.’
Paisley rectory: Nursery would bring ten jobs
Police chief tells court of assault
A CHIEF inspector, helping two constables in a hostile football crowd, was kicked to the ground and then had his nose split open by a punch.
At Kilmarnock Sheriff Court yesterday a jury decided that a farm labourer, William Shepherd, 19, of Cherrywood Drive, Beith, was the man who ran from the crowd to deliver the blow.
During a two-day hearing, they had been told that a town centre disturbance had broken out after the quarter-final Scottish Junior Cup match between Beith and Vale of Leven on 28 March last year.
Chief Inspector Hamish Hyslop, now a  superintendent at Kilmarnock, had been in a backup van called to give assistance when the crowd, chanting: ‘Kill the Bill,’ had turned on police making an arrest.
He told the jury: ‘There was a large crowd of 30 to 40 shouting abuse and two officers being molested and interfered with.
We felt they were in danger.
Sgt Foulds and I went to their assistance.’
He said a man had taken a lunge at him and he had fallen to the ground.
He had struggled to his feet, but then felt a really hard blow on the face.
Mr Hyslop had had little idea how badly he was injured until he was heading back to the station in the van.
‘I went to blow my nose.
When the blood hit the roof of the car I realised it was serious,’ he said.
The 5cm wound which split one nostril required eight large stitches to pull the wound together and 20 more to close the edges.
The jury took two hours to return a majority decision finding Shepherd guilty of assaulting Mr Hyslop.
Sentence on Shepherd and five other youths involved in the incident as a whole was deferred until 7 April.
‘Your behaviour was abominable,’ said Sheriff David Smith.
‘’ You behaved like savages, some of you.’
Police to look at new Gilmour murder evidence
By Severin Carrell
DETECTIVES in Paisley have been ordered to check new evidence presented to the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, by a man appealing against his conviction for a murder he denies committing.
The move, by the Paisley area's procurator-fiscal, James Friel, comes after witnesses came forward to support fresh evidence uncovered by The Scotsman last June on the tenth anniversary of the man's conviction.
Raymond Gilmour, 31, now in Saughton prison, Edinburgh, was found guilty of the murder and rape of a 16-year-old Johnstone schoolgirl, Pamela Hastie, in 1981.
His conviction rested on two confessions Gilmour alleges were respectively beaten out of him and concocted by police officers.
A spokeswoman for Mr Friel said: ‘In the light of certain information which has been passed to the Crown Office, the case is being looked into.
We have asked the police to make inquiries’
The evidence rests on the behaviour of an English lorry-driver who regularly stayed in Johnstone.
He is believed to have been near the scene of the crime and to have a record of sexual assaults on girls.
Since that was highlighted, several witnesses have come forward and told Gilmour's lawyer, Gordon Ritchie, that they were aware of a lorry-driver acting suspiciously on the afternoon of the murder.
One woman, a teenager at the time, had been offered a lift by him near Rannoch Woods, where the schoolgirl was killed.
Statements from a witness unavailable to Gilmour's defence lawyers at the time of his trial which corroborate his claims that detectives threatened and used violence when they interrogated suspects, have also been sent to Mr Lang.
Mr Ritchie has been told by legal counsel that this new evidence in their opinion provides substantial grounds for Mr Lang to order a retrial or a full reinvestigation of the case, but assessment of the appeal documents is at an early stage.
In spite of reports yesterday that Mr Friel's move amounted to a reopening of the inquiry, Scottish Office sources have told The Scotsman that the decision to ask Strathclyde CID to look at the evidence is an established part of the appeal  procedure .
Last night, Ena Gilmour, Raymond Gilmour's mother, of Hawthorn Avenue, Johnstone, said: ‘I will allow myself to be slightly optimistic, I don't put it any stronger than that because I have been let down before and I don't want to let myself go too far this time.’
Parents are cleared over boys' deaths
THE SHERIFF hearing evidence at an inquiry into the deaths last September of two schoolboys whose bodies were recovered from the Bellrock Quarry on St Nicholas Golf Course at Prestwick, said yesterday that their parents were blameless.
The fatal accident inquiry at Ayr had been told by the lawyer for the golf club that the most important way to stop accidental drownings is by education.
He added: ‘That must lie with the parents.’
However, Sheriff Robin McEwan, QC, said the youngsters, Alan McKay, 13, and Iain Allan, 12, were at a stage where they were learning to exercise independence.
The inquiry is expected to end today.
Drug couriers jailed for seven years each
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
TWO couriers from London who delivered cannabis resin valued at almost £150,000 to Dundee were each jailed for seven years yesterday.
A judge told William Sim and David Todd that they had been playing for high stakes and had to pay the penalty.
The men admitted being concerned in the supplying of cannabis on 28 and 29 October last year when they travelled by train from London to Dundee with 29 kilos of the drug.
Robert Anthony, for Sim, 33, of Portobello Road, London, told the High Court in Edinburgh the accused's cousin had borrowed £5,000 from moneylenders in London but disappeared when he was unable to repay it.
The moneylenders then looked to Sim for the cash and threatened him and his family.
On one occasion ‘heavies’ approached him in the street and cut his throat, near to the jugular vein.
He was warned that he would not be so lucky the next time.
Mr Anthony said that when Sim was still unable to pay, the moneylenders told him he could clear the debt by taking the drugs to Dundee.
He was too frightened to tell police.
Paul McBride, for Todd, 32, of Hogarth Road, London, said that he had known Sim for a number of years and out of loyalty wanted to help him.
Lord Milligan said he had some sympathy with Sim's predicament but he had chosen to defy the law rather than the people who were threatening him.
A third accused, Jack Hill, 38, to whose home in Lauderdale Avenue, Dundee, the drugs were delivered, was jailed for three years.
He admitted possessing cannabis worth about £800 with intent to supply it.
Outdoor centre staff given eight days' warning on jobs
By Alan Forbes
THE ROW over the closure of Strathclyde outdoor centres worsened yesterday when an education official admitted that teachers at one centre had been given only eight days' warning that they faced losing their posts.
David Alexander, a depute director, told the education committee that the staff at Castle Toward residential education centre had been informed last Tuesday that the committee would yesterday discuss their transfer to mainstream day schools.
The teachers' place at the centre near Dunoon would be taken by staff from the Faskally outdoor education centre in Perthshire, which is closing this summer.
The news was greeted with astonishment by Christopher Mason, leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrat group: ‘It's extraordinary that a ‘caring, sharing’ council told its employees only eight days ago that they would be offered redundancy or redeployment.’
He added: ‘Here I see some full-time union officials who wouldn't tolerate such treatment of their own members.’
Dr Mason went on to attack the Labour administration's decision to shut the Faskally, Fornethy, Seafield and St Columba's centres to save £1 million.
He said the closures would be a blow to youngsters in deprived areas.
A Militant councillor, Willie Griffin, accused Labour rather than the Government of forcing through the closures, adding that the £172,000 that would be saved annually from the Faskally closure was ‘paltry’.
The cash was the equivalent of about two years' salary for the education director, Frank Pignatelli.
A Labour councillor, Tom Barrie, said the cuts would not have been made if poll tax avoiders such as Mr Griffin had paid up.
A bitter debate over cuts opened with Labour's proposal to cut about £700,000 from pre-five education.
Dr Mason said the move, which involved the loss of about 18 staff, went against Strathclyde's long held policy of education pre-school children.
His call for Strathclyde councillors to reject cuts and stand for re-election if the Scottish Office decided to cap the region's budget was rejected by Labour.
The education chairman, Tom Farrell, said the cuts gave him great pain, but services would be affected worse if the Scottish Office stepped in to reduce spending.
Lothian cash appeal to upgrade road
AN APPEAL for the Government to provide financial support to improve a road between Edinburgh and Midlothian has been made by Lothian Regional Council.
Backing for a scheme to upgrade the A701 between Straiton and Milton Bridge is being sought by the council's transportation convener, Ron Muir, to promote economic development and employment in Midlothian.
The four options being considered by the council are:
Option 1: upgrade the A701 at a cost of £12.1 million which would cause extensive traffic delays.
Options 2 and 3: costing £17.7 and £17 million.
Would follow a route east of the existing road, bypassing local communities and leaving A701 as a quiet access road.
Would cause only light traffic delays.
Option 4: passing west of Bilston and rejoining the A701 around Milton Bridge would also be safer than Option 1 but would mean the loss of parts of Pentland Caravan Park and pass through farmland.
Cost: £15.2 million.
Advice unit on health to close
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
AN ORGANISATION set up three years ago to advise ministers on the running of the health service in Scotland is being wound up.
Scotland's health minister, Lord Fraser, announced yesterday that the Scottish Health Service Advisory Council will be disbanded when its current work programme is completed later this year.
‘There have been major developments in the NHS in the three years since the advisory council was set up and new avenues for discussing possible changes have been developed,’ said Lord Fraser.
He said the changes introduced to the health service have affected the council's role and members have expressed dissatisfaction with its development.
Advice on health service matters will continue to be available from the six professional advisory committees — the national medical, dental, nursing and midwifery, pharmaceutical, paramedical and scientific services.
‘I would like to make clear the importance I attach to the continued availability of advice, from within and outside the NHS, in contributing to the development of the health service in Scotland,’ said Lord Fraser.
JEDBURGH Member of gang jailed for robbery
PETER Middleton, a member of a Newcastle gang which raided the Jedburgh branch of the Trustee Savings Bank last December, was jailed for three years yesterday at Jedburgh Sheriff Court.
Sheriff John Young told Middleton, 36, of Monkchester Road, Walker, that the sentence was set against the background of a well-planned bank raid.
Middleton had denied breaking into the bank on 6 December last year while acting with others, with intent to steal.
Police believe at least four other men were involved.
Lung-cancer case delayed by illness
By Susan Dean
MAKESHIFT court proceedings in the home of a dying lung-cancer victim, Alfred McTear, had to be abandoned halfway through the second day yesterday on doctor's advice.
Mr McTear, 48, became unwell 90 minutes into the second session of his evidence to a Court of Session-appointed Commission taking place in his council house living-room in Beith, Ayrshire, for his £500,000 action for damages against a tobacco company.
The case could open the floodgates for thousands of similar claims worldwide.
The former telecommunications installation worker is giving evidence in advance of a full court hearing up to two years away because he has only weeks to live.
He is too ill to travel outside his home, which is why his evidence is being heard there.
The proceedings, which are in private, will be forwarded to the eventual court case which his wife Margaret, 47, will continue after his death.
The father-of-three, who used to smoke 60 cigarettes a day, claims that Imperial Tobacco failed to provide health warnings when he began smoking 30 years ago.
By the time such warnings were printed, he had become addicted, he says.
Mr McTear's solicitor, Cameron Fyfe, said yesterday that his client's doctor had been called after Mr McTear, who is very weak and has difficulty breathing, became unwell during cross-examination.
She had advised that the case could not go ahead, and Mr McTear went to bed, said Mr Fyfe.
The case would continue tomorrow, Mr McTear's health permitting, and possibly go on to Saturday.
Fireman tells trial of blast rescue attempt
FIREMEN had raked through explosion debris with their hands after a faint voice was heard, a fire chief told a trial yesterday.
A divisional fire officer with Lothian and Borders fire brigade, William Templeton, was giving evidence at the High Court in Edinburgh.
Nearly 20 firefighters had searched the debris in the two-storey house at 2 Pilton Drive North, Edinburgh, Mr Templeton said.
The house had been devastated by a fire and explosion on 10 April last year.
Mr Templeton said that at the time there had been no lifting equipment there.
Firemen had taken nearly an hour to cut through the roof and dig the rubble with their hands.
They first had found a foot and then the body of a man, but he was dead.
Mr Templeton said that when he arrived at the fire after 10pm, he had spoken to a man who was being treated for injuries in an ambulance.
Mr Templeton said he had asked the man if there was anyone in the building.
He said the man had replied: ‘No, no-one else was in the building, just me.’
He could not identify the man he had spoken to and did not know his name.
Mr Templeton said that minutes later he had spoken to a policeman who contradicted that information and said he had been told that there was someone in the building.
A search and rescue procedure involving about 20 firefighters had begun in the building and soon afterwards a voice had been heard from below the rubble.
Mr Templeton was giving evidence at the trial of James Sutherland, 50, of Gilmore Place, Edinburgh.
He denies two charges of wilful fire-raising at the house, which he owned, while acting with Barry Buckley, 44, of Prince Regent Street, Edinburgh, now dead, with the intention of defrauding the Sun Alliance Insurance Group on 30 March and 10 April last year.
It is alleged that Mr Buckley was severely injured in the explosion and that Sutherland knew he was trapped and had not told the emergency services that anyone was in the blazing house.
Sutherland has denied the culpable homicide of Mr Buckley.
Later James McInally, a forensic scientist with Lothian and Borders police, told the court that after tests on the accused's clothing and in the burned house, they had concluded that Sutherland had been involved in splashing petrol in the house.
At the time of the explosion, he had been trapped at least by the legs in a corner where his shoes were found and some debris had fallen on him.
But he had pulled himself out, leaving his shoes behind.
Mr McInally said that forensic tests had revealed liquid petrol on the accused's shirt and jeans.
Andrew Lamb, prosecuting, asked if it was possible for the explosion to have taken place when someone opened the front door of the house while smoking a cigarette.
Mr McInally said no: a cigarette falling on petrol would simply go out.
He said that joists of the house had been impregnated with petrol, as had been material in the hall.
The trial, before Lord Sutherland, continues today.
£5.3m centre to be built for genetic researchers
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
THE influence of inheritance on a wide range of common diseases is to be investigated at a £5.3million research centre to be built in Edinburgh.
It will provide a high-powered focus for research into the genetic component of conditions including cancer, high blood pressure and Alzheimer's disease.
Edinburgh University scientists aim to delve to the very root of these diseases, helping to predict the likelihood of individuals becoming affected and improving treatments.
It marks a new focus for the university's research efforts, which previously have concentrated on relatively rare disorders caused by a single gene defects, such as cystic fibrosis.
Prof David Brock, of the university's department of human genetics, said: ‘Over the last ten years we have been very successful in finding defective genes.
The time has now come to move on to more common diseases.’
Virtually every common disease has a genetic component, said Prof Brock and inherited factors may be more important in developing heart disease, for instance, than the more commonly quoted risk factors of poor diet, lack of exercise and smoking history.
A large part of the centre's work will be based on exploring the background of families already known to be at high risk of inheriting those diseases.
From them, genes can be located which may be carried by far greater numbers.
‘Scotland is particularly well placed to do this kind of work,’ said Prof Brock.
‘We have a homogeneous population, there has been very little immigration into Scotland and we have fantastic records.
You can trace families in Scotland in a way you cannot elsewhere.’
Pinpointing the genes involved would, Prof Brock said, open up ‘the opportunity for more accurate and supportive genetic counselling to would-be parents and the prospects of gene therapy in the future’.
The centre is being built in the grounds of Edinburgh's Western General Hospital adjacent to the Medical Research Council's human genetics unit.
Work is to start in October and it is expected to open in summer 1995.
It is being established with grant money provided by a number of research bodies and trusts, including the Wolfson Foundation and the Cancer Research Campaign.
Their contribution was described by the university's principal, Sir David Smith, as a considerable compliment.
He said the centre provided ‘a golden opportunity to improve our understanding and, perhaps more importantly, to bring the fruits of these advances as rapidly as possible to practical treatment programmes’.
Focal point for gene research: an artist's impression of the £5.3million centre
Academic pays back fraud cash
A DISGRACED professor who contrived a scheme to defraud the University of Stirling of almost £15,000 escaped a prison sentence yesterday after a sheriff heard he had paid the money back.
Last month, David Walters, 56, former director of the Institute of Retail Studies and Professor of Retailing at Stirling, had pled guilty to defrauding the university of £14,631 and attempting to defraud it of £345.
Sheriff William Reid had told him he could face prison but it would help if the university got its money back.
Fining Walters £5,000 at Stirling Sheriff Court, Sheriff Reid said he had taken into account the fact that he was a first offender.
‘You have lost your Chair, you have lost your reputation, but you have repaid the £15,000.
That being so, I'll limit the penalty to a fine.’
The defence agent, Alex Prentice, said that Walters, now of 3 Eagles Nest, Little Sandhurst, Surrey, and earning £12,000 to £15,000 a year, could pay the fine at £200 a month.
He said Walters — a former RAF pilot who became an intellectual high-flyer — had suffered anguish over the affair.
The court was told he had also been expelled from the Air Training Corps, ‘something he held very dear’.
At the earlier hearing, Sheriff Reid had heard that Walters had dreamt up the fraud after a Jersey-based financier had failed to come up with cash to back market research for a new board game.
Head named Scottish teacher of the year
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
THE head teacher of an embattled Edinburgh secondary has been named Scottish teacher of the year after being nominated by parents.
Willie Crosbie, who has been at Castlebrae High School for 15 years, was presented with the Woman magazine award yesterday, in recognition of his efforts to turn around the school's unenviable reputation.
The prize comes two years after the school, in the Craigmillar estate, was threatened with closure by Lothian education authority.
With fewer than 300 pupils, it was reprieved because the Roman Catholic church would not accept plans for the pupils to share facilities with the denominational Holy Rood school.
Since then, Mr Crosbie has successfully bid for £1.25 million in urban aid grant.
A World of Work centre is being built, with strong links to local businesses, which provide vocational training.
Exam results improved dramatically last year and fewer school leavers are unemployed.
Mr Crosbie said yesterday there are also signs that the school roll is to rise, after a campaign to win back the confidence of local parents.
The citation which won the award, written by David Lowe, a school board member, read: ‘Mr Crosbie's commitment, dedication, innovation and leadership have been far and beyond his call of duty.’
Helen Porter, the school board chairwoman, welcomed good publicity for a change.
‘If he wasn't there, I don't think the school would be open,’ she said.
‘He's turned it around.
He's also good with the kids, who really look up to him.’
Mr Crosbie said it was very flattering to be nominated by his school board and to have recognition of the work of the whole school.
The head teacher was presented with a set of Encyclopaedia Britannica, worth more than £1,600.
He also goes forward with 12 other finalists to the UK finals of the teacher of the year competition in London next month.
Willie Crosbie: ‘turned around school's reputation’
Calls for oilspill inquiry rejected
THE shipping minister, Lord Caithness, yesterday dismissed calls for a sheriff's inquiry into the Braer oilspill in spite of a petition signed by more than a third of Shetland's adults being handed over in London.
The petition called for an open public inquiry into the grounding of the tanker in January, strict tanker exclusion zones and improved ship monitoring and standards.
It also demanded that the Government immediately underwrite the total costs facing islanders and the local authority.
It has been signed by 5,851 people.
One of the organisers, Isobel Mitchell, and Shetland Islands Council member Willie Tait flew to London to present the petition, which also has the support of the isles MP and Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, Jim Wallace.
Ms Mitchell said: ‘The grief, anger and outrage in our community in the wake of the Braer have now been replaced by a determination that this type of economic and environmental disaster must never be allowed to happen again.
‘The Braer has taught us a terrible and forceful lesson and the real tragedy will be if we fail to learn from it…
Despite all the anti-pollution equipment, the training and bravery not one drop of the 85,000 tonnes of oil was ever retrieved.
We may not be able to contain a spill, but we must do all that we can to prevent another disaster.’
She said the inactivity of the Government was ‘deplorable’.
Their refusal to heed warnings and take action to protect sensitive coastlines was ‘grossly negligent and contemptuous’.
‘Despite the environmental carnage around the wreck, the sullying of the Shetland name and the ensuing loss of livelihood at the heart of our fragile economy the Government has done very  little to protect us from another spill,’ she said.
She said the Government over the past 15 years had made around £50 billion in revenue from Sullom Voe oil terminal in Shetland.
‘Our worst nightmare has happened and the Government has oil on its hands.’
Clearly this Government has a political and moral duty to do all that it can for Shetland,’ she added.
Lord Caithness said the case was being adequately dealt with by the Department of Transport marine accident investigation and Lord Donaldson's inquiry into shipping safety around Britain.
‘To set up a formal sheriff's inquiry is a very long and complicated process and a legal process,’ he said.
‘What is key is to get evidence from the crew as soon as possible and that we were able to do under the marine accident investigation system.
They were up there the day the Braer went on the rocks.
‘There are very great difficulties in actually compelling people to come back here to give evidence — the crew for example— to a formal sheriff's inquiry because of the time it takes to set up.’
‘The Braer has taught us a terrible and forceful lesson and the real tragedy will be if we fail to learn from it.’
Court of Session to rule on taxi murder
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
A CASE in which the family of a dead taxi driver is trying to have a man branded as his killer must be heard in Scotland's highest civil court, five appeal judges ruled yesterday.
David Anderson has been acquitted on a jury's not proven verdict of murdering Raymond Mullan three years ago by stabbing him through the heart with a hunting knife.
He is now facing a similar allegation in a £100,000 damages action raised against him by Mr Mullan's widow and three teenage children.
Initially, a sheriff held that the case could go ahead at Greenock Sheriff Court but Mr Anderson, 22, of Nelson Road, Gourock, has won its transfer to the Court of Session.
In yesterday's decision, the appeal judges said that the case was too important to be heard anywhere but in the country's supreme court.
It was also pointed out that civil jury trial was available in the Court of Session but not in the sheriff court.
Margaret Mullan, 39, of Wren Road, Greenock, and her children, Charlene, 18, Nicola, 16, and Craig, 13, started the damages action within weeks of Mr Anderson's acquittal at the High Court in Paisley in May 1990.
It had been alleged that after hiring Mr Mullan's taxi for a journey from Gourock to Greenock, he produced a hunting knife and stabbed him on the chest.
Mr Anderson asked Sheriff Colin McKay to remit the damages action to the Court of Session because of its importance and difficulty.
The move was rejected and he then appealed to Lord Ross, the Lord Justice-Clerk, sitting with Lords Morison, Prosser, Penrose and Brand.
Lord Ross said that the sheriff had failed to attach proper importance to the fact that an allegation of murder was one of the most serious which could ever be made against any individual.
The case was plainly important to Mr Anderson but also from the point of view of the public.
A civil court was being asked to decide whether Mr Anderson had murdered Mr Mullan, an issue normally determined by a jury in the High Court, not by a sheriff.
Lord Ross added: ‘This appears to me to emphasise that there is both importance and difficulty in this action which would make it appropriate for the action to be heard in the Court of Session as the supreme court rather than in the sheriff court.
‘I would add that the availability of jury trial in the Court of Session appears to me to be a further factor favouring remit.’
Lord Morison said it had been argued that the unique and novel attempt by the Mullan family to establish something which the Crown had failed to do in a criminal case raised questions of general importance.
Their main aim was not to obtain compensation — it was said that there was no prospect of recovering damages from Mr Anderson — but to rectify what they regarded as the injustice of his acquittal.
‘The case is of importance both because of its possible effect on Mr Anderson and also because an allegation of murder made in a civil action, particularly after an acquittal, is a matter of justifiable public concern and interest.
There is a lower standard of proof required in civil cases, balance of probability, as opposed to the ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ needed in criminal trials and Lord Prosser commented: ‘It is undesirable in the public interest, as well as in Mr Anderson's interest, that a finding of probable murder be made in anything other than a supreme court.’
Lords Penrose and Brand agreed that the case should be sent to the Court of Session.
No date has yet been fixed for a hearing.
Minister to meet rail managers
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
RAILWAY managers who hope to mount a buy-out for the ScotRail franchise after privatisation are to meet John MacGregor, the Transport Secretary, in Glasgow tonight.
They will present him with an upbeat report claiming significant improvements in performance, with all lines beating Passengers' Charter standards for timekeeping and reliability.
He will also learn of an initiative to monitor performance line-by-line with the aim of improvement.
Mr MacGregor will be told that during the first 12 of the 13 four-week periods of the 1992-93 financial year — which ends in a fortnight — fare income was up 9 per cent on the equivalent periods a year earlier.
Cyril Bleasdale, director of ScotRail, and other senior managers who will meet the minister are optimistic that the figures will boost their case as well placed for a move to the private sector.
Mr MacGregor will also be shown statistics revealing that between 93.4 and 97.5 per cent of ScotRail trains met timekeeping targets in the four weeks to 27 February.
Mr MacGregor's expected announcement of the route of a railway between London and the Channel Tunnel has been postponed because it could not be fitted into the parliamentary timetable yesterday.
Debate urged on restraint for elderly
AGE CONCERN Scotland yesterday called for a public debate on methods of restraint applied to frail elderly people cared for in residential homes or by relatives.
Mike Cairns, director of the charity, said that elderly dementia sufferers were subject to a variety of methods of restraint ranging from the crude tying-down and locking up of the elderly to the more subtle use of drugs.
He told a conference in Perth organised with Stirling University: ‘There has been a very public debate about restraint of children, with the ‘pin-down’ issue, and how you contain disruptive young people in care.
And yet old people are being restrained all the time.
‘It's being done quietly and as a society perhaps we are not so concerned.
‘This has been a subject that has been bubbling around for years and with an ageing population, it is an issue that hasn't been talked about enough.’
Welfare groups add to outcry
By Sarah Wilson
WELFARE groups joined in the condemnation of the Government's decision to impose value-added tax on fuel bills yesterday by counting the cost in human terms.
Mervyn Kohler, the head of public affairs at Help the Aged, forecast that increased fuel costs would result in even more winter deaths among the elderly, who often turned off their heating because of fears of high bills.
‘Britain has one of the highest swings between summer and winter deaths.
We have many more people dying in the winter here than in colder countries such as Sweden or Canada.’
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, told the Commons on Tuesday that the current zero rating would be swept aside from April next year, when domestic fuel and power would be subject to 8 per cent VAT, with the full 17.5 per cent applied from April 1995.
Mr Lamont said the impact on the poor would be taken into account when income-related benefits were next upgraded.
Details are due after the next Budget in November.
Pressure groups demanded reassurances that the poor and elderly would be protected from the extra cost of heating their homes.
Both Age Concern and the National Association of Citizen's Advice Bureaux (NACAB) were writing to the Government to register disappointment.
Lucie McKenzie, speaking for Age Concern in Scotland, pointed out that about one third of elderly people did not claim the income support they were entitled to and therefore would not receive any extra money to help with additional heating costs.
Because the poorer elderly spent such a large proportion of their income on fuel, she added, they would face stark choices if the cost rose.
Thousands of others in low income groups, including disabled people who receive invalidity benefit, would also have to bear the extra fuel cost themselves, added NACAB.
A spokesman for ScottishPower joined in the criticism of the VAT ruling, saying: ‘We have worked hard to ensure that Scotland has the lowest tariffs in the UK.
But at a stroke the Chancellor has severely dented our efforts.’
Euan Robson, the Scottish manager of the Gas Consumers' Council, said: ‘Winters are longer and colder in Scotland but the Government seems not to have taken account of this.’
Lang pressed to support Euro call for PR
By Joanne Robertson
THE Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, will be called on to back demands for Scotland's MEPs to be elected next year by proportional representation.
At a meeting in Edinburgh earlier this week of the cross-party European Movement, its Scottish Council agreed to campaign for PR in line with the system operated in Northern Ireland, even if England and Wales retained the first-past-the-post system.
Its members, led by a former Scottish Office minister, Sir Russell Fairgrieve, will seek a meeting with Mr Lang to urge him to exercise his influence in the Cabinet and the Council of Ministers for Scottish MEPs to be elected by PR, which could dramatically affect Labour's dominant position in seven out of the eight European seats.
Sir Russell, the Scottish Council chairman, said: ‘This is great news that representatives of all Scottish political parties agreed unanimously that proportional representation should be the method of election for Scottish MEPs in the June 1994 European elections.
‘There is no precedent created as this already takes place in Northern Ireland, which is an integral part of the United Kingdom.
‘Unless we force the issue, we'll get nowhere.
We believe the people of Scotland want to see themselves fairly represented in Europe, which cannot be achieved under the present system.’
In spite of an overwhelming vote in the European Parliament last week for a report calling for all Euro seats to be elected by PR, the Government remains opposed to changing the traditional first-past-the-post system.
A Foreign Office spokesman said: ‘Ministers have repeatedly made clear the Government's position on PR and there are no plans to change it.’
The meeting of the European Movement unanimously underlined its strong support for Britain to adopt PR and fall into line with the other EC members which operate some proportional system for the European elections.
The vice-president of the European Parliament, David Martin, the Labour MEP for Lothian, welcomed the move to put pressure on the Government to introduce PR for the European elections.
Extra Euro seats for Britain were agreed at the Edinburgh European summit last December but the Government has yet to announce how many seats, if any, Scotland will be allocated.
Pointing to the vote in the Strasbourg parliament last week which backed PR by 207 votes to 79, Mr Martin commented: ‘Whilst I'm sceptical that the Government will  yield to full PR for the 1994 elections, they could introduce an element of PR by using the six new seats in this way.
‘I will be putting a question to the Council of Ministers with regard to these seats at the April session.’
Party officials urge Salmond to stand down
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
SENIOR office-bearers in one of the Scottish National Party's Lanarkshire branches have made the first formal call for the party leader, Alex Salmond, to resign.
Executive members of one of the party's most active branches, Mossend, confirmed yesterday they had written to Mr Salmond asking him to stand down as a result of the MPs' decision to strike a deal with the Conservatives in exchange for their votes on the Maastricht bill.
The branch secretary, Kathleen McAlorum, a Motherwell district councillor, said that an emergency meeting of the branch executive had been called last Sunday after complaints and threats of resignation from members over the deal for representation on the European committee of the regions.
Mrs McAlorum, who stood as the party's parliamentary candidate in East Kilbride last year, said the unanimous decision to call for the party leader's resignation had been provoked by the widespread anger among the party members.
She said: ‘They traded in our political self-respect for representation on a committee which doesn't mean a thing to anyone.
Our parliamentary group does not appear to be in touch with grassroots opinion — it's as if they are on another planet.
‘We are all devoted to the party, but the MPs’ decision to vote with the Tories is an absolute nightmare.
‘The overwhelming feeling here is that Mr Salmond should go and that comes from people who have consistently supported him.’
Party activists claim that resolutions from SNP branches will be put forward for debate at the party's national council unless the leadership admits it blundered.
Mrs McAlorum underlined the damage done to the party through the connection with the Tories, particularly in areas like Lanarkshire where voters were fighting against the worst ravages of the recession.
Fiona Hyslop, one of the national executive committee members who voted for the unsuccessful motion drawn up by the policy vice-convener, Rob Gibson, which expressed regret at the leadership's decision during last weekend's NEC meeting, criticised the party infighting.
The defeat of the motion that prompted three resignations from the SNP cabinet is expected to be challenged at the party's next national council in June.
Ms Hyslop added: ‘There are those who were unhappy with the parliamentary group's vote but who do not want to see months of infighting within the party.’
An spokesman for SNP headquarters refused to discuss the resignation call.
‘It is a matter of policy that we do not comment on any private correspondence which has been sent to the national secretary.’
Pleas to cut Scots quota of MPs fail
By Our Scottish Political Correspondent
DEMANDS by English Tory MPs for a cut in Scotland's 72 seats at Westminster have not been met, according to the provisional report by the Boundary Commission released today.
The Boundary Commission for Scotland concludes that the number of Scottish seats in the House of Commons should remain at 72 in spite of widespread speculation over the loss of Glasgow seats.
A number of Conservative MPs south of the Border have repeatedly protested that just over 50,000 voters are needed to elect a Scottish MP in Glasgow compared to the 80,000-plus required in the south of England, which returns a large number of Conservative MPs.
A previous review recommended a cut in Strathclyde's parliamentary entitlement from by one seat to 32, and the subsequent publication of detailed proposals for Strathclyde indicated plans to reduce the number of parliamentary constituencies in Glasgow by one — a move widely interpreted as likely to lead to the loss of Labour seats.
The commission later decided to restore the seat and today its interim report said: ‘At present the Commission is not minded to recommend a reduction in the total number of constituencies in Scotland from 72 to 71.’
Brown brands Budget a betrayal of Britain
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
MICHAEL PORTILLO, the Treasury Chief Secretary, stoked the row over the Budget imposition of value-added tax on domestic fuel yesterday by refusing to give a commitment that almost six million pensioners and others on income support would receive full compensation for increases in bills.
Mr Portillo came under strong pressure from Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, who branded the Budget a betrayal of the people of Britain.
Mr Brown recalled numerous election pledges by the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, and the Prime Minister that they would not raise taxes and added: ‘These were calculated, cold-blooded and cynical statements made simply to win an election campaign.
The Conservative Party and the Prime Minister's leadership will never be trusted again.’
Mr Portillo was pressed by Mr Brown three times to say whether the VAT charge would be fully repaid to the poor through benefits.
He said that changes in the retail price index (RPI) or cost of living would be taken into account in determining benefits.
But he told Mr Brown: ‘You are saying that in some way income-related benefits have to be adjusted for particular price rises that occur.
That is an entirely new concept.’
He said other Budget changes would affect only the rich and yet would increase the RPI and so benefits based on the RPI would be raised.
Mr Portillo claimed that people on low incomes were very low users of road fuel yet would be compensated through the RPI for the extra expense that other people would pay.
‘It's a case of swings and roundabouts.’
He went on to claim that tax changes on share dividends, company cars and the married couple's allowance would hit the highest paid most.
Mr Brown intervened: ‘This is wholly unsatisfactory.
It is a clear attempt to evade the question that is being put.
Will you give us an unequivocal answer: will those on income support be compensated in full for the rise in VAT?’
Mr Portillo denied evading the question and said the Chancellor had said that the Social Security Secretary, Peter Lilley, would take the rise in VAT on fuel into account when income-related benefits are uprated next year.
Mr Portillo said the Chancellor had had no option but to increase taxes to curb ballooning Government borrowing.
In the face of fierce Labour criticism, he acknowledged: ‘Before the election we said we had no plans to raise VAT.
That was the plain truth.
‘Last year we were looking at levels of Government borrowing far lower than those we are looking at today.
We must take action to deal with the changed situation we presently face.
The recession has lasted longer than anyone thought.’
Mr Brown savaged the Budget and said Mr Lamont had given a a ‘triple Conservative tax whammy’, with tax rises this year, next year and the year after that.
He scorned Government claims that Mr Lamont had produced a package for jobs and said it was concerned with saving only one job — the Chancellor's.
Alan Beith, the Liberal Democrat treasury spokesman, said: ‘This Budget is the bill taxpayers are having to meet for the catastrophic mismanagement of the economy under the Conservatives.
‘It tells us just how big a mess the Government has got us into: a £50 billion deficit and very little sign of the promised post-election recovery.’
Recalling Tory election campaign claims that the Opposition would raise taxes while they would not, he said: ‘The Conservatives have debased politics by seeking election on a platform of low taxes while pursuing a policy of high taxes.’
Muslims held after blast
THE OWNER of two apartment blocks in  Calcutta , where at least 47 people were killed in a huge explosion in the early hours of yesterday, has been arrested.
Calcutta's police chief, Tushar Talukdar, said forensic scientists would decide whether the explosion, which ripped through the buildings shortly after midnight, had been caused by careless handling of a cache of explosives or by a bomb.
Mr Talukdar said the owner of the buildings and an associate, both Muslims, had been arrested.
He declined to say on what charges.
The explosion occurred in Bowbazaar which links the city's main business area with a crowded suburban railway terminus.
Such a blast during the day would have killed hundreds, police said.
‘That gives us the primary impression that the explosion was of an accidental nature…although there can be no doubt the explosives were stockpiled for killing people,’ one senior policeman said.
The Press Trust of India said more than 100 people had been injured.
Rescue operations continued throughout yesterday.
Police said there may have been plans to plant the bombs elsewhere in Calcutta to try to reignite Hindu-Moslem riots which hit India in December and January, claiming nearly 2,000 lives.
A bomb was later found by police in a food can near a cinema hall and defused, the Press Trust of India reported.
Amid what one government minister described in parliament as ‘an atmosphere of hatred’ between Hindus and Muslims, Mother Teresa, the nun who won the Nobel Peace Prize, pleaded for calm yesterday.
In a telephone interview from her Calcutta mission for the poor, she said: ‘Don't destroy each other because God has created us to love and be loved.’
Para-military police reinforcements were drafted into Calcutta after the explosion, just four days after a series of bombs in Bombay killed at least 250 people.
A United States intelligence report has suggested India's capital, New Delhi, could be the next target.
A massive security operation has been mounted in the city and United Nations offices in New Delhi have cancelled visits by foreign staff, banned field trips by local personnel and advised them to avoid crowded places.
In Bombay, police said three more people had been arrested in connection with Friday's explosions — a car dealer, his associate and a wanted criminal.
At least four people have been arrested already.
Police chief Amarjeet Singh Samra said the most wanted people were six brothers who had left for Dubai on Thursday and Friday, just before the explosions.
‘All indications revolve around the Memon family,’ Mr Samra said.
‘The others involved are only abettors.’
India has asked the government of the United Arab Emirates to return two of the brothers.
Toll rises: rescue workers recover a body from one of the buildings destroyed in the blast
US holds secret talks on Korean nuclear threat
SECRET talks were held yesterday between United States and North Korean representatives as Washington urged Pyongyang to reconsider its decision to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
North Korea has said it will pull out of the treaty rather than allow United Nations inspections of two suspected nuclear facilities.
Yesterday's meeting took place in Beijing.
China is North Korea's closest ally and has been trying to defuse recent tensions.
US embassy officials in Beijing would reveal no more than that the meeting had taken place, but South Korean television and the national Yonhap news agency quoted unidentified high-level officials as saying the meeting was an effort to resolve the crisis.
Yonhap quoted an official as saying North Korea had accepted a US proposal to meet again in Beijing, possibly as early as next week, and a senior Seoul government source told Reuters the talks were to be held after after a current US-South Korean military exercise, Team Spirit, ended.
‘The North said they would not hold talks during the…exercises,’ the source said.
The North has responded to the manoeuvres by putting its armed forces on a semi war footing.
Air raid drills and evacuation procedures have been practised in the capital.
Also yesterday, South Korea's intelligence chief was quoted in the Chosun Ilbo newspaper as saying he had an intelligence report that North Korea had planned to conduct nuclear tests last year and had up to 22 kilograms (48lb) of weapons-grade plutonium.
Kim Deok, director of the Agency for National Security Planning, was also quoted as telling a parliamentary committee North Korea could have three nuclear bombs by 1995.
 In response to reports that South Korea was seeking Beijing's role as a mediator, China said yesterday it was hoping ‘all the parties concerned’ would resolve the dispute.
‘It's in the common interests of the countries concerned in the region to realise denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula,’ China's foreign ministry said.
‘We have been working toward this end.’
The International Atomic Energy Agency, a UN body, will hold an emergency meeting today to discuss the unprecedented decision.
It may refer the case to the UN Security Council, which could impose economic sanctions.
The European Community yesterday urged North Korea to reconsider, and the withdrawal was discussed by NATO ambassadors in Brussels.
— AP and Reuter 
Editorial, Page 8
Cheap fish imports spark riots in France
FRENCH fishermen fought with riot police in several ports yesterday and at least one policeman was badly hurt as anger over cheap imports spilled over into violence.
Thousands of people fearing for their livelihoods gathered across France to put pressure on the government ahead of a European Community fisheries meeting today.
But in the south-western port of Bayonne, a march by about 1,000 people degenerated into violence as demonstrators smashed barriers, lit a fire and hurled flares at the police, who responded with tear gas, water cannon and truncheons.
Four people were arrested.
One flare hit a policeman in the face and doctors said his condition was critical.
Four other officers were slightly hurt.
In the western town of Nantes 11 people were injured when protests escalated into violence.
Police also used teargas in Marseille, Saint-Brieuc and Quimper, where demonstrators tore down barriers, hurled firecrackers and flares and broke windows in government offices.
‘I vigorously condemn all violence directed at people or property,’ the secretary of state for the sea, Charles Josselin, said in a statement.
‘Such action cannot in any way help the fishermen's cause.’
The biggest march was in Quimper on the Brittany coast, where up to 10,000 people gathered for a silent protest which remained calm until the late afternoon when a handful of people began throwing stones and tear gas bombs.
Protesters, including sympathetic farmers and shopkeepers, placed a symbolic coffin in front of Quimper's prefecture, or local government office.
Shops lowered their shutters in solidarity.
Earlier, Mr Josselin said he would call for a 30 per cent increase in minimum prices imposed on imports at the EC fisheries meeting in Brussels.
Mr Josselin told a cabinet meeting he would also ask for price controls to be imposed on more types of fish, and for Russian cod imports to be suspended altogether.
Somali reaction force to investigate clash
THE United States yesterday ordered a quick reaction force into the southern Somali port of Kismayu to investigate militia fighting that led to the suspension of national reconciliation talks in Addis Ababa.
A US military spokesman, Col Fred Peck, said some of the 500 troops in the force had moved into Kismayu yesterday afternoon and the rest would arrive today.
The United Nations has suspended the Somali peace talks in the Ethiopian capital until it has details of the fighting in Kismayu between militia forces of Mohamed Said Hersi, known as Gen Morgan, and Ahmed Omar Jess.
Fighting broke out in Kismayu on Tuesday morning when about 300 armed Morgan supporters, using thousands of women and children as human shields, advanced on Jess supporters in the north-east of the town.
The 900 Belgian troops stationed in Kismayu were unable to stop them for fear of hitting the civilians.
About 50 people were wounded and 50 of Jess's men had to flee.
Col Peck blamed the incident on Gen Morgan, calling his men terrorists and bandits, and praised Mr Jess's militia for observing the ceasefire.
The US reaction force will be backed by mortars and 13 helicopters, including two Cobra gunships.
China steps up pressure on Britain
By David Wallen Diplomatic Editor
CHINA stepped up the pressure over Hong Kong yesterday, threatening to remove its government after 1997 in complete breach of the handover agreements.
The latest outbursts against Governor Chris Patten's democracy package came from the head of China's Hong Kong affairs office, Lu Ping, who said Mr Patten would be ‘condemned through the ages.’
It prompted an immediate statement from the Foreign Office trying again to calm the increasingly hostile relations between the two countries.
In a separate move the Chinese premier, Li Peng, who attacked Mr Patten earlier, returned to the fray, saying China did not want confrontation with Britain but the UK was putting ‘obstacles’ in the way of talks to try and defuse the row.
But a potential white knight emerged last night in the shape of President Bill Clinton who, it emerged, would hold talks with Mr Patten in May.
Mr Clinton has spoken out firmly on China's poor human rights record in the past and has speculated about removing its Most Favoured Nation status which would cripple the developing southern part of the country.
Mr Patten is anxious to see MFN retained as the majority of investment in China is from Hong Kong, and how he uses his influence in the talks will be critical.
Mr Lu warned the United States to stay out of the row.
‘No third country has the right to meddle in Hong Kong affairs,’ he said.
‘It will only further complicate the question.’
He was venomous in his attacks on Mr Patten, accusing him of slamming the door on talks with Beijing.
‘From the very beginning, the Hong Kong governor has had no sincerity for resolving differences through talks,’ he said.
‘In the history of Hong Kong, Chris Patten will be condemned through the ages.’
But he stopped short of setting up a ‘shadow government’ before the handover, a previously threatened step that would undermine the authority of the colonial government and denied China had any intention to seize the colony back before 1997.
Mr Patten did not respond except to say he was concerned about the future well being of the territory and he was ready to start talks at any time.
In a statement the Foreign Office insisted talks were the only sensible way forward.
China's fury was prompted by Mr Patten's decision last Friday to go ahead and publish proposed legislation on his democracy proposals for the next elections in 1995.
He had offered China talks and the chance to make counter proposals, but talks about talks foundered on Beijing's insistence that Hong Kong representatives in the team should not have equal status.
The Foreign Office said there would be no backing down on its condition that Hong Kong representatives must be given equal status in the talks.
The Foreign Office is trying to play down the row but officials concede it could be some time before both sides talk again.
Meanwhile an influential former British ambassador to China, Sir Percy Cradock, warned of a ‘darker scenario’ unless a ‘difficult compromise’was reached.
He said Hong Kong could face a ‘period of political siege for the next four years followed by an abrupt transition to a harsher and more repressive regime.’
Unless both sides made great efforts the situation could be irretrievable, he said.
In Britain the Chinese ambassador, Ma Yuzhen, has been actively lobbying MPs, apparently in an attempt to break the parliamentary consensus behind Mr Patten.
Lu Ping: ‘Chris Patten has had no sincerity for resolving differences’
No-fly zone violated in Bosnia, US says
THE United States yesterday alleged that planes that bombed targets in eastern Bosnia last weekend flagrantly violated a UN no-fly zone and said two Americans are part of a UN team located near the target area.
The United Nations said on Tuesday that three single-engined propeller-driven craft — one biplane and two monoplanes — dropped bombs last Saturday on two villages south-east of the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica.
The Yugoslav air force denied any of its aircraft had violated the air exclusion zone.
‘The flights were flagrant violations of the no-fly zone but they were the first armed attacks recorded by the UN since shortly after the no-fly zone was instituted’ last October, the State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, said.
He told reporters the United States was still committed to getting enforcement of the no-fly zone but he left the impression US allies were still opposed.
Enforcement is ‘a subject that we consider still on the table.
It's a subject that we continue to discuss,’ Mr Boucher said, but he added that he had no progress to report.
‘Since the planes were attacking government-held territory, we assumed that they were flown by ethnic Serbs,’ Mr Boucher said.
He said that two Americans, whom he did not identify, were in Srebrenica with General  Philippe Morillon, commander of the UN Protection Force.
Aid convoys have been backed up at the border since Monday after Gen Morillon said he would not leave Srebrenica until aid was allowed through.
Bosnian Serbs meanwhile allowed two stranded aid convoys to head for Gorazde and Sarajevo, but another convoy intended for the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica remained stuck at the border.
Hundreds of refugees in Srebrenica in eastern eastern Bosnia have been living rough on the streets and eating bread made from corn husks.
In Sarajevo, some of the heaviest shelling in recent months erupted around the besieged city as leaders of Bosnia's warring factions prepared for a new round of peace talks in New York.
Yeltsin calls for more centralised CIS
A MAJOR reorganisation of the Commonwealth of Independent States was urged by Russia's president, Boris Yeltsin, yesterday as he struggled to regain his grip on power.
Mr Yeltsin, in a declaration read out at a news conference by the foreign minister, Andrei Kozyrev, described the association of former Soviet republics as amorphous and ‘unable to fulfil the hopes invested in it’.
‘While not aspiring to any ‘leading role’, we are conscious of our responsibility to co-operate closely with all independent states,’ the declaration said.
It added: ‘Without a more definite organisational set-up, without the creation of bodies for voluntary co-ordination of our activities, the commonwealth will remain too amorphous.’
The president's appeal is directed at a summit of the commonwealth to be held in Armenia's capital, Yerevan, on 30 April.
He said there was special need for an effective system of collective security to handle local conflicts.
Mr Kozyrev cut short a trip to Finland, returning to Moscow to read the president's address to the commonwealth.
Clearly anticipating hostility from Ukraine to any Russian suggestion of new central structures, Mr Kozyrev told the news conference: ‘I don't think any magnifying glass will help you find any neo-imperialist designs in this.’
On the home front, Mr Yeltsin chaired a meeting of the Presidential Council — a powerful and secretive body including the defence, security, interior and foreign ministers — hoping to reverse humiliating defeats last week by Russia's top legislature, the Congress of People's Deputies.
Reports from the meeting said the  president was urged to take extremely tough measures, including the imposition of presidential rule, to drag Russia through its crisis.
Fresh attempts at compromise with the legislature were also on the agenda, however, according to the deputy prime minister, Sergei Shakhrai.
‘In theory, we're all in the same boat,’ he told a newspaper.
‘Sadly, at the moment, we're all drilling holes in it.’
Mr Yeltsin, who went to ground after storming out of the Congress of People's Deputies on Friday, re-emerged on Tuesday with an appeal to the world's richest nations for extra aid before it was too late.
He warned that conservatives were trying to claw back power.
Diplomats say western countries are worried, however, that they could be clinging too long to a leader whose domestic support is fading.
Growing discontent in Russia focuses on the widespread suffering economic changes have inflicted.
Inflation surged 2,500 per cent in 1992 and is currently running at about 30 per cent a month.
Mr Yeltsin wants the Group of Seven leading industrial nations (G7) to meet before its scheduled July summit in Tokyo to help to bail out the 15-month-old reform plan.
France suggested Mr Yeltsin's April summit with the US president, Bill Clinton, could be expanded to include other G7 leaders but other member states, particularly Germany and Japan were doubtful this would take place.
Ties with Britain too costly, says Papua
PAPUA New Guinea, echoing the republican thrust of its South Pacific neighbour Australia, said yesterday it would consider breaking its ties with the British monarchy.
Prime Minister Paias Wingti, questioned in parliament on the need for continued links with Britain, said it was time his country reviewed its constitution after 17 years of independence.
Australia's Prime Minister Paul Keating pledged on Monday after re-election that his government would begin transforming the country into a republic with the Queen replaced as head of state.
Keating, who crushed the pro-monarchy conservative opposition in national polls last Saturday, said he would create a panel of eminent Australians to study how the country could become a republic by 2001.
This would coincide with the centenary of Australia's conversion from a group of colonies to a federation of states.
Mr Wingti said in Port Moresby that it was costing Papua New Guinea money to maintain the office of governor general as Queen Elizabeth's representative in the country.
‘Sections of the constitution may be out of date as the country is moving forward,’ he said.
‘I have made it public that the country needs to have its own identity, its own institutions.’
He suggested that a committee should examine the country's ties to the Queen.
Claims of bomb raid on ayatollah denied
CLAIMS that Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, had been the target of a bomb attack were denied by both the government and dissident groups last night.
Alarm was followed by confusion after the office of the exiled former president, Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, announced that 20 people had been killed in an explosion at the Tehran residence of Mr Khamenei.
A statement issued to news agencies in Paris, where Mr Bani-Sadr is in exile, said: ‘We have received information that today, between 1400 and 1500, there was an explosion at the residence of Seyed Ali Khamenei.’
A  spokeswoman at Mr Bani-Sadr's office told reporters that according to‘people who work with us…about 20 people were killed’.
She said Mr Khamenei was hit but it was not known if he had died.
An official in Mr Khamenei's office denied there had been an explosion.
The Washington office of the Mujahedeen Khalq Organisation, a leading dissident group, said it had checked its contacts in Tehran and believed the report originated from residents celebrating the end of the Muslim year with fireworks.
Iran's IRNA news agency dismissed the explosion reports.
‘This is all fabrication by the opposition,’ an official said.
— AP and Reuter.
Corporal punishment is a deterrent
John CW Symon (Points of View, today) writes: ‘It would seem obvious that young hooligans do not think of the consequences of their actions…quite likely they do not think of what they are doing as ‘crime’ at all…
’ He also states that severity of punishment is patently no deterrent.
So, is it in order for them to mug or murder Mr Symon and, if not, what do we do to protect him?
Where should our priorities lie?
I don't know what experience he has had to justify his claim that corporal punishment is no deterrent.
In mine, it most certainly is.
I spent six of the happiest years of my life at a boarding school where the regime was spartan.
From what I read and see it was much less comfortable than modern ‘detention centres’.
Corporal punishment was used sparingly but consisted of either four strokes or six across the behind with a whippy cane.
Bullying would get six, so there wasn't any.
With a group of others, I was misguided enough to raid the school strawberry beds.
We were caught and got four strokes each.
The experience was painful enough to ensure that no-one did it again; it simply wasn't worth the risk.
Some youngsters respond to persuasion and the idea that to do certain things is beneath their dignity.
Others do not.
With them, pain is sometimes the only effective ultimate deterrent.
The experiments of the last 30 years in bringing up the young have failed.
They have landed us with a society which grows increasingly barbaric and animal, in which amoral behaviour is considered the norm.
The conduct of an increasing number of the young would have been unthinkable 30 to 40 years ago.
We do a lot of research into the pollution of seas, rivers, land, and air.
How about more research into the pollution of young minds?
Parenting
Your ICM poll results reveal that the statement, ‘A single parent can bring up children as well as two parents,’ is accepted by 77 per cent of the people polled.
Why is the word ‘can’ there?
Surely what is relevant is the response to the statement, ‘Single parents bring up children as well as two parents’, a vastly different proposition.
National lottery
The introduction of a national lottery has the potential to provide enormous benefit to the quality of sport throughout the UK.
As the elected representatives of governing bodies of Scottish sport we have been following closely the lottery bill's progress through Parliament.
At this important stage, we would like to draw attention to some particular concerns.
Naturally we expect to see a fair share of lottery revenue coming to Scotland.
The bill appears to guarantee this by the allocation of 8.9 per cent of income for the development of Scottish sport, with a further share of the overall allocation to UK sport being awarded to the UK sports commission, when it is established.
In sum, we would expect Scotland's share to amount to some 10.66 per cent, the same percentage of UK Government expenditure as currently received by the Scottish Office.
However, we are concerned that the comments of the Heritage Secretary, Peter Brooke, during the bill's second reading suggested that the allocation to the commission would be deducted from the share to be made available to sport in the home countries.
The effect of this is a reduction which is clearly at odds with the 8.9 per cent set out in the original bill.
Given the current estimates on income to be generated by the lottery, this could mean a loss of as much as £4 million annually to Scottish sport.
We understand that the lottery proceeds are mainly to be used for much-needed sports development projects.
However, we would hope that some of the income could be earmarked to provide financial support for our many talented sportsmen and women to enable them to achieve their true potential.
The 13 Olympic gold medals won by Spanish athletes in Barcelona last year is a reflection of the investment made by Spain.
Finally, we have gathered from recent select committee reports that it is the intention of the Government to allow annual flexibility on the allocation of funds to each of the beneficiaries.
We feel that this may skew any long-term investment planning for sport.
Perhaps it is appropriate to  safeguard a reasonable percentage of each good cause's allocation to allow such planning to proceed.
While we welcome this major initiative, we would like a fair chance to play off Mr Brooke's ‘level playing field’.
Ethnic purity
How can people in Scotland presume to call themselves ethnic Scots and even more presumptuously assume ‘English immigration’ might be a passing phenomenon?
Have not England, Scotland, Wales, over the centuries, been overrun by Irish, Angles, Saxons, Jutes, Romans, Vikings, Danes, etc?
For anyone to claim to be pure Scots, English or Welsh seems nonsense.
If newspapers had been available when marauding hordes from all over the continent were ravaging our land, the people who had managed to settle in one spot for three or four generations would be complaining bitterly that the Angles, Saxons, Jutes, Danes, Romans, Vikings, etc were overrunning the traditions of the island.
This island does not belong to any one, two or three groups of people, even if they can trace ancestors back two or three centuries.
It belongs to anyone from any country who is legitimately allowed to live here and who contributes to the general social welfare.
Since immigrants from hot countries have settled here for generations, surviving the cold, icy blast, the hybrid ‘English,’ with the blood of many nations in their veins will not turn a hair at the cooler climate or the cooler neighbours.
Scots will have to accept that racial purity went out with Hitler.
Heads of the House
SAY what you like about politicians — and we should, as often as possible — they dress conservatively.
It's every bit as much grey men in grey suits on one side of the Commons as it is on the other, with occasional flashes of yellow from Mrs Shephard or Mrs Currie, flashes of grey sports coat from Dennis Skinner and flashes of who knows what from Sir Nicholas Fairbairn.
But in the round, and many are, as the unforgiving camera shows, not to mention rumpled, crumpled, balding and bulging, much like any other get-together of British men, they dress conservatively.
Further, the keen observer of the lesser-spotted, great warbler or reedy  pipit of the species, will note that there are no hats.
There are various types of head plumage, from thatch via greaseball to natural skin tone, but not a hat in sight.
Except when a member wants to make a point of order during a division.
Then, as we saw recently, various MPs start to behave in a very silly way.
Not unusual, mildly diverting, but awfully silly and all because the traditional topper couldn't be found.
Instead, MPs successfully hunted out flat caps and trilbies.
The more ingenious, those who had mastered paper planes at school, made paper hats from perfectly innocent newspapers.
Uproar, laughter, lots of silly grins and had it set a trend?
A miner's helmet for Michael Heseltine?
A tartan bunnet for Alex Salmond?
A dunce's cap for the Chancellor?
Not if the sobersides have their way.
They want to abolish the grand old tradition completely and scrap the topper.
Where's their sense of humour?
Keep it, we say, and give it to John Major.
Conjuring tricks could be his last chance.
Is Korea on the brink?
TENSION has returned to the Korean peninsula and warnings of war are filling the air.
Yet the question has to be asked: how much is this really an artificial crisis which will subside as quickly as it has arisen?
Its immediate cause resides in two distinct but related issues.
One is North Korea's declared intention to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) after the demand of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to inspect sites which Pyongyang says are non-nuclear.
The other is the joint US-South Korean ‘Team Spirit-93’ military exercises.
It has been suspected for some time that North Korea has been working on a nuclear device.
How far it has progressed down that road no-one is sure.
In that it joins other states like Iran, Israel, Pakistan and India who are all thought to be pursuing military nuclear programmes.
But there are also domestic reasons why it should have decided to cease co-operation with the IAEA.
The North Korean leader Kim Il-sung is 80 years old, and there has been speculation about his health.
He has been grooming his son Kim Jong-il for the succession, but the latter does not enjoy his father's authority and a power struggle could already be under way.
The decision to withdraw from the NPT may well be part of that.
Furthermore, if the world responded with sanctions, an isolated regime potentially crumbling from within might attempt to forestall public discontent by blaming outside interference for the country's travails.
Then there are the exercises in South Korea.
They have always triggered a panic reaction in the North, which suspects that the US and Seoul are planning to invade under the guise of war games.
Indeed, there must be serious doubts about the decision to hold them this year.
They were suspended in the wake of the growing rapprochement between the two Koreas and there was no pressing reason to reinstate them now.
But despite these ominous developments, the pressure to contain the crisis is substantial.
The South Korean government has been remarkably low key in its response, apparently intent not to inflame the situation.
And despite the rhetoric, US officials met with North Korean counterparts yesterday.
Neither has China, Pyongyang's closest ally, any interest in escalating the dispute.
It has established diplomatic and trade relations with South Korea and its rapidly growing economy would only suffer if a war were to start across the border.
It, too, has been trying to defuse tensions.
It is very likely that the posturing will be toned down after the exercises are over.
That still leaves the unresolved question of the nuclear inspections.
The US is talking separately with China, Russia, Japan and others to find ways to resolve the standoff so that Pyongyang does not lose face, yet allows inspections to take place.
That, surely, must be the way forward.
Moreover, nuclear proliferation is an issue which needs to be tackled more comprehensively and at a wider international level.
The unplanned incident which sparks a conflict can never be ruled out, but on this occasion diplomacy is likely to win.
Budget contest winner
A DUNFERMLINE reader, James Wilkie, has won a £1,000 computer in The Scotsman Budget competition with a highly accurate prediction of Mr Lamont's plans.
In our competition, sponsored by independent accountants Scott-Moncrieff Thomson & Shiells, readers had to make their own judgment on 12 elements of the Budget, ranging from income tax thresholds to VAT, excise  duties and public borrowing.
Mr Wilkie got ten out of the 12 questions correct, and only got the other two wrong — the size of the £2,000 band and the increase in duty on unleaded petrol — by thinking the Chancellor would be even tougher than he turned out to be.
Mr Wilkie will shortly be receiving an AST 3/335 Bravo personal computer with 4Mb Ram, 80Mb hard disk drive, 14 in colour monitor, Dos, Windows and a mouse, which has been supplied by 20/20 Systems of Cowdenbeath and AST Europe.
Birt and Hussey win board's backing
By David Wallen
THE BBC's chairman, Marmaduke Hussey, and director general, John Birt, have survived calls for their resignation.
The corporation's board of governors yesterday decided to keep both men in their jobs but tried to end the embarrassing row over Mr Birt's tax affairs.
In an attempt to prevent any repetition of the scandal, the board decided that all senior management should be full members of staff.
Mr Birt's freelance status as director general, agreed by Mr Hussey, started the controversy.
A statement read: ‘We now believe that the decision to employ John Birt other than as a staff member was a mistake and we deeply regret the dismay it has caused to the public and to BBC staff.
We have decided that from now on, as at present , all members of the board of management should be employed on a staff basis.’
The board also said that in future it would receive more information on ‘public interest issues’ affecting the BBC.
The 12 governors met yesterday for the third time in a week at Bush House, in London.
BBC sources said they were united in their desire to see both men stay.
Speculation that the deputy chairman, Lord Barnett, might also be removed came to nothing.
The governors had effectively decided at an emergency meeting on Tuesday night that Mr Birt should stay but question marks still hung over the future of Mr Hussey, especially as the BBC's General Advisory Council recommended on Wednesday that he should go for effectively bringing the BBC into disrepute at a time when its charter was coming up for renegotiation.
Staff at the BBC seemed far from happy with the outcome, but the belief was that the row will die down as management concentrates on the market-oriented reforms being ushered in.
The row grew into one of the most embarrassing in the BBC's history after it was revealed that Mr Birt had been employed as a freelance to gain tax advantages in his £140,000-a-year job.
David Winnick, the Labour MP for Walsall North, who called for Mr Birt's removal, said: ‘I very much regret that Mr Birt decided not to offer his resignation, which would have saved the governors a great deal of embarrassment.’
A smiling John Birt leaves the meeting
Scientists start tests on genetic spray cure for cystic fibrosis
By Alison Daniels
SCIENTISTS in Edinburgh are one step nearer to finding a cure for the crippling lung disease cystic fibrosis.
They are testing a genetic spray which can cure the disease in mice.
The breakthrough could offer an effective treatment to the 6,000 people who suffer from the life-threatening disease in the UK, many of whom die in their early 30s.
Scientists in Oxford and Cambridge are also working on a similar gene therapy which combines cloned human DNA with liposomes, or fat.
They announced yesterday that their treatment also eliminates the genetic defect in laboratory mice, bred with cystic fibrosis.
It involves injecting the substance into the mice's lungs, a treatment which could not be used on humans.
However, the team of Medical Research Council researchers based at Edinburgh's Western General Hospital are hoping to refine the gene complex into a spray which can be inhaled by human sufferers.
The research team's leader, Dr David Porteous said the Oxford and Cambridge results were an important first step even though the treatment could not be used on a regular basis on human cystic fibrosis sufferers.
However, he said the spray being tested on the Edinburgh mice could be used on humans as it was a non-invasive treatment which did not involve surgery or injections.
‘We are working very hard with our colleagues at the Royal Brompton and St Mary's Hospital in London to complete their experiments using a safe DNA mist.
‘This would be as simple to take as current drug and antibiotic treatments for cystic fibrosis and asthma patients.’
‘If successful, patient trials will quickly follow.
The first are planned for the Royal Brompton and if these look promising the treatment could soon be tested further in Edinburgh and then around the world.’
The genetic spray was described as a very exciting development by another of the team's scientists, Dr Julia Dorin.
She explained that once the gene mist was inhaled it was taken up by the body's cells and corrected the defect.
‘What we are working on is a mist which the mice breath in as opposed to pouring the complex into the trachea.
Humans could be given the complex in this way.’
Dr Porteous added that gene therapy testing had been made possible by the genetically-engineered mice developed by the MRC team last year.
The mouse is bred with the genetic defect but remains alive, enabling potential cures to be tested out on it.
Poor to get extra help with VAT costs Major forced to step in over fuel bill row
By Ewen MacAskill, Political Editor
THE Prime Minister was forced into a damage limitation exercise yesterday as the row over VAT on fuel bills spiralled out of control.
Infuriated by press coverage and threats of a Conservative revolt, John Major ordered the Cabinet ministers directly involved to sort it out quickly.
Mr Major himself told the Commons at Prime Minister's question time that the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, had ‘made it absolutely clear that there will be extra help for less well-off pensioners and other people on low income’.
He said the extra help would be given from April next year, shortly before the VAT increase is imposed.
Cold-weather payments would also be adjusted to take account of the new fuel bills.
Between five and ten million people could benefit, according to Government sources.
This could cost up to £1 billion, defeating much of the purpose of the VAT increase as a revenue-earning measure.
Labour was not satisfied with Mr Major's assurance and last night demanded specific figures on how much help would be available.
The pledge was enough to satisfy some Tory back-benchers who had threatened rebellion but others said they remained unconvinced by the Government's ‘clarification’.
Although Downing Street accused the press of producing misleading information, the row falls into a pattern apparent over the past six months of confusion in the Government and a lack of communication between departments.
Conflicting signals came from both ministers and officials on Wednesday.
As late as yesterday morning, Ann Widdicombe, the social security minister, was taking a different line from the one adopted by ministers later in the day.
The row blew up on Tuesday when Mr Lamont announced in the Budget that VAT of 8 per cent would be imposed on fuel bills next year and 17.5 per cent the year after.
Although he indicated that there would be help for those on low incomes, doubt was sown by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Michael Portillo, in the Commons on Wednesday and the indication was that compensation would be confined to benefits being upgraded in line with inflation.
Downing Street said that the decision to provide help in addition to the inflation upgrading had been taken before the Budget and that there was therefore no U-turn.
Yesterday morning Mr Major consulted Mr Lamont, the Social Services Secretary, Peter Lilley, the Chief Whip, Richard Ryder, and other ministers when they arrived at No 10 for the Cabinet meeting.
As a result of that discussion, Mr Lilley was dispatched to television and radio studios to clarify the issue.
He told ITN's lunchtime news: ‘There will be special extra help to those on low incomes through measures we will announce in the autumn in the annual uprating statement.’
In the afternoon Mr Major told the Commons that those on low income ‘will get the help from next April before the higher fuel bills come in.
That help will be additional to the future increase in pensions and other benefits which will take place automatically.
‘Cold-weather payments will also be adjusted to reflect the increase in fuel costs.’
The Labour leader, John Smith, sought an assurance that there would be full compensation.
He said: ‘Have you no conscience at all about short-changing the poor as well as betraying your election commitments?’
A Tory back-bencher, Andrew Bowden, praised Mr Lilley for his speedy clarification but asked Mr Major to consider the plight of almost one million pensioners who did not claim income support.
Last night Mr Portillo said the phrase ‘full compensation’ was meaningless because people lived in different homes in different circumstances and that there were too many variable factors that made it impossible to give a specific figure at present.
The confused picture was not helped yesterday morning when Miss Widdicombe was asked in an interview whether this was surely a special case for extra payments and replied: ‘Why is it special?’
A few hours later ministers were saying that there would be extra payments.
Auditors clear Lothian Enterprise
By Gary Duncan
INVESTIGATIONS into alleged misuse of public funds by the local enterprise company for Lothian have found no evidence to support the claims, it emerged yesterday.
Scottish Enterprise said it had carried out an audit at Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Ltd after the allegations were made in a series of unsigned documents passed to the press and the SE chairman, Prof Donald MacKay.
The request for the audit was made by LEEL's chief executive, Dr Des Donnar.
Yesterday, Crawford Beveridge, SE chief executive, said the issues raised in the documents had been examined in the audit.
‘There was no evidence of impropriety,’ he said.
‘This should now allow LEEL to focus on the real issues of training and economic development.’
Mr Beveridge's comments came as a press report claimed Scottish Enterprise was facing a crisis of morale.
SE last night rejected speculation that the departure of a string of executives indicated deep-seated discontent.
A spokesman admitted some personnel may have been unhappy with a process of ‘radical’ change, but insisted: ‘The vast majority of people would not have recognised the description in that article.’
Some staff had chosen to go because voluntary redundancy terms were attractive.
He said two people named as leaving, Gavin Jones, joint head of Scottish Trade International, and Donald Patience, director of investment, were staying.
Last journey for the ‘Glasgow godfather’
By Denny Macgee
A FREEZING wind blew through Glasgow's east end yesterday.
It was a day befitting the funeral of the man reputed to be the ‘godfather’ of the Glasgow underworld.
About 1,000 people huddled against the harsh Scottish weather as the coffin of Arthur Thompson, sen, passed on its way to Riddrie Cemetery.
The majority were there to pay their respects as 62-year-old Thompson, who died after a heart attack last week, was laid to rest.
Others, observed one bystander, might even have been there to make sure.
Uniformed police and plainclothes detectives were also present in even greater numbers than had originally been planned after an elaborate bomb hoax only hours before the funeral.
Police cordoned off an area at the cemetery after an anonymous call and army bomb disposal specialists carried out a controlled explosion on a suspicious package found near the grave.
Officers stood guard at the gates of the cemetery, making sure that only members of the official funeral cortege entered to attend the burial service.
The media were also out in force, although not with the blessing of the Thompson family or their friends and associates.
One or two journalists were told, in no uncertain terms, that they were not welcome outside the extravagantly converted family home —‘The Ponderosa’ as it is known locally — or at the windswept graveside where Arthur Thompson was buried.
He was laid to rest alongside his son, Arthur, jun, who was shot to death; his daughter Margaret, who died in mysterious circumstances; and his mother-in-law Maggie Harrison, who was blown up in a car-bomb attack almost certainly intended to kill Thompson himself.
Only 100 or so family and close friends were at the graveside, visible from the garden of the family home, to hear the Rev Russell McLarty of St Paul's Church, Provanmill, say that Arthur Thompson's children wanted their father to be remembered as a kind and generous man who loved life and took great pleasure from his family and grandchildren.
Arthur Thompson, he said, should be remembered as a man of dignity who was loved by many.
The vast number of wreaths filling three of the eight chauffeur-driven limousines which led a funeral procession which stretched almost from the gates of the cemetery to the family home, appeared to testify to that.
However, because all the cards bearing messages of sympathy had been removed, exactly who had sent flowers other than his immediate family, and whether there was one from the infamous Kray twins, must remain a mystery to all but the Thompsons themselves.
Laid to rest: Traffic is brought to a halt as the flower-bedecked hearse leads the funeral cortege on its way to the cemetery
Opposition derides fall in unemployed
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
UNEMPLOYMENT in Britain has fallen for the first time in almost three years.
Seasonally adjusted figures released yesterday put the number out of work at 2,971,100 — 22,000 down.
In Scotland the total dropped by 1,300 to 248,000.
In spite of the fall, the Government still came in for criticism from opposition parties and trade union leaders, who pointed out that the total was still higher than this time last year.
Yesterday's figures were for February and did not include recent huge job losses at Rolls-Royce.
The seasonally adjusted total was nevertheless better than expected.
It had been feared it would break through the three million barrier for the first time in six years.
The Employment Secretary, Gillian Shephard, said it was ‘good news for us all’ but cautioned: ‘We must be careful not to read too much in to one month's figure.
It would be consistent with previous recoveries for the figures to be volatile for some time.’
Unadjusted unemployment, which topped three million last month for the first time since 1987, fell by 19,451 to 3,042,614 — 10.8 per cent of the workforce.
In Scotland, the unadjusted figure fell 3,700 to 257,000 — 10.2 per cent of the workforce.
The Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, said it was too early to say if this was the end of the upward trend in unemployment.
‘We will have to wait until next month before we can confirm or deny whether this is so or make a more informed assessment,’ he said.
Nonetheless, he thought the provisional figures were encouraging.
David MacLehose, director of the Confederation of British Industry in Scotland, said a fall in unemployment was always welcome, especially when it was matched with the highest increase in notified vacancies at job centres for two years.
Taken together with other recent surveys, those figures suggested confidence might be returning to employers, he said.
Henry Mcleish, Labour's Scottish employment spokesman, said the truth was that the unemployment figures were a national scandal.
‘No-one should be fooled by the small fluctuation in this month's unemployment figures as they are being claimed by the Government themselves as possibly erratic.
The stark truth is that the unemployment figure is still a national scandal.’
John Swinney, a Scottish National Party vice-convener, said that while any fall in the unemployment figures was welcome, the figures were 17,000 up on last year.
‘They can in no way be seen as an endorsement of the Government's disastrous economic policies and will bring little comfort to the thousands still out of work.
There are still a quarter of a million unemployed people in Scotland who are testimony to the dreadful human misery caused by over a decade of Tory rule and the terminal decline of the UK economy,’ he said.
Jim Wallace, leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, said that while the reduction was welcome, there was no room for complacency.
Nor should too much hope be pinned on one month's statistics.
Man who killed father loses appeal
A SON jailed last year for blasting his sadistic and tyrannical father to death with a shotgun lost his appeal against his four-year sentence yesterday.
Lawyers for Clifford Newton, 46, who said he had endured years of bullying, intimidation and violence culminating in a death threat from his father, had urged the Court of Appeal to reduce the jail term.
The court heard that Newton had snapped in the mistaken belief that his father was about to draw a gun on him.
He had fired at Bernard Newton, 67, and reloaded twice before shooting him in the head with his fourth cartridge.
Dismissing the appeal, the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Taylor, said the sentence for manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility — which he said did not mean total loss of responsibility — was entirely proper and could not be faulted.
Newton, of Old Main Road, Irby, near Grimsby, had denied murder but pled guilty at Nottingham Crown Court last June to manslaughter.
His father, an 18 stone 6ft tall trawlerman, was known as ‘The Beast’ by trawler crews.
Mr Newton was shot after an incident in which he slapped Clifford's wife.
Clifford told police: ‘I picked the gun up and went totally berserk and shot him.’
When Mr Newton arrived at Clifford's home, he had slapped his wife across the face a number of times.
Confronted by his son, he had said: ‘You are going to get it, you bastard.
I am going to kill you.’
Clifford had shot once, reloaded and shot again.
He had gone away to get more ammunition and fired twice more.
Lord Taylor, sitting with Mr Justice Pill and Mr Justice Sedley, described it as a tragic case of homicide within a family.
Lord Taylor said medical reports on Newton stated he had acted under acute stress while his emotional control and judgment were impaired and he was overcome by extreme anxiety and anger.
He had now regained stability and presented no danger.
Diminished responsibility did not mean exhausted responsibility, said Lord Taylor.
Newton's claim that he had shot his father to defend himself was difficult to reconcile with the number of shots fired.
Rifkind calls for Bosnia pull-out
By David Wallen Diplomatic Editor
BRITISH troops should be withdrawn from Bosnia by November and replaced by other United Nations forces, the Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, indicated yesterday.
Britain is pressing the UN to rotate troops to ease the burden on individual countries and make it easier for nations to offer forces for the growing number of peacekeeping duties around the world.
Mr Rifkind said he had told the UN that the Cheshire Regiment would be in Bosnia for six more months.
It would then be replaced by The Prince of Wales's Own Regiment of Yorkshire for a further six months.
There were no plans to extend that commitment, he said.
Mr Rifkind even appeared to place a question mark over British troops carrying out relief convoy duties in the former Yugoslavia this summer.
He said: ‘One has to keep it under review to see what the need might be.’
Up to now, the Government, rather than the UN, has met the cost of the 3,000-strong British contingent and the UN presence could go on for years, he said.
‘There should not be an assumption that those countries that make the initial contribution should be there as long as the UN is there.’
It was highly desirable, he said, that the UN should consider rotating forces.
Speaking to defence writers, he made clear he was against the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation taking over responsibility for all peacekeeping in the former Yugoslavia should a ceasefire and peace be agreed.
Russia and Ukraine were among other countries that could be involved.
The Defence Secretary also said that now he had been in the post a year, he was reviewing defence spending priorities to see if they were correct.
He denied the move amounted to a defence review, however.
Signs of upturn in housing market
A SURGE in mortgage activity raised fresh hopes yesterday that the housing market has finally turned the corner.
Building societies report that net new commitments in February — the amount of new mortgages in the pipeline — rose 75 per cent on the depressed level in January to £2.72 billion.
The director general of the Building Societies Association, Mark Boleat, said the rise was encouraging and supported the reports from housebuilders and estate agents that the market had turned up since the beginning of the year.
‘House-buyer confidence, although still fragile, has strengthened over recent months,’ Mr Boleat said.
‘Buyers are beginning to take advantage of the large number of attractive fixed rate mortgage products which have been announced following the reduction of base rates in late January.’
The doubling of the stamp duty threshold in the Budget would give a further modest impetus to the market, he added.
The level at which stamp duty is imposed has been lifted to £60,000, which should save homebuyers at the lower end of the market an average £600.
Building societies also reported a small inflow of depositors' funds during February.
The £208 million improvement is the third successive month that building societies were able to lure savers' funds into their accounts.
The societies have been at loggerheads with the Government over the past 12 months after Mr Lamont introduced a series of savings offers which attracted revenue away from the societies.
Amstrad first with pocket organiser
THE computer giant Amstrad  yesterday announced what it said was the world's first ‘personal digital assistant’— a pocket-sized computer that allows the user to write directly on to the screen with a special pen.
The PenPad PDA 600 is a hand-held personal organiser that does away with a keyboard and is aimed at the traditional Filofax and electronic organiser markets.
The Amstrad chairman, Alan Sugar, said the device would go on sale early in May costing £299 including value-added tax, a price that would ‘embarrass the competition when their products eventually arrive’.
Apple is expected to launch its own personal digital organiser in a few weeks and other companies are expected to follow suit later in the year.
Weighing just 400 grammes, the PenPad is able to recognise handwriting and turn it into text for storage, fax transmission or print-out.
Mr Sugar said it was the machine's ability to recognise handwriting that set it ‘worlds apart’ from technology already available.
Among the features built into the PenPad are a diary, notes section, address and telephone section, meetings lists, calculator, calendar , automatic phone dialling, alarm calls and world time clock.
Launching the product at London's Science Museum, Mr Sugar hit out at other suppliers for hyping new products ‘without any evidence that their equipment is actually nearing production’.
But he said the machine did not mean a return to the days of the mid-1980s when his company made huge profits from new computer equipment.
‘None of the products we are developing will be as big as the big blockbusters of the past.’
Bullets hit my car, says police woman
A POLICEWOMAN had dived for cover as a gunman suspected of killing a colleague and injuring another opened fire on her car, the Old Bailey was told yesterday.
WPC Susan Larkin, 24, said she had taken cover in the footwell of her police car as bullets hit the vehicle.
She said she and another officer had been pursuing a red Ford Sierra car on the road between the villages of Hillam and Burton, North Yorkshire, when it suddenly stopped and a gunman got out.
She told the court: ‘He lifted the gun up and pointed it towards us in our car.
I then heard gunfire, a couple of shots.
I managed to get my seat belt off and ducked down in the seat to get out of range of the gunshots.’
She added: ‘I managed to get into the footwell.
I could hear bullets hitting the front of the car.’
She said her colleague, PC Mark Whitehouse, 25, had reversed the car in an attempt to escape from the gunman, but he had crashed into a fence.
The gunman had stopped shooting and made off after a passing motorist arrived on the scene, the court heard.
WPC Larkin described the incident last June as distressing and terrifying.
Paul Magee, 42, and Michael O'Brien, 32, both deny attempting to murder WPC Larkin and PC Whitehouse.
They also plead not guilty to the murder of Special Constable Glenn Goodman and the attempted murder of PC Alexander Kelly, 33, in another shooting incident earlier that morning.
PC Whitehouse said he and WPC Larkin were shocked and upset after hearing about the shooting of the other officers over their radio.
‘We were extremely fearful for our own safety.
We were both shaking and trembling,’ he told the jury.
The officers had been warned to look out for a red Ford Sierra car following the shooting, in the early hours, of Special Constable Goodman and PC Kelly during a routine vehicle check on the A64 Leeds-York Road.
The court heard that PC Whitehouse had been questioning the driver of another red Ford car when the Sierra came speeding round the corner.
WPC Larkin said: ‘It swerved towards PC Whitehouse.
He got into the driver's seat of our car and turned the vehicle round in order to follow the Sierra.’
The police car had pursued the Sierra along the road to Burton Salmon.
Suddenly the car had stopped and the gunman had got out and started firing.
The trial continues.
Anneka Rice and husband to part
ANNEKA Rice and her husband have agreed to a trial separation after work pressure forced their marriage on to the rocks, her publicity agent said.
Alan Capper said there were no other parties involved and Anneka, who has been married to the theatre producer Nick Allott for five years, hoped the separation will not be permanent.
The couple have two children, four-year-old Thomas and Joshua, three.
Nick would be seeing the children regularly and would keep in ‘warm and close’ contact with Anneka, said Mr Capper.
‘Anneka's extremely sad, but she's something of an optimist by nature and hopes very much that there will be a reconciliation,’ said Mr Capper.
The decision to separate was ‘entirely mutual’ and was triggered by the accumulated pressure of two very successful careers which had become even more successful in the last couple of years, he added.
‘There has been a lot of pressure and the mere fact that there has been a parting does give both sides a buffer period.
That's what she hopes,’ said Mr Capper.
Anneka was today filming on location somewhere in London for her current programme, Capital Woman, ‘which has certainly required an extra effort.’
Nick moved out of their riverside home in Barnes, west London, last week and was now living in a London flat.
Mr Capper denied newspaper reports that the house was up for sale.
‘For Anneka it's got to be life as normal in difficult circumstances.
She's got to carry on with her career and she's got to carry on with being a mother, both of which she takes very seriously,’ he said.
Anneka's friendship with TV producer Tom Gutteridge, which was the subject of much press speculation, had nothing to do with the split.
‘They have a close professional relationship and that's all there is to it.
they have worked together for some time and they're likely to go on working together,’ said Mr Capper.
Mr Gutteridge, whose Mentorn Production Company produces Anneka's programmes, separated from his wife Jilly shortly after Anneka and Nick admitted in a statement issued through their lawyers that they were going through a ‘difficult time’ in October 1991.
Nick, 36, who works for theatre  impresario Cameron Mackintosh, is reported to have been seen having lunch with Mariella Frostrup, the 28-year-old presenter of ITV's video review programme The Little Picture Show.
At some stage they would discuss their future together.
Vulcan bomber to stay in Britain
A FAMILY fought off competition from Europe yesterday to keep the world's last flying Vulcan bomber in Britain.
The RAF's Vulcan XH558 bomber was handed over to the Walton family by the station commander at RAF Waddington, Lincolnshire.
The ceremony coincided with an announcement in the House of Commons that the last RAF V bomber had been sold to them.
The family runs the British Aviation Heritage Collection at Bruntingthorpe aerodrome, Lutterworth, Leicestershire.
The Waltons' winning tender for the aircraft was chosen from 11 others by the Ministry of Defence.
The last flight will be made from RAF Waddington to its new resting place at Bruntingthorpe next Tuesday, where the aircraft will be grounded but maintained in operational condition.
David Walton, 40, who received the aircraft today from Air Commodore David Hurrell, said: ‘The likelihood of the aircraft taking to the sky again is fairly remote but it will be preserved in its current condition and who knows what the long term future holds.
‘We intend to keep it in its present immaculate condition and to taxi her up to take-off speeds at regular intervals to keep the engines and flight systems in perfect working order.
Mr Walton said the cost of the aircraft to his family was ‘commercially confidential’ but he added: ‘I think it was a bargain.
‘There is a magic connected there with the aircraft.
It has served its country dutifully for over 30 years and we are delighted to be its new custodians.’
Mr Walton, a private helicopter pilot, said all his family had a long interest in aviation.
One of his two brothers and his sister were also private pilots.
Media under fire for AIDS ‘witch hunt’
NURSES' leaders yesterday accused the media of carrying out a witch hunt in exposing health workers with the AIDS virus.
The attack came from the Royal College of Nursing after a series of recent reports concerning doctors and other medical professionals with HIV.
The college says health workers have been deterred from getting help because of the tactics of some newspapers and it condemns the media ‘for failing to report the reality of risk from HIV positive health care staff.
‘Newspapers have promoted a witch hunt rather than reassure a worried public,’ it says.
— PA
Princess urges aid for young homeless
THE Princess of Wales yesterday made an impassioned plea for help in stopping the ‘terrible waste of young lives’ caused by homelessness.
She appealed for society to sit up and take notice of problems faced by young people driven from home by sexual abuse, violence or neglect.
These young people stumbled ‘from one nightmare into another’, often falling prey to drugs, prostitution, disease and despair, she told a conference in London organised by Centrepoint, a charity that runs hostels for the homeless.
The princess dismissed the idea that homeless teenagers were ‘designer beggars’ intent on fleecing the public of cash for drink and drugs.
She also rejected the suggestion that they simply needed to make a telephone call home to solve differences with their parents.
The princess said children often felt the only way out was ‘to become invisible’ and leave.
‘Whether they have left home because of sexual abuse, violence or simple neglect, leaving home is a desperate but often courageous last resort,’ she said.
‘Breaking free from their past pain, not knowing who to turn to…they run from one nightmare into another.’
She also made a plea for children in care saying that ‘a child already damaged by previous experiences’ should be cared for ‘as we would our own children’.
Royal plea: Children who leave home ‘run from one nightmare into another’
New row looms over Chunnel rail link route
A FRESH row brewed last night over the contentious Channel Tunnel rail link through the south-east of England after the Labour Party claimed it had obtained full details of the route.
The shadow transport spokesman, John Prescott, described a route through Dartford, Thurrock and Swanscombe, saying it would come within 300 yards of a Gravesend housing estate.
He warned that thousands of householders faced the prospect of years of planning blight.
The Government had been due to confirm the route on Wednesday but postponed the details until next week.
The Government was understood to have decided against making a statement at the request of Labour which wanted the opportunity to reply in full to the Budget.
Mr Prescott said Transport Secretary John MacGregor could have made a Commons statement today but claimed Mr MacGregor ‘was not prepared to cancel his engagements in Scotland’.
Mr MacGregor alleged the Kent Messenger newspaper acquired advance details in what was ‘another example of incompetence from the Government’.
‘The Government was going to make the announcement on Wednesday.
The Press was all geared to publish everything on Thursday,’ Mr Prescott said tonight.
In a statement tonight, Kent Messenger Group Newspapers said it had been working to produce a guide to the rail link.
‘The publication was compiled under embargo for release as soon as the route announcement was made by the Government.
‘The contents were known only to a small team of journalists who worked off-site on the project.
‘Information about the route has been leaked before the official announcement was made.
We are satisfied that no one connected with the Kent Messenger Group was responsible for that act.’
In the Commons tonight, Jacques Arnold, Conservative MP for Gravesham, through whose constituency the line will run, said the Government had wanted to make a statement about the route on Wednesday but decided not to after Labour threatened to withdraw all cooperation if the statement was made the day after the Budget.
Royal Mail snub stamps on literary reputation of RLS
By Gary Duncan
AS A writer, Robert Louis Stevenson may have borne the stamp of greatness but after the world-renowned Scot was sized up by the Royal Mail it seems Britain's letters may never bear a stamp of RLS.
The decision by the Post Office's powers-that-be to deny the author of Treasure Island and Kidnapped, a place on a planned series of commemorative postage stamps in 1994 — the centenary of his death — has angered a group of members of the Robert Louis Stevenson Society.
Yesterday they vented their wrath in a letter to the Times.
The letter, signed among others by the writer and broadcaster, Magnus Magnusson, Sir David Steel, MP, the biographer, Lady Longford, and Prof David Daiches, accuses the Royal Mail of committing a serious error of judgement in overlooking RLS.
Many events have already been planned to mark his centenary, it points out.
‘We believe,’ the letter reads, ‘that as in the case of Walter Scott, Thomas Hardy, George Eliot and other writers of genius among whom Stevenson rightfully takes his place, a commemorative postage stamp should be issued and his name likewise be honoured.’
It goes on: ‘Stevenson's standing and popularity as a novelist are still worldwide.
Yet the Post Office failed to select him, albeit from over 300 candidates, as one of those for the nine sets of special stamps it plans to issue for 1994.’
Concluding, the letter urges the Royal Mail to reconsider.
‘There must surely be time for second thoughts,’ it says.
‘May we urge that, as is his due, Stevenson be given this richly deserved accolade.’
Yesterday the Royal Mail was keeping its own counsel about this hot literary topic.
No-one was available for comment.
Stevenson might have felt one of his own remarks appropriate: ‘The cruellest lies are often told in silence.’
Fish war fears after import ban rejected
By Frank Urquhart
FEARS of an all-out fish war rose last night after European fisheries ministers refused to bow to catchers' demands for a ban on imports.
Sporadic outbreaks of lawlessness at British ports — which have already included an attack on a Russian trawler at Peterhead — are likely to intensify as fishermen step up their protests against the imports they blame for prices plummeting at the quayside.
The fisheries council meeting in Brussels decided to take no immediate steps to curb imports and rejected a French demand for a 30 per cent increase on minimum import charges.
The decision was a major boost for Scotland's fish processors who need foreign imports to remain viable, but came as a bitter blow to British fishermen hit by the turmoil at the quayside auctions.
A leading industry figure said: ‘We could have real problems keeping a lid on this situation.’
English fishermen's leaders gave warning that militant action could result from the failure of the council to aid the catchers.
Scottish fishermen's leaders sought to distance themselves from the threat of direct action.
They may have problems, however, keeping skippers and crews in check.
Yesterday's crucial talks were guarded by riot police with armoured trucks and water cannon, following fears of a major demonstration by French fishermen who are also seething over the level of imports flooding the EC.
But their protest passed peacefully.
Sir Hector Monro, Scotland's fisheries minister, said after the meeting that the council had secured the best deal available.
He said: ‘I think the processors will be given some confidence as a result of the meeting but I think the fishermen will wish we had been able to do something dramatic.
It is, however, a complex situation with no easy answer.
It does take a little time to right a market that has got so badly out of step.’
Sir Hector explained that the French representatives had found themselves out on a limb when they called for an increase in import charges.
‘We don't want to stop imports because our processors need so much of the fish that comes in,’ he said.
The ministers agreed that regulations governing import prices should be strictly enforced by all member states and that top level talks be held with Russia, Norway and Iceland in the hope of securing an agreement to stabilise the market.
Such negotiations would have to be handled delicately to avoid jeopardising the sale of mackerel and herring to Russia on which the Scottish pelagic fleet is dependent.
Sir Hector said: ‘There was a general acceptance that we have to get things moving in the right direction but it is not easy to find a quick solution.’
Bob Allan, chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, said he was bitterly disappointed at the outcome of the talks, which had failed to tackle the heart of the crisis facing the industry.
He said: ‘We have been offered nothing tangible.
The council has lost the opportunity to demonstrate that the Community can respond to a crisis and give its policies on fisheries some credibility.
‘Fishermen from all over the Community have been arguing the same case — that the commission has to look after its own — and the council of ministers has singularly failed to do so.’
Mr Allan declined to speculate on the reaction of the fleet to the council decision.
The SFF would take time to reflect responsibly on the outcome of the council.
Robert Milne, chief executive of the Scottish Fish Merchants Federation, said: ‘We are delighted that sanity has prevailed.
Our ministers have done an extremely good job in maintaining the  status quo .’
He added that imports had to continue at competitive levels to safeguard jobs in the processing industry.
Policeman jailed for slapping prisoner
A POLICEMAN who slapped a prisoner twice during a struggle at Fort William police station was jailed for 30 days at Fort William Sheriff Court yesterday.
Former Constable Murdo O'Connor, 31, was immediately released pending an appeal against sentence.
O'Connor had admitted slapping a forestry worker Christopher MacPherson, 21, in Fort William police station last May.
MacPherson had been arrested after being found lying drunk outside a disco.
O'Connor had had sentence deferred for psychiatric and social background reports last month.
The court was told O'Connor had resigned from the force in December on medical grounds.
Mr Gowans explained O'Connor should never have been on the beat.
He suffered from post-traumatic stress because of a lone confrontation with eight youths two years earlier.
A police surgeon had advised him to find a desk job within the force, but none had been available.
The Northern Constabulary deputy chief constable, Finlay Maclennan, said: ‘The matter was fully investigated by a senior officer from the Northern Constabulary and reported to the fiscal in Fort William.
It is not our policy to comment on sentencing relating to individual cases, which is, of course, a matter for the courts.’
Top jockeys came within 10 feet of death in air near-miss
LESTER PIGGOTT and three other top jockeys came within 10 feet of death when an RAF Tornado roared past their light aircraft, an official report disclosed yesterday.
Piggott and the other passengers were hurled out of their seats by the turbulence and the Piper PA34 pilot thought the plane had been hit.
Piggott, Michael Hills, Philip Robinson and George Duffield, all jockeys, were flying from Newmarket to York on 19 August, 1992, when the near catastrophe took place, said the Joint Airmiss Working Group (JAWG).
The Tornado, from RAF Coningsby, Lincolnshire, was one of four on a routine exercise and was racing upwards from below the Piper, said the group's report which strongly criticised air traffic controllers.
The fighter pilot appeared to see the Piper ‘a split second before’ the potential collision and rolled the jet over so its belly skimmed past the Piper.
JAWG, which put the incident over Lincolnshire into the rare A Category of airmisses — in which there was a real risk of collision — said the Tornado would have hit the Piper if the pilot had not rolled left.
‘The Piper pilot was convinced his aircraft had been hit.
The turbulence was such that his head hit the ceiling and his headset came off and fell to the floor.
His passengers were all shaken and some were thrown from their seats and on to each other.’
After the incident, Piggott said: ‘It nearly blew us away and we all finished up in the roof.
When the jet came up from nowhere it left a space devoid of air and we just dropped into it.’
Duffield said: ‘I was asleep.
I woke and found Lester's head in my lap.’
The Piper pilot suspected structural problems and requested, and made, a landing at Waddington.
No damage was discovered and the flight went on to York.
The report criticised air traffic controllers for their poor judgment in allowing the Tornado ‘to climb into confliction’ with the PA34.
It said the Tornado pilot was not provided with enough information and controllers should have shown more awareness.
The Piper pilot was not informed that four Tornados were in the area.
The report added that the Waddington screen controllers involved were ‘not to undertake screening duties until their competence to do so had been subject to a further check’.
TV plea in hunt for Paul's killers
By Graeme Wilson
HOPES of a breakthrough in the Paul Sheldon murder case were raised last night after detectives released identikit photographs of the two men they are hunting.
The computer-enhanced images were put together by police artists with help from Peter Sheldon, 18, who was with his brother when he was stabbed to death.
The photographs were shown on BBC's Crimewatch UK and more than 40 police officers manned telephones in Edinburgh throughout the evening in anticipation of a flood of calls.
Paul, 20, a student from Balerno, died last month after he, his brother, Peter, and a friend Tom Cole were attacked on Whitehouse Loan near Bruntsfield Links.
He was stabbed through the heart.
His mother, Glennis, said she hoped the photographs would lead to the vital piece of information needed to solve the case.
‘Peter wanted to do anything he could to help catch Paul's killers but it was not easy for him to help with the pictures.’
‘It wasn't difficult to remember what the men looked like but it was painful for him to see the faces of the people who killed his brother.’
‘Anybody with any information, no matter how silly they think it is, has to come forward as we must get these people or else they will do it again.
It could be anybody's child next time.’
Detectives searching for Paul's killers are sifting through more than 2,000 different leads they have received.
Det Chief Inspector George Brown, the officer leading the investigation, is still confident the killers will be caught.
He said: ‘I feel myself that there are people out there who have information but are waiting for somebody else to come forward.
I would say to them that now is the time to contact the police.
‘All calls will be treated confidentially and there should be no fear at all of their identity being disclosed.’
The identikit photographs of the two men being sought
Joiner gets £43,000 asbestos damages
A JOINER who claimed he contracted the lung disease asbestosis while making doors for the Clyde-built liner QE II has been awarded £43,000 by a judge.
Robert McKenzie, 52, of Eastburn Road, in Glasgow, had raised an action against Cape Building Products for damages at the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
He had been employed in the 1960s by the firm, which was known at the time as Maranite Ltd, when asbestos fibre was used to make boards for doors for the shipbuilding industry.
Lord Penrose said in a written judgment that he accepted medical evidence that Mr McKenzie was suffering from early asbestosis.
There was a risk that he could develop mesothelioma or lung cancer.
At an earlier hearing, Mr McKenzie had told the judge that he had been employed in making doors for the transatlantic liner.
Sacks of asbestos fibre had been opened in the factory, releasing dust into the atmosphere.
An extractor system and masks had not been effective.
Mr McKenzie said he eventually had to stop work because of pain and shortness of breath.
Cape Building Products accepted that any asbestos related conditions Mr McKenzie was shown to suffer were attributable to its fault.
Videophone sex shows warning issued
LIVE sex shows — broadcast via the latest hi-tech videophones — are being planned for British subscribers, it was claimed yesterday.
A National Communications Union official, Rachel Ashworth, told the Women's TUC annual conference in Blackpool that British Telecom had set up a Freephone number to deal with inquiries from potential operators.
‘These lines provide no service for the public and encourage perverts,’ she said.
Delegates backed her call for a ban on all phone sex lines which are advertised in newspapers and magazines.
The video sex services were being planned by operators who run the so-called 0898 sex lines.
Later BT pledged to stop 0898 phone operators using its videophones for sex shows.
Reacting to Ms Ashworth's claim, BT said it would be appalled if those machines were used for that purpose.
‘It is a matter for ICSTIS (the premium rate regulator) and Oftel to regulate and we would respond immediately to any complaint about the misuse of videophones by cutting off the line,’ a BT spokesman said.
Reports over the past year have claimed porn businesses are rushing to buy the phones.
But those keen to dial a sex show face problems — the screen is a mere three inches high and gives a poor image.
— PA
Plea for higher nursing levels
BETTER nursing levels should be provided at the showpiece St John's Hospital at Livingston, it was said yesterday at the end of a fatal accident inquiry.
The depute fiscal, Elaine Warden, asked the sheriff to demand more staff for patients whose agitated conditions made them liable to fall out of bed.
She was speaking at the end of the inquiry into the death of Jean Cook, of Bridgecastle Road, Armadale, who fell out of bed in hospital twice within seven hours in March last year.
Mrs Cook was taken to Edinburgh's Western General Hospital for emergency brain surgery after the second fall, but died five days' later.
The inquiry at Linlithgow Sheriff Court heard that the pensioner was supposed to have been under supervision when the second fall happened.
But she was alone when she climbed over the raised cot sides of her bed and crashed to the floor, injuring her head.
Mrs Cook, a heart patient, was suffering from a condition which made her agitated and likely to fall out of bed.
Mrs Warden said that there were other patients with similar complaints to Mrs Cook who were also at risk.
Sheriff Hector MacLean will give his judgment at a later date.
SNP treasurer pleads for end to internal bickering
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
AN APPEAL for unity in the Scottish National Party was made last night by its national treasurer, Tom Chalmers, who had voted against the party's MPs at last week's stormy executive meeting.
That had followed the MPs' decision to strike a deal with the Conservatives in exchange for votes on the Maastricht bill.
Mr Chalmers, the SNP's prospective candidate for Glasgow in the European elections, expressed the growing desire within party ranks for an end to the public attacks on the leadership.
At a meeting in Glasgow city halls, he said: ‘The party cannot afford to indulge in internal bickering and name-calling.
There are too many important issues at stake.’
In another development, six of the 11 executive members who voted against the motion expressing confidence in the MPs' decision, stressed their opposition to the argument being continued in public.
Their statement was interpreted as an attempt to distance themselves from the so-called ‘Central Belt activists’ who withdrew their strongly worded motion at the executive and voted with the six on the statement drawn up by Councillor Rob Gibson which regretted the MPs' actions.
In a letter to The Scotsman, Mr Gibson, Mr Chalmers, Roseanna Cunningham, Fiona Hyslop, Anne McNair and Nicola Sturgeon underlined their acceptance of the outcome of the executive meeting.
The letter states: ‘We accepted the democratic decision of the NEC [national executive committee]and also believe that such debates should take place in the legitimate bodies of the party.
‘We do not support the pursuit of this issue in public argument and we will be committing our efforts to campaign for the recall of the Scottish parliament, to stop water privatisation and to achieve independence in Europe.’
The determination to move the party's and public's attention from internal splits on to the current political agenda was demonstrated in speeches last night by Mr Chalmers and a former SNP leader, Gordon Wilson, targeting the constitutional question.
Mr Wilson, in Dundee, attacked the Government's ‘taking stock’ package as a ‘minimalist fraud’and the Labour Party for refusing to honour its pledge to recall the Scottish parliament.
He said: ‘Labour's devolution scheme would create a puppet parliament still under the thumb of the UK Treasury, with the power to legislate but not the money to implement.
This is why we need an independent Scottish parliament.’
Mr Chalmers said in Glasgow: ‘The only political parties who are not prepared to sit down and talk about the recall of a Scottish parliament are the Tory party and the Labour Party.
It is significant that it is the two major unionist parties who are not prepared to even talk seriously about real constitutional change.’
£900m tax write-off angers Kirkwood
By William Chisholm
ARCHY KIRKWOOD, the Liberal Democrat MP, is pressing for a National Audit Office inquiry after discovering that the Inland Revenue wrote off almost £900 million in unpaid taxes in a single year.
Mr Kirkwood (Roxburgh & Berwickshire) has accused the Government of pouring money down the drain after receiving figures from the Treasury on lost revenue.
A written answer disclosed the amount of tax written off in each of the last five years for which statistics are available: 1987, £333 million; 1988, £629 million; 1989, £530 million; 1990, £568 million; and 1991, £883 million.
Mr Kirkwood said: ‘I am deeply concerned at the extent to which these huge sums of public money are simply being written off.
‘These figures do not include uncollected VAT, nor do they show the unrecovered sums due to non-payment of poll tax.’
The latest figures amounted to a damning indictment of the efficiency of central Government, Mr Kirkwood said.
The totals had been disclosed at a time when local authorities and others were being subjected to curbs for alleged lack of efficiency.
‘I am referring the matter to the National Audit Office as a matter of urgency,’ he said.
‘Morale in the Inland Revenue is at an all-time low as a result of market testing and centralisation.
‘It is time ministers took steps to stop this public money going down the drain.’
Major refuses to publish paper
A TORY'S demand to publish a government assessment of manufacturing industry was refused by the Prime Minister in the Commons yesterday.
The Department of Trade and Industry paper was reported by the Sunday Times to claim that Britain's manufacturing base was weak and deteriorating.
John Major insisted at question time: ‘The paper was private advice to ministers and will not be published.’
He was pressed on the issue on Tuesday by the Labour leader, John Smith.
Ann Winterton (C, Congleton) urged him to ‘acknowledge the growing concern felt by many MPs on the erosion of our manufacturing base’.
Mrs Winterton had welcomed £1.3 billion extra export credit in the Budget.
She asked: ‘Will you seek to have published the report on these matters prepared by the DTI which has recently been the subject of much press speculation.’
Mr Major said that not only had the Budget extended the export credit guarantee scheme but: ‘Mr Lamont has also cut premiums over the last few months by as much as 27 per cent to help exporters.’
‘We have announced over recent weeks a range of policies that are specifically geared to improve the prospects for manufacturing, both the efficiency of existing manufacturing and widening the manufacturing base.’
Mr Major was also pressed to condemn management pay increases at Rolls-Royce, which is planning redundancies.
Gordon Prentice (Lab, Pendle) urged: ‘Will you join me in condemning the 24 per cent pay increase and the 35 per cent pay increase of the chief executive and chairman of Rolls-Royce at a time when they are sacking 5,000 skilled workers, including 170 in my constituency?’
Mr Major told him: ‘If you were here more often, you would know how often I have set out my views on that subject.’
He has said in the past that industry chiefs should restrain pay increases.
— PA
McLeish decries Budget ‘crumbs’ for jobless
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
THE BUDGET provided few crumbs of comfort for Scotland's unemployed, with only one in 26 people out of work north of the Border benefiting from the measures, according to an analysis by Henry McLeish, Labour's Scottish affairs spokesman.
Mr McLeish said yesterday that only one in nine of Scotland's long-term unemployed (85,000) would benefit and that net new money for Scotland amounted to less than £1 a week for each unemployed person.
He said that government measures on a pro rata basis might affect only 140 unemployed people in each of Scotland's parliamentary constituencies, even though they have, on average, more than 4,000 out of work.
He added that there was no help for 8,600 young people who have failed to obtain guaranteed youth training places.
‘At a time when Scotland needs a Budget for jobs, skills and recovery, the Tories have produced an unconvincing, grudging and minimalist package of tired, well worn measures,’ he said.
The shadow employment secretary, Frank Dobson, also attacked the jobs package in the Budget, in the resumed Commons debate on the measures, as merely a propaganda exercise to help a Chancellor in trouble.
Mr Dobson said that the new learning-for-work programme to encourage long-term unemployed people to take full-time vocational courses in education would benefit only 30,000 of the one million long-term jobless.
He said that even if the Budget measures did help 100,000 unemployed people, as the Chancellor forecast, it meant that ‘out of every 30 people out of work, 29 will get not a shred of help at all from the Budget’.
Attacking what he said was the limited usefulness of the measures, he said: ‘The situation is so desperate that anything seems better than nothing, even when what the Government is proposing is next to nothing.’
Gillian Shephard, the Employment Secretary, told the House: ‘This has been a good week for Britain.
On Tuesday we had a first-class Budget, a Budget for recovery.
On Wednesday we had improved retail sales figures.
‘And only this morning I was able to announce that seasonally adjusted unemployment has fallen.’
She said it was a Budget for jobs, providing 100,000 additional training and employment opportunities at a cost of £230 million.
KEVIN COOMBS Norman Lamont arrives yesterday for the first meeting of the Cabinet since the Budget
Crunch day ahead for constitution partners
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
THE cross-party Scottish Constitutional Convention today faces a crunch decision: whether to fold or find a new role.
The Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, Jim Wallace, bluntly stated yesterday it should ‘go into cold storage’.
The Labour Party will go into today's meeting of the convention executive prepared to argue that it should become the base for new home rule campaigning, including that for a multi-option referendum.
Although Mr Wallace agreed that a referendum call was potentially unifying, he said of the convention: ‘I can't see it having any active role at the present time.’
The convention's executive committee will discuss a paper from its chairman, Kenyon Wright, highlighting the choice between hibernation or renewal.
Although the convention members include the Scottish Trades Union Congress, local authorities and church representatives, Canon Wright's paper notes that the support of both political parties is vital.
He argues that the convention partners should affirm the broad principles of the scheme for a devolved Scottish parliament in the UK agreed before the last election and move on to adopt an educational role.
That is, he contends, ‘to get across clearly, at all levels of Scottish society, the detailed ways in which our scheme would provide better government than the new (stock-taking) proposals from Westminster, and would tackle more effectively the major ‘bread and butter’ issues which trouble our people’.
Labour's Scottish constitutional affairs spokesman, Henry McLeish, said that the breakdown of cross-party talks in the row over the Scottish National Party's vote with the Government last week gave a new responsibility and opportunity to the convention.
He said: ‘Since the SNP's meltdown, we have had no direct dialogue with the Liberal Democrats.
We can start again within the convention which should, we are putting forward, be more radical, based on campaigning, and taking account of the new realities in Scottish politics.’
Labour wants to consider changing the convention membership so it can include voluntary organisations such as those who formed the Coalition for Scottish Democracy last weekend and build a link with European regional politics.
But Mr Wallace said he had put forward such ideas last year and nothing had happened: ‘I think everyone is asleep in it.’
Canon Wright said: ‘I believe that to go back on the progress that was made in the convention would be a retrograde step, for what is going to replace it?’
Mr Wallace acknowledged that his own ideas for a Scottish parliamentary council were unlikely to proceed, but a campaign for a multi-option referendum was ‘the only thing we can all unite on as it encompasses all our differences’.
He has set up a working group to be chaired by the Argyll and Bute MP, Ray Michie, to look at constitutional campaign strategies, including the mechanics of a home rule referendum.
Its initial opinions will be debated at the Scottish Liberal Democrat conference in Dunoon next weekend along with motions calling for the party to seek cross-party unity and anti-Tory election pacts.
Galloway Liberal Democrats also want party MPs to consider withdrawing from Westminster as part of the campaign for a referendum to which the Scottish MPs are opposed.
The conference will also discuss the legalisation of the use and sale of cannabis and whether denominational schooling should be ended.
Drugs haul Scots jailed From Tim Brown, Madrid
THREE Glasgow men who brought hashish worth £264,000 at street prices into Spain from Morocco were yesterday each jailed in Madrid for four years.
James Jeffrey, 50, Charles Smith, also 50, and Kevin Thorn, 33, were arrested in November, 1990, after anti-drug squad officers had kept them under surveillance in the Spanish capital and on the Costa del Sol for several months.
The police moved in as the three loaded part of a haul of 200 kilos of hashish into a warehouse near Madrid.
Council helps to fund study into colliery's viability
By Marcello Mega
WORKERS at Monktonhall Colliery, who have not been paid for seven weeks, are to receive financial assistance from Lothian Regional Council to fund an independent study into the pit's viability.
The council's economic development committee agreed yesterday to make a maximum contribution of £25,000 to help fund the survey which is to be carried out by Quayle Munro, an Edinburgh-based investment and venture capital organisation.
The colliery reopened last year when 160 miners invested £10,000 each to form a consortium but it has been beset by production and financial difficulties.
It is hoped that a positive report will emerge which will help to restore the standing of the mineworkers with the business community.
Monktonhall Mineworkers Ltd is more than £1.7 million in debt and has fallen behind with major orders it has secured.
Further investment is needed to allow the consortium to open another coalface to speed up production.
But its financial difficulties have deterred potential investors.
One source told The Scotsman yesterday that if the situation deteriorated further, the pit might have to be closed temporarily and kept on a care and maintenance basis only.
He added: ‘Many of the miners used their homes to secure loans.
They have now gone weeks without pay, but it would be disastrous if the pit was allowed to close.’
The consortium's desperate financial position prompted the opening of an appeal yesterday aimed at raising £500,000 to secure the pit's future.
A board of trustees will control the appeal's accounts.
The chairman of the council's economic development committee, Donald Anderson, said the amount of goodwill enjoyed by the mineworkers was outstanding.
‘They have had people walking in offering them their savings.
Everyone wants them to succeed.’
Earlier, at the committee meeting, he said: ‘There is no point in pretending that this is not an emergency.
Individuals are going without pay.
We need an assessment of the colliery's business plan to see what the options are to secure the pit, the jobs and investments of the miners there.’
He hinted that if the Quayle Munro report proved favourable, the council would be prepared to consider further financial assistance to help the colliery back on to its feet, but he qualified that by saying the sums involved would ‘not be massive’.
Councillor David Costello, the council's planning chairman, said the need for a speedy report from Quayle Munro had to be impressed upon the company.
He added: ‘We must also urge institutions which have supported the mineworkers and are owed money not to take precipitate action before this report is published.’
The consortium is engaged in talks with a number of potential partners.
Caledonian Mining, a Nottinghamshire-based but Scottish-registered company, pulled out of negotiations earlier this week but it is known that the firm retains an interest in Monktonhall.
Officers say private jails may lead to violence
By Tom Morton
PRIVATISING prisons is morally wrong and could result in violence and bloodshed, the Scottish Prison Officers' Association annual conference at Inverness heard yesterday.
Bill Stephens, the SPOA chairman, warned that industrial action by Scottish prison officers against privatisation was inevitable within 12 months.
David Evans, general secretary of the Prison Officers' Association in England and Wales, mounted a fierce attack on ‘the threat of contracting-out or privatisation.’
Government plans to ‘market test’ establishments, investigating which services might be put out to tender, represented ‘the cutting edge of Government policy to destroy public service and weaken public sector trade unions,’he said.
Mr Evans added: ‘Private prisons have no place in a civilised society.
We contend that in a democracy predicated upon the rule of law and public accountability, the enforcement of penal legislation should be the undiluted responsibility of the state.’
Mr Stephens said he was uncertain if he was being told the truth by the Government over any hidden agenda on privatisation.
While the market testing process is already under way and Scottish prisons assume decentralised ‘agency status’ on 1 April, there has been repeated Scottish Office denial of any intention to institute a private prison.
Bill Blythe, governor of Porterfield Prison at Inverness, gave a cautious welcome to market testing.
‘Given a level playing field, I do not feel we have much to fear,’ he said.
Eddie  Frizzell , chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, said yesterday he wished once again to make it clear that no discussions had taken place between himself and senior colleagues, or any private sector contractor, on the possibility of managing and funding a private prison in Scotland.
A Scottish Office spokesman dismissed recent reports that private organisations were preparing plans for private prisons as pure speculation.
He added that the prison officers were wrong to think that the possible contracting out of some services within prisons could lead to privatisation of entire jails.
Girl aged 8 tells trial how male relatives abused her
A GIRL yesterday told a jury of a horrifying sex ordeal at the hands of her father, grandfather and her uncle.
The eight-year-old, who gave evidence by closed-circuit television, said she had been tied to a bed by the men, who wore masks and ‘did bad things’ to her after putting Sellotape over her mouth.
The girl also claimed she and her two sisters, now aged six and four, had been photographed naked by her uncle while her father and grandfather were in the bedroom.
The girl was giving evidence at the High Court in Glasgow at the trial of her 38-year-old father, her grandfather, 64, and her uncle, 23, who cannot be named for legal reasons.
They deny that on various occasions unknown between May 1989 and October 1991 they committed indecent offences and raped the sisters in houses in Glasgow.
The men deny taking nude pictures of the girls while they themselves were naked and showing them to the children's mother.
The judge, Lord Morison, and both Crown and defence counsel took off their wigs and gowns before the girl appeared on screen from another room in the building.
Questioned by Paul Cullen, prosecuting, the girl said the offences had taken place at a house where she had stayed with her parents and at her grandmother's house.
When they were at the grandmother's house, they slept in a spare room and sometimes their father, grandfather and uncle had come in.
‘I was tied to the bed with rope and had Sellotape over my mouth,’ she said.
The girl described how the men would wear Freddy Kruger masks when they touched her.
‘It was horrible.
It scared me,’ she said.
Mr Cullen asked if she could not have run away at the time.
The girl said: ‘No, because I was tied up and two aunties were holding my leg.’
She added that she did not see the men doing these things to her sisters because: ‘I was in the dark cupboard then.’
Charles Boag-Thomson, QC, for the father, said to the girl: ‘Daddy tells me he is very upset because he did not do these things.’
The girl replied: ‘I can't remember if it was daddy because I was only three.’
Asked by Ruth Anderson, for the uncle, if she was absolutely sure he had done bad things to her twice, the girl replied: ‘I can't remember because I was only little.’
Miss Anderson: ‘Could it be that your uncle never did bad things to you?’, she replied: ‘I don't know.
I think he did.’
The trial continues.
Scot given five years for rape
A ROYAL Navy technician who was extradited to New Zealand from Britain was jailed for five and a half years in Christchurch yesterday for snatching a woman off a beach and raping her.
Darren Moffat, 25, an electronics technician from Roxburgh, was extradited in September.
He had been in New Zealand in January last year for a holiday with relatives in Christchurch when the crime took place.
Moffat attacked the woman on 11 January, 1992, as she was walking her dog on Waimairi Beach, near Christchurch.
He tied her up then forced her into a clearing in the dunes and raped her twice, the court heard.
She helped to produce a sketch of her assailant and as a result of its publication, another woman told police that he was the same man who had attacked her the day before.
The judge said the further attack added to the premeditated nature of the rape, although no charge resulted.
Moffat's lawyer said that family trouble and a broken relationship had caused him to lose control.
Kirk told cuts may threaten its parish structure
By Gary Duncan
A WARNING that the Church of Scotland's parish structure could collapse in the face of threatened cuts in funding has been made in a report to go to the General Assembly in May.
Radical measures, including the limited introduction of part-time and job-sharing ministers and the sale of unnecessary church buildings, are recommended in the report to stem a tide of mergers between congregations and to allow smaller parishes to continue to exist.
The report, prepared by the Kirk's parish reappraisal committee, also sees a danger that some of the smallest congregations, particularly in rural areas, may argue they can continue to operate when that is no longer the case.
‘This should not be encouraged,’ it says.
Publication of the report comes as the Church of Scotland prepares to confront a difficult financial position at the General Assembly.
With most of its boards now running annual deficits, it is thought tough cost-cutting steps may be taken.
It is in the light of that situation that the committee has issued its warning that there is little scope for cuts in the parish ministry — the main point of contact between the church and its members.
Its report states: ‘There is a growing awareness of the limited financial resources likely in the future to be available to fund the parish ministry and the mission of the Church of Scotland.
‘The committee has to go on record and declare that a drastic reduction in these resources will place the parish structure of the Kirk in jeopardy and seriously damage its mission to the people of Scotland.’
Yesterday, the Rev John Russell, the committee's chairman, said that with a slump in the number of parish ministers from 2,750 in 1929 to 1,259 in 1991, there was no slack left for a further reduction in parish work.
‘If you are going to make cutbacks then you may as well stop talking about a parish ministry.
This really will almost have destroyed the parish ministry in Scotland.’
The report urges the General Assembly to back a survey of the finances of all presbyteries.
It says there has been difficulty in convincing both presbyteries and congregations of the need for financial planning for the future.
It also recommends that the General Assembly approve the introduction of part-time ministers — but only where that is necessary for a territorial purpose such as in a remote area or where parish work could be combined with another church role.
Job-sharing, splitting ministries between two individuals, is also supported.
The report emphasises that the parish ministry should be at the heart of the Church of Scotland in remote rural areas as elsewhere but it also expresses concern that this is dependent on adequate financial resources.
Actor lined up for part of Maxwell
THE search for an actor to play Robert Maxwell in a television drama about his life and death is nearly over.
Sir Anthony Hopkins and Robbie Coltrane were among those linked to the part but both have previous commitments.
Scottish Television will announce its choice within the next two weeks.
‘People have been approached and we are just waiting to hear now when the contracts are signed and sealed,’ said a spokesman.
The two-hour film is due to be screened on November 5, the second anniversary of the publisher's mysterious death.
He disappeared from his yacht off the Canary Islands and his body was sighted in the water the next day.
ITV is involved in a race with the BBC to bring out the first film drama of his life.
Albert Finney is now reported to be high on the BBC's list for the part.
The Scottish Television script has been written by a former Daily Mirror editor, Mike Molloy, and a former People managing editor, Revel Barker.
It will be made a London-based company, Blue Heaven Productions, for the ITV network.
Stirling tops the league of increased grants
SCOTTISH universities and higher education institutions discovered yesterday how much they will receive in grants next year from Scotland's new funding body.
Edinburgh, Stirling and Paisley universities were among the institutions which fared well in the exercise, but there was some disappointment at Glasgow and Aberdeen universities.
The Scottish Higher Education Funding Council takes up its role from 1 April and has about £343 million to distribute.
Until now, grants to the eight older universities have come from the University Funding Council in Bristol, while the Scottish Office funded the 17 central institutions, including four new universities, technical institutes and specialist centres.
The grants announced yesterday cover about half of the funding for the higher education sector.
The remainder comes from Government-paid student fees as well as research council and private sector contracts and grants.
Stirling won a 14 per cent increase in funding, the biggest gain, while Edinburgh was boosted by its strong showing in both teaching and research.
The news was also sweet for Paisley, which was rewarded for its success in attracting students, while Heriot-Watt and Strathclyde scored well on their research.
But there were sourer feelings at Glasgow, which came out as Scotland's second research institution, lagging significantly behind its main rival in the capital, and Aberdeen had to receive support from the funding ‘safety net,’ designed to avoid a reduction in this year's budget.
There was disappointment, too, for some of the 17 central institutions which suffered from their poorer research position.
SHEFC's grants are divided into two main areas, teaching and research, with a small amount being allocated to the ‘safety net’.
Funding for teaching is largely based on an institution's record in attracting students in the past.
Research grants were worked out using the national research ratings published by the University Funding Council last year.
As a result Edinburgh's 5-star rating in medicine earned it £3.6 million, with Glasgow's 3-star rating netting £1.8 million.
Professor Jack Shaw, the SHEFC's chairman, said the system for allocating funds was meant to be predictable and would allow clear budgeting and stability at a time when student numbers have been growing rapidly, some fee levels have been cut sharply, and large efficiency gains expected.
There are to be 5,000 more student places next year, biased to science and engineering, and then a freeze on recruitment for two years.
Napier's principal, Professor William Turmeau, said the budget may lead to the most difficult financial year it has ever experienced.
Though Glasgow Polytechnic required the support of the safety net, its vice-principal, John Phillips, argued that it had competed well when with its Queen's College partner and emerged as one of Scotland's leading three or four universities.
Sir David Smith, Edinburgh's principal, said the results were very encouraging and clearly acknowledged staff quality and commitment.
DUNDEE Two hurt in shooting
ARMED police yesterday searched a number of houses in Dundee after a shooting in which two men were slightly injured.
The incident happened outside a tenement in Fairbairn Street at 11pm on Wednesday.
A shotgun was fired through a close into a door and two men were injured.
They were taken to Dundee Royal Infirmary but released after treatment.
Police have appealed for witnesses who may have been in the area to come forward.
DUMFRIES Specialist speech aids stolen
SPECIALIST equipment used to treat people with speech impediments has been stolen in a break-in at a Dumfries hospital.
It includes a lightwriter identical to one featured in Wednesday night's QED television  programme Misha, about a 15-year-old girl's fight back after being horribly injured in a hit-and-run accident.
The break-in took place at the speech therapy department at Nithbank Hospital between 7pm on Monday and 6:30am yesterday.
Police have appealed for information.
AYR Sheriff may visit golf club quarry
A SHERIFF said yesterday that he might visit the quarry at St Nicholas Golf Club, Prestwick, where the schoolboys Allan McKay, 13, and Iain Allan, 12, died last September.
Sheriff Robin McEwan, QC, was speaking in the closing stages of a three-day fatal accident inquiry at Ayr Sheriff Court.
He hoped to give his written determination on the evidence some time next month.
CRIEFF Brothers die in car crash
TWO brothers were killed when their car crashed off a Perthshire road yesterday.
Douglas, 20, and Scott Wood, 19, were found dead in the wrecked Metro on a twisting side road between Crieff and Comrie, less than a mile from their flat at Strowan Stables, near Crieff.
Douglas worked as a butcher in Crieff.
Scott was a plasterer.
FASLANE 13 nuclear convoy protesters arrested
A TOTAL of 13 demonstrators were arrested yesterday after three incidents involving a convoy of vehicles which carry nuclear weapons to the Royal Navy base at Faslane.
The convoy was halted for a time by protesters at Dalreoch, on the Dumbarton-Helensburgh road, again at Helensburgh and on the third occasion at the protest camp at the gates to the base.
The convoy had travelled from the south via Edinburgh and through Glasgow city centre on the M8 motorway.
Search for fake bomb culprit steps up
THE HUNT for a hoaxer who brought chaos to Aberdeen by planting four fake bombs near oil company offices in the city was stepped up yesterday, writes Frank Urquhart.
Two elaborate dummy bombs were discovered on Wednesday morning after a telephone call to police.
Two more devices were found in the evening after a second call.
One of devices recovered after the second tip-off had been hidden only a short distance from Shell offices at Hill of Rubislaw, sealed off after the morning bomb scare.
Grampian Police say they are satisfied there is a link among all four incidents and that they were designed to cause maximum disruption.
House-to-house inquiries have begun near where the fake bombs were found and the devices are being examined for clues.
Detectives are also viewing hours of video tape from cameras covering the grounds of the four offices involved.
Det Supt Ron Coutts, heading the investigation, said the devices found in the evening had been hidden outwith the areas searched in the morning.
Employees of oil companies in the city have been warned to be on the alert for anyone acting suspiciously near their offices.
Funding cuts will lead to job losses, says Strathclyde
By Alan Forbes
STRATHCLYDE is claiming that thousands of jobs in construction and other industries will soon be lost because the Government has slashed funding for road projects.
The regional council says the Scottish Office is cutting £17 million from its £88 million capital allowance for each of the next two financial years under the mistaken belief that the money will be made up by European funding.
Today Strathclyde's chairman of roads and transport, Malcolm Waugh, will tell the Transport Secretary, John MacGregor, in Glasgow that the Government should not use EC aid as a substitute for its own cash to councils.
Mr MacGregor will also be told that Strathclyde will have to delay road construction contracts unless the Scottish Office cancels its funding reductions.
Projects facing indefinite delay include:
Work on a section of the A77 Ayr Road Route.
Construction of the £2.3 million Stonehouse bypass in Lanarkshire, which was due to start next month.
A major overhaul of the M8 motorway's CITRAC traffic control system.
Bridge strengthening to meet European requirements.
This is the second time in two years that Strathclyde has threatened to halt work on the Ayr Road Route.
In 1991 Mr Waugh succeeded in persuading the Scottish Office to relax funding controls so that the project could be speeded up.
Mr Waugh acknowledged that he was once again freezing the Ayr Road project even although money had been allocated to it in 1991.
He added: ‘As Government ministers reminded us this week, circumstances change.
The Government previously assured both Brussels and local authorities that it used EC grant to provide additional resources for qualifying programmes.
But here we see the Scottish Office actually cutting programmes in anticipation of grants which cannot be guaranteed.’
Strathclyde roads department says the most it expects to receive from the European Regional Development Fund in the coming financial year is £7.5 million.
However the Scottish Office last night challenged that figure.
A spokesman said: ‘Scottish local authorities will get £75 million next year.
Given that Strathclyde is the biggest local authority in Europe, £7.5 million must be a considerable underestimate.’
The Scottish Office spokesman added that there was no reason why any roads projects should be delayed.
Mr Waugh denied he was playing poker with the Scottish Office.
He claimed Strathclyde could not legally authorise projects it could not afford.
Meanwhile he added that Strathclyde may have to reconsider investment in diesel multiple units for the region's rail service because of uncertainty over the future of British Rail.
He said he would hold talks with the BR board about his council's continuing financial support.
Genetic theory on Asians' special schooling needs
By Severin Carrell
A SENIOR Strathclyde region official said yesterday that infant malnutrition and genetic factors could be responsible for the high numbers of Asian and black children being placed in special schools in the region.
David McNeil, the senior depute director of education for Strathclyde, claimed that factors other than lax assessment methods and low use of interpreters could be responsible for over-representation of Asian and black children in two acute categories of learning difficulties.
His comments came after The Scotsman revealed yesterday that the Commission for Racial Equality is to investigate complaints that Strathclyde may have illegally discriminated against children with English as a second language judged to have learning difficulties.
The CRE investigation, its first against any named council or organisation in Scotland since it was set up in 1976, will focus on alleged breaches of race relations and employment laws for failing to provide for children who do not speak English fluently and for failing fully to involve their parents.
According to research conducted by Strathclyde educational psychologists, statistical evidence indicated that several dozen Asian and black children may have been unfairly designated as having severe or profound learning difficulties.
The research, commissioned by the Scottish Office, found that few children were tested in their first language or given access to interpreters, or had their bilingual and cultural backgrounds taken into account before they were put in special schools.
Mr McNeil said yesterday that although the region would co-operate fully with the CRE investigation as it was legally required to do, he believed it was focusing too narrowly on the region's assessment procedures.
‘There's a need for a national investigation into why these figures seem to come out in this way, not just within Strathclyde, but within Britain,’ he said.
The high figures, he claimed, could come from ‘a multiplicity of other factors, possibly malnutrition when young or genetic factors’.
Mr McNeil said the region had tried but failed to persuade the CRE to conduct the same inquiry on a nationwide basis, and regretted its decision to proceed.
He said the region did not accept the accuracy or validity of the psychologists' findings.
Their research, he said, should have been more broadly based to include interviews of the children.
Since the report was published, he said, the authority had sought to alter their working methods.
Mr McNeil said, however, that given the CRE investigation he could not say if the education department had subsequently employed any bilingual educational psychologists or more interpreters.
Last night, a spokesman for Lothian Racial Equality Council, said Mr McNeil's comments about malnutrition and genetics were extremely disturbing coming from a senior official in his position.
‘One only has to draw this line of argument to its logical conclusion to see the dangers of it.’
Bashir Maan, the chairman of Strathclyde Community Relations Council, which is funded by both the region and the CRE, was unavailable to comment on Mr McNeil's remarks.
Earlier, however, Mr Maan had said he personally believed that the CRE investigation could damage the CRC's relationship with the region, and he opposed the decision to start the inquiry.
Mr Maan said that over the last three to four years, Strathclyde had become far more cooperative with moves to abandon discriminatory practices and willing to accept criticism.
In the late 1980s, such an inquiry would have been welcome but was now unnecessary.
‘They're doing everything they can under the legislation to bring everything up to date,’ he said.
‘Strathclyde is a huge organisation, the biggest local authority in the country: it takes time for these things to be corrected.’
A CRE spokesman said he was unable to respond to either Mr McNeil's or Mr Maan's comments directly since an investigation was now under way.
He said, however, that the commission had a legal obligation to respond to complaints it received, as in the case of Strathclyde, and had already taken steps to evaluate the substance of the complaint.
Any nationwide inquiry would have unsupportable resource implications for the CRE.
Rare bug found in Fife
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
ONE of Britain's rarest bugs, never before seen in Scotland, has been found in an ancient woodland in Fife.
The tiny millipede, Stigioglomerus crinita, was discovered during microscopic examination of leaf litter collected from Craighall Den wood, near Ceres.
Scottish Natural Heritage said the animal was white, blind and thought to be female.
It prefers lime-rich ground and has been recorded on only 20 occasions in Britain.
It is unique in the millipede world for its ability to roll up into a sphere as a means of protection.
It was uncovered by Dr Gordon Corbett, formerly of London's Natural History Museum, and has set the world of entomology a-buzz.
Stewart Pritchard, SNH Fife area officer, said the discovery of the rare invertebrate showed how important ancient woodland was for nature conservation.
‘We would like to obtain a lot more information about our invertebrate fauna.
They are of great importance not only as food for birds and mammals, but also in pollination and recycling of nutrients.
Unfortunately, they are also so easily overlooked.’
The agency is funding the Initiative for Scottish Insects, a group of 50 professional and amateur entomologists.
Last year ISI was commissioned to survey a large area of the Fife coast, which harbours many insects which are rare elsewhere in Britain, including the Northern Brown Argus Butterfly.
According to Dr Graham Rotheray, curator of insects at the National Museums of Scotland, Scotland is the last enclave of once widespread British species.
SNH recommends leaving wind-blown trees in woodlands, where possible, to encourage insect populations.
Strike leader denies breach of the peace
A LEADER of the Timex strike in Dundee denied a breach of the peace charge at the city's sheriff court yesterday.
John Kydd, a divisional organiser of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union and a former shop stewards' convener, is accused of blocking an entrance road to the Timex factory by refusing to move his car.
Kydd, 50, of Brownhill Road, Dundee, denied that on 1 March, on the northmost entrance road leading to Timex Electronics Corporation in Harrison Road, he conducted himself in a disorderly manner, parked his car on the road, locked the doors and windows and refused to move it when asked by police.
He tendered his plea by letter.
Trial was fixed for a later date.
Gaelic radio service tunes into FM
By Tom Morton
THE BBC's Gaelic radio service in the Highlands is to have its own FM frequency from September, it was announced yesterday.
Radio nan Gaidheal will broadcast a single morning block to the Highlands and Islands, replacing the current piecemeal pattern of programmes.
In addition, the present range of Gaelic evening programmes will go out on the new frequency.
Listeners elsewhere in Scotland will be able to hear Radio nan Gaidheal's evening programmes only on medium wave and in a later slot, as listeners have indicated that the present 6:15 to 7:30pm slot is too early and clashes with prime time Gaelic television.
The new morning schedule for the Highlands would allow programmes to be scheduled at more suitable times, said Radio nan Gaidheal's editor, Maggie Cunningham.
‘It is important, as Gaelic television develops, that both media complement each other,’ she added.
Lorry firm wins time to appeal over ban
By Susan Dean
A SCOTTISH haulage firm facing a week's suspension by the Department of Transport has won a stay of execution.
Strathaven-based Yuill and Dodds, which was due to have its licence suspended for seven days from midnight on Sunday, has been given 49 days' grace to decide whether to appeal against the decision.
The ban was imposed by the Scottish Traffic Commissioner, Brigadier Michael Betts, on Monday this week.
It followed an inquiry after a court case last year when the company was fined £1800 for allowing drivers to break rules on the number of hours they could drive.
Yuill and Dodds, which ran the miners' gauntlet to deliver supplies to British Steel during the 1985 strike, was convicted at Linlithgow Sheriff Court in October on 36 charges of allowing drivers to exceed permitted hours and to take insufficient breaks.
The company was also admonished on 18 counts of causing and permitting drivers to falsify tachograph records.
The suspension results from the firm's consequent failure to adhere to rules governing the granting of its licence, ie, to remain operating within the law, according to a spokesman for the Traffic Commissioners in Edinburgh.
The 49-days' grace, backdated to Monday, was granted after a request by the firm's solicitors.
The Traffic Commissioners spokesman said that if the company does decide to appeal, the stay will remain in force until the case is heard by the Transport Tribunal.
The managing director, James Dodds, was unavailable for comment.
He has so far refused to indicate whether he intends to appeal.
Two Salvation Army homes to close down
TWO residential homes which for many years have cared for young people and the elderly are being closed by the Salvation Army.
It regretted that there would be job losses in both cases, at Redheugh adolescent unit at Kilbirnie, Ayrshire, and Methlan Park Eventide Home at Clydeshore Road, Dumbarton.
The main reason for the closure of Redheugh is that ‘it is in the wrong area with very few young people now coming from the local community,’ said an Salvation Army statement.
‘The current requirement is for smaller units situated within the local community to which the young people belong.’
Methlan Park will be closed because it cannot be adapted to meet standards required under the Community Care Act.
Talks are under way to find a home of their choice for the 20 residents.
The Salvation Army said it acknowledged with gratitude the faithful and caring service of the staff over the years.
Resignation in row over SNP provost
AN Independent member of Falkirk District Council, Billy Buchanan, has resigned from the licensing board in protest at John Constable, the SNP provost, continuing as its chairman, writes John Smith.
Councillor Buchanan said yesterday that when the Scottish National Party gave up as the minority administration in November, the provost had told the council the SNP would relinquish all committee chairmanships and vice-chairmanships.
At the board's quarterly meeting, Mr Buchanan voted for a Conservative councillor, Roy Thomson, who had been proposed as chairman, but the move failed.
Mr Constable said later that the provost was traditionally chairman of the board, which was not run along political lines.
Girl's sex abuser jailed for 3 months
A MAN who abused a young girl for four years was jailed for three months at Stirling Sheriff Court yesterday after a television programme had prompted the child to talk to her mother.
The depute fiscal, Sheila McDermid, said that the mother became suspicious in December when the girl, now 12, began to talk about sex abuse after watching an episode of Emmerdale.
Mrs McDermid said the programme featured a sexually abused child.
She said the girl discussed with her mother what she would do if something similar happened to her, before clamming up and denying she was a victim.
The mother was suspicious and told police.
When the man was interviewed he made a full admission.
Angus McInnes, 33, from Stirling, who was said to be an alcoholic, pled guilty to committing lewd, indecent and libidinous acts towards the girl on numerous occasions between May 1988 and May 1992.
Sheriff Robert Younger told him: ‘You are a first offender and perhaps your alcoholism may have played a part in these offences.
But they are very serious, too serious in my view for any other disposal.’
FALKIRK Resignation row over provost
AN INDEPENDENT councillor on of Falkirk District Council, Billy Buchanan, has resigned from the licensing board in protest at John Constable, the SNP provost, continuing as its chairman.
Mr Buchanan said yesterday that when the Scottish National Party gave up as the minority administration in November, the provost had told the council the SNP would relinquish all committee chairmanships and vice-chairmanships.
At the board's quarterly meeting, Mr Buchanan voted for a Conservative councillor, Roy Thomson, who had been proposed as chairman, but the move failed.
Mr Constable said later that the provost was traditionally chairman of the board, which was not run along political lines.
LOTHIAN News service for crime fighters
MEMBERS of neighbourhood watch schemes will now be able to exchange ideas on cracking crime.
Tips on how to tackle violence, car thefts and house-breaking, for example, are to be published in a newsletter set up by Lothian and Borders Police yesterday.
The newsletter, Panel Buzz, is to be distributed to 20 crime prevention panels and 500 neighbourhood watch schemes as well as to libraries.
Charges over fatal crash thrown out
CHARGES brought against a man after four people died in a crash in the Borders were dismissed by a sheriff yesterday, writes William Chisholm.
James Clamp, 23, who was at the wheel of a car which struck a bridge parapet then burst into flames last June, was a disqualified driver.
A friend of Clamp's, James Neil, 25, of Beattie Court, Hawick, was subsequently charged with causing and permitting Mr Clamp to drive while disqualified and without insurance.
But in a judgment at Jedburgh Sheriff Court yesterday, Sheriff James Paterson accepted a plea on Neil's behalf that the charges were incompetent because the prosecution had not served the complaint in time.
Ruling the complaint to be incompetent, he said the procurator-fiscal had not drawn the police's attention to the need for urgency in serving the necessary papers on Neil.
At an earlier hearing the court heard that the police had made unsuccessful attempts to serve the complaint.
Clamp, Mark Minto, 22, and two sisters, Paula, 16, and Louise Herbert, 17, all Hawick, died in the crash near Bonchester Bridge.
After the sheriff's judgment, there was an indication from the fiscal that an appeal would be lodged.
Region forced to take action over sewage pollution
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
HEALTH fears over raw sewage washing up on a Fife beach have resulted in one local authority forcing another to clean up the pollution.
At a meeting of its environmental committee yesterday, Dunfermline District Council agreed to issue a public health notice against Fife Regional Council.
The notice requires the region to tackle pollution in North Queensferry.
The action follows incidents in which severe wet weather caused the local sewage system to overflow into gardens in the town.
For years, sewage solids have been coming ashore between the two Forth bridges.
The order, if it is not contested, will result in material being removed from the beach, but will not enforce improvements to the sewage system.
The district council decision has been welcomed by a Conservative councillor, Alan Trotter, who has been campaigning for action, with regional Councillor Fred Ratky.
The problems are largely caused by an overflow facility at the entrance to the main sewage treatment plant in Dunfermline.
In extreme wet weather, it allows untreated and unscreened sewage to escape to the River Forth.
The pollution is exacerbated by the 90-year-old outfall pipe which has broken, in the past, in at least four places.
The region claims the situation should improve this year with new storm water tanks in Dunfermline reducing the likelihood of overflows.
A spokesman said about one-third of the sewage load from the town is due to be diverted some time this year to a new treatment plant.
There are also improvements planned on the screening facilities.
However, the old outlet pipe is not to be replaced before 1994/95.
Mrs Freda Bastianelli, the mother of four-month-old twin boys, who has a house on the shoreline, complained that another year was a long time to wait for a possible cure.
She rarely takes the babies into the garden because of the sewage, which she claims is a regular feature of the small sandy beach in North Queensferry.
She is particularly concerned over the potentially-harmful ‘particles’ of sewage blown into gardens and over houses in very windy weather.
Tests are being carried out to establish how dangerous the water is.
Mr Ratky believes the problem could damage prospects of tourism in the town.
Gay rights activist loses sex case appeal
A GAY rights activist was back behind bars last night after three judges rejected his appeal against conviction for a sex attack on a teenage boy.
Walter ‘Terry’ Smith, 36, of Cowgate, Edinburgh, had been freed from jail to give him time to get fresh evidence to prove his innocence.
He was jailed for four years at the High Court, Edinburgh in July 1992 when a jury found him guilty of indecently assaulting an 18-year-old boy he met in St Andrews Bus Station, Edinburgh.
It was alleged the boy had missed his bus and Smith offered him a lift home.
But, it was said, he took him to his flat and indecently assaulted him while two other men looked on.
Smith, an ex-army nurse who worked as a counsellor for homosexual soldiers, claimed in his appeal that he was the victim of a miscarriage of justice.
He claimed two key witnesses at his trial had committed perjury.
He featured in the ‘magic circle’ report into allegations of a gay conspiracy in Scottish legal circles.
Lord Hope, the Lord Justice General, sitting with Lords Allanbridge and MacLean rejected the  appeal .
Last month, the appeal court had heard fresh evidence from two witnesses not called to give evidence at Smith's trial.
Lord Hope said in the case of the first witness that his additional evidence would not have led the jury to reject the evidence of Thomas Leighton, who had corroborated the boy's account of the attack.
As far as the second witness was concerned, the appeal court had reached the view that his new evidence would not have had a material bearing on the jury's assessment of Leighton's credibility.
The judges granted a warrant for the re-arrest of Smith who was taken back to prison.
Khamenei broadcast ends doubt
IRAN'S supreme spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, appeared on television yesterday to urge Muslims to join anti-Israeli Qods Day (Jerusalem Day) rallies today.
His TV appearance followed Iran's denial of opposition reports that a bomb had exploded in his Tehran home on Wednesday, possibly injuring him.
The 53-year-old leader was shown standing with a reporter in a large hall next to his home, where he holds public meetings.
‘I advise our dear people and all Muslim nations to hold the international Qods Day ceremonies this year more warmly and enthusiastically than in previous years,’ he said in the broadcast monitored in Nicosia.
‘This will help the struggle of the Palestinians…in their regaining of their rights.’
A foreign ministry spokesman, quoted by the official Irna news agency, denied the report of the bomb blast, first issued by ex-president Abolhassan Bani-Sadr in Paris, as a politically motivated lie.
The spokesman said the report had been aimed at overshadowing the Qods Day protest, held on the last Friday of Ramadan since the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini dedicated the day to anti-Israeli demonstrations in 1979.
In his broadcast yesterday Ayatollah Khamanei said: ‘Today the Zionists (Israelis) are unfortunately being supported in putting double pressure on the Palestinians.
‘Considering that many of those who used to issue slogans for Palestine have parted ways with this oppressed nation, the Palestinian strugglers…need worldwide support.’
Iran opposes the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organisation for seeking conciliation with Israel and condemns the US-sponsored Arab-Israeli peace talks.
A Tehran Radio commentary yesterday said today's rally was expected to become ‘a popular manifestation for resolute rejection of imperialistic and collaborationist plans’.
For several weeks Iranian media have been exhorting people to turn out for the demonstration.
In Tehran they will march from four main squares to Tehran University, the site of Friday prayers.
— Reuter
Turning down the heat
IT HAS always tended to be assumed that governments, by and large, prefer things to go well.
They must, of course, take calculated risks from time to time to achieve objectives which they perceive to be right but not universally popular.
Generally, though, they are credited with believing, like the rest of us, that life is too short to go looking for unnecessary trouble.
That simple inference grows increasingly open to question in the case of John Major's administration.
This week's case in point is the fumble-fisted fiasco over Norman Lamont's Budget announcement that he would phase in VAT on domestic fuels.
Leave aside, for the moment, the question of whether it was justified in principle.
Assume, as ministers presumably believed, that it was fiscally essential to recover the deficit wrought by the recession.
How does a government, particularly one with a small majority and unsettled back benches, go about presenting a policy which must inevitably be controversial?
It can do one of two things.
It can either tough it out, claiming virtue in its readiness to take hard decisions in the national interest; or it can assemble safeguards and concessions and proclaim compassion for the neediest.
Either tactic offers at least a chance of keeping trouble to the minimum.
Here is what actually happened.
Mr Lamont made his announcement on Tuesday.
He said that social security benefits, which are tied to movements in the Retail Price Index, would reflect the change, but that he recognised its particular impact on people with low incomes and therefore Peter Lilley would take it into account when benefits were uprated next year.
On Wednesday, facing demands for more detail, Mr Lamont's deputy, Michael Portillo, and the Treasury said that benefits would only go up in proportion to the RPI.
Downing Street, ever sensitive to Ian Lang's problems, meanwhile told Scots who pointed out that northern latitudes are colder than southern, that they should take comfort from Budget measures on whisky and the oil industry.
On Thursday, facing uproar on all sides of the Commons, Mr Major ordered that the mess be sorted out and Downing Street duly declared that there would be extra money for the poor over and above RPI uprating and that it had all been planned before the Budget.
Details of the money involved, of course, and of its form, would come later.
It is hard to imagine how the matter could have been handled less adeptly.
The opposition will portray it as another U-turn by a government increasingly at the mercy of its back benches and incapable of recognising its plight.
The Government's version is scarcely more impressive, however.
If there was a package worked out in advance, why wait until back-bench fury was at its height before saying so?
And how is it possible that, to all appearances, neither the Treasury nor its chief secretary knew about it?
U-turns, at least, imply a conscious act of steering by someone at the wheel.
This manoeuvre looks rather more like a tail-spin.
Concern as Cairo declares war on militant Muslims
THE Egyptian government has declared open war on Muslim militants, ordering police to shoot to kill and plunging the country into its worst political violence for more than a decade.
Senior officials say the militants, who have attacked police, Christians and tourists in a violent campaign to overthrow the government and turn Egypt into a purist Islamic state, are few and will soon be wiped out.
But human rights activists and liberal intellectuals fear security forces and militants are locked in a vicious circle of killing that threatens the future of a country vital to the stability of the Middle East.
Security forces took the offensive ten days ago, storming a mosque packed with militant worshippers in the southern tourist resort of Aswan and raiding eight slum apartments in Cairo.
On Wednesday, hundreds of police backed by armoured cars assaulted three hideouts in Assiut, the southern university town which was one of the birthplaces of the militant el-Gama'a el-Islamiya (Islamic Group) and scene of a militant uprising in 1981.
The three bouts of bloodshed and a series of smaller incidents killed 28 militants, 11 police and three civilians.
‘We tried dialogue.
It failed.
We tried the defensive.
It failed.
So once they resort to firearms, that is it,’ a senior government official said.
The Gama'a vowed revenge for the death of those killed in Assiut, who included a 23-year-old militant leader believed by police to have directed the group's campaign of attacks on tourists in the southern Nile valley.
Since last July the assaults have devastated tourism, one of the country's major industries.
‘El-Gama'a el-Islamiya asserts that the blood of Ahmed Zaki and his men, who have avenged the blood of tens of militants spilled over almost a year in Egypt, will not dry until the blood of revenge flows,’ the militants said in a statement.
‘It is going to be over,’ the government official said.
‘You think that they are a large number.
They are not.’
But the editor of the liberal opposition newspaper al-Wafd said the only solution was more democracy.
Egypt officially has a multi-party system but the same ruling group has been in power since 1952.
‘(The state) thinks a security confrontation is enough and rejects the real way to ensure full security and real peace,’ Gamal Badawi wrote.
‘The key is in the hand of the government.
It can open the door and Egypt will be saved.
Or it can close the door and there will be shame, disgrace and destruction.’
Step in right direction
THE German central bank, the Bundesbank, yesterday lived up to expectation and cut a key interest rate.
True, it did so cautiously — the cut in the discount rate from 8.0 to 7.5 per cent(with no change in the Lombard rate) does indeed represent a modest move — but this caution is clearly an attempt to take account of the slowdown of the German economy while signalling that the central bankers are continuing to keep an eye on inflation.
The size of the reduction is hardly surprising, given the bank's stated policy of gradual steps.
Apart from the domestic consequences, the Bundesbank is of course also fully aware of the pressure from its European partners to reduce its interest rates and allow currencies closely linked to the German mark to relax monetary policy and stimulate growth.
Already Denmark, the Netherlands and others have responded with cuts in some rates.
It is also no doubt less than a coincidence that the central bank made its move in the week before the French elections.
A right- wing administration in Paris is expected to maintain France's pro-European stance and close co-operation with Bonn, but the knock-on effect of a drop in German interest rates will help to mitigate the negative domestic consequences of the government's Franc fort policy.
Nevertheless, the prime reason for the Bundesbank's decision to go ahead with an interest rate cut will have been the solidarity pact which was agreed last Saturday between Chancellor Kohl's government and the opposition to put Germany's post-unification finances on a sound footing and help the revival of eastern Germany.
The preceding months of wrangling were the cause of a great deal of economic uncertainty.
The wide-ranging package includes a 7.5 per cent surcharge on income tax from 1995 to help close the budget deficit resulting from the cost of financing the recovery in the east.
A key aspect for the Bundesbank will have been the acceptance by the unions of the need for moderate pay increases in order to prevent the slide into an inflationary spiral.
The Bundesbank can be — and has been — criticised for not going far enough to stimulate the German economy.
But with the last cut in the discount and Lombard rates in early February, and further reductions expected in the coming months, it clearly recognises the need for lower rates even if it does adhere to its policy of small steps.
The bankers, however, should not wait too long before their next move.
Bosnian president suspends peace talks
BOSNIA'S Muslim president yesterday suspended temporarily his participation in international peace talks in New York, saying he could not be involved as long as Serbs continued their offensive in eastern Bosnia and Sarajevo.
President Alija Izetbegovic told reporters his meeting with mediators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen was very short because of the ‘bad news’ from Bosnia which made it impossible to continue talks.
But he said ‘that doesn't mean we interrupt the negotiations.
We are staying in our hotel and we are waiting for the Serbs to stop killing the people.’
He said Serbs had to stop attacking Sarajevo and Srebrenica and halt ethnic cleansing in Bijeljina in north-eastern Bosnia.
A source close to Mr Vance and Lord Owen said Mr Izetbegovic declined to discuss any substance during the morning meeting because of the fighting.
They had spoken to both the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, and the Yugoslav foreign minister, Vladislav Jovanovic, who are attending the peace talks.
‘I think the patience of the world is getting stretched — possibly some people would say already beyond the point of endurance,’ Lord Owen told reporters.
Authorities in Serbia again blocked a UN relief convoy which has been trying for days to reach the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica.
The commander of UN troops in Bosnia, General Philippe Morillon, has been holed up in the town for the past week vowing not to leave until the safety of the inhabitants is assured.
But he said last night he was confident the convoy would reach Srebrenica early today.
Serb President Slobodan Milosevic had agreed to arrange for the convoy, carrying 125 tonnes of food, to spend the night in Bratunac on the Bosnian side of the border.
The Serbs had repaired a war-damaged bridge on the road to Srebrenica, he said.
‘The morale of my soldiers could not be higher.
They see how popular their action is.’
A UN military observer, Colonel Walter van Dijk, who was with the convoy when it was stopped at a police and army barricade in Serbia yesterday, said the fate of the convoy had been ‘resolved at the highest level’.
‘What we have achieved today is a guaranteed departure,’ he said.
‘The Bosnian Serbs will have liaison officers with the convoy and bring it as close as possible to Srebrenica.
‘There are discussions in Belgrade tonight and I am convinced now that we will go.’
Anger in US over dinner jokes
THE US National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP) and gay groups have demanded apologies from Oliver North and several Virginia Republicans, accusing them of making derogatory jokes about blacks and homosexuals at a Republican dinner.
Speakers told the jokes on Friday at a dinner honouring a former Virginia representative, Stan Parris, who has said he may campaign for a congressional seat next year, the Washington Post reported yesterday.
Some remarks ridiculed President Bill Clinton's plan to lift the ban on gays in the military, the newspaper said.
Mr North told the crowd that he tried to telephone Mr Clinton, but the White House switchboard would not let him through until he disguised his voice with a lisp.
Mr North, whose conviction in the Iran-Contra scandal was dismissed by a federal appeals court, is widely expected to run for the Senate as a Republican from Virginia.
His spokesman declined to comment.
Senator Warren Barry called Mr Clinton's plan on gays in the military a ‘fags in the foxhole’ proposal, and the chairman of the Fairfax County Republicans, Patrick Mullins, said it gave new meaning to the military warning ‘watch your rear flank,’according to the Post.
Mr Barry, who is white, also called a bridge linking northern Virginia with the largely black District of Columbia as the ‘Soul Brothers’ Causeway,’the newspaper said.
The White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, called the remarks ‘unfortunate.’
‘All forms of intolerance are unacceptable,’ she said.
The Reverend Kenny Smith, president of the Fairfax County NAAACP, called the speakers' remarks deplorable and clearly racist.
Some of the 250 people in the audience told the Post they believed the jokes were too harsh.
None of the speakers apologised, saying they did nothing more than what many well-known comedians do, the newspaper added.
Allen ‘vindicated’ by report
DOCTORS have determined that Woody Allen did not sexually abuse one of the children he adopted with his estranged partner Mia Farrow, representatives for both sides said yesterday.
The long-awaited report has been a key part of the couple's bitter custody battle.
Police have been investigating charges by Farrow that Allen sexually molested their adopted daughter Dylan, aged seven, at Farrow's summer house in Connecticut.
As part of the investigation, three experts from the Yale New Haven Medical Centre conducted an analysis.
The doctors would not comment on their findings yesterday, but after a three-hour meeting with them Allen said he had been vindicated.
He said they had conducted hundreds of interviews and concluded that the charges were ‘either concocted or imagined.’
A statement by Farrow's lawyer, while not directly confirming the details of the report, said it was ‘incomplete and inaccurate.’
‘We do not believe that the child made this up, but even allowing for that possibility, the question why must be answered and for that Mr Allen will always be culpable,’ the statement from the lawyer, Eleanor Alter said.
Ms Alter said the doctors had refused to meet people ‘whose information would have been vitally important.’
‘Dylan has been consistent in her description of abuse and Ms Farrow will continue to support her,’ the statement said.
Allen and Farrow, who never married, were together for 12 years before splitting up in January 1992.
They are now engaged in a long-running custody battle over Dylan, another adopted child, Moses, 14, and their biological child, Satchel, 5.
The couple split up after Farrow saw nude pictures of her adopted daughter Soon-Yi Previn, 21, taken by Allen.
Later the film director said he was in love with the young woman, who was adopted by Farrow and Andre Previn when they were married.
Doctor's photograph
AN article was published in Lifestyle on 24 November, 1992, under the heading, ‘Our local counsel services’.
Accompanying this article was a photograph which we realise now should not have been published, as it did not bear any connection to the article.
This photograph, of a doctor, was one that had been taken some time previously to illustrate an article on long hours worked by junior doctors.
We apologise to the doctor concerned for the distress caused by publication of his photograph with the Lifestyle article and fully accept that we were mistaken in publishing it in connection with counselling services.
Detached with a view to sanity
I LEARNED it from my elder sister, the Indian scout of my life.
For as long as I have been conscious she has been out there in front of me, dodging arrows, triggering ambushes; doubling back to brief me on the safest and fastest route forward.
If I had to list the assets I was born with she would have to come top.
In childhood the system was simple.
If someone was beastly to me and I mentioned it, she thumped them.
She was then sent to our shared bedroom and I would smuggle in jam sandwiches with the crusts left on, her favourite.
She was dubbed rebel; troublesome.
Really she was just working out her guilt for having thrown me under the wardrobe when I was six weeks old.
The upshot was that she had a rocky route through the rest of childhood and adolescence while I slipstreamed smoothly behind.
She was six years older so by the time I was 12 I was accustomed to propping my eyelids open well into the early hours, listening to her tearful ‘he loves me, he loves me not.’
I passed to her the wisdom I picked up eavesdropping on our two eldest sisters, whose lives were then lived in romantic turmoil.
There was a bit of give and take.
But on the whole I was the receiver, not the giver of advice.
My Indian scout married, I married.
After my wedding she said: ‘Don't weigh and measure.
Just give and don't think about it; things balance out anyway.’
She was right.
She had babies, I had babies.
She said: ‘Don't be cross with them.
Try to put yourself in their shoes.
If you are losing patience just get out for a walk.
It clears the air every time.’
She was right.
She had teenagers, I am working my way up to them.
She said: ‘Help.
I can't stand this.’
I hope she is wrong.
She got divorced, I did not get divorced.
She said: ‘There are no winners in divorce.’
Then I rang her up with a real ‘he said, I said’ story, an embroilment with a friend which had worried me.
She said: ‘Detach’.
She had been reading a lot of self-help books and this was her conclusion.
She said: ‘You are dealing with a neurotic, it goes without saying that he is all screwed up.
If you bend and twist to try to accommodate him, you will end up like a pretzel, and your behaviour will be every bit as neurotic as his.
You keep a straight course, let him jig around you.
That way his problem remains his problem and you get on with your work.’
She was right.
I have noticed, however, that ‘detach’ has become her answer to everything.
Husband problems, children problems, friend problems, mother problems.
In all human relationships her motto is ‘Detach with affection’.
It is surprising how often it works.
I saw the virtue of her advice most clearly when I stayed with a girlfriend a few weeks ago.
Her husband is having an on-off fling which he does not openly admit, but takes little trouble to disguise
When it is on, her weight plummets, she can't sleep, she cries a lot.
When it is off she revives, laughs again, looks relaxed.
I suddenly saw her as the shuttlecock in the game her husband is playing with his inamorata.
I am certain they don't intend to damage her in the way they are.
In fact, I am sure they don't think of her much at all.
Her unhappiness, her moods, only damage herself and her children.
I heard myself tell her to concentrate on her own life.
Nothing she says or does is persuading her husband to change.
I think she should mentally wrap him in a parcel, tie it tight with string and put it on one side for the moment.
And, in the meantime, think about herself not him.
If she makes sure she is looking good, feeling good, working well, she has a better chance of taking a cool look at him from a distance and deciding if she really wants him in her life.
But she will not get that distance until she learns to — that's right — detach.
On the surface it sounds like a selfish philosophy.
In practice it is really the opposite.
I suppose in detaching we all take responsibility for ourselves, and that in turn allows the other people in our lives to stop feeling responsible for us.
The end effect is a sense of freedom.
So I would recommend to you my big sister's advice ‘Detach with affection’ And if you can't manage that, just detach.
As she says: ‘It certainly beats thumping people.’
Bosnia carnage
One of the most disgraceful international aspects of what is going on in Bosnia is that Western leaders, including our own, seem to be accepting the escalating Serbian brutality, and its consequences of carnage, rape, starvation and terror as if it were inevitable and beyond their combined capacities for effective reaction or remedy.
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, held a key role during Britain's presidency of the EC and could have set the whole tone of the West's approach to the problem.
He failed conspicuously to do so and continues to side-step any commitment to taking the effective steps which many senior military experts believe could at least limit the damage, by calling from time to time for a mere tightening of sanctions against Serbia.
What we are seeing nightly on our TV screens is as vile and disgusting a process of racial extermination as anything practised by the Nazis, yet once again the West, including a Britain that should know better than most, is responding in terms which echo chillingly down the years from Hitler, appeasement, Chamberlain and Munich.
My own reaction, as the latest sickening episode even exceeds in depravity and licentiousness the grossness of the last one, is that I no longer wish to be associated with a UK Government which is so lacking in moral leadership, compassion, wisdom and humanity that it can allow such a situation to continue to exist, while having the capacity to intervene.
Even if the Western powers were to act now with speed, resolution and cohesion they will never escape the moral responsibility for having dithered.
Their guilt is exacerbated by the fact that their evident unwillingness to intervene has allowed the aggressors a free hand in ordaining unlimited parameters within which to pursue their monstrous activities.
I am ashamed to be British!
Clarification
There has been much discussion of recent SNP parliamentary tactics.
We feel that certain points need explained to help clarify the situation.
1, We proposed a critical motion at the national executive committee on the decision of our parliamentary group to vote against the Labour amendment on the EC committee of the regions.
2, We accepted the democratic decision of the NEC and also believe that such debates should take place in the legitimate bodies of the party.
3, We do not support the pursuit of this issue in public argument and we will be committing our efforts to campaign for the recall of the Scottish parliament, to stop water privatisation and to achieve independence in Europe.
(Cllr) Rob Gibson
Roseanna Cunningham
Nicola Sturgeon
Tom Chalmers
Fiona Hyslop 
Word broken
The SNP must not allow itself to be bullied by Labour in the stramash over the Commons vote.
It is useless trying to co-operate with people who cannot keep their word or have any intention of keeping it.
Nationalists supported the Wilson/Callaghan governments for years, only to be stabbed in the back in the end.
They were then blamed for allowing a Thatcher victory, when Labour's downfall hinged on a refusal to implement its own policies.
This Nationalist co-operation and its outcome led to the loss of many SNP activists, who had known all along that Labour could not be trusted.
Since then, Labour has never made a generous offer of co-operation with other Scottish groups or parties which recognised their differing views on home rule or democracy.
My advice to Nationalist MPs is, whether on occasion they support Liberal Democrat or Tory motions on their merits, they should never vote with Labour, as it is a party fundamentally incapable of sticking to principle.
Name change
The list of designatory letters for Councillor Hugh Fraser, of Lothian Regional Council (Diary, 9 March) is slightly out of date.
You report Councillor Fraser as being an FBIM, a Fellow of the British Institute of Management.
On 1 November last, BIM merged with the Institution of Industrial Managers (IIM) to form the Institute of Management.
The new name is in part a combination of the names of the two predecessor institutes, but it also reflects a wider  European and even a global interest in pursuing excellence in management.
The abbreviation ‘IMgt’ has been adopted.
Members may, of course, continue to use the old designatory letters if they wish, but most have adopted the new style.
If Councillor Fraser follows the trend, he will now be ‘FIMgt’ which makes his list 30 letters, and a clear winner among those so far reported.
Pupil's case
While thankfully appreciating Graeme Wilson's reporting today of my son Rajesh's case against Daniel Stewart's and Melville College, Edinburgh, I feel strongly that the statement by Paul Caton, the deputy principal, needs some correction.
First, the family are not giving him any legal ‘threat’.
It is an inevitable reality now after waiting for over nine months for the Commission for Racial Equality to investigate and take appropriate action.
It may still come, but we are not prepared to wait indefinitely.
The window-dressing appointment of an Asian vice-captain of the school after we lodged our complaint is not going to help very much.
In fact, this is what we are fighting for: non-white talents should be recognised and suitably awarded without any prejudice.
Mr Caton also mentions that my first son, Rajiv, was dux at the school.
He knows very well the reason why it was possible.
The then principal never tolerated any lack of discipline or discrimination of any kind.
The then deputy was an equally able person who never tolerated any nonsense.
I trust this will clarify some of the misconceptions created by Mr Caton's statement.
Fordyce Maxwell
An inspection of the gadgets
JUST browsing, thanks, through the catalogues offering a better life for a small outlay.
Whichever part of you isn't functioning, there's a gadget to help, from the pinhole eyeglasses — Amazing but true!
Train your eyes to focus on whatever distance you have a problem with — to the Snorebuster, a cordless giant wristwatch-size device which detects snoring.
Then an electric shock hurls the sleeper out of bed, right?
Wrong.
A tiny stimulation to the wrist, or bio feed-back as we say in the trade, persuades the snorer to stop.
Pity.
There's less fun in that than the Ideal Home mail order offer to pamper your bottom, at least if you're a cyclist.
A space age gel saddle is the ultimate in silky comfort.
Cool in summer, warm in winter.
‘Once fitted, you'll never be without it.’
If this kind of thing strikes you as mildly loopy, do a little further mail order browsing with Pets Pleasure.
Dog towels with dog and paw motif; your cat's own mouse den, a delightfully snug bed; a waxed jacket for the dog which has everything; a plastic holder with carpet insert to encourage your cat to keep its claws off the furniture.
I suppose a well-aimed shoe, with or without foot, is out of the question?
Fit-ness instructor
A SKIING holiday is for those with more money than sense, giving you the chance to meet a lot of people you could meet at home for nothing.
Witness the Scottish enclave at Val d'Isere in France where one ski instructor got through a whole season without having to speak a word of French.
Just as well, it gave him time to master Scots and almost cope with the request for advice from a lady from Aberdeen, seeking to match boots and skis: ‘Aye, aye, mannie, fit fit fits fit ski?’
Vocal accord
IN the final matches of this year's Five Nations rugby championship, the Welsh are in Paris tomorrow, where Scotland were unlucky to lose early this year.
So what else is new?
Only that there was at least a minor cultural triumph on the terraces where Francois Aliane, celebrated French restaurateur from Edinburgh, rugby enthusiast and Scotophile, was waxing the way fans do and giving his views to a French spectator.
Dazzled by Monsieur Aliane's tartan favours, not to mention his repartee, the French fan remarked: ‘Sacre bleu, you Scots speak most fantastic French.’
CLEVER, or what?
From the Times Educational Supplement, an advert: St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle: Trail Blazers.
It's advertising a trail of discovery for schools.
Let's hope some of our little fire raisers don't manage to get there and put the ad into practice.
Taking one's leave
STILL in a job?
Sure?
Beware any sudden invitation to a company training course, particularly if they show a film.
The report from one such course recently was that, during the film, various people were tapped on the shoulder and asked to leave not only the showing, but also the company.
Other sensitive dismissals reported include reading names over the public address system or leaving a black plastic bag on the desk as a hint.
It's too close to the old army system —‘those with both parents still alive one pace forward — not so fast, Jones’— for comfort.
Skilled workers
RECESSION, redundancy and laugh a minute budgets have their knock on effects.
Not least in America, where else, where companies know they can pick and choose among executives desperate to work again.
It used to be, according to the Association of Corporate and Professional Recruiters in that charming way Americans have, ‘get us a warm body’, or even a bright and experienced executive.
Now it has to be a software engineer who rocks, an operations chief who scuba dives or the bank president who knows a Scandinavian folk song when he hears one.
One firm insists on golfers with a single figure handicap.
To get a job with some other pernickety employers you might have to run a marathon, walk a dog, sprout some hair or shed some weight.
All together, hup one, two, three, hup, one, two, three, load that barge, tote that bale, but don't go to the training course film.
The donkey worked
WE know how to keep reader interest.
Response to last week's items on how to estimate the weight of a donkey and goose-grazing hours has been staggering.
Unfortunately, there's only room to quote the most pertinent, ie least facetious.
Dr Hardiman of Stirling points out that the Veterinary Record's formula for estimating the weight is, if not necessarily a bummer, slightly flawed.
No unit of measurement is quoted.
Take ten house points.
Secondly, the three constants of 0.240 x 2.576 x 0.000252 can be reduced to one, to wit 0.0001557, saving a bit on the mathematics when it comes to selecting your seaside donkey and assuming that the EC hasn't banned them yet.
As for goose-grazing, they take this seriously at Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group headquarters.
Four thousand goose-grazing hours an acre are not to be bandied about lightly as a conversation stopper.
No sir, that's the figure above which the crop is unlikely to recover.
Below that, there's still a chance.
Only one question: Who's counting?
Out of place
LEADING, a link Terry Wogan would have been proud of, to the strange case of the University of Edinburgh's Talbot Rice art gallery and an invitation to one of its forthcoming attractions: ‘Margaret Hunter is a Scottish painter living and working in Berlin who's expressive paintings…‘
Hold it.
The wandering apostrophe strikes again.
It keeps the university on a par with a small shoe shop's statement that: ‘Management  doesn't accept responsibility.’
MAN for the job no. 927: Pole Positions — The polar regions and the future of the planet by Daniel Snowman, published by Hodder and Stoughton.
In the wrong jobs: Scientific staff Bacon, Bullock and Thrush at Stirling University's Institute of Aquaculture.
Getting up steam
STAND by your bunks, or should that be hammocks, for Battle of the Atlantic 50th anniversary celebrations.
Marking the longest campaign of the Second World War, it starts with a review of the Fleet on 26 May, followed by five days of festivity, including a march by more than 2,000 veterans through Liverpool.
But before then The Battle of the Atlantic Suite will have been released on compact disc, depicting a Murmansk convoy in the dark days of the war.
If you're going to do something like this, do it big.
The suite, composed by Dave Roylance and Bob Galvin, calls for the works: solo soprano, 92-piece orchestra, 80-strong choir and four fan-fare trumpeters.
It wasn't like that down in the boiler room.
Light the lights
OUR man in the stalls writing a preview more in hope than expectation: Last night it was confidently expected that the Fifth Estate's performance of Scapegoat at the Netherbow Theatre, Edinburgh, would go ahead.
Tuesday night's opening had to be cancelled and on Wednesday night the leading lady was ill.
There is no truth in the rumour that this tactic is being used to keep the critics at bay.
Third time lucky, and are you still there, Mrs Worthington?
HARDSELL is the name of a public relations company in London.
Its latest promotion is for Death of a Salesman.
Apology clears Prost
FORMER world champion Alain Prost was cleared of bringing motor racing into disrepute yesterday, after offering his apologies to the International Motor Sports Federation (FISA) in Paris.
FISA president Max Mosley told a news conference that the French Formula One driver would not be disciplined for highly critical remarks about FISA officials attributed to him in an interview with a French magazine.
Prost, who appeared at the same conference, said: ‘I made my apologies to the world council.
I did not intend to defame anyone.’
Winner of the South African Grand Prix on Sunday, Prost had been widely expected to be banned for one or more races or heavily fined.
for his remarks, which angered some FISA members.
The Toyota team was fined $300,000 (£208,000) by FISA for illegally helping French driver Didier Auriol in last month's Swedish rally.
Auriol, winner of the Monte Carlo rally, was disqualified in Sweden after officials said he had been given oil outside a technical help zone.
— Reuter 
Alain Prost arrives at a Paris hotel for yesterday's hearing
Lang set to back three Rs approach for schools
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
A BACK-TO-BASICS drive for Scottish pupils is expected to be the key influence in a ministerial review of the new school curriculum.
Arithmetic, spelling, grammar and punctuation are expected to receive strong backing from Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, in a keynote address on education policy in Aberdeen on Monday.
He is also thought to be considering bringing members of the public into every school inspection team.
The policy speech comes less than a month before the likely date for ministers to set out the balance of subjects in the new curriculum for Scots children aged between five and 14.
It is likely to cause concern among Scottish educationists who have watched English ministers interfere repeatedly in England's separate national curriculum.
Mr Lang is understood to favour a strong emphasis on more traditional teaching methods, stressing discipline and focus.
That echoes the fierce debate in England over so-called trendy teaching methods, and over political interference in the curriculum by the Government.
The Scottish Office has also been giving consideration to reforming school inspection teams, so that members of the public will always be involved.
That follows a reform south of the Border in which Her Majesty's school inspectorate was largely wound up, and schools forced to select their own inspectors from an approved list of private companies.
Each team in England has to include a lay member.
Mr Lang is also expected to turn his criticism on parents who neglect their children's education and who fail to teach right from wrong and respect for others.
He is thought likely to take a strong line against computer games like Nintendo and Sega, for failing to stimulate young minds.
Tackling truancy is being seen as a crucial part of the parental role in schooling, with responsibilities emerging as equal to parent rights in the Government's approach to education.
Inflation on the increase
PROSPECTS of another interest rate cut receded yesterday as inflation edged up from its 25-year low last month.
Economists said the marginal increase to 1.8 per cent in February from 1.7 per cent in January coupled with signs of a stronger economy had sharply reduced the likelihood of another cut.
Prices in February rose 0.7 per cent for a year-on-year increase of 1.8 per cent after a sharp rise in seasonal food costs and the January sales' price cutting came to an end.
Underlying inflation, which provides a better guide to cost pressures as it excludes volatile mortgage interest rates, was slightly stronger at 3.4 per cent, up from 3.2 per cent in January.
City reaction, Page 13
Muslims weep and cheer as UN convoy rolls in
CROWDS of starving Muslims, mostly women and children, cheered and wept yesterday as a long-delayed United Nations aid convoy loaded with food and medicine finally won through to the besieged eastern Bosnian town of  Srebrenica .
The United Nations said it was planning to build on its success and was hoping to get another aid convoy through to the embattled town tomorrow.
‘We have a convoy!
We have a convoy!’ yelled the UN official Larry Hollingworth over a radio link from Srebrenica to Sarajevo as the vehicles arrived with the commander of UN troops in Bosnia, Gen Philippe Morillon, at their head.
It was a personal triumph for Gen Morillon, who went to Srebrenica last Thursday and declared he would not abandon the town's 60,000 desperate inhabitants until the convoy got through.
Asked about the townspeople's reactions, Mr Hollingworth said: ‘I'm so excited myself…
They just cannot believe it, they are waving, they are clapping, they are teary.’
Over the past nine days the convoy had made repeated attempts to reach Srebrenica but was blocked by Bosnian Serb authorities in spite of reports that up to 40 people a day were dying in the town.
The convoy is only the third to reach Srebrenica since Bosnia's civil war began last April.
US aircraft have been dropping supplies by air since 1 March, but aid workers say that is not enough to feed the people.
Lyndall Sachs of the Belgrade office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees said it was hoped that another convoy could be sent in as early as today.
‘It is imperative that we get another convoy in, and without the delays this first one experienced.’
A senior World Health Organisation envoy, Sir Donald Acheson, said in Zagreb that the situation in Srebrenica was ‘a horror at least one degree worse than anything so far experienced in Bosnia’.
He said the town needed at least 60 tonnes of aid a day.
Ms Sachs said yesterday's convoy carried between 80 and 90 tonnes.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, urged the US to double the amount of food it has been parachuting into Srebrenica and send 60 tonnes a day.
Gen Morillon gave a warning that Srebrenica was close to capture by Bosnian Serb forces, which have besieged the town for the past 11 months.
He told reporters in Zvornik that after a Serb offensive, in some places ‘it's only two kilometres to the front line.’
In Geneva, a UN spokesman said Washington was being asked to provide heavy helicopters to take in supplies and evacuate wounded people from Srebrenica.
France and Britain meanwhile joined the United States in pushing for enforcement of a no-fly zone.
The Security Council met last night to discuss a draft French resolution, but no adoption was expected until Monday.
‘We've had two confirmed incidents when Serbian aircraft have been used to bomb enemy positions,’ the Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, said in London.
— Reuter and AP 
General Philippe Morillon: personal triumph
TB case leads to alert for patients
AN ALERT has been issued to 470 patients after a member of staff at a West Midlands hospital was found to be suffering from tuberculosis.
The Wolverhampton Health Authority has written to the patients who were treated on ward D19 at New Cross Hospital, Wednesfield, during the last six months.
They are being urged to see their own doctors if they develop symptoms such as a persistent cough, sweating or weight loss.
The member of staff, whose identity is being kept secret, was found to have tuberculosis after complaining of feeling unwell.
Tanker driver killed in crash fireball
A tanker driver died yesterday when his lorry veered off a motorway and exploded on a railway line, sending a fireball into the air.
More than 45 firefighters were called to the scene at Preston Brook on the M56 in Cheshire after the tanker carrying kerosene crashed on to the Liverpool to London line.
An ambulance spokesman said that one other man has been taken to hospital with pelvic injuries.
It is believed he was driving a car which was also involved in the incident.
— PA
Minister moves to ban porn TV station in Britain
THE hard-core pornographic satellite station, Red Hot Television, is to be banned in Britain — and now a court battle looms.
Peter Brooke, the Heritage Secretary, announced the ban yesterday, saying: ‘This Government will not tolerate exploitative material of a sexually-explicit or gratuitously-violent nature.’
Mark Garner, executive consultant with Red Hot Television's parent company, Continental Television, said: ‘We are delighted this will have to go to court and we will be there at the earliest opportunity.’
The Government took the first step to outlawing the station by writing to the European Commission and to Red Hot Television, which broadcasts from Denmark, reporting the ban.
After a 15-day consultation period with the commission and Denmark ends on 3 April, if Denmark continues to broadcast, the Government can issue an order making advertising and decoding equipment a criminal offence.
Anyone who already has a decoder can carry on watching, a spokesman for the Department of National Heritage acknowledged.
He said: ‘We can't jam the signals but we can make the advertising and sale of decoders illegal after this date.’
The veteran television campaigner Mary Whitehouse said the ban was splendid news.
‘It means that at long last the Government is getting to grips with one of the biggest evils in our society today.’
Lord Rees-Mogg, chairman of the Broadcasting Standards Council, said he strongly welcomed Mr Brooke's action.
Mr Brooke said the station ‘repeatedly offends against good taste and decency.
It is unacceptable and has the potential to cause great harm to children who may see it.
‘The service exceeds by a wide margin the standards we expect from UK broadcasters and I see no reason why material of this sort should be available in the UK simply because it is broadcast from overseas.’
Red Hot Television hopes to rush its case to court in an attempt to overturn the ban.
Mr Garner said: ‘We believe the law will have to find in our favour — our legal advice points to that.
‘All the Government is doing is bowing to back-bench pressure.
A hot potato is being passed on to the courts and ministers are safe in the knowledge they can hold up their hands and say: ‘We tried everything we could’.’
He said it was wrong British people should be forbidden to buy decoding equipment to watch it and denied the station, which is seen in 25,000 British homes as well as nine European countries, was ultra-violent.
Convention given one month's grace
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
THE QUEST to find a new role for the Scottish Constitutional Convention will be extended for another month, in spite of considerable doubts expressed about its future yesterday by the leadership of the Scottish Liberal Democrats.
After a two-hour meeting, the Lib Dem leader, Jim Wallace, said his party had given the organisation another chance to come up with a new way forward.
In spite of the postponement, a number of senior Liberal Democrats believe the Convention should remain in a state of suspended animation for the near future.
While all members unanimously agreed the body should not be wound up, a small team has been given the task of drawing up a programme of action which will satisfy the Lib Dems' requirements.
After the Glasgow meeting, Mr Wallace said of the Convention's prospects: ‘My view is still that when this group tries to examine what is a realistic possibility, realistically we will not be able to embark on any major schemes.’
A number of executive members agreed that the newly formed Coalition for Scottish Democracy would take the lead on campaigning for constitutional change and be the main co-ordinator of future events.
The Coalition is able to organise events which all the opposition parties attend, such as last weekend's conference to respond to the Government's stock-taking announcement.
Moreover, the Scottish Labour leader, Tom Clarke, stated he would support future events even if the Scottish National Party was also involved.
A seven-strong team will examine a number of ideas and will report to the next executive meeting on 16 April.
Canon Kenyon Wright, chairman of the executive, declared ‘final and definite’ decisions would be taken at the meeting on the proposals, which include finalising the plan for a Scottish parliament; holding a series of conversations with major groups in Scottish society; developing Scotland's European links and parallel movements across the UK and broadening the membership of the Convention.
Commons group to query loss of £21m
THE cross-party Commons public accounts committee is to investigate how accounting failures led to £21 million going missing from a fund used to provide loans to needy people.
The committee's chairman, the Labour MP Robert Sheldon, said the discrepancy was very worrying and one of a series of mistakes in Whitehall.
The problem was found by the National Audit Office during an audit of the Social Fund, which provides loans to meet maternity expenses, funeral costs, heating during periods of cold weather, ‘important’ intermittent expenses, and in emergencies or disasters.
The NAO, the taxpayers' representative, said that by 31 March last year records of loans amounting to £21.3 million were incorrectly transferred out of a computer system for a considerable period.
Transfers of loan records between Social Security offices were not always completed correctly.
The Benefits Agency was taking action to identify the loans so recovery can commence.
The shadow social security secretary, Donald Dewar, said the NAO report was further evidence of chaos in the Department of Social Security.
Urging an investigation, he said: ‘Millions of pounds of hard earned taxpayers’ money has gone missing and claimants in desperate need could lose out.’
‘Coming on top of the extension of VAT to fuel, the administration of the benefits system is clearly in a complete mess, and [social security secretary]Peter Lilley has to get his act together.’
The NAO chief, Sir John Bourn, said some money would have to be written off because it could not be recovered.
The exact figures was not identified but was a small part of the £21.3 million total, he said.
Loans are supposed to be repaid by deductions from future benefits, but it appears that a computer system has failed to keep track of claimants moving from one area to another.
Mr Sheldon said: ‘It's a very worrying business.
We have had a number of computer failures where the computerisation has resulted in loss of information and much more important for the taxpayer, losses to the taxpayer.’
He went on: ‘When you lose £21 million like this, it's a very serious matter because it's a very large part of the amount of money that they handle.
They should have had much better control and devised their computerisation rather more effectively than they did.’
Told that the total amount missing was £37 million, but that the report seemed to suggest that £16 million was due to various errors, accounting procedures, and normal mistakes in transferring data into the computer, Mr Sheldon said a very high-powered body of Government specialists was on hand to offer advice on computerised activities.
‘The trouble is so many don't make use of that expertise we have within the Government service.’
‘It's not just here.
There's a whole range of things from the Foreign Office downwards where they have made mistakes costing many millions of pounds and we shall certainly be wanting to take evidence from this area of activity just to see what went wrong and how it can be put right and how we can prevent this sort of thing happening in the future.’
Sir John said in the NAO report that there had been a breakdown in the proper operation of the computer system.
The Benefits Agency had told him it was taking action to identify the loans concerned and transfer them back into the system.
‘They also informed me that the new Social Fund computer system, to be introduced in 1993, would automatically perform these transfers.’
‘The agency were unable to estimate what proportion may prove to be untraceable or otherwise impracticable to pursue and would therefore have to be written off.
But they believed that it would be a small part of the £21.3 million.’
Palace refuses to comment on baby rumours
BUCKINGHAM Palace yesterday refused to comment on reports that the Princess Royal is pregnant.
Several newspapers claim an announcement is imminent.
A palace spokesman said: ‘We do not comment on speculation in newspapers.
When a member of the Royal Family becomes pregnant, an announcement is made at a time of their choosing.’
The Princess Royal already has two children, Peter, 15, and Zara, 12, from her marriage to Captain Mark Phillips, whom she divorced last year.
The 42-year-old princess married Commander Tim Laurence, who is five years her junior, just before Christmas.
According to reports Commander Laurence is eager to become a father.
In past interviews the Princess Royal has displayed a distinct lack of enthusiasm for pregnancy, describing it as a very boring nine months.
‘I'm not particularly maternal.
It's an occupational hazard of being a wife,’ she said.
— PA
Two charged over £4m Old Master
A MAN and a woman will appear at Barnet magistrates' court, north London, today charged with dishonestly handling a £4 million Rubens, stolen in Ireland's biggest art theft.
It was found in a house in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire, police said last night.
It was taken in 1986 from the County Wicklow home of Sir Alfred Beit, when 17 Old Masters worth an estimated £30 million went missing.
Another of the stolen paintings, The Music Party by Antoine Palamadez, was found yesterday in Euston Station's left luggage office.
Corps marches into history
THE ROYAL Army Ordnance Corps yesterday marched proudly into history as the Queen took its final salute.
The Queen, the unit's colonel-in-chief, stood watching a final march past by as the corps band struck up for the last time.
The corps, which traces its roots back to the 15th century, is to disappear, after 75 years in its present form, at the beginning of next month.
It is to merge with the Royal Corps of Transport, the Royal Pioneer Corps, the Army Catering Corps and part of the Royal Engineers to form the Royal Logistic Corps.
The Corps' 75-year existence came to an end in bright sunshine on a Surrey parade ground.
Old comrades joined with serving soldiers to parade the regimental colours past the Queen at the RAOC's base at Deepcut.
The Queen, wearing a purple coat and hat, went on to meet some of the heroic bomb disposal experts who belong to the Corps.
She posed for photographs with six winners of the George Medal and a holder of the George Cross, all of whom were honoured for their work in dismantling bombs.
The Queen paused briefly to chat with children from the base as she made her way to view a specially prepared static display of the Corps' role in providing technical and logistical support to the army.
Major Gerry Crossland said: ‘It is a sad day for us.
It is the last formal parade of the Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
The next time they parade will be for the reformation as the Royal Logistic Corps.’
The Royal Logistic Corps, which will hold its first parade in front of the Princess Royal on April 5, is to be based at Deepcut.
Dig reveals church built by Saxons
HISTORY books will have to be rewritten in the light of archaeological research at Canterbury Cathedral which shows there was a massive church there in Anglo-Saxon times.
Excavations carried out while the cathedral's nave is being repaved confirm that the Anglo-Saxons were builders of great churches, contrary to the prevailing historical view.
The full extent of the ancient church on the site could not be gauged, Prof Martin Biddle, the cathedral's archaeological consultant, said yesterday.
The findings showed the Anglo-Saxon nave was as wide and as long and almost as high as the present one, which was built by the Normans.
‘This does change the history books,’ Prof Biddle said.
‘People were writing only 20 years ago that Anglo-Saxon architecture was small in scale, but it is not true.
‘This tells us that the architecture of the England of Alfred, Edgar and Canute was the match of anything in Europe north of the Alps at that time.’
The Anglo-Saxon cathedral burned down in 1067, and the Norman Archbishop Lanfranc had the current cathedral built on almost exactly the same site.
The findings vindicate the writings of a monk, Eadmer the Singer, who early in the 12th century wrote an account of the old building, as he remembered it from his childhood.
Prof Biddle, of Hertford College, Oxford, said: ‘What this excavation has given us is the idea of scale.
In the same way as the Anglo-Saxons produced marvellous manuscripts, prose and poetry, they were equally as good in the skills of architecture.’
The first Canterbury cathedral is known to have been dedicated by St Augustine at the end of the 6th century.
The Venerable Bede wrote in 731 that the cathedral was built on the site of an earlier Roman church.
Prof Biddle said the dig had not unearthed any archaeological evidence before about 900.
The director of the Canterbury  Archaeological Trust, Paul Bennett, said: ‘We have found this fantastic story almost exposed beneath a bit of carpet.’
Inquest told loneliness led to student's suicide
A STUDENT, Sarah Molyneux, hanged herself because she could not make friends during her first term at university, an inquest was told yesterday.
Her body was found at her home in Winchester, Hampshire, by her mother.
Sarah, 19, had gone home for Christmas after spending three lonely months at Surrey University.
Georgina Molyneux told the Winchester inquest: ‘When she came home at Christmas she was not her normal self, she seemed very quiet.
‘She said she did not really want to go back to university and my husband told her she did not have to if she did not want to.
‘She did not really give any reason why.
The only thing she said was that she had not made any friends.’
Mrs Molyneux returned home on 30 December to find the attic trap door open.
‘I found her lying with her head on a little chair and half lying on the floor.
She had fallen from the hatch.
Around her neck was a dressing gown sash.’
Sarah, a former student at Peter Symonds Sixth Form College in Winchester, was studying nutrition at Surrey University.
A close school friend, Paula Bolwell, 19, said Sarah had been unhappy when she had visited her at college.
‘She told me she had mucked up her first few weeks and was finding it very difficult to make friends.’
Jenny Holland, who shared a flat at university with Sarah, told the hearing she was quiet but did get on with her fellow students.
‘A couple of the girls felt she was being quiet and withdrawn and asked her if there was anything wrong.
She always said she was OK.
‘We had a Christmas party a week before the end of term and she helped out with the cooking and joined in the fun.
She was dancing on the tables with the rest of us.’
The inquest was told Sarah left her digs in early December but did not go to her home.
Police do not know where she went.
The Mid Hampshire coroner, Grahame Short, said: ‘It seems that Sarah was contemplating at that time taking her life.
‘Before she went to university she had great expectations but when she got there she was disappointed.
‘This was a tragic death and I have every sympathy for Sarah's parents.
They have lost their daughter at the prime of her life.
‘Sadly, it seems that some young people find it difficult to adjust when they leave home for the first time.’
A post-mortem examination revealed that death was due to hanging.
Mr Short recorded a verdict of suicide.
Ulster MP calls for review of jury system
AN MP last night called for a Government review of the jury system in Northern Ireland after an inquest failed to decide who had fired the first shots in a gun battle in which three Irish Republican Army men died.
Ken Maginnis, Ulster Unionist MP for  Fermanagh and South Tyrone, said the decision demonstrated the faults of the system.
‘The unsuitability of the jury system in cases of this kind is so apparent that the Government must look at the whole process,’ he said.
The inquest, in Enniskillen, Co Fermanagh, heard how undercover soldiers fired more than 200 rounds at a hijacked car during a shoot-out in which Michael Gerard Harte, his brother Martin and their brother-in-law Brian Mullin, all from Six Mile Cross near Omagh, died.
No warning was given by the soldiers because they believed their comrades' lives were in danger and they were under fire from the hijacked car, the hearing had been told.
Lawyers for the dead men contended no shots had been fired by the three and said the soldiers had dispensed a form of summary justice in the incident at Drumnakilly Road near Omagh, Co Tyrone, nearly five years ago.
The hearing ended last night with the jury members saying they were not sure who fired the first shots because they found the evidence was inconclusive.
Tories name candidate for crucial by-election
THE MAN who unsuccessfully opposed the Liberal democrat leader, Paddy Ashdown, at the general election was chosen last night as the candidate to fight the crucial Newbury by-election for the Conservatives.
Julian Davidson, 30, unmarried, and a consultant in design, printing and advertising, was selected from a short-list of three, which included a former Treasury minister, John Maples, who lost his Lewisham West seat at the last general election.
Mr Davidson will be defending a 12,357 Tory majority in this supposedly solid Conservative stronghold.
But with the Government's popularity having plunged over the past 11 months, he may have a struggle on his hands to beat off the Liberal Democrats, who were runners-up in Newbury last April.
The by-election for which no date has yet been fixed has been caused by the sudden death last month of Mrs Judith Chaplin, a former political adviser to the Prime Minister.
She was a newcomer to Parliament at the last election.
— PA
Anglo-Saxon church is revealed at Canterbury
HISTORY books will have to be rewritten in the light of archaeological research at Canterbury Cathedral which shows there was a massive church there in Anglo-Saxon times.
Excavations carried out while the cathedral's nave is being repaved confirm that the Anglo-Saxons were builders of great churches, contrary to the prevailing historical view.
The full extent of the ancient church on the site could not be gauged, Prof Martin Biddle, the cathedral's archaeological consultant, said yesterday.
But the findings showed the Anglo-Saxon nave was as wide and as long and almost as high as the present Norman one.
‘This does change the history books,’ Prof Biddle said.
‘People were writing only 20 years ago that Anglo-Saxon architecture was small in scale, but it is not true.
‘This tells us that the architecture of the England of Alfred, Edgar and Canute was the match of anything in Europe north of the Alps at that time.’
— PA 
Hotelier gets life sentence for wife's murder
A HOTELIER was yesterday jailed for life for the murder of his wife Monica, who disappeared nearly 11 years ago.
Peter Taylor, 64, also received concurrent sentences totalling 12 years for soliciting a man to commit the murder, conspiring with his daughter Susan Smith to murder her husband Howard and for soliciting Mr Smith's murder.
Mr Justice Auld made a hospital order under the Mental Health Act for Smith.
He told her: ‘Whatever Howard Smith's treatment of you — and I accept that it was evil and gross — you embarked on this conspiracy with your father to murder him with remarkable deliberation and involvement in the arrangements for his killing.’
The judge said he accepted Smith was suffering from a mental illness.
Earlier, the Winchester Crown Court jury found Taylor, of Boscombe Overcliff Drive, Bournemouth, guilty of soliciting a convicted burglar, Louis Matthews, to murder Monica Taylor in a contract killing.
Mr Matthews said Taylor offered him £500 to carry out the murder, which he declined.
Later, he learnt Mrs Taylor, a 53-year-old mother of three, had disappeared.
She has never been found.
The court was told that nine years after murdering his wife, Taylor plotted with his daughter to murder her husband in November 1991.
However, the two men he approached to arrange the murder were undercover detectives and Taylor and his daughter were arrested.
Taylor and Smith, 42, of Dousland, Devon, both admitted conspiring to murder her husband.
Smith sat sobbing and shaking in the dock with a prison officer between her and her father as the case was heard.
Mr Henry Blacksell, prosecuting, told the court the Crown accepted Smith knew nothing of the events in 1982 when, as the jury found, her father had murdered her mother.
The hearing was told Smith was psychologically terrorised by her husband.
She was said to have paid £1,000 towards the £2,000 down payment given to the undercover detectives by her father and Chief Superintendent John Homer said that in dealings with Mr Smith police had found him a difficult and opinionated man.
In an interview with police, Smith, who at the time was going through divorce proceedings but living in the same house as her husband, told them: ‘It was him or me.’
She said her husband had always been a bully and used to say they were both partners with a voting right but he had the casting vote.
She said her husband seemed to be unbalanced and capable of doing nasty things to their children.
Threats had been made to her and the children and in the end she had been driven over the edge.
Peter Taylor: solicited burglar for contract killing
Ferranti secures £20m contract
By Marcello Mega
A £20 MILLION contract which will help to safeguard about 100 jobs over the next few years has been won by GEC Ferranti of Edinburgh.
The firm, which is now part of GEC-Marconi Avionics, has been selected to develop a laser warner system for the European Fighter Aircraft, Eurofighter 2000.
GEC Ferranti is already employed on the £300 million development contract to create the radar for the EFA, which has been devised by Britain, Italy, Spain and Germany.
Yesterday's announcement was made by the defence procurement minister, Jonathan Aitken, in a written answer to a parliamentary question from the Labour MP for Edinburgh East, Gavin Strang.
Mr Aitken said that Ferranti had beaten impressive international competition for the contract.
The warner system will give pilots advance warning of the firing of enemy missiles or anti-aircraft artillery which use laser guidance or ranging systems.
It will integrate with the aircraft's defensive aids sub-system (DASS) and will be one of the first laser warner systems selected for fighter aircraft.
When laser energy is detected, the information is passed to the DASS control processor via a databus and the pilot is alerted to take appropriate action.
A spokesman for GEC Ferranti said: ‘This is a significant contract and will secure many jobs, mainly at the Silverknowes factory, for a number of years.
In addition, it involves new technology and we would hope that once the system is perfected large scale orders will follow.
‘In the meantime the system will be applied only to the EFA, but it will also be suitable for tanks and helicopters as well as other aircraft so it will be very good for future business.’
He added that the company was also hoping to secure another multi-million pound contract, for an integrated helmet-mounted display system.
Mr Strang said the winning of the contract was a tribute to the engineering capability at Ferranti, adding: ‘The long term benefit is probably even greater than the 100 jobs it will sustain over the next few years.’
Law chief calls for major review of justice system
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
THE leader of Scotland's solicitors called yesterday for an end to piecemeal tinkering and urged on the Government a major review of the entire system of justice.
Brian Adair, the president of the Law Society of Scotland, said that with underfunding and undermanning the country's criminal and civil courts were creaking at the seams in spite of efforts to shore them up.
He told the society's annual meeting at Gleneagles Hotel that the problems of delay, out-of-date procedure, expense and waste all demanded radical and innovative thinking.
However, the Government's approach, conditioned by the sole objective of reducing expenditure, was far too narrow and attacked only the soft underbelly without reaching the heart of the problem.
Stressing that his views were personal and not society policy, Mr Adair gave as examples of tinkering with the criminal system attempts to have the not proven verdict abolished, to introduce an offensive weapons charge and to examine the number of crimes committed by people already on bail.
‘They are all attempting to affect one tiny aspect of the criminal justice system, but without anybody having an overview of the whole system,’ he said.
Another complaint was the waste of police time in court, but by a relatively straightforward change in the law — to allow certain evidence to be produced by sworn statement without the witness having to appear personally — it could be eliminated at a stroke.
On the civil side, he suggested that all divorce custody and access disputes could be removed from the confrontational atmosphere of the existing courts to a family mediation court.
He also felt that there was a case for district courts taking some civil work, such as small claims, which at present had to go to the sheriff courts.
He said the Law Society already had a working party reviewing the criminal justice system and he was now setting up a similar group to identify areas which needed radical change in the civil field.
‘I invite the Government to set up a review body to investigate in depth the whole of our system of administration of justice.
If the Government accepts and consults with those who are at the litigation coal face it could create truly radical and effective changes.’
Mr Adair said that a review body chaired by a sheriff- principal could report by the end of the year.
‘Indeed a bill might be one of the first to come before the Scottish Grand Committee.
I would be delighted to think that it might be.’
Brian Adair: country's courts are creaking at the seams
Footballers plan rally over charges
By James Rougvie
ABOUT 2,000 young Sunday footballers intend to rally in Dundee City Square this weekend in protest at council plans more than to triple the cost of pitches and dressing rooms.
One Sunday league official yesterday forecast that more than half of the 130 teams, where boys of between nine and 15 play every Sunday, could go out of existence.
Pitch and dressing room charges have been pegged at £1.35 for a number of years, but now Dundee District Council is proposing a £4 charge.
An earlier proposal was £8, but that has been scaled down in the face of protest.
The assistant treasurer of the league, Jim Hampton, said it would lead to teams packing up because the volunteers running the teams could not afford the extra cost.
‘A lot of the teams are run by unemployed people who can barely afford the charges as they stand.
They are dipping into their pockets every week, despite sponsorship and fund raising activities.’
Mr Hampton's own club, Dryburgh Athletic, runs seven teams, and each could play up to three times a week at the end of the season to clear the fixture list.
‘If you add the £4 for a referee, it is a lot of money, and there are teams which will just fold up because they cannot find that kind of money.
Instead of training and playing, these children will be on the streets.’
The position could be eased slightly, said Mr Hampton, if the council were to stage the increase rather than bring in one huge rise.
The convener of the council's leisure and recreation committee, Charles Farquhar, says he understands the position since he is president of the long-established Lochee Boys' Club.
‘Even bringing down the charges to £4 means the council will be incurring a £40,000 loss.
I would regret it if teams cannot carry on, but the finances of the council are under pressure.
In this financial climate, what can we do?’
It is the intention of the organisers of the Sunday march to repeat the rally on Thursday evening, when the council meets to ratify the £4 proposal.
Editorial, Page 8
Cairngorm study winds up in failure
By Ewen MacAskill and Auslan Cramb
THE future of the Cairngorms, one of Scotland's most fragile mountain environments, is to be left in the balance after the failure of a Scottish Office advisory group to reach agreement.
The long-overdue report from the Cairngorms Working Party is to be published next Friday after more than two years of debate and consultation which sought to find solutions to cope with increasing people pressure on the area.
The Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, is expected not to accept the report's recommendations and instead opt for a period of public consultation.
The group, which was set up by Mr Lang, is embarrassingly split in its conclusions.
The basic divide is over whether the future management objectives can be achieved on a voluntary basis, as at present, or whether they should be taken on by a powerful national park authority, with separate funding and planning powers.
The overwhelming majority of the group, which is chaired by Magnus Magnusson, chairman of Scottish Natural Heritage, backs voluntary regulation.
That option has been rejected by two members, however — the noted mountaineer Eric Langmuir, who serves on the north-east board of SNH, and John Hunt, reserves manager for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
A minority report, signed by the two, will be published as an appendix when the main document is publicised in Braemar next week.
It is understood that Mr Hunt and Mr Langmuir do not dissent from the main recommendations for management, but they reject the voluntary partnership structure as a means of delivering good conservation practice in the mountains.
The Cairngorms, internationally recognised as an area of world importance, have been a battleground between environmentalists and developers, particularly over bad management by landowners including inappropriate forestry and the bulldozing of estate roads.
Mr Lang set up the working party in March 1991 after the Government rejected calls for national parks in Scotland.
The group was expected to have completed its recommendations by last spring, but it has been riven by controversy.
When the group was set up, Mr Lang asked it to ‘consider current land and land-related uses in the Cairngorms and to recommend an integrated management plan for the future that reflects the needs of natural resource conservation and enhancement, social and economic priorities and access for recreational purposes’.
Critics of the group's report will claim the differences between landowners and conservationists were irreconcilable from the start.
Around 250 responses were received last year commenting on the group's initial consultation paper, and 140 of them found fault.
Environmentalist groups are certain to argue that voluntary agreements with lairds, or designations such as national nature reserve or site of special scientific interest, have failed to protect the area.
When the working party was announced, it was claimed the membership had been loaded towards the landowning fraternity.
One environmentalist said last night that the report would reveal whether that criticism had been fair.
He could see no way by which the original proposals in the consultation paper would deliver the improvements necessary in the Cairngorms.
‘And if that is the case, this will have been one more long, expensive waste of time.’
Drug supply for prisoners in Saughton
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
DRUG-USING prisoners are to be given a heroin substitute for the first time in a Scottish jail in an effort to stop needle sharing.
A trial programme of prescribing methadone is to begin in the next two weeks at Edinburgh's Saughton prison.
It follows criticism that the authorities were failing to provide the same level of help for drug users which is available outside prison.
Methadone has been prescribed in Edinburgh for the past few years in an effort to control the spread of AIDS by offering people an alternative to injecting drugs.
However, the lack of a similar system in prison meant that jailed drug users were still sharing illicit injecting equipment.
That problem was recognised last year and has led to the introduction of the year-long pilot project which is to be the subject of independent monitoring.
John Durno, governor of Saughton prison, said yesterday that up to 200 prisoners could go through the programme in the year.
He said the prison would follow a methadone reduction programme rather than maintaining prisoners on the drug.
It is proposed that prisoners will be in the programme for three to four weeks, during which time they will be given counselling from both within the prison and from community-based drug workers.
Doctors have given warning that drug abuse in East Lothian is developing into a major health problem with worrying signs of a high level of needle sharing.
Drs Muriel Simmonte and Andrew Riley detail the problem in Edinburgh Medicine magazine.
‘The pattern…is similar to that observed with disastrous results in the drug users in the Muirhouse area of Edinburgh in the 1980s.
If a similar disaster of HIV spread is to be avoided in East Lothian, a co-ordinated and concerted effort to reduce high-risk behaviour is urgently required,’ they say.
Virgin set to take BA before US courts
TALKS aimed at settling the ‘dirty tricks’ dispute between British Airways and Virgin Atlantic collapsed in London yesterday bringing the long and bitter row to a new low.
Virgin said its lawyers had now been instructed to pursue legal action and the affair looks destined to go before the American courts.
Richard Branson's airline blamed the breakdown on BA for trying to impose a ‘gagging clause’ in an agreement which would have seen BA pay £9 million in compensation to Virgin.
The talks were set up after Virgin won a High Court libel action in London against BA over alleged ‘dirty tricks’ damaging Virgin's reputation.
Mr Branson yesterday asked the Government to appoint independent inspectors through the Department of Trade to investigate ‘BA's commercial practices towards their British rivals’.
The High Court action reached its climax on 11 January when BA issued a public apology to Virgin and paid it £610,000 for damage caused by libel.
But Virgin wanted compensation to cover commercial damage and pushed for limited undertakings regarding BA's future conduct.
Last week, Virgin said it was ready to settle if BA dropped a clause forbidding it from referring to the matter in future.
But yesterday's Virgin statement said: ‘British Airways has sought from Virgin onerous and impractical undertakings including silence over matters of historical record.’
Mr Branson commented: ‘It seems sad that after having accepted such a modest level of compensation we were unable to conclude an agreement.
I have no desire to rake over the past but we should have the right to refer to matters of historical record.
Censorship and true competition are incompatible.’
Later, British Airways said it regretted the breakdown of talks.
Its group managing director, Robert Ayling, said: ‘We made what we considered a generous settlement offer.
We also offered as an alternative to refer the question of compensation to an arbiter and to pay whatever he decided.
‘We have not sought to ‘gag’ Virgin.
We have simply asked it to agree not to rake over the events of the past and to join us in making it clear these events are behind us.’
A van with extra spark
A BUSINESSMAN'S van was purring when he drove down the A1 in East Lothian.
When strange squeaks came from the engine after five miles on the road, at speeds up to 60mph, David Koch pulled over to check.
Under the bonnet he found Sparky the cat scrambling across the battery.
‘I could not believe it,’ he said yesterday.
‘I must have travelled all the way with Sparky in the engine.
‘I got quite a surprise.
The cat must have got a bigger shock.
I guess she has used up one of her nine lives.
Sparky belongs to a neighbour of Mr Koch, of the Croft Houses, Stenton, East Lothian, and he returned her home, safe and well
.
Family pubs plan builds on Scottish success
PARENTS will be allowed to take children into pubs in England and Wales under sweeping proposals to ease licensing laws announced yesterday by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke.
Publicans would have to apply for a special children's certificate as they have to do in Scotland.
Mr Clarke said the arrangements in Scottish pubs had worked well since their introduction two years ago.
There will also be a new licence to allow French-style cafe bars to serve alcohol alongside food and non-alcoholic drinks.
The Government also wants to make it easier for people to obtain a drinks licence and to water down the power of licensing magistrates, who currently have absolute discretion to refuse applications, often without giving a reason.
Under the reform plans, children accompanied by an adult would be allowed into ‘suitable bar premises in certain defined circumstances, for example for a family meal, and then only up until, say, 8pm’.
Brewers hailed the move as ‘sheer common sense’, but anti-alcohol pressure groups and some MPs gave warning there would have to be stringent safety measures in pubs used by families with children.
Mr Clarke said the proposals were designed to bring licensing laws up-to-date and would provide greater choice, particularly for families with younger children.
He stressed the Government had ‘absolutely no intention’ of relaxing the ban on the sale of alcohol to under 18s, or of efforts to prevent underage drinking.
He said: ‘This will mean children can be given an introduction to sensible drinking in the company of their parents.
‘We believe it will help to stop children becoming lager louts when they reach the right age to be allowed to drink.’
The Brewers' Society strongly welcomed the move to allow children into pubs.
Its director, Robin Simpson, said: ‘It is actually sheer common sense to allow pubs to apply for these certificates.’
Bob Cartwright, public relations director of Bass Taverns, said: ‘We have seen it working well in Scotland and we believe it will also work well in England and Wales.’
The director of policy of the Consumers' Association, Stephen Locke, said it had been pressing the Government to introduce the measures for some time.
But Alcohol Concern called for careful monitoring of Mr Clarke's proposed changes.
Its director, Eric Appleby, said of the plan: ‘Before such a step is taken pubs must become better and safer places — places suitable for children.’
The shadow home secretary, Tony Blair, urged wide and open consultation of the proposals.
— PA 
KIRKCALDY £20,000 camera monitoring system
KIRKCALDY High Street is to be equipped with cameras in an attempt to reduce crime.
The district council has approved the installation of a £26,000 system.
Monitoring of the screens during common working hours will create two jobs for disabled people.
Security staff will take over at other times
.
ORKNEY Ship workers in strike ballot
SHIPPING services in Orkney face the threat of disruption as crews of the Orkney Islands Shipping Company vote on whether to take strike action.
Members of the Transport and General Workers' Union are taking part in a postal ballot after a breakdown of pay negotiations.
If they voted to strike, sailings between the Outer Isles and Mainland Orkney would be disrupted.
Results of the ballot will be known on Tuesday.
FIFE Changes to train timetables attacked
FIFE councillors have attacked plans for changes to the region's train timetables.
They fear the proposed withdrawal from 17 May of some stops by ScotRail and InterCity will cause further deterioration in the service.
Stations affected include Markinch, which serves Glenrothes, Ladybank and Cupar.
ScotRail and InterCity say the services they are withdrawing or altering will affect a small number of commuters
.
PAISLEY Man faces court over death
A 23-YEAR-old man is expected to appear in court in Paisley on Monday in connection with the death of a man in the town.
The body of the 56-year-old, whose name has not been released, was found in a house at Seedhill Road after an incident late on Thursday night.
Police said yesterday a report was being prepared for the procurator-fiscal.
Warders vote to bring back ‘Cages'
PRISON officers have called for the reopening of the special segregation unit in Inverness, called ‘the Cages’.
Opposition to the move, at the annual Scottish Prison Officers' Association conference in Inverness yesterday came from the staff of Porterfield Prison, Inverness, who claimed that the moth-balled unit would not fulfil the role for which it was originally intended — to house disruptive prisoners.
The unit was the scene of a violent riot in December 1972, three years after it opened.
One warder lost an eye in the battle to regain control.
Alan Shannon, a Peterhead delegate, who moved the successful motion, said: ‘Peterhead has been the dumping ground for disruptive prisoners for years.
Every other prison has an option but we have nothing.
‘We have to deal with them when they get disruptive, violent, angry.
‘I am a man who is six foot one inch tall.
But a man of five foot carrying a knife frightens me.
‘If we could get him away then it would help us get the situation stabilised.
These guys aren't rational.
Sometimes they don't know why they have done it or how to control it.
‘When they came back from the segregation unit they would thank us for getting the chance to get their heads together.’
Mick Feeney, a Barlinnie delegate, seconding the motion, said: ‘The unit was of great  benefit to the service because we could get the ringleaders of trouble out of the system for a while.
‘They appreciated the peace it gave them from the ones who wound them up and it gave us peace.
We need the Inverness unit back so we can keep trouble at bay.’
Gordon MacGregor, of Inverness, said he did not believe the unit would be re-opened to carry out the function conference wanted.
‘It is well-documented that we fought long and hard to keep it open,’ he added.
‘But we feel this resolution is now too little too late.’
However, the SPOA general secretary, Bill Goodall, said no final decision had been made on the unit's future.
He added: ‘It is not true that it will never reopen.
There is a need for this facility and the real reason it was mothballed was not because of the need for rationalisation — but it was an embarrassment.
‘So stop calling it the Cages.
It is a Segregation Unit.
We have to enlist the politicians to help us reopen it.’
The conference also overwhelmingly renewed its policy to bring back capital punishment.
Delegates stressed they were not demanding blood, but a real deterrent to murder and multiple murder.
Mr Goodall said: ‘We have to protect prison officers, police and society and in particular our children have to be protected.
‘
9 charges dropped in tyre depot drug trial
NINE of 13 drug charges against a former tyre depot manager were dropped at the High Court in Aberdeen yesterday.
The dropped charges included allegations that Alexander Murray, 34, of 30 Bethlin Mews, Kingswells, Aberdeen, had assaulted five men at Kenway Tyres, Bridge of Don, by injecting them with heroin.
Murray denies four remaining charges alleging he supplied heroin to five men at the depot on 31 December, 1991, and was concerned in supplying the drug.
Giving evidence in his own defence, Murray told the court: ‘I'm not trying to say I'm an angel but I'm not guilty of these charges.’
He told his defence advocate, Herbert Kerrigan, QC, he had been a registered heroin addict for several years and was taking methadone.
Murray said that before his arrest he had become aware drugs were being taken.
‘I was upset it was happening during working hours,’ he told the court.
He described as unbelievable a suggestion that he had asked staff about drugs at their job interviews.
Murray said one particular employee had been going about the depot under the influence of drugs.
‘It became frequent,’ he claimed.
He admitted taking heroin with one employee after work but denied introducing him to drugs or setting up any deals.
The trial continues.
Tourist chief urges better signs at sites
HISTORICAL monuments are so badly signposted that many visitors are unaware of their existence, the Scottish Tourist Board's chief executive, Tom Band, told a tourism conference yesterday, writes Alison Daniels.
Mr Band told the STB and Heritage Education Trust's conference on heritage, education and tourism at Hopetoun House, South Queensferry, that many tourists thought there was little more to Scottish history than Mary Queen of Scots and Bonnie Prince Charlie.
However, better signposting and effective presentation techniques could be used to illustrate Scotland's story from neolithic settlements to industrial sites.
While praising the work of bodies like the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland, he said the notion that a simple sign was not a serious way of dealing with history had to be discarded.
He announced the publication of a guide, Site Interpretation, for tourist sites.
Court rejects Timex claim
MANAGEMENT at Timex in Dundee failed yesterday to win a court order to prevent sacked workers from gathering near the factory gates as employees are bused in.
The firm went to the Court of Session in Edinburgh to try to get an interim interdict against the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, two officials and two shop stewards' leaders.
Lord Cullen rejected the Timex claim, however.
He said he was not satisfied that a case had been made that a nuisance was being caused.
He granted the union, its divisional organiser, John Kydd, district secretary, Gordon Samson, shop stewards' convener, John Kydd, jun, and deputy convener, William Leslie, the expenses of yesterday's hearing.
An earlier decision by the same judge preventing the four from organising or inciting mass pickets at the factory is due to go before three appeal judges next week.
Yesterday's court hearing came in the seventh week of the bitter dispute which began as a strike in protest over lay-offs then led to the sacking of 340 workers.
The firm wanted a court ban on sacked workers gathering near the factory's gates at times when staff were being bused in and out.
John Wright, counsel for Timex Electronics, told the judge the gatherings had produced disorder of an unacceptable level.
They were causing distress to the firm's staff and amounted to a nuisance.
Counsel for three of the trade unionists, Lynda Clark, QC, said Timex was seeking to prevent lawful meetings.
A Timex striker appeared at Dundee Sheriff Court yesterday charged with breach of the peace.
John Cowans, 20, of Liff Road, pled not guilty to a charge that he threatened Ronald Lee and Terence Quinn, both members of the new Timex staff, and that he challenged one of them to fight.
The alleged offence is said to have been committed in the Stack's Leisure Park, Lochee, on 12 March.
Sheriff Michael Munro imposed bail conditions forbidding Cowans from going within half a mile of the Timex factory at Harrison Road and preventing him from approaching anyone known or believed by him to be member of the new Timex workforce.
Trial was fixed for 9 June.
Nationalists stage water protest raid
SCOTTISH Nationalists took over part of the headquarters of one of England's largest water companies yesterday in protest at the possible privatisation of the industry in Scotland.
The demonstrators bluffed their way into the headquarters of Anglian Water, in the Prime Minister John Major's constituency town of Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, by walking in behind staff with security cards.
Ten Scottish National Party members invaded a room on the first floor of the building which they occupied for three hours before being evicted by security guards.
They agreed to go quietly on condition that their leader, Ian Morrison, was allowed to negotiate with AW management.
The protesters were demanding to see a confidential document written by Anglian Water to the Scottish Office about the reorganisation of Scottish water.
They claimed the Scottish people had a right to know what it was about.
Anglian Water refused to hand over details of the document.
A spokesman said: ‘The document expresses a view on the privatisation of Scottish water.
But it is confidential and we are not going to show it to anyone.’
Mr Morrison, organiser of the SNP Inverness branch, met two Anglian Water executives, Chris Mellor and Jim Adams, for half an hour and expressed his concerns about the privatisation plans.
An Anglian Water spokesman said he then agreed to leave.
After being led out of a back exit, one protestor, Euan Harper, vowed: ‘We will do whatever it takes, civil disobedience or whatever, but Scottish water will not be privatised.’
AYRSHIRE Pilots in training crash named
TWO MEN who died when their training aircraft crashed in a field in Ayrshire on Thursday were named yesterday as investigations into the cause of the accident continued.
British Aerospace Flying College said the men were Derek Smith, an instructor, of Newmilns, Ayrshire, and Paul Westwood, 36, a trainee pilot, of Bagshot, Surrey.
The men died when their plane crashed near Kirkoswald on a training flight.
Mr Smith, an experienced instructor, had been with the flying college of five years.
He was married with two adult sons.
Mr Westwood was employed by British Airways.
He joined the company in 1973.
He was married with two young children.
Council drops action against paper
By Alan Forbes
MONKLANDS District Council became the target of fresh accusations yesterday after it abandoned legal action against the local newspaper that had run a campaign against an alleged jobs-for-the-boys ‘mafia.’
The council's ruling Labour group decided last November to seek legal advice from counsel about taking action against the Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser.
The decision was taken after the paper had published a series of articles alleging nepotism in job appointments and an unfair distribution of funds in the district.
The articles were particularly embarrassing as Monklands comprised the constituencies of Labour's leader, John Smith, and the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke.
Yesterday, however, the council sent a fax to the Advertiser stating the legal action against it had been dropped.
The message added: ‘The district council has taken legal advice from senior counsel who have confirmed that the district council did have a case which it could competently pursue against the local paper.
‘The district council, however, is of the view that taking this case to court could lead to more damage to the area through adverse publicity and this would be against the interests of local people.
For this reason, subject to ratification by the full council, the district council will not proceed with legal action against the Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser.’
The editor of the Advertiser, Graham Isdale, said he was not surprised by the decision and he accused the council's leaders of wasting poll tax payers' money by pursuing action that was doomed to fail.
Gordon Lind, chairman of Monklands West Conservatives, claimed that Monklands had misused public funds in its pursuit of the paper and he said he would call on the  Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, and the local government Controller of Audit to investigate.
Mr Isdale said: ‘As far as I am aware the legal action related to our use of the term ‘Monklands mafia’.
That is ludicrous because the term has been used for over ten years, it was coined by Labour councillors and has even been used jokingly by the people it referred to.
‘The Labour Party has failed to grasp the nettle in Monklands and this is shown by the fact that the only real criticism in its inquiry report was directed at us, the local paper.’
The Advertiser was continuing to lose council advertising, Mr Isdale added, and public notices were now being placed in a recently established council newsletter.
‘It is more than coincidence that the council should create its own newsletter to carry notices after we were carrying the ‘Monklands mafia’ articles,’Mr Isdale said.
Man in rape case taken to hospital
A MAN accused of raping his three young granddaughters collapsed in court yesterday and was taken to hospital.
Minutes earlier, one of the girls had claimed her 64-year-old grandfather had abused her.
The girl, who will be seven next month, told the High Court in Glasgow that her grandfather had been wearing a red nose and had been dressed like a clown at the time.
After he had been taken to hospital by ambulance the judge, Lord Morison, adjourned the trial until Monday.
Earlier, the girl's eight-year-old sister had claimed that the grandfather, her father and an uncle had touched her private parts while wearing masks like Freddy Krueger, of the Nightmare on Elm Street films.
The grandad, their father, aged 38, and their mother's brother, 23, deny charges of raping the sisters and shameless indecency.
They also deny taking nude photographs of the girls, now aged eight, six and four, while they themselves were naked, and showing them to the girls' mother.
The sisters are giving evidence on closed-circuit television from a room in another part of the building.
Walkers granted beach access
A JUDGE ruled yesterday that the public have the right of access to an Argyll beauty spot, provided they walk.
Lord Coulsfield decided that there is a right of way from a road at Benderloch, by Oban, to Tralee beach for pedestrians.
Adrian and Elaine Lauder, of Kiel Crofts, Benderloch, raised an action at the Court of Session to vindicate an alleged public right of way along a track from the road to the beach.
Mr Lauder made use of the track for the diving business he runs, Lord Coulsfield said in a judgment issued yesterday.
The action was brought against Hugh MacColl, of Glencoe, and his sister Eugene Wright, of Dorking, Surrey, who own an estate which includes crofts, common grazings and the beach.
Lord Coulsfield said: ‘The question of the extent and nature of any rights of access to the beach has been much discussed locally and it appears that feelings have run fairly high.
Notices have, on occasions, been defaced and, on one occasion, a locked gate was removed from its mountings.’
The judge said that at one point a trench was dug across the track to prevent vehicles using it, but it was filled in.
Soon afterwards the track was blocked again by sand and gravel dumped on it.
The judge said Mr and Mrs Lauder conceded that from May 1972 effective steps were taken on the landowners' behalf to assert a right to exclude the public.
He said that some witnesses in the action had strong views about the rights of the public over the beach and quarrying which has been carried on there.
To establish a public right of way it was necessary for Mr and Mrs Lauder to show use by the public as of right for 40 years before May 1972.
Lord Coulsfield said it appeared probable that the track was built before the end of the 1920s.
Anne Black, who lives in the area, said that Sunday schools originally travelled to the beach by horse and cart.
Lord Coulsfield said: ‘In my view the use which is established by the evidence is as great as might be expected in the exercise of a public right.
‘It does not appear to me, however, that it has been established that there was sufficient use of the track by cars in the early 1930s to provide the foundation of a claim for a public right of way for vehicles.’
The judge said that in the circumstances he was prepared to grant Mr and Mrs Lauder's claim for a right of way for pedestrians.
Cancer victim fights for time
By Susan Dean
A DYING lung cancer victim is fighting against time to finish his evidence for his £500,000 test case against a tobacco company he blames for his illness.
Alfred McTear, 48, has contracted pneumonia and was unable to start giving evidence yesterday to the commission appointed to hear him before the full legal hearing, which may be two years away.
If successful, the case could allow thousands of similar claims worldwide.
McTear, a father of three, who has difficulty breathing, was due to resume giving his testimony before lawyers and court officials in the living-room of his council home in Beith, Ayrshire, yesterday.
The hearing, granted by the Court of Session because Mr McTear cannot leave his home, started on Tuesday but had to be abandoned on Wednesday when he became unwell during cross-examination.
John Carruthers, one of the solicitors acting for Mr McTear, said the family doctor had declared his client unfit yesterday and that Mr McTear himself felt too ill to proceed.
Proceedings had been due to resume on Monday next week, but the commission was on standby to travel down over the weekend if necessary if there was an improvement in his client's health.
‘His illness is so grave we will go down almost at any time,’ he said.
Mr Carruthers said that the vast majority of evidence was over but acknowledged he was concerned that Mr McTear would not be able to conclude his testimony.
‘He is determined to try to give all his evidence but he is most certainly fighting a race against time.
He is a very brave man.’
Mr McTear, a former 60-a-day smoker, is suing Imperial Tobacco for damages, claiming that the company failed to warn him of health hazards when he took up smoking in the mid 1960s.
By the time warnings were introduced, he says, he had become addicted.
His wife, Margaret, 47, will continue the battle after Mr McTear's death.
Firm calls for fresh look at £7m plan
By Alan Dron
A TOY firm appealed to Renfrew District Council yesterday to reconsider its plans for a £7 million scheme which it says would yield 800 jobs.
On Tuesday, the council's planning committee refused to consider the application by Toys R Us to open a store on Hillington industrial estate on the outskirts of Glasgow.
Yesterday, however, the firm resubmitted its application and its managing director, David Rurka, said he hoped it would encounter a changed attitude.
‘All we are asking for,’ he said, ‘is for the council to look at it and vote on it.’
A similar plan was turned down by Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, a year ago after a public inquiry, on the grounds the land was zoned for strategic industrial use.
The council does not have to consider a new application within two years, unless it differs substantially from the original.
The firm says it does.
Mr Rurka said he found the council's decision difficult to understand, but he stressed that he did not want an adversarial relationship.
‘We've never closed a store, but if we ever did close that one, we would be happy to restore the land for industrial use.’
The company has 105 stores in Europe.
This week's refusal to consider its application has led to a suspension of plans for further expansion in Dundee, Aberdeen and Stirling.
New homes give hope for Drumchapel's image
By Denny Macgee
THE regeneration of Drumchapel, one of Glasgow's notorious peripheral housing estates, took a big step forward yesterday with the start of building on the first rented homes to be erected in the area for 35 years.
The 42 houses which will be provided by a new resident- controlled housing organisation, will be built on the site of 1950s tenements in the Kingsridge and Cleddans area of the scheme, traditionally known as an area of poor housing.
The £2.4 million project is part of a £7 million investment in the Drumchapel estate by Scottish Homes over the next 12 months.
Sir James Mellon, chairman of Scottish Homes, said the start of the development marked the beginning of a new Drumchapel with radical changes to provide quality homes for the future.
He praised the Cernach Housing Co-operative for having ‘the vision and the guts’ to knock down old tenements and replace them with the type of housing the people of Drumchapel wanted.
Susan McDonald, chairman of Cernach Co-operative, said they wanted to make Kingsridge and Cleddans — known as ‘Up the Hill’ and an area where few wanted to live — into a place where people would have a sense of pride.
The co-operative hopes to transform the area's image.
BALERNO Primary school damaged in fire
A FIRE last night seriously damaged a primary school in Balerno, Midlothian.
Lothian and Borders fire crews were forced to call for extra assistance after the fire engulfed the kitchen and roof of Dean Park Primary School, a single-story building.
A brigade spokeswoman said that no cause had been established and there were no casualties.
Police receive 200 leads in Sheldon case
POLICE hunting the killers of Paul Sheldon are studying 200 leads they received after the release of likenesses of two suspects, writes Graeme Wilson.
Officers spent yesterday logging the information on to HOLMES, the police computer system.
Det Chief Insp George Brown, who is leading the police operation, said calls were still coming in after the pictures were released to the press and shown on BBC's Crimewatch UK.
‘None of the calls have hit me between the eyes so far as the vital piece of information, but I'm still hopeful that what we need may be in there,’ he said.
‘Morale among officers is very high, largely because the responses to every appeal have been fantastic.’
Detectives have dealt with about 2,500 people since the murder last month and taken more than 1,000 statements.
Paul, 20, died after he was stabbed while walking with his brother, Peter, and a friend, Tom Cole, on Whitehouse Loan, in Edinburgh.
Timex fails to ban sacked workers
MANAGEMENT at Timex in Dundee failed yesterday to win a court order to prevent sacked workers from gathering near the factory gates as employees are bused in.
The firm went to the Court of Session in Edinburgh to try to get an interim interdict against the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, two officials and two shop stewards' leaders.
Lord Cullen rejected the Timex claim, however.
He said he was not satisfied that a case had been made that a nuisance was being caused.
He granted the union, its divisional organiser, John Kydd, district secretary, Gordon Samson, shop stewards' convener, John Kydd jun, and deputy convener, William Leslie, the expenses of yesterday's hearing.
An earlier decision by the same judge preventing the four from organising or inciting mass pickets at the factory is due to go before three appeal judges next week.
Yesterday's hearing came in the seventh week of the dispute which began as a strike in protest over lay-offs then led to the sacking of 340 workers.
The firm wanted a court ban on sacked workers gathering near the factory's gates at times when staff were being bused in and out.
John Wright, counsel for Timex Electronics, told the judge the gatherings had produced disorder of an unacceptable level.
They were causing distress and amounted to a nuisance.
Counsel for three of the trade unionists, Lynda Clark, QC, said Timex was seeking to prevent lawful meetings.
Investor still keen on Monktonhall
By Marcello Mega
AS THE miners' consortium running Monktonhall Colliery completed an eighth week without pay yesterday, it was discovered that a potential major investor was certain the pit was viable.
One of the consortium's most experienced miners said: ‘A lot of the lads are in a desperate situation, but they are still turning up and working every hour.
They need and deserve a break.’
Monktonhall Mineworkers Ltd began to operate last year when 160 miners each invested £10,000 to reopen the pit.
As its board continued to seek backing to allow the company to ease its £1.7 million debt burden and step up production to meet contractual demands, The Scotsman learned that a Scots-registered firm was still interested.
Talks between Caledonian Mining, based in Nottinghamshire, and the consortium's leaders broke down on Tuesday amid accusations of a hostile take-over bid.
The company's chairman, Harris-born Colin Macleod, then said his interest had evaporated.
Yesterday, however, a source close to the company said that that was not the case.
‘Caledonian Mining remains interested in Monktonhall, but Macleod is no longer prepared to talk to the board in case it provokes further misleading comments to the press,’ the source said.
‘There is no doubt that the pit is viable, but…the miners there only have a second-hand machine they got from British Coal and one coalface…
The pit requires colossal investment.
The consortium has huge contracts with British Coal and ScottishPower but has been unable to fulfil them.’
He added that Caledonian Mining remained interested in obtaining a 70 per cent stake in the company.
‘The men would be paid wages and would remain shareholders.
The pit would be profitable and they would be able to repay their loans more quickly than they envisaged.’
Miners at the pit remained unimpressed, however.
Yesterday, one of them who lives in Prestonpans said: ‘We decided that Caledonian Mining would get in here over our dead bodies.
We didn't particularly have faith in them.
‘When you have been through what we have…you don't want to hand control over.
We are doing our damnedest to get the coal up and turn things round.’
He added that further investment was required to allow another coalface to be opened.
‘Then we will be able to pay our way.’
The consortium's dire financial position has prompted Lothian Regional Council to provide up to £25,000 for an independent survey of the pit's viability which it is hoped will restore confidence among potential investors.
An appeal was also opened for the mineworkers this week.
The pit's banker, the Bank of Scotland, said yesterday that the consortium's overdraft remained frozen.
SNP team occupies offices of water firm
SCOTTISH National Party members took over part of the headquarters of one of England's largest water companies yesterday in protest at the possible privatisation of the industry in Scotland.
The ten demonstrators bluffed their way into the headquarters of Anglian Water, in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire (the constituency of the Prime Minister, John Major), by walking in behind staff with security cards.
They occupied a room on the first floor for three hours before being evicted.
They agreed to go quietly on condition that their leader, Ian Morrison, could negotiate with AW management.
The protesters were demanding to see a confidential AW document to the Scottish Office about Scottish water.
They claimed the Scottish people had a right to know what it was about.
AW refused to hand over the document.
A spokesman said: ‘It expresses a view on the privatisation of Scottish water.
But it is confidential and we are not going to show it to anyone.’
Mr Morrison, organiser of the SNP's Inverness branch, met two AW executives, Chris Mellor and Jim Adams, and expressed concern about the privatisation plans.
One protestor, Euan Harper, vowed: ‘We will do whatever it takes, civil disobedience or whatever, but Scottish water will not be privatised.’
Sheriff attacks prison deaths
OVERNIGHT care for remand prisoners at Saughton prison in Edinburgh, where four men killed themselves last year, should be reviewed immediately, a sheriff said yesterday.
Sheriff Roger Craik, QC, made the recommendation in his findings after a fatal accident inquiry into the death of a prisoner, William McLeod, in September.
McLeod, 27, was discovered by prison officers hanging from a bed sheet attached to a window bar.
His cellmate slept through the tragedy.
He had been awaiting trial at the High Court on assault, robbery and firearms charges.
In a highly-critical judgment, issued at Edinburgh Sheriff Court, Sheriff Craik said the inquiry had revealed ‘an area of distinct slackness’.
The sheriff said it was ‘desirable’ that all remand prisoners be checked at least hourly every night and not just those identified as at risk from suicide, or poor health or those likely to try to escape.
‘It need hardly be stressed how undesirable a situation is, whereby a prisoner can hang himself and remain suspended for several hours within a cell, unbeknown to either his cellmate or the supervising authority,’ said the sheriff.
The sheriff also suggested the prison authorities look again at cell design to try to eradicate any potential risks and prevent prisoners blocking observation holes.
The observation hole in the cell occupied by Mr McLeod had been blocked, said the sheriff.
‘This is apparently against prison regulations, but little seems to have been done to enforce the rule.’
Concluding his findings, Sheriff Craik said he appreciated the prison authorities did not have an easy task and that their resources were limited, but added: ‘The steps recommended here are not fundamental ones and should, in my view, be attended to.’
The sheriff's findings into the death of another remand prisoner, John Sime, were also issued yesterday.
Sime, 44, died in November.
He hanged himself from a piece of sheet attached to a ventilation grille.
Sime had been in court on the day of his death and had displayed no anxiety or stress.
The sheriff again urged prison chiefs to look at cell design.
A Scottish Prison Service spokesman said it would look carefully at the recommendations.
New study call as rigs linked to leukaemia
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
FURTHER investigations into the causes of childhood leukaemia were called for yesterday after publication of a report which challenges the link with radioactive discharges.
The report was welcomed by the authorities at the Dounreay nuclear plant in Caithness, who said it was consistent with their view that radioactive emissions were far too low to cause any problems.
A spokesman added, however, that more detailed investigations were needed to determine exactly why clusters of cases had occurred around the country.
A prominent anti-nuclear campaigner in Caithness expressed caution about the report.
Lorraine Mann, of the Scottish Campaign against Nuclear Dumping, said it was too early to dismiss a connection between a cluster of cases around Thurso and the Dounreay plant.
She said suspicions still centred on the plant.
This latest controversy follows a report published yesterday in the British Medical Journal which suggests childhood leukaemia may be caused by an unidentified infectious agent, such as a virus.
The report linked a higher-than-normal number of cases among children in rural parts of Scotland to the development of the North Sea oil industry.
The theory is that the type of population mixing which took place on oil installations spread that agent among oil workers who then took it back to the areas in which they lived.
In rural areas which had never before been exposed to the agent, an increase in childhood leukaemia cases resulted.
The report looked specifically at the cluster of cases around Dounreay and concluded that they were most likely to have been caused by oil workers rather than emissions from the nuclear plant.
Mrs Mann said she found the infection theory difficult to sustain in explaining the Thurso cluster although she added that she would not discount it.
Lang gives green light for next regional elections
By Tom Morton
REGIONAL council elections will go ahead as planned in Scotland in May 1994, in spite of the councils' having less than two years to survive.
The Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, confirmed in Inverness yesterday that elections for the single-tier authorities would take place less than a year after those due next year for the regional councils.
Mr Lang heard representations from the Association of Highland District Councils and Highland Regional Council on options for local government in the Highlands.
‘I think the regional council elections will have to go ahead,’ Mr Lang said.
‘In order for them not to happen the law would have to be changed and, with the time it would take to change the law, we wouldn't be able to do so before the elections are due to happen.
‘In any event, I think one has to think very carefully before cancelling elections, even from the best of motives, because it is a diminution of local democracy.
‘I think it's a relatively small inconvenience, although I accept that it is inconvenient.’
A helicopter trip, intended to demonstrate ‘the size and diversity of the Highland area’ was laid on by the association for Mr Lang, although bad weather forced the cancellation of one leg.
The district councils group, which has employed a public relations company to press its case against replacing the districts with one or two large single-tier Highland authorities, also showed Mr Lang a video promoting their view.
‘To replace nine democratically elected authorities with one or two would hardly enhance local democracy and accountability,’ Alison Macgee, the convener of Sutherland District Council, said.
Mr Lang had lunch with senior Highland Region councillors, who afterwards argued for a single Highland authority based on the region to replace the current system.
Mr Lang praised the professionalism with which both points of view had been communicated.
‘It underlines the difficulties of the decisions we have to take and the importance of the issues,’ he said.
There was clear consensus on the need for a change to single-tier authorities, he said, but there was no option which would be applied across Scotland.
Notice would be taken of local circumstances.
‘I am conscious of the difficulties which apply either with one big authority or with a lot of small authorities,’ he said.
Mr Lang hopes to announce the decision on the boundaries of the new authorities in the next four months.
‘I hope to be able to legislate in the next parliamentary session,’ he said.
‘If we do that, the new authorities will be fully in operation by April 1996.’
Calcutta railway station blast kills bomb suspect
A BOMB exploded in a crowded railway station in Calcutta yesterday, killing one person and wounding at least 12 in the latest of a number of blasts in India.
A senior police officer, DN Biswas, quoted eyewitnesses as saying the person killed was carrying a suitcase which exploded.
The blast at the Sealdah railway terminus in central Calcutta occurred during the evening rush hour.
It was the second explosion this week in India's largest city.
Eight days days ago a series of blasts rocked Bombay, the country's business capital.
Police have said there was no link between the  incidents in the two cities.
Yesterday's explosion occurred soon after an express train from the northern city of Jammu had pulled up at Sealdah, Mr Biswas said.
He quoted eyewitnesses as saying a man disembarked carrying a suitcase which exploded.
The man was killed and at least 12 people around him were injured, the police official said, adding that the dead man had not yet been identified.
A railway spokesman, Gautam Banerjee, said the bomb went off when a police patrol stopped the man and wanted to search his bag.
‘The man became nervous and dropped the bag and it exploded.’
Mr Banerjee said only the would-be bomber had been killed, but witnesses and other railway officials said they had seen four bodies on the platform.
Sealdah is less than half a mile from the Bowbazaar district, where a cache of explosives blew up on Wednesday, killing at least 66 people.
Yesterday one eyewitness, Ganga Sau, who sells tea at the Sealdah station, said: ‘There was a tremendous explosion and all of us ran, remembering what happened in Bowbazaar.
We came back and found a man lying with a leg blown off, his face totally disfigured and a lot of blood everywhere.’
In Bombay, where at least 246 people were killed and about 1,200 injured in 13 bomb blasts last Friday, police said a large amount of explosives was still in the city and as yet unlocated.
They said two more people had been arrested yesterday, taking the total number of arrests in the case to 11. — Reuter and AP
New hope as cult ‘expects sign from God'
THE FBI said yesterday that the Texas cult leader David Koresh had indicated that he appears close to receiving a sign from God, implying that an end to his 20-day standoff with federal agents might be near.
‘I got the idea he was not talking in terms of weeks but was talking in terms of days,’ an FBI agent, Bob Ricks, told reporters.
‘He gave us an indication with regard to certain astrological things that are going on…if these things came to pass, we're talking in terms of days.’
The latest talks with Koresh were described as the most positive since 2 March, when he said he would walk out of the compound if an hour-long tape was broadcast.
But he reneged on that promise and said he would wait for a message from God.
Mr Ricks said Koresh had now told negotiators that astrological events were taking place that would meet his need for a sign from God.
‘It does appear he is now willing to focus on the main issue, that's why I'm hopeful,’ the agent added.
Followers of Koresh believe that he is the Messiah and that the end of the world is near.
The cult has been barricaded in a block of buildings since a shootout with federal agents on 28 February.
On Thursday the FBI played through loudspeakers tapes of previous conversations between negotiators and Koresh and a cult member, Steve Schneider, to make certain that all 105 followers still inside the compound were aware of what had been presented in the talks.
A stack of debris was cleared to provide agents an unobstructed view of the compound and drums of diesel and petrol were eliminated so the cult could not use the fuel as an incendiary device, Ricks said.
A package was delivered to the compound yesterday containing letters from lawyers appointed to represent several people inside.
Also included were copies of the search and arrest warrants, a religious tape and three magazines with articles on the situation.
Libya tells Arabs of Lockerbie proposals
ARAB foreign ministers agreed yesterday to relay to the United Nations new proposals from Libya to break its deadlock with the West over the Lockerbie bombing.
But Arab diplomats said the proposals did not change Libya's basic position — that suspects would be surrendered only if they were to stand trial on neutral ground.
The ministers, from seven Arab countries, met in Tunis on Thursday night and yesterday for a fresh attempt to resolve the stalemate.
The UN Security Council imposed an air and arms embargo on Libya last year in an effort to force the surrender of two men suspected of blowing up the American airliner over Lockerbie in 1988.
The meeting, called by Libya, was also attended by the secretary-general of the Arab League, Esmat Abdel Meguid, who told reporters later: ‘We call on the three Western countries — the US, Britain and France — to take account of the Libyan willingness to find a solution and avoid escalation of the crisis.’
He did not disclose the substance of the Libyan suggestions but a delegate at the meeting told Reuters: ‘Libya's proposals are still along the lines of its known positions, that the two could be tried only in a third country and not in the United States or Britain.’
The Security Council is due to review the Lockerbie dispute on 15 April.
Russian air force plane shot down by Georgia
GEORGIA shot down a Russian air force plane over the rebel region of Abkhazia yesterday and its leader warned Moscow against repeating ‘the mistakes of Afghanistan and Czechoslovakia.’
‘It is time to stop before it is too late,’ Eduard Shevardnadze told journalists in the Abkhazian village where the plane fell, killing its pilot.
‘The mistakes of Afghanistan and Czechoslovakia must not be repeated,’ he said, referring to Soviet invasions of the two states.
Georgia has accused Russian troops in Abkhazia of backing separatists who were driven back after trying to storm the regional capital Sukhumi this week.
But Russia says its forces are neutral in the conflict.
Moscow says Georgian forces have been attacking Russian bases in the volatile Black Sea province and has vowed to retaliate if the attacks continued.
Mr Shevardnadze said the Russian air force Sukhoi Su-27 plane was shot down early yesterday by Georgian troops as it flew over positions near Sukhumi, controlled by government forces.
The pilot, Major Vaclav Shipko, 34, was found dead.
But the Russian air force press centre in Moscow said Maj Shipko's plane and another SU-27 had been sent to prevent an attack on a paratroop base near the rebel capital of Gudauta, about 20 miles north of the frontline.
‘For half an hour Russian pilots were flying over the base, preventing a missile and bomb attack by two Georgian SU-25 fighters,’ an air force spokesman was quoted by Itar-Tass news agency as saying.
‘After that, contact with one of the Russian planes was cut off.
Intelligence reports say the plane caught fire and disintegrated in the air after being hit by a Georgian missile, launched from the ground,’ the spokesman added.
He said Russian planes were not carrying ‘air-to-surface’ missiles or bombs, which could allow them to attack targets on the ground.
Mr Shevardnadze says local Russian commanders are responsible and not President Boris Yeltsin.
Tbilisi was angered by a visit of the Russian defence minister, General Pavel Grachev, to Russian military bases in Abkhazia last month without informing the Georgian government.
In a television interview earlier yesterday Mr Shevardnadze angrily rejected charges from Gen Grachev that Georgia was waging war against its own people.
‘It is unprecedented cynicism,’ Mr Shevardnadze said.
‘These are ravings which originated in Russian intelligence and were imposed on Grachev.’
Tass quoted Gen Grachev as saying the Georgian air force had painted seven Su-25s in Russian colours and was using the planes to bomb populated areas.
‘A real war is being waged in Georgia by the government against its own people.
The Georgian side is trying to smear the Russian armed forces to make up for its own errors,’ he said.
Georgia's parliament appealed to the United Nations on Thursday, saying: ‘The events of recent days in Abkhazia confirm Russia is expanding the scope of its undeclared war against Georgia.’
Lost works of art returned by Russia
A GERMAN museum yesterday took possession of 101 priceless sketches, water colours and prints, part of a collection stolen by Red Army troops at the end of the Second World War.
The pictures, which include works by Durer, Goya and Toulouse-Lautrec, were moved to a castle north of Berlin from the Bremen art museum to escape Allied bombing raids but they disappeared as the war ended.
‘It was all a very pleasant surprise,’ museum director Siegfried Salzmann told a Moscow news conference.
‘We are glad the owner has handed over the pictures of his own free will rather than selling them on the Western art market.’
Experts have said the collection could be worth up to $20 million (£15 million).
— Reuter
Thousands of works of art once held in Russian and German museums are still missing after the war, including the famed Amber Chamber from the Imperial Summer Palace at Tsarskoe Selo, dismantled by the Germans when they occupied the outskirts of Leningrad.
No trace of the chamber has ever been found.
German embassy officials in Moscow said the unframed pictures, contained in a battered brown portfolio, had been handed back to the embassy by a former Red Army officer who insisted on remaining anonymous.
The portfolio would stay in Russia until authorities have given permission for the pictures to be exported.
‘We do not want to be accused of smuggling these pictures out of Russia, we want to do things quite officially and have to wait until the Russian ministry of culture says everything is all right,’ said embassy spokesman Enno Barker.
REUTER JHG ONW JMM
Whites die in Johannesburg attack From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
IN an apparent racial attack, black gunmen wielding AK47 rifles yesterday sprayed bullets at random at white motorists near Johannesburg, killing a mother and her 14-year-old son and seriously wounding three other people.
A telephone caller to the South African Press Association claiming to be a commander of the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA), the military wing of the radical black nationalist Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), said: ‘My people carried out the attack.’
The man, who declined to give his name, said the killings were in line with APLA's 1993 programme, which the shadowy organisation has dubbed ‘the Year of the Great Storm’.
The purported APLA man added: ‘White people can expect more such activities this year.’
APLA carried out a series of attacks in the Eastern Cape and Orange Free State late last year in which a number of whites were shot dead.
But earlier this month, the PAC appeared to have abandoned armed struggle when it agreed to attend next month's renewed multi-party constitutional talks.
At the same time, the PAC signed an all-party declaration rejecting violence and endorsing a negotiated solution to South Africa's political problems.
The movement had previously boycotted constitutional talks.
The attack took place about two miles beyond Johannesburg's southern suburbs at 7.30am as commuters were streaming to work and mothers were delivering children to school.
Eye witnesses said a green BMW cruised along the road with gunmen firing AK47s out of every window at passing white motorists.
Sandra Mitchley, 35, died immediately in a hail of bullets.
Her son, Shaun, died soon afterwards from his wounds on a garage forecourt, where he had been taken.
A 13-year-old schoolgirl, Clare Silberbauer, received massive head wounds.
She was helicoptered to hospital and is in critical condition.
Mrs Mitchley's husband, Norman, 47, is critically wounded.
Craig Lambrecht, a 16-year-old schoolboy, was badly wounded but his condition in hospital was said to be stable.
Several other motorists had near misses.
A woman driver, Erika Leukemans, said a bullet came through the windscreen and missed her head by centimetres.
The law and order minister, Hernus Kriel, announced a 200,000 rand (£43,500) reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the murderers.
‘The killings are made all the more reprehensible by the fact that innocent children were involved,’ he said.
A police helicopter traced the green BMW to Orange Farm, a giant squatter camp south of Johannesburg.
The gunmen fled into the endless fetid alleys of the sprawling camp, but the driver was arrested.
He claimed he was forced to drive the gunmen.
The murders mark a new turn in South Africa's violence.
Individual motorists are frequently shot outside their homes or when parking, usually so that thieves can take their cars.
BMWs are favourite targets.
They are then taken to ‘beauty shops’ in Soweto and other townships to be re-upholstered, re-sprayed and have their registration plates replaced.
They are driven to Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Zambia to be sold in a highly lucrative ‘export trade’.
At least seven other people were killed in various parts of South Africa yesterday, four of them in Natal, where just over two weeks ago six black school children were shot dead at point-blank range by AK47 gunmen.
Reacting to the killings, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Desmond Tutu, the Anglican archbishop of Cape Town, said it demonstrated it was time for all South Africa's politicians ‘for goodness sake to get off your butts and get on with the business of getting a new constitution for this country.
We are getting tired of people behaving like prima donnas.
I say this to all of them.’
Britain and Latvia agree on gold
BRITAIN agreed yesterday to hand over £47 million in gold to Latvia to compensate the Baltic state for lost assets deposited with the Bank of England before the Second World War.
The 210,720 ounces of Latvian gold was frozen by the bank after Stalin's Red Army overran the state, with its neighbours Lithuania and Estonia, in 1940.
In 1968 Britain reached an agreement with Moscow to sell gold from all three states for £5.8 million.
£500,000 went to Soviet coffers, the rest to reimburse UK businesses with outstanding claims.
When the Baltic republics became independent in 1991 they each lodged claims for the return of their assets.
Yesterday's agreement in Riga follows similar settlements with the other two states.
The trill of the first U-turn of spring
MY neighbour, a pensioner who does not qualify for income support, was melodramatic in her condemnation of the Chancellor.
‘He's nothing less than a murderer.
Does he not know that people will actually die, old folk who will turn down the heat without telling anyone?
If old people can't meet the bills, they don't use the heat.
He must know that.’
Less robust, but far more weighty, messages of similar import from Conservative back-benchers have been raining down on the heads of Norman Lamont and John Major since Tuesday's announcement that VAT will be imposed on domestic gas, electricity and coal.
Though with one significant difference.
In the Tory MPs' reckoning, the timetable for the introduction of the new tax was the prime concern, the impact falling in a likely election year.
There is real hope, probably futile, that the second hike to 17.5 per cent will somehow be wished away.
But more of that later.
In the turmoil which followed the Budget, it became impossible for ministers to conceal that, once again, the Government was in a muddle, making policy on the hoof around television and radio studios.
Was that the faint trill of the first U-turn of spring?
Was it a panic climb-down?
Or was it, in fact a stalling operation masquerading as action?
Already, John Major and his Cabinet colleagues have started rowing back, but not all on the same stroke.
Would special payments cover the full cost, £2-3 a week according to some estimates, of the extra VAT on fuel?
Will all pensioners be covered, or just those on income support?
The answers were clear as ash in a smouldering grate.
Within hours of junior social security minister Ann Widdecombe ruling out special payments for the elderly —‘why is it special?’— Major was telling her boss Peter Lilley and others to come up with a solution.
Within hours of that Downing Street meeting, Lilley was talking of ‘additional extra help for those on low incomes on top of the help that is already built in’.
A touch of deja vu started to creep in at this point.
Was not ‘cushion’ the term which eventually became vogue for the extra help which was thrown over the poll tax time and again in a vain attempt to douse the flames of dissent.
Just how deep and wide will this cushion have to be?
It is difficult to see through the vagueness now surrounding the Government's plans, but it is clear that ministers were both unprepared and unco-ordinated in their response to what MPs across the political divide detected as the stench of injustice.
The proportion of pensioners on income-related benefits, income support, is roughly a third of the total of just over nine million on state benefit.
Early government line, from Michael Portillo, the Treasury chief secretary, to Widdecombe, was that there was categorically no special help and that price rises would ‘by the normal route feed through into the retail price index’.
By Thursday afternoon this had been, to use a typical Whitehall term of understatement, finessed.
In other words a new policy had emerged to meet the crisis.
Thus Major was able to say amid Tory cheers: ‘That help will be additional to the future increase in pensions and other benefits which will take place automatically.
Cold weather payments will also be adjusted to reflect the increase in fuel costs.’
That last sentence was new too.
It did not amount to a commitment for full compensation for pensioners but it was a long way from where the Chancellor started two days earlier.
The hope among many is that Lamont, or as looks increasingly unlikely, his successor, will be able to pull back from the second rise when he comes to the December 1994 Budget.
That hope assumes economic recovery on a scale which the Chancellor himself is shy to predict.
But he is bold enough to suggest that this Budget, and the three-year-plan laid down within it, will win the Tories the next election.
Why?
The Opposition has had a field day with the charges of betrayal it could with so much justification fling at the Government over broken election promises.
It does little for the already low standing of politicians in the public esteem for Major to say effectively that they did not have plans to raise taxes then and they only did it because it was necessary.
Labour said it would raise taxes and was subject to the most sustained derision, as well as black propaganda.
Perhaps it is more courageous to break a promise if it means salvaging the economy, especially — and here cynicism rears its head too — if you stack the odds in favour of a pre-election tax give-away.
Politics is a tough and dirty game and there are dangers of high sanctimony creeping into the argument when moral standards in public life are brought into it.
Yet there is a link.
While it may be naive to think that much of the population really believes specific election pledges, that does not justify complacency.
It is up to politicians in a democracy to nurture faith in it, not devalue that faith.
The economy may well have turned the corner by the next election.
Yet the ravaging effects of unemployment, the recession scars, not least in the traditionally well-off south-east, will still be there.
Will income tax cuts wipe out the memory and the lasting experience of a wider indirect tax burden, which hits not just the very worst off, but those precious C2s, hardest?
And wouldn't it be ironic if John Smith, after much agonising about Labour's soul and purpose, bit the bullet, and, abandoning what many say was the reason for failure last time, promised not to put up taxes — and nobody believed him.
Back alleys
I was appalled to note in Peter Jones's report today of the Scottish Labour conference that in opposing the proposal to give the Scottish party greater autonomy the North Aberdeen MP, Bob Hughes, could warn delegates against the danger of ‘being dragged down the back alleys of silly little constitutional issues’.
I wonder how he reconciles this view with the ringing commitment by the Labour leader, John Smith, on the first day of the conference to the establishment of a Scottish parliament, capable of returning Scotland's possibly privatised water supplies to public ownership within the first year of the next Labour government.
We should be told if this too is a ‘silly little constitutional issue’ in Mr Hughes's opinion.
And if so, it is devoutly to be wished that both his SNP and Liberal Democrat opponents in North Aberdeen at the next election will together ensure that his constituents are reminded of their sitting member's fundamental disagreement with his own party's long-established policy on this key constitutional question.
New home for Scotland's records
THE COPIOUS volumes of records acquired each year by the Scottish Record Office are to be housed in a new repository on the outskirts of Edinburgh as the famous domed building on Princes Street is full.
A model of the new £11 million building, which will have 43 kilometres of shelving, was unveiled yesterday by the Scottish minister of state, Lord Fraser.
The repository will be located at Sighthill and named after a former 19th century deputy clerk register Thomas Thomson.
It will take all Scottish Office acquisitions until 2020.
In 25 years an extension will be built, extending the storage capacity until the year 2050.
Some 30 staff will move to the repository when it is completed in the summer of 1994.
The architects say the building has been designed to meet the highest archival standards so that the records can be stored at the correct temperature and humidity.
Speaking at the unveiling, Lord Fraser said it would house the one kilometre of records selected for storage each year.
On the steps of General Register House, Lord Fraser of Carmyllie (left) and Patrick Cadell, Keeper of the Records of Scotland, display a model of the planned repository at Sighthill HAMISH CAMPBELL
Hardliners fail in attempt to oust president immediately
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin appeared last night to have narrowly won a reprieve after the Russian parliament had voted overwhelmingly to take the first step towards his possible impeachment.
Angry deputies of the parliament, the Supreme Soviet, voted 125-16 to ask the Constitutional Court to rule on the president's announcement on Saturday that he was assuming special powers to force through a referendum on who rules Russia.
If the court finds that Mr Yeltsin's declaration of presidential rule violated the constitution, he could be impeached by the full parliament, the Congress of People's Deputies.
But the Supreme Soviet deputies rejected calls from hardliners to try to remove the 62-year-old president from office immediately and observers said Mr Yeltsin appeared to have won this round in his battle with the conservative-dominated parliament.
Abroad, Mr Yeltsin's assumption of special powers won general but wary support from world leaders.
The US president, Bill Clinton, hailed the Russian leader as the leader of ‘the historic movement towards democracy and free markets in Russia’ and made it clear that their planned summit meeting in Vancouver on 3 and 4 April would go ahead.
Britain, France and Germany were among other countries pledging their support.
But at home Mr Yeltsin's main rival, the parliamentary chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov, made it clear that the power struggle was far from over, and outside the parliament, thousands of protesters took to the streets both for and against the president.
A heavy police contingent, with more than 100 jeeps and bus loads of militiamen in reserve, separated the two sides.
In parliament Mr Khasbulatov criticised the ministers of defence, security and the interior, who had signed a government statement of support for Mr Yeltsin's declaration and appeared in the debate to declare their neutrality and respect for the constitution.
Afterwards liberal deputies expressed their relief that things had turned out as they had, while hardliners were correspondingly downcast.
In his broadcast on Saturday Mr Yeltsin said he had been forced to act to prevent the restoration of Communist rule.
He told Russians he had signed a decree effectively neutralising parliament.
If he won a referendum on 25 April, he said, parliament would be dissolved and its parent body, the Congress of People's Deputies, abolished completely.
Vice-President Alexander Rutskoi declared the measures unconstitutional and Valery Zorkin, chairman of the Constitutional Court, accused the president of staging a coup.
The hardline Russian Unity faction called for parliament to declare the president's powers suspended with immediate effect.
‘The prosecutor should begin legal action against those state officials who supported the coup including its main ideologue,’ a spokesman told deputies.
The main blow to Mr Yeltsin's critics came when the prime minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin — read out a government statement of support for the president pledging that the defence, interior and security ministers would remain faithful to ‘the principles of the constitution.’
This was close to Mr Yeltsin's initial appeal that he was forced to act to protect basic principles of the constitution such as democracy and human liberties.
The defence minister, General Pavel Grachev, called for a compromise and promised that the army would stay out of the dispute.
But he warned that ‘tempers are running high’ in some units.
‘Any attempt to split the army forces could lead to bloodshed,’ he told deputies.
Mr Yeltsin won backing from the Georgian leader and former Soviet foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, despite recent fighting between Russian and Georgian troops in the separatist region of Abkhazia.
But the former Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, told the Interfax news agency that Mr Yeltsin's declaration of emergency rule was ‘a serious political error that shows the narrowness of his political base.’
In another interview, with Italian radio, Mr Gorbachev said he was ready to serve Russia again if the people demanded it.
‘If things were to get worse, if the desire of the people is for Gorbachev to leave everything to deal again with the problems of Russia, then I am ready to do my duty,’ he was quoted as saying.
— Reuter and AP
Left routed in French poll
FRANCE'S conservative op-position routed the ruling Socialist Party in yesterday's first round of the general election and was heading for the biggest landslide victory this century.
Early today polling institutes forecast the opposition could win 440 to 476 of the 577 National Assembly seats after next Sunday's run-offs.
For the Socialists, in power for ten of the last 12 years, it was their worst general election defeat since 1968.
Sea search for lifeboatman
THREE lifeboats, three tugs and an RAF Sea King helicopter were yesterday searching for an 18-year-old lifeboatman who fell overboard from a fishing boat.
A spokesman for Tyne Tees Coastguards confirmed that the missing man was a member of Newbiggin lifeboat crew — one of the lifeboats taking part in the search off Whitby, North Yorkshire.
When the youth fell overboard from the boat Boy Peter, one of two others on board threw a liferaft towards him but he failed to reach it.
— PA
Hopes for missing fisherman fade
AN 18-YEAR-OLD fisherman who fell overboard early yesterday is presumed to have drowned, police said last night.
Lee Morris, of Newbiggin, went overboard at about 3:50am some three miles east of Whitley Bay while the vessel Boy Peter, on which he was a crew member, was putting out nets.
A search involving four lifeboats, an RAF and a police helicopter failed to find him and has been called off, police said.
— PA
Rave-goer's death still a mystery
THE RESULT of a post-mortem examination on a man who died after collapsing at a rave party will not be known for another 48 hours, police said yesterday.
The man, from Nottingham, was one of three, all aged 19, who collapsed at the all-night rave at the Hummingbird night club in Birmingham.
All were taken to the Dudley Road Hospital, where one died.
None of the men has been named.
The hospital said one remained seriously ill on a ventilator while the third had been discharged.
The youths collapsed inside the club in the early hours of Saturday.
Police have said there was evidence of drug taking at the £17-a-head event, including discarded packets of white powder and some cannabis resin, but there were no arrests for drugs.
The rave, attended by 2,000 people, was organised by Dance Planet from Oxford- shire and revellers were from all over the country.
— PA
Attempt to create a record curry hots up
AN ATTEMPT to create the world's biggest chicken curry — a one-tonne monster which could feed 10,000 diners — will be made on Saturday.
The chicken korma will take six hours to cook in a specially-built giant gas-fired pan at the Ideal Home Exhibition in London.
The curry is the creation of an Edinburgh restaurateur, Tommy Miah, who two days later will present a specially-cooked curry to 10 Downing Street to mark John Major's 50th birthday.
The monster korma will require hundreds of chickens, mounds of bayleaves and sacks of onions, but Mr Miah said: ‘I haven't calculated the exact quantities of ingredients yet.
‘I chose chicken korma because it is on the mild side for that number of people.
For Mr Major it will be something medium to spicy.’
Mr Miah, founder of Britain's Indian Chef of the Year contest, hopes the huge curry will earn a place in the Guinness Book of Records.
‘I checked and they said no-one has attempted it yet.’
His previous attempt on the world record was abandoned last year in Glasgow after health officials questioned whether the heat source would be powerful enough to heat the curry all the way through.
‘But this time we're confident there will be no problem.’
Mr Miah said.
— PA 
Tommy Miah: medium to spicy curry for Mr Major
Carey admits he made mistakes
THE ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury admitted yesterday he had made many mistakes during his two years in office.
In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph at the end of his second year as Archbishop, Dr George Carey said the next 12 months would be difficult for the Church as it focused on the ordination of women to the priesthood.
He added: ‘I am sure that if I had my time again there would be many things I would do differently’, but went on: ‘Criticism is part of the price of leadership.’
Lit cigarette turned car into fireball
AN ESSEX motorist turned his car into a fireball when he lit a cigarette as he drove home with a gallon can of petrol on the seat beside him.
John Chilvers, 21, died in hospital, in spite of escaping from the explosion.
He walked 100 yards to nearby cottages in St Marys Lane at West Horndon, near Brentwood, Essex, with his clothes alight.
Amazed residents who answered his frantic knock on the door threw water over him.
A police spokeswoman said: ‘He had a can of petrol in the car that he was taking home.
It appears he lit a cigarette which ignited the petrol fumes.
He managed to escape from the car and struggle to nearby houses where he was given first aid.
‘He was conscious immediately after the ordeal and was able to tell police what had happened.’
Mr Chilvers, who lived in West Horndon, was taken hospital and transferred to the burns unit at Billericay, where he died with his parents at his bedside.
A vehicle recovery man who took away the wrecked Maestro car said: ‘There was hardly anything left — just the number plate and part of the bumper.’
Desperate ways to achieve desperate means Alan Murray charts the IRA's strategy of using civilian carnage to further its message and looks at its possible next moves
THE IRA's wanton assault upon ordinary civilian life in Warrington on Saturday recalls the days of indiscriminate carnage inflicted upon the population of Northern Ireland, London and Birmingham in the early 1970s.
Then, the IRA's invention of the car bomb enabled the terrorist organisation ruthlessly to cut down innocent civilians and heighten the feelings of tension and despair.
That the IRA has chosen to play a deadly game with the civilian population in England with a second litter bin bomb attack in a month may indicate desperation or bloody mindedness, or both.
The Camden Town bomb attack in London at the end of February similarly injured several civilians, some seriously, and the IRA attempted to lay some blame for the carnage on the authorities.
But Saturday's tragic loss of life offers the Provisional leadership little opportunity to allay the blame that rests squarely on its shoulders.
The return to Warrington where a gasometer was destroyed three weeks ago may appear to set a curious pattern to the IRA's logistics, but it may be that recent arrests and seizures of weapons and explosives in London in early March has inflicted a major blow to their intentions in the capital.
It could also be that those who remain to resume operations in London are lying low because of the fear of target surveillance by increased security service activity and resources.
The attack on Warrington may simply mean that there remains intact in that area of England a small cell of perhaps no more than two activists who escaped detection and arrest in operations following the gasometer explosion.
Shortly after that attack, the IRA said it would increasingly target industrial infrastructure as part of its economic war to induce a declaration to withdraw from Northern Ireland by the Government.
But those long in the tooth in analysing IRA intentions well know that what is threatened in their terrorist statements is not necessarily what is planned to happen in the days ahead.
Reverting to attack civilians in such a wanton and callous fashion on a Saturday afternoon is no great surprise.
The Baltic Exchange attack in London at the general election last April inflicted civilian deaths, while the attacks in Manchester in November and the Harrods and Camden Town attacks have displayed unmistakable intent on the part of the IRA to inflict further numerous civilian casualties.
The precise reasoning behind the apparent intent to inflict fatalities and casualties among the civilian population in Britain is far from clear.
Sinn Fein is striving to be invited to inter-party talks between constitutional parties and the British and Irish Governments, but such talks are virtually ruled out by Unionists.
At the weekend the Unionist Party leader, Jim Molyneaux, said the proposition of talks being started again was ruled out until Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish Constitution are revoked and amended.
That precondition virtually destroys any expectation for talks this year, such as only the most optimistic have harboured.
In essence, the IRA's Army Council is relatively immune to seemingly minor political advances in Ulster or the underlying political vacuum that is more apparent now.
Local government elections loom in  foreboding fashion during May, with the Northern Ireland Office hoping for evidence of decline in support for both Sinn Fein and Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party.
But however slight either's demise might be in terms of council seats lost or poll percentage decline, there is little ground for optimism.
The Warrington explosion would serve to underline the widely accepted theory that the military element of the Provisional movement is very much in control of policy and that it will argue that civilian casualties in Britain will not impinge upon the vote from traditional quarters in Ulster.
Within the last ten days the leading Provisional figure, Martin McGuinness, took the  opportunity through the medium of the BBC to advise the British Government that the IRA would not move ‘unilaterally’ to bring its campaign to an end or declare a temporary ceasefire.
Perhaps the Provisionals' unexpected return to Warrington to inflict wicked carnage was a means of underlining that wearying message.
Its perpetration is a most despicable and worrying event and one that suggests that civilian rather than military or security targets guarded by armed men, may suit the IRA from a tactical and political standpoint at this juncture.
Whether it will more influence ordinary citizens in England to join the chorus for withdrawal from Northern Ireland chanted frequently by Tony Benn and Ken Livingstone remains to be seen.
In the lifetime of the current Westminster parliament, it appears inconceivable that the Government will go beyond its existing words to entreat Sinn Fein to parley.
It is difficult to envisage how the killing of a three-year-old child can squeeze a fundamental change of policy from a Government in a democracy.
But then, when military minds enjoy total and unfettered power in any context, the complexities of political reality can be battered beyond recognition, just like the body of a child pulverised by powerful explosive inhumanity.
Innocent victims: Colin and Wendy Parry outside the Warrington hospital where their son is being treated for bomb injuries
Policeman dies after stabbing
A CHIEF constable last night paid tribute to a police sergeant murdered on duty as he tackled a gang of teenagers — just days after being commended by a judge for his courage in facing a gunman.
A father-of-two, Sergeant Bill Forth, 34, died early yesterday after being stabbed in spite of efforts by a colleague and householders to save him.
Northumbria Chief Constable John Stevens said: ‘This incident is a tragic example of the extreme dangers faced by police officers going about their daily duties in protecting the public.
‘This young officer was highly respected by his colleagues and only recently commended by a Crown Court judge for his courageous actions during a firearms incident.
I am deeply saddened by the death of Sgt Forth and mourn the loss of a well-loved colleague.’
Sgt Forth and colleague PC Bill Hay, 35, went to the Clover Hill area of Sunniside, Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, just after midnight after a report of a disturbance, said to have involved a gang of youths threatening a teenager.
PC Hay went to investigate but raced back to the patrol car after receiving a call for help from Sgt Forth over his pocket radio.
He found his colleague struggling with two youths, and managed to arrest one after a brief chase.
Residents then told him the sergeant had been seriously wounded, and they took custody of the suspect so the constable could help his colleague.
In spite of his efforts and those of a nurse Sgt Forth died in the town's Queen Elizabeth Hospital soon after.
Sgt Forth from Sunderland was married with two children, Christopher, 10, and seven-year-old Rebecca.
His wife Gill was being comforted last night by family and friends.
He had been with the police for 14 years and only recently transferred to Whickham police station near Gateshead.
Mr Stevens said that PC Hay of Gateshead, who is married with two daughters, was extremely distraught and resting at home.
‘I and the rest of Northumbria Police will do everything in our power to support PC Hay and his dead colleague's family.
This is a very sad day for Northumbria Police,’ he added.
A post-mortem examination revealed that Sgt Forth died from multiple injuries.
It is understood that he was beaten with a wooden post before he was stabbed.
Within hours of the tragedy  colleagues and residents on the council estate laid wreaths and flowers at the spot where the officer fell.
The death brought renewed calls for stiffer penalties for killers of policemen.
A spokesman for the Police Federation said: ‘Life should mean life for people found guilty of murdering policemen.’
Last Thursday at Newcastle Crown Court, Judge William Crawford praised Sgt Forth's actions in a siege in Leam Lane, Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, last June following a bungled hold-up.
In the court case Judge Crawford told Sgt Forth: ‘You showed great courage and responsibility in dealing with this incident.’
The gunman, who was jailed for 18 months, fired into the ground when Sgt Forth, then working in CID, and another officer arrived at the scene.
The officers tracked the gunman in spite of being warned: ‘Back off or I'll kill you.’
Northumbria police said last night they were questioning a 15-year-old and a man of 25.
Sgt Bill Forth: highly respected by his colleagues
Computers put eyes on the blink
COMPUTERS can be a blinking nuisance to operators, researchers have discovered.
Japanese office workers were found to blink only one-third as often as normal when watching their computers, according to a study in the New England Journal of Medicine.
They kept their eyes wide open so tears evaporated more easily and dry eyes can be a reason why people using computers complain of eye strain, the researchers said.
Victim needed 20 stitches after attack
By Audrey Gillan
IT WAS not until he could taste his own blood that Ian Norrie realised he had been slashed — the pain from the punches disguised the feeling of cold metal entering his cheek.
His back was pushed against the wall as a youth set about him.
Yet he did not retaliate: he ‘just wanted it to be over’.
Mr Norrie had been walking along Leith's Great Junction Street on Friday evening when he saw two youths approaching him.
They began to  imitate him — the 28-year-old man is very conscious of his 6ft 3in and tends to stoop when he walks.
As they moved closer towards him words were exchanged.
‘It was just one of them who assaulted me.
I thought he had just punched me but he must have produced a knife,’ Mr Norrie mumbled through his swollen mouth.
‘I wasn't able to defend myself at all, I was just wanting to get it over with.’
The assault was over in seconds and Mr Norrie ran in to a local church where he asked the warden for help.
The victim was taken to the Royal Infirmary where he received 20 stitches.
He was later transferred to St John's hospital in Livingston where he underwent plastic surgery.
Mr Norrie rarely goes out because he seldom feels well.
He suffers from epilepsy and does not feel able to work.
He had gone into town on Friday afternoon to ‘get out of the house’.
‘I knew there was a number 32 bus at seven o'clock, so I decided I would walk down Leith Walk,’ he said.
He had just made it to Crabbies Distillery when he was assaulted.
‘I feel very afraid to go out now.
I think it will take a long time before I could go out on my own,’ Mr Norrie added.
‘People just shouldn't carry knives.’
Mr Norrie's father, John, is a church warden and the family live together in a tied house in Blackhall, Edinburgh.
The father and son had not spoken about the assault yesterday but John Norrie was clearly shaken by his son's facial injuries.
Jean Norrie said it was ‘just terrible’ explaining that her son doesn't drink and is a ‘very timid lad who doesn't keep at all well’.
She said: ‘He has been in a lot of pain and this just puts the lid on it.
He is very uptight about it.
He could have been a lot worse but the whole thing will upset him a lot.’
Lothian and Borders police have issued descriptions of the two men suspected of assaulting Mr Norrie.
The first is male, 6ft, around 20 with short black hair, of medium build and wearing a light coloured jacket and jeans.
The second is also male, 5ft 10in, 18 to 20 years old, of thin build and wore jeans.
Ian Norrie: ‘I was just wanting to get it over with’
Duns Scotus beatified after almost 700 years
By Marcello Mega
JOHN DUNS Scotus, long referred to as ‘Blessed’, has at last officially been given that exalted position by the Roman Catholic Church, almost 700 years after his death.
Pope John Paul II performed the beatification ceremony, which precedes canonisation, at St Peter's in the Vatican city at the weekend in the presence of a Scottish delegation which included Father Martin Johnston, the parish priest in Berwickshire where Duns Scotus was born.
At St Patrick's Church in Edinburgh, more than 500 people gathered to pay tribute to him on Saturday.
Duns Scotus is a major figure for the ecumenical movement in Scotland and that fact was recognised when the service took place at an evening prayer meeting attended by many non-Catholics, rather than during mass, as would have been normal.
Duns Scotus took his name from his home town and his country.
After his education in Scotland, he moved south and was ordained as a Franciscan priest in Northampton in 1291.
He taught at universities in England, France, Italy and Germany, and died aged 43 in Cologne in 1308.
John Duns Scotus: major figure in ecumenical movement
Thompson wins best actress award
EMMA THOMPSON won Britain's version of an Oscar last night, taking the best actress award for her role in Howards End, which was also named best film.
The British Academy of Film and Television Awards are seen as an early pointer to the Oscars which are to be announced in Hollywood on 29 March.
Howards End has nine nominations for American honours, including one for Thompson as best actress.
Her husband, Kenneth Branagh, won a Michael Balcon award for his contribution to cinema at last night's ceremony at London's Grosvenor House Hotel.
Thompson said: ‘I probably don't quite realise how nervous I will be at the Oscars.
I'm probably going to have some sort of a frothing fit before it and be flown home to England in a wooden crate.’
Robert Downey jun won the Best Actor award for his role in Sir Richard Attenborough's film Chaplin — he is also nominated for an Oscar.
Best British Film went to The Crying Game, which is also nominated for a hatful of Oscars.
In the television awards, John Thaw won best actor for Inspector Morse which also netted the Best Drama Series.
Helen Mirren won Best Actress for Prime Suspect 2.
Noel's House Party, won the Best Light Entertainment award for television.
The Joanna Lumley and Jennifer Saunders comedy, Absolutely Fabulous, took the Best Comedy award with Lumley taking Best Light Entertainment Performance for her role.
The Richard Dimbleby Award for the year's most important personal contribution to factual television went to the former BBC political editor, John Cole.
The Alan Clarke Award for outstanding creative contribution to TV went to producer Kenith Trodd.
Other award winners included:
Emma Thompson arrives for last night's BAFTA awards ceremony
Police chiefs give support to review of justice system
By Gary Duncan
DEMANDS for a full-scale review of the criminal justice system north of the Border yesterday won forceful backing from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland.
In a move which will increase pressure on the Scottish Office to consider establishing a review mirroring that under way in England, the nation's police chiefs said that they fully supported a call for a full investigation into the administration of justice made by Brian Adair, the president of the Law Society of Scotland.
In a speech to the society's annual general meeting on Friday, Mr Adair urged the Government to end what he called the piecemeal tinkering with the legal system.
He said the country's criminal and civil courts were creaking at the seams in spite of efforts to shore them up.
Mr Adair argued that the Government's approach to these difficulties was conditioned solely by the objective of cutting spending, was too narrow and ‘simply nibbles at the problem’.
In a statement yesterday, the police chiefs said: ‘The association wholeheartedly agrees with the views expressed by Mr Adair.
It is public knowledge that chief constables and police authorities have been concerned in recent years over the question of wastage of police officers’ time in court.
‘Steps have been taken to ameliorate the situation, but these are merely tinkering at the edges of a wider, more fundamental issue — the system which all of us have to operate cannot cope with today's problems.
‘Mr Adair's call for a review leading to a change in legislation is, in the opinion of the association, the correct way forward.
‘The association fully supports the society in this endeavour and stands prepared to make a significant contribution to any consultations that take place.’
Last night the Scottish Office said that the Government was far from complacent regarding a fundamental review of the criminal justice system.
However, in comments which appeared to reflect official reluctance to establish a full-scale review, the department emphasised the scale of existing activity on a whole range of related issues.
A spokesman said: ‘As the Secretary of State has repeatedly said, he will take account of any recommendations of the Royal Commission [in England and Wales]which are deemed appropriate for Scotland.
‘Further, as the minister of state, Lord Fraser, said recently, we currently have a major interdepartmental working group looking at all aspects of criminal justice legislation besides some eight other working groups looking at particular aspects of the system.
‘Far from sitting on our hands, we are being very active.’
‘Steps have been taken to ameliorate the situation, but these are merely tinkering at the edges of a wider, more fundamental issue — the system cannot cope with today's problems’
Doctor prescribes a large dose of the jitters
By John Smith
BY DAY, and often by night, Dr Graham Tydeman is a reassuring registrar in obstetrics at Falkirk Royal Infirmary, calming down anxious mothers as they give birth.
In his spare time, however, he is constructing a Silence of the Lambs-style cage in his garage near Armadale which is intended to frighten the living daylights out of anyone who enters it.
In his alter ego, Graham Tydeman has already made waves as a sculptor with the accent on the unusual; now, it would appear, he has excelled himself.
For his part in a week-long happening at Glasgow's Tramway Theatre in early May —‘an exploration around the body, halfway between theatre and sculptor’— he has drawn on his own private nightmare.
It was one, he said, which kept recurring…known as ‘locked in syndrome.
‘It's where you have a body which is only just ticking over, but where the brain survives.
You have a soul locked in — able to be in touch with the outside world, but with no way of communicating with it.’
Dr Tydeman said that he had only once seen a patient suffering from the condition and he found it particularly  frightening and disturbing.
The image had inspired the cage.
The top half of the welded steel structure, he continued, would be similar to that which featured in Silence of the Lambs and would have leather belts draped around it.
Before anyone goes in and sits on the dentist's chair which forms the centrepiece of the cage, Dr Tydeman will first monitor them using some external equipment.
Once inside, the volunteer will be linked to a battery of equipment to monitor blood pressure, heart sounds, the content of expired air, blood oxygen saturation levels and the rate by which air is being used.
‘Some of the results will be up on monitor screens for the audience to see — others will be broadcast.’
Dr Tydeman said that he had managed to persuade medical companies to donate £15,000 of equipment so far, and he was expecting double that amount to follow.
Cagey hobby: Dr Graham Tydeman inside the Silence of the Lambs-style cage he has constructed for an exhibition
Taylor urges judges to reflect public opinion
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
JUDGES must take into account public opinion when sentencing offenders and aim to leave everyone with a feeling that justice has been done, England's Lord Chief Justice, Lord Taylor, declared yesterday.
Speaking on sentencing policy to the Law Society of Scotland's annual conference at Gleneagles Hotel, Lord Taylor said there were two schools of thought — that which believed in the need for, and efficacy of, punishment and that which did not.
‘The argument for the reformers has been that punishment simply does not work.
Putting young offenders into a prison or other custodial establishment does not deter them from offending.
On the contrary, it is argued, such institutions simply breed crime because the novices learn from the old lags.
‘But there are powerful arguments for custody, not as a sentence of first resort but certainly as one weapon in the ‘armoury’.
If an offender, even a very young offender, has been given the benefit and assistance of probation and has been given a community service order, what is the court to do when he comes back again and again and again?
‘Short of repeating the same threat and wagging the same finger once more, which the offender soon learns to treat with contempt, there must surely be a custodial sanction available.
‘True, it may not necessarily reform the offender but at least it punishes him in a way which society would regard as just.
‘Moreover, the argument that a custodial institution is inevitably a university of crime depends very much on the regime there and the allocation of inmates.
‘Certainly, to put young offenders in the same prison and even in the same cell as hardened criminals will be counter-productive but more discriminating allocation of prisoners to suitable establishments with training facilities may well be capable of effecting reform and rehabilitation.’
Lord Taylor went on: ‘It is of prime importance that sentences passed should not be so far out of touch with the expectations of ordinary law- abiding citizens as to create discontent.
However forward-thinking the penologists, criminologists and bureaucrats in government departments may be, their views should not be allowed to prevail so as to impose a sentencing regime which is incomprehensible or unacceptable to right-thinking people generally.
‘If that happens there could be a real risk of aggrieved parties taking the law into their own hands.’
‘The sentence imposed must take account of public opinion and aim to leave all concerned with a feeling that justice has been done.’
Why was it, Lord Taylor asked, that there was so much criticism of individual sentences in the courts?
He was the first to concede that on occasions a judge got it wrong to the extent that a sentence was passed which was wholly unacceptable.
‘We are all human beings and we can all err on occasions.
When that happens the Court of Appeal can and usually does put it right, whether the sentence was too high or, as in a recent case from Wales, too low.’
(In Scotland the Crown at the moment does not have the power to appeal against sentences which it regards as too lenient, although moves are under way to give it such a right.)
Lord Taylor then went on to criticise the way in which the media reported some cases.
‘There are many occasions when perfectly sensible and reasonable sentences are subjected to criticism unfairly.
Often the press reports fail to state the facts completely or they slant their account of the case.
The impression the public gains is that judges frequently impose unsatisfactory sentences.
‘I do not for a moment doubt the right and duty of the media to comment on sentences and criticise judges.
But I wish they would aim at scrupulous accuracy regarding the facts and moderation in their comments.
An examination of the transcript of what the judge actually said in full not infrequently shows the comments to have been excessive and unfair.’
Editorial, Page 8
LINLITHGOW Man due in court on murder charge
A MAN, 25, is expected to appear at Linlithgow Sheriff Court today charged with the murder of a retired civil servant, Matthew Fleming.
Mr Fleming died from head injuries in Edinburgh's Western General Hospital after an attack in Livingston on 25-26 February.
Police confirmed yesterday a man has been arrested in connection with the killing and a report was being prepared for the procurator-fiscal.
Horse's death was ‘grudge killing'
THE owner of a valuable horse which was found bludgeoned to death said yesterday she believed the killing was carried out by someone with a grudge against her.
Tina McGuffog, 46, a planning enforcement officer, found the seven-year-old mare, Gala, dead in a field beside her home near Twynholm, Kirkcudbrightshire, when she returned last Wednesday afternoon.
She thought at first it had been shot.
But a post-mortem examination showed the animal had been felled by one blow with a sledge-hammer or similar weapon.
Mrs McGuffog said: ‘The blow was so fierce that Gala was killed by the brain hitting the back of the skull.
She died instantly.
‘The killer must have acted very quickly.
He knew what he was doing.
He must have come at least a mile across the fields and climbed over a stock-proof fence.’
The cottage is in a remote area, about three miles from the A75.
But at the time of the killing, Mrs McGuffog's husband Alan was in a shed 60 yards away, splitting logs.
‘I had my two dogs with me and on hindsight one of them was trying to tell me something,’ he said.
‘But I didn't hear a thing.’
Their daughter Helen, 8, who was ill in bed at the time, also heard nothing.
A pony in the same field was unharmed.
Gala was from a famous line.
Her father was a thoroughbred from the Trakehner stud, founded by William I, King of Prussia in 1732, and her mother was an Anglo-Arab.
Mrs McGuffog, who works in a Dumfries and Galloway regional council planning office in Castle Douglas, bought Gala 18 months ago.
She added: ‘I hope the police find the person who did this terrible thing.
I'm appealing to anyone who saw anything to come forward.’
A police spokesman said: ‘We have established that this was a deliberate act and we are investigating.’
Shetlanders claim oil resurfacing
FIERCE storms have churned up oil which had settled in rocky crevices along Shetland's west coast after the Braer tanker ran aground, local people claimed yesterday.
The waves were ‘coffee-coloured’ on Burra Isle, near the village of Hamnavoe, according to a Shetland Islands Council member, George Pottinger.
He said that the oil, which was spilled more than two months ago, had seeped into cracks and crevices along the coast and more had settled above the tide mark and on the sea bed.
He feared that shorelines would be repolluted with every storm for months to come.
‘Burra has not made a song and dance about how it has been affected,’ he said.
‘We kept hearing people say that the beaches were clean.
But the oil is very much in evidence here.
The problem has not gone away.’
A Hamnavoe salmon farmer, Walter Pottinger, said a brown froth had gathered along the shoreline.
‘The oil has far from disappeared,’ he said.
‘The sea has obviously come up and washed it out of the rocks and the heavy rain has probably washed the puddles of oil from high up on the banks where the sea wasn't reaching.’
He added that several people had told him their windows had been covered in oil again — a problem most islanders faced ten weeks ago when the Braer hit rocks near Sumburgh.
The council's pollution control officer, Jim Dickson, said he had heard no reports of oil pollution in that area and suggested the oil may have come from some other source.
‘The Braer oil is biodegradable.
It is impossible to get fresh oil two months after the event,’ he said.
‘About half a dozen times a year we find tarballs on that coast, which can come from right across the Atlantic, or passing ships could be to blame.’
Researchers study drug cost dilemma
A TEAM of medical researchers is studying the moral dilemma faced by doctors as they are forced to consider more closely the cost of the drugs they prescribe.
The work is being carried out at Britain's first centre for research into the economic value of drugs, based at Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee.
The Pharmacoeconomics Research Centre (PERC) is a joint initiative of Dundee and St Andrews universities and Tayside Health Board.
They say their study has been prompted by the Government's commitment to driving down medical bills, forcing NHS bodies to view ‘value for money’ as a key area of treatment policy.
The medical and scientific director, Dr Peter Davey, said: ‘Doctors have always had to make value judgments in their diagnoses and that is something that is never going to change.
‘What is new is the increased pressure within the health service for doctors to balance the effectiveness of drug treatment against what it is going to cost.’
He claimed the centre is structured to provide the necessary balance for training and for carrying out economic evaluations of medicines.
Dr Davey, a senior lecturer in clinical pharmacology at Dundee University, stressed the centre would not be promoting health service cutbacks.
‘Economics is not about cost-cutting, it is about getting the best use out of your resources,’ he said.
‘It is quite feasible for a patient to be prescribed a more expensive drug at the end of a pharmacoeconomic study.
Economic analysis helps the doctor to select the right treatment because it makes the moral issues absolutely explicit.’
Among the questions the study will address are the basic cost of certain drugs, the frequency of dosage and their means of administration.
Dr Davey said: ‘Any health service with limited resources has to take economics into account in its health care decisions.
By promoting economic aspects and bringing them out into the open for everyone to see, we are contributing towards better informed decisions on the part of prescribers and policy makers alike.’
Local protest over coal extraction plans
By John Smith
A PLAN to extract coal over 250 acres of farmland in an unspoiled corner of West Lothian has provoked a local protest.
Linlithgow's Labour MP, Tam Dalyell, has aligned himself with local people fighting the proposed workings and has expressed concern that they could damage or destroy a line of beech trees bounding the site.
Mr Dalyell has made his views known to West Lothian District Council and has pledged to raise the issue in parliament if necessary.
A petition is being raised in the nearby village of Armadale, where residents are angry at the prospect of encroachment on what has been described as the last ‘soft’ wooded landscape in the vicinity.
Locals in the attractive rural setting adjacent to the intended site on Woodbank Farm have also objected formally, as has the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland.
A large English opencast operator, Banks, which is working several sites in Scotland, plans to extract 76,000 tonnes of coal and 10,000 tonnes of fireclay.
The firm has told locals that extraction will last 18 months and that the site will be restored for agricultural use, with considerable tree planting.
The company has questioned the viability of taking coal from other seams at Woodbank Farm, but has refused to rule out the possibility of applying for further operations.
Willie Ferrier, the chairman of Armadale Community Council, said that mineral extraction around Armadale had left its mark.
‘Enough is enough.
There is no way they should be allowed the only attractive soft landscape area left, especially for such a paltry amount of coal.’
Dr Graham Tidiman, who lives near Woodbank Farm, said that the planned opencast site was a pleasant oasis in a decaying industrial landscape.
‘I am very concerned from the ecological point of view.
What is being contemplated here is the rape of a pleasant environment for the sake of a short term cash gain.’
Mr Dalyell said he felt strongly about the issue.
‘I think it is absurd to remove that beautiful countryside when we are at our wits end over what to do with deep-mined coal.’
He forecast that the proposed workings would mean losing the beeches which lined the avenue immediately to the north of the site.
Unlike other indigenous species, he added, they had long lateral roots.
Any damage would cause the trees to wither.
Karen Paterson, the council's principal planning officer, said that the environmental health department had indicated it was satisfied the opencast operation would not pose a noise or dust nuisance.
She said that a tree expert had been consulted and was coming back to the council with advice on the breadth of a ‘stand-off’ zone to ensure no damage to the beech roots.
She added that in planning policy terms, there was no good reason for officials recommending refusal of the application.
Axed staff pledge to besiege factory
By James Rougvie
SACKED Timex workers in Dundee intend to lay siege to their factory in an attempt to get their jobs back.
A massive demonstration of trade union muscle on Saturday, when 5,000 placard-waving supporters gathered in the city square, heard the stakes in the dispute raised dramatically with a call to shut the factory for good if management did not take back the 340 strikers.
Yesterday the shop stewards' convener, John Kydd, promised: ‘We can bring this company to its knees; it is a choice the company has to make.
We would prefer to go back but if we close it for good it would be far better to have no Timex in Dundee than a Timex with scab labour earning scab wages and working under scab conditions.’
On Friday the Law Lords in Edinburgh refused a Timex company management application for a ban on meetings taking place near the factory gates — interpreted by the union as paving the way for a show of force which will test the nerve of the company and its new recruits who daily run the gauntlet of jeering pickets and supporters.
Mr Kydd, who on Saturday challenged ‘there is not a police force in the country can keep these roads open’, added ‘we are now entitled by the court to have meetings and if we wanted to we could have half a million up there.’
The promised escalation in activity outside the factory may come at a crucial time for the company, according to Mr Kydd.
‘Timex is hoping to be the first in Europe to turn out a new £2,000 hi-fi system.
We were tooling up for it when we were sacked.
‘It is the latest technology and there is no way that their new workers will be able to meet the customers’ targets.’
He recalled also that the company had won awards for quality and production but added: ‘It will be difficult to portray that image when there are several hundred people at the factory gate shouting abuse at prospective customers.’
Saturday's rally was the first real indication of how much support the workers have attracted.
Miners from North Staffordshire wearing pit helmets, women from the Nottingham and Doncaster coalfields, workers from Yarrow and trade unionists from England and Scotland carried banners which were a roll call of industrial struggles past and present.
A petition was presented to Henry McCubbin, the Labour Euro MP for North-east Scotland, stating the Timex workers' case and calling for the introduction of standards of employment protection equalled to those in other European countries.
The shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, was given a polite, if muted, response when he called the sackings an affront to decency and justice but stopped short of endorsing a call for a national strike.
The Scottish Trades Union Congress general secretary, Campbell Christie, appealed to parents of new Timex recruits to persuade their families not to cross picket lines with the warning that they would be sacked quickly when it suited the company.
IAN RUTHERFORD Taking steps: marchers take part in the demonstration in Dundee at the weekend showing their support for the 340 strikers sacked by Timex
WICK Soldier dies in house blaze
A SOLDIER died yesterday after a fire at his home in Wick.
William James, 34, a sergeant with the Queen's Own Highlanders, was found dead in his smoke-filled home at Tulloch Ard, Scalesburn.
It is understood Sgt James, who was separated from his wife, was alone at the time of the fire.
He was a permanent staff instructor attached to a local Territorial Army unit.
Players cry foul over pitch fees
IN THEIR home and away strips, shell suits and trainers, more than 1,000 budding footballers gave Dundee District Council the red card yesterday over plans to raise the cost of hiring pitches and dressing rooms, writes James Rougvie.
Yesterday they boycotted their arranged games for what was a dress rehearsal for a protest later in the week when the council meets to decide its leisure and recreation charges.
The Dundee Sunday Boys' League, which has 130 teams ranging in age from nine to 15-year-olds playing in seven leagues, faces an increase of more than 300 per cent, which an official yesterday forecast would cause 80 per cent of the teams to fold.
At the moment, the teams pay £1.35 for the pitch and the same for the dressing facilities.
The council intends to raise the fees to £4, which would still lose it more than £40,000 a year, according to the leisure and recreation convener, Charles Farquhar.
Yesterday, busloads of lads were disgorged at the city square to make their feelings plain.
George Ferguson, vice-chairman of the league, said: ‘Every one of these kids knows what is at stake.
It is a pity the council do not know.’
Around a quarter of the managers were unemployed, he said, and the parents of the boys would have to try and make up the increase.
The league has prepared a financial breakdown of the costs of running a team in the under-12 section and including strips, first-aid kits, washing, referees and half-time juice, the total comes to £1,145 a year, before the new charges.
Cost to a club running teams in all sections of the league amounts to £8,199.
Mr Ferguson said: ‘What is it going to cost the council in terms of vandalism if all these 2,000 lads are wandering the streets?
We are not saying they are vandals, but what will they do?
It is not just the Sunday League, but Boys’ Brigade and Scouts who will also be affected.’
Lamont rejects VAT concession on fuel for poor
THE Chancellor, Norman Lamont, yesterday ruled out exempting needy people from VAT on domestic fuels as imposed in his Budget.
Amid the continuing row over the move, Mr Lamont said it would be expensive, inappropriate and an administrative nightmare to achieve.
But he repeated his promise that there would be extra help for poor pensioners and families on income support to assist them in meeting increased heating bills.
But Mr Lamont, appearing on BBC Television's Breakfast with Frost programme, refused to be drawn on ‘full compensation’ saying that the expression was not easily defined.
His comments drew a swift and furious response from Labour.
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, said: ‘There will be outrage and anger throughout the country as Norman Lamont refuses to guarantee full compensation for pensioners and others on low incomes facing up to £2 a week more on VAT.
‘The Chancellor is now rowing back from full compensation and he will never be trusted again.
This has shown that the Government is incapable of keeping its word, not just from one election to another but from one day to the next.’
Mr Brown vowed that Labour would mount a ‘nation-wide crusade’ for a guarantee of full compensation.
In a speech to the East Midlands Labour Party conference at Skegness, Lincolnshire, the Labour leader, John Smith, attacked the Government's ‘lies, deceit, betrayal, staggering cynicism and contempt’.
He said the Conservatives had achieved a ‘fraudulent’ election victory and had produced a ‘scandalous’Budget sweeping away all their manifesto pledges of a year ago.
Those hardest hit by the Budget were those least able to afford extra burdens.
Mr Lamont insisted that the Conservatives were committed to helping the poorest families over VAT on domestic fuels.
But he said it would not be remotely simple to achieve this by retaining zero-rating for a particular section of the community.
‘It would be expensive and I don't think it would be appropriate.
It would be an administrative nightmare to exempt certain people from VAT.’
Mr Lamont said: ‘Help for poorer people will be financed from the reserves.
I am giving no figures…
This measure in the Budget is designed to raise revenue.
I want to help those in adverse circumstances, but I do not want to give it all back.’
His comments came as it was revealed that three-quarters of Tory MPs wanted needy people to be protected from the tax on fuel and on the eve of a report, to be issued today, which said families in debt on their fuel bills were already choosing between heating and eating — even before the proposed addition of VAT.
In the report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, interviews with 48 households with pre-payment meters found people were limiting fuel consumption by having fewer cooked meals and using less hot water.
In extreme cases, people had gone without fuel for up to eight days over a series of two-week periods.
Consumers complained about unaffordable debt repayment settings on both gas and electricity meters.
Meanwhile, a poll of 75 Tory back-benchers in the Sunday Times showed three out of four believed pensioners and poor families should be fully compensated for the cost of the decision to impose VAT on domestic fuel.
The survey also showed, however, that the MPs strongly supported the principle of extending VAT to fuel, so long as the needy were protected.
University challenges Lang over trust move
By Denny Macgee
GLASGOW University has challenged the Scottish Secretary to justify not appointing a representative from the institution to the Yorkhill Trust.
The new trust will run Glasgow's Royal Hospital for Sick Children and the Queen Mother Maternity Hospital but Ian Lang took the decision because, he said, the trust's hospitals do not have a significant teaching function.
Professor Forrester Cockburn, head of the university's department of child health at the sick children's hospital, said the move had angered not only the university staff at Yorkhill, but the health service staff who work with them in a team effort at the hospitals.
Prof Cockburn, head of one of seven university departments involved at Yorkhill, added that Mr Lang's decision showed a lack of understanding of how a major teaching hospital works.
Under the legislation setting up hospital trusts, the National Health Service and Community Care Act, the Secretary of State has discretion to decide which hospitals have sufficient teaching and research functions to merit university representation.
Mr Lang has decided that Yorkhill and the city's Southern General Hospital do not have a scale of teaching and research to justify such representation.
However, the university has now written to the Scottish Office asking it to justify the decision.
In a separate move, the chairwoman of the new trust has said she would be open to the possibility of the trust co-opting a representative from the teaching departments involved at Yorkhill on to the board.
Joan Cameron, a former Provost of Bearsden and Milngavie, who will chair the trust, said there had to be some vehicle for liaison.
‘Otherwise, we cannot manage,’ she said.
Mrs Cameron said yesterday that she would have liked to see the university medical school represented on the board.
‘In an ideal world, I would have been delighted to have had someone from the university on the trust.’
She added: ‘As far as I know, there is nothing to stop the board co-opting.’
Glasgow University's principal, Sir William Fraser, has already expressed concern at the Secretary of State's decision and has written seeking an explanation of the ruling.
He said yesterday: ‘It appears that the Secretary of State has been advised that that Yorkhill complex does not have what the act calls ‘a significant teaching commitment’.
Since there are seven university departments involved, I find this difficult to understand and will be pursuing the matter with the Scottish Office.’
One member of the university staff has been appointed to the trust.
However, Sally Kuenssberg, a specialist in children's panel training in the department of adult and continuing education, says that she has been appointed as an individual with experience of the needs of children.
She said yesterday that it was not profitable for the new trust members to speculate on why the Scottish Office had not appointed a member of the medical school.
However, she added: ‘We know that Yorkhill is a world-class research and teaching establishment.
One of the functions of the non-executive members will be find ways of giving professors a meaningful voice in the trust, and early consideration will be given to that.’
Council buys back home after abuse find
By Alan Forbes
THE discovery by a young woman that her father had sexually abused her older sisters while they were children has led to a local authority agreeing to buy back a house it had sold into the private sector.
The woman, known only as Miss X to councillors, bought the house with her father, the sitting tenant, over a year ago.
Miss X had taken out the mortgage because her father was retired and she had intended that her fiance should move in with her and her parents.
Last May, several months after the purchase, the daughter discovered that her father had sexually abused her older sisters while they were children.
The discovery put the daughter in an almost impossible position.
Although she could no longer bear to live with her father, she could not abandon mortgage payments.
Had she done so, the house would have been repossessed by the building society and her mother made homeless.
Miss X and her fiance could not afford to buy another property, so she asked Glasgow District Council to repurchase the house so that her parents could stay on as tenants.
The council had no legal obligation to buy back the property and previous repurchases were virtually unheard of.
However, because of the unusual nature of the case, members of the district council's public sector housing subcommittee on management agreed to the request and agreed to assist Miss X on compassionate grounds.
The discovery of her father's history of abuse is not only a personal tragedy to Miss X. Resale of the family home means she has missed out financially because the house, valued at £32,500, was purchased by her for only £14,625 after a standard 55 per cent discount was made.
The distressing story of Miss X is contained among more mundane reports on council house allocations, lets and demolitions which were presented to the subcommittee.
The sub-committee chairman, Archie Simpson, said at the weekend: ‘This was a unique and extremely sad case.
I cannot remember a previous time when we have bought back a former council house.
But after we had heard background reports from social work and other sources, we agreed that we should buy the house back.’
Prepare for bitter struggle, black radicals told
From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
MEMBERS of the radical black Pan Africanist Congress were told by their leader yesterday to brace themselves for a bitter struggle as they celebrated the 33rd anniversary of the Sharpeville massacre with a fiery demonstration of militancy in the township where the killings occurred.
Youths dressed in the PAC's black and yellow colours shouted demands to be given AK47s and Scorpion machine-pistols as their president, Clarence Makwetu, eulogised the 69 people who died there at a PAC anti-pass law protest on 21 March, 1960.
The commemoration came as police yesterday accused the PAC's military wing, the Azanian People's Liberation Army, of carrying out an attack on Saturday night on a hotel in the Eastern Cape town of Fort Beaufort in which an 18 year old student, Fredrick Yearling, was shot dead.
The APLA is believed also to have carried out Friday's attack in Johannesburg in which white motorists where riddled with automatic weapons fire by black gunmen.
A mother and son were shot dead and a 13-year-old schoolgirl, Clare Silberbauer, was shot in the head and has undergone brain surgery.
Her father, Stan Silberbauer, said yesterday from his daughter's hospital bedside: ‘She does not see us, hear us or know us.
Men with guns, may God forgive you.’
Mr Makwetu told the chanting PAC youths at Sharpeville: ‘I appeal to you to brace yourselves for a bitter struggle.
We are still engaged in the unfolding campaign that started with the massacre of our people in this township on 21 March 21, 1960.
‘Our founding President, Robert Sobukwe, said ‘Now that they (the government) rely on the gun and we can get the gun, confrontation is inevitable.’
The current talks with the regime are just another method of struggle.
But we will pursue all other methods.’
Mr Makweto said the PAC was against power-sharing with the ruling National Party and the formation of an interim government.
The African National Congress from which the PAC split in 1959, has agreed that a transitional government should be established this year and that there should be five years of power-sharing between major parties after the country's first one man, one vote elections sometime next year.
At least nine other Sharpeville Day rallies were held in townships around Johannesburg, some organised by the ANC and others by the rival Zulu-oriented Inkatha Freedom Party.
At least one person was shot by unknown gunmen after an Inkatha rally, addressed by the party leader, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, had broken up in Katlehong.
At the rally Chief Buthelezi called on the ANC leader, Nelson Mandela, to ‘stop posturing’ and join him at a series of public meetings to eradicate violence in areas where ANC and Inkatha supporters have been at war.
‘I am appalled by the barbarity,’ the chief said.
’…We cannot and will not tolerated this massacre any longer…
I am ready tomorrow to meet with Mr Mandela because South Africa is at stake and the whole peace process is in jeopardy.’
On a road bypassing Katlehong black gunmen ambushed a car driven by a white man.
They tied him into the car and set it alight.
The motorist Mr Barnard Buys, who managed to wriggle free before the car exploded, said: ‘They kicked me and boxed me.
One who spoke good English told me ‘You Boer, you are going to die.
You must know 1993 is the year of terror.
Old white people and white children will be murdered.’‘
Two policemen were shot dead in  Johannesburg yesterday, bringing to 40 the number of South African police members who have been assassinated on duty so far this year.
Salvadorean right approves amnesty for war criminals
EL SALVADOR'S right-wing parties over the weekend forced through a controversial amnesty for army and rebel chiefs accused by a UN commission of human rights atrocities during 12 years of civil war.
The ruling ARENA party and its allies in the legislature passed the amnesty law with a simple majority after failing to win cross-party support.
The vote came just five days after the United Nations-appointed ‘Truth Commission’ report blamed the army for the vast majority of war crimes in a conflict that killed 75,000 people, most of them civilians.
‘This is an amnesty that, instead of unifying the country, will divide it even more,’ Ruben Zamora, opposition leader, said.
Hundreds of protesters on Saturday had forced the legislative session to be suspended for three hours as they shouted down ARENA deputies and screamed for justice.
Colonel Guillermo Benavides and Lieutenant Yusshy Mendoza, both serving 30 years in prison for killing six Jesuit priests in 1989, will be released under the amnesty.
The amnesty prevents the trial of other military leaders, including General Rene Emilio Ponce, the defence minister who was cited by the Truth Commission for ordering the Jesuit murders.
Rebel and opposition leaders had demanded that President Alfredo Cristiani and the assembly act on the recommendations of the Truth Commission before passing an amnesty.
These included removing dozens of military officers and all 14 Supreme Court judges, approving radical judicial reforms, banning everyone cited for rights abuses from public office for ten years and setting up a compensation fund for victims of the war.
Also, the administration of former US President Ronald Reagan withheld information from Congress and the public about some of the worst human rights abuses in El Salvador's civil war, the New York Times reported yesterday.
The newspaper said Reagan officials, and to a lesser extent officials from the administrations of Jimmy Carter and George Bush, may have covered up evidence of abuses to win approval from Congress of $6 billion (£4 billion) in aid.
— Reuter
The UN Security Council this week urged full compliance with the commission's recommendations and completion of a promised purge of military officers listed for rights abuses and corruption.
Right-wing deputies offered on Saturday to study the recommendations over the next 90 days.
Cristiani, the military and several rightist groups have attacked the report as biased and unjust.
Italian scandal claims another minister
THE Italian agriculture minister, Gianni Fontana, yesterday resigned from the government after being targeted by a corruption probe.
A spokesman said that Mr Fontana had put his mandate back in the hands of the prime minister, Giuliano Amato.
The corruption scandal tearing through the country forced out three ministers last month.
— Reuter
EGYPT Radical cleric to face new trial
EGYPT yesterday ordered the retrial of a radical Muslim cleric whose followers have been charged in the World Trade Centre bombing.
Egypt has accused the blind sheikh, Omar Abdel-Rahman, of fomenting violence which has killed 152 police and tourists in Egypt.
An earlier prosecution failed.
— AP
ISRAEL Security promise as six are killed
TWO Israeli soldiers died in ambushes and troops shot dead four Palestinians over the weekend in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Afterwards, the government announced it will increase protection for Israelis, both in the occupied territories and inside Israel.
— Reuter
PAKISTAN Landowner held 250 in own jail
A FEUDAL landowner has imprisoned 250 people as bonded labourers in a private jail in Pakistan, a local newspaper reported yesterday.
The Jang newspaper reported that two women who escaped said they were raped and men were tortured in the jail in Nawabkot, about 125 miles north-east of Karachi.
Many had been held for more than 15 years.
— Reuter
Conservative alliance in France routs Socialists
THE right-wing opposition alliance appeared last night to have crushed France's ruling Socialist Party and to be headed for the biggest Conservative victory in France's history.
On the basis of the first computer projections after polling stations closed last night, the alliance of the neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) and the centre-right Union for French Democracy (UDF) was expected to win up to 85 per cent of the 577 parliamentary seats with just 40 per cent of the votes.
The projected right-wing landslide is even bigger than expected.
Such a crushing victory inevitably puts a question mark over President Francois Mitterrand's future, despite his repeated insistence that there was no question of his resigning.
The projected abstention rate of around 31 per cent was relatively high for a French general election, showing voters disillusionment with politics in general.
The Socialists, who have ruled the country for the last five years, were expected to be left with less than 70 seats, after winning a mere 19 per cent of the vote — their lowest score in any general election in recent times.
The green alliance of the Green party and the Generation Ecologie, which only a couple of months ago was being credited with nearly 20 per cent of the vote, suffered a severe disappointment in seeing its projected score drop to 8.5 per cent— five less than its vote in last year's regional elections.
They are not expected to win any seats.
The official ecology alliance suffered from a proliferation of dissident ecologist candidates who picked up 3 to 4 per cent of the vote.
Less than a dozen of the official green candidates are now expected even to make it through to the second round of voting next Sunday.
It was  particularly galling for the greens to see themselves overtaken by the extreme right National Front, which was being credited last night with 12.5 per cent of the vote but was not expected to win more than a couple of seats.
The Communists, with a projected 8.5 per cent, were expected to win around a dozen seats.
That is nevertheless only half their present number, and well under the 20 needed to form a recognised parliamentary group with the privileges that entails.
Socialist leaders called last night on ‘all those who support the forces of progress’ to turn out in force next Sunday to prevent an overwhelming a conservative victory which, they said, would be dangerous for France.
Right-wing leaders were careful not to sound too victorious a note, fearing a possible demobilisation of their supporters next weekend through an excess of confidence and optimism.
They nevertheless had difficulty in hiding their satisfied smiles.
They are expected to win some 100 seats straight off in the first round of voting, and the Socialists none.
The early projections put the RPR just ahead of its UDF ally in terms of both votes and seats, making it likely that Mr Mitterrand would call on a neo-Gaullist to head the new government.
The RPR general secretary, Alain Juppe, said his party's electoral pact with the centre-right UDF of the former president, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, had paid dividends: ‘The dynamics of union worked.
The future government will have solid support.’
Mr Giscard d'Estaing said on television that Mr Mitterrand would have no choice but to hand over the conduct of France's affairs ‘to those who have this enormous majority in parliament’.
Asked if he thought the 76-year-old president should resign, he said: ‘That's his problem, not mine.’
If Jacques Chirac, the RPR leader, stands by his oft-expressed decision not to seek the prime minister's post, the job is thought most likely to go to Edouard Balladur, his former finance minister.
France is now facing its second period of cohabitation between a right-wing government and a socialist president, and if the statements of the conservative leaders are anything to go by, it is likely to be tougher than it was last time.
Gunmen fly out after embassy siege ends
FOUR of the five gunmen who had been occupying the Nicaraguan embassy in San Jose, Costa Rica, for nearly two weeks left the country yesterday a few hours after the siege had ended peacefully.
Jose Urbina Lara, leader of the group, who stormed the embassy on 8 March, stayed behind at the airport but was expected to leave later for the Dominican Republic, where he has been granted asylum.
The heavily armed gunmen initially took 24 hostages, but later released 14.
The remaining ten were freed early yesterday.
The gunmen had been demanding $6 million and changes in the Nicaraguan government.
Urbina said they had taken the embassy in protest against President Violeta Chamorro's policy of allowing left-wing Sandinistas to retain control of the police and army after she had beaten them in elections in 1990. — AP
UN commander in deal to evacuate Serbs
THE commander of UN forces in Bosnia, General Philippe Morillon, has reached an agreement to evacuate Serbs from the northern Bosnian Muslim stronghold of Tuzla, United Nations military officers said.
At the same time, United Nations sources in Sarajevo said it was hoped to use helicopters to evacuate more refugees from the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica, but final approval was still awaited.
The first Serb families could be brought out today in the Belgian trucks used to take 700 Muslims to Tuzla from Srebrenica on Saturday.
The vice-president of the self-declared Bosnian Serb Republic, Nikola Koljevic, said the Serbs had agreed to allow an airlift to evacuate the seriously wounded from Srebrenica but the agreement did not mean a permanent air link could be established with the Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia.
A spokeswoman for the Belgrade office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said the helicopter air bridge between Srebrenica and Tuzla was ‘under consideration’.
US planes dropped more aid over Srebrenica early yesterday but, for the first time, scattered individual packets rather than pallets to try to prevent a repetition of incidents in which starving inhabitants have attacked each other in the chaotic scramble for food.
The US European Command in Frankfurt said tests had shown that the new rations, falling slowly because of air pockets in the packaging, would not kill people on the ground and could be dropped directly over towns rather than nearby.
Meanwhile in the besieged Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, at least eight people were killed and 95 injured in fighting as rebel Serbs tightened their grip on the strategic western suburbs.
Serb artillery unleashed a ferocious barrage on the Old Town area and the residential neighbourhood of Vratnik at dawn.
Shelling, apparently from Muslim positions, also rained down on the airport, hub of the international relief airlift for the besieged capital, and closed the road leading from it into the city, UN officials said.
In Brussels yesterday NATO sources said the alliance had completed plans to enforce a no-fly zone over Bosnia, with the United Nations expected to approve the use of allied fighters this week to shoot down Serb or other planes flying over the republic.
The sources said the operation would be run from a NATO air headquarters at Vicenza, in north-eastern Italy, and would probably include fighters from the United States, Britain and France.
‘We're ready to go, just as soon as the UN tells us,’ said one source, who asked not to be identified.
Various plans were available, ranging from simple patrolling of the skies to bombing airfields in Serbia and elsewhere if necessary.
While NATO will run the operation, it will be under the strict political control of the UN, which can stop or modify the operation as it likes.
The UN Security Council is expected to vote for enforcement this week.
The resolution is also expected to include a ‘warning period’ of days or even weeks before enforcement begins.
Major's teflon coating wearing thin
WHATEVER way you look at it, whichever perspective you adopt, it is hard to resist one straightforward conclusion where John Major is concerned.
He has acquired a King Midas in reverse touch.
Everything he fingers politically seems to turn to dross.
The list, only two years into a premiership, stretches from the ERM and Maastricht to the coal mines and, now, VAT on fuel.
This latest presentational fiasco carries with it a perverse irony: it was that trickiest of time-honoured running sores, the cold climate allowance, which first brought Mr Major to public attention.
He survived the experience, albeit somewhat bruised, which is better than can be said for his predecessor as a social security minister, Ray Whitney.
Mr Whitney gave that infamous interview with BBC Scotland's Mary Marquis, in which he was widely seen to have patronised her in particular and Scots in general.
The barrage of public anger was intense, Mr Whitney returned to the backbenches not long afterwards.
Mr Major learned by his predecessor's mistake.
Indeed, in large measures, that could be identified as a central feature of Mr Major's ministerial career.
He learned from Nigel Lawson the depth of Mrs Thatcher's hostility towards the ERM and manoeuvred accordingly.
He learned from Mrs Thatcher the dangers of igniting the Tory divide over Europe and so returned from Maastricht, opt-outs in hand, proclaiming victory.
The only person he doesn't learn from, or at least so it seems, is himself.
This is about the only plausible remaining explanation for the midweek muck-up over VAT, heating and help for the poor.
The issue was as politically predictable as they come, there should have been no muddle as a result.
The fact that there was — much to Downing Street's fury, speaks volumes as to the unco-ordination of this Government.
This administration is a perpetual motion mess.
And the blame for that situation, ultimately, rests with Mr Major himself.
He controls all the key levers of government from No10, as chief executive it is his primary task to spot trouble coming up and to cope accordingly.
This week just past he not only failed to anticipate the row, he then reacted too slowly to it.
Most humiliating of all when he did intervene on the record he only contributed a further nuance to the policy confusion under way.
On all levels this is deficient leadership.
Mr Major must be a man with a beleaguered mentality — not thinking particularly straight, tending to take the wrong decisions.
There is no sureness of touch, no deft ability to square circles as and when required.
Maastricht, most of all, is sapping his and his party's reserves of energy.
Other issues, like the coal mines, seem incapable of resolution.
Even the final fallback position, Micawberism over the economy, seems doubtful.
Perhaps the most telling aspect of the great wad of paper work which MPs get handed at the end of the Budget statement was the revelation tucked away that, even on Norman Lamont's most optimistic financial forecast, the UK would not be in a position to meet the European Economic convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty.
So there you have it.
Put yourself inside Mr Major's head and see if you could find real reasons to be cheerful.
The central plank of your political philosophy — putting Britain at the heart of Europe and making sterling the Deutschmark of the Nineties — has collapsed.
Now you admit that all your fundamental objectives and ambitions which flowed from such a strategy are themselves unrealisable, certainly over the course of this parliament.
You know that from here on in the best that can be hoped for is a sufficient economic upturn, plus a helpful nudge from the boundary redistributions, to carry you back into power — again probably, with a modest parliamentary majority and all the headaches it brings.
It's survival but it's scarcely fun, far less fulfilment.
No wonder the man is making mistakes.
A picture as they say is worth a thousand words and so it was that on the afternoon unemployment broke through the three million barrier I chanced a glimpse of the private feelings of John Major.
He was exiting the Commons Chamber at the end of Prime Minister's Question Time and I happened to be walking along the corridor which he was entering.
He was in his stride, Michael Heseltine beside him.
They exchanged looks to the effect that the experience just over had been rough and unpleasant.
The hammer-the-dispatch-box-Major on public display in the chamber was, in private reality away from the cameras, rather haggard and harassed looking.
He strikes me as a man who meantime has ceased to enjoy his lot.
That realisation, as it begins to dawn on the Tory backbenches, will be a rather worrying one for his parliamentary colleagues.
The cleft stick plight which is his current political position is displayed most vividly over Mr Heseltine's coal mine dilemma.
Try as he might it is clear that he cannot make the economic figures add up, creative accounting or not, in a way which will make the parliamentary Tory Party arithmetic secure.
Heseltine has taken to private chats with the backbench malcontents in a last effort to smooth some sort of passage for his proposals, but the word is that there remain a frustrating number of irreconcilables around.
There seem only two possible outcomes to the present impasse.
Either the Government performs a climbdown of epic humiliation scale or it publishes and risks being damned in the division lobbies.
Each course involves still further political damage to Major, his earlier Teflon coating having long since worn through.
The disloyal mutterings about his leadership will grow, as will the possibility of a token candidate standing against him when his party position comes up for formal renewal in November.
This is sand-glass stuff and while each grain may seem small at the time there is an invincible logic to what happens in the end.
John Major is by no means finished — but I wonder, how strong his resilience and that of his party will prove to be?
Scottish Colourists' work up for auction
By James Johnston
WORKS by the Scottish Colourists, including Samuel John Peploe and John Duncan Fergusson, are included in a sale which Sotheby's is holding in Edinburgh tomorrow.
The sale of Scottish and sporting pictures and silver is one of the most important of the year held in Scotland by Sotheby's.
There are more than 350 lots, which were on view at Sotheby's in New Bond Street, London, earlier this month and which can still be seen today and tomorrow at the Assembly Rooms before the sale begins.
The silver will be auctioned from 3:30pm tomorrow and the pictures from 6pm.
There are four paintings by Peploe — three of which are expected to realise more than £20,000.
Samuel John Peploe (1871-1935) was born in Edinburgh.
He gained fame from his later still-life works.
Also on offer tomorrow is a painting by John Duncan Fergusson entitled Yachts, which has an estimated value of up to £35,000.
Born in Perthshire in 1874, Fergusson, who died in 1961, acknowledged a debt to the Glasgow School of painting which emphasised colour rather than line.
There are three works by Francis Cadell (1883-1937), another of the Scottish Colourists, included in the sale.
The saga of the World Chess Championship will reach an important stage in London today when the reigning champion, Gary Kasparov, and his British challenger, Nigel Short, will be at Simpson's-in-the-Strand, regarded as the London home of chess, to witness the opening of new sealed bids for the venue of their match.
On 23 February, FIDE, the World Chess Federation, announced that the 1993 championship would take place in Manchester, but both champion and challenger rejected the decision and have announced they will play each other outside the jurisdiction of FIDE under the auspices of a new body, the Professional Chess Association.
The Prince of Wales will attend the annual conference of the Scottish Crofters Union in Stornoway on Friday.
On the same day, the prince will open the new Western Isles Hospital in Stornoway and a new studio centre in the town for Grampian Television.
In London on Wednesday Christie's will offer for sale the Winchester rifle used by the legendary Annie Oakley, who, as a member of Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show, gained the reputation of the most phenomenal markswoman ever.
Playing to audiences of 20,000 or more in America, England, France, Austria and Italy at the end of last century, Annie could split playing cards in two with a .22 pistol, shoot glass balls out of the air from the back of a galloping horse or over her shoulder using a mirror for sighting.
Christie's has placed an estimate of between £15,000 and £25,000 on the smooth bore Winchester.
On offer at the same sale is a halfpenny coin dated 1890 which Annie Oakley shot through the centre at Earls Court, London.
This particular coin could fetch up to £500, according to Christie's.
In Aberdeen today, the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, will open the new headquarters of the Macaulay Research Institute.
On Friday in Washington President Clinton will meet Germany's Chancellor Kohl as the new US president continues to make personal acquaintanceship with world leaders.
On the same day, the Scottish Liberal Democrats will begin their annual conference, at Dunoon.
The conference, which will last for three days, will be addressed on the opening day by the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Paddy Ashdown.
In London tomorrow the winners of the Spectacle Wearer of the Year Awards will be named.
The awards are given to those who, in the opinion of the judges, promote the positive aspects of wearing glasses to the British public.
Last year's winners were Cliff Richard and Lorraine Kelly.
This year a new category, Spectacle Wearer of the Year at Large, will be awarded to an international figure of either sex.
The week's sports highlights include the naming today of the rugby players who will represent the British Lions on the tour to New Zealand.
On Wednesday, at Ibrox Stadium, Scotland will play Germany and on Saturday the annual university boat race between Oxford and Cambridge will take place on the Thames.
Judging public mood
A DAY on which this newspaper, not untypically, carries reports of a city centre bombing, a knife attack, a police murder and a drugs death might seem an inauspicious occasion to take issue with a judicial speech about the virtues of punishment.
There is little doubt that yesterday's Gleneagles address by England's Lord Chief Justice, Lord Taylor, will strike a chord with many people in its powerful, if scarcely original, defence of custodial sentences, its call for sentencing of a severity which matches public horror at crime and its hearty swipe at ‘forward-thinking’ social theorists.
Populism, however, is rarely the worse for sceptical assessment: particularly when it is equated with justice.
Lord Taylor's main point is to suggest that judges should pass sentence with an eye to the public's expectations.
Put like that, it sounds sensible and democratic.
The judiciary are an estate of the Crown and the servants of statute, and may therefore be supposed to be under a duty to reflect the public will.
The problem is one of definition.
Judges are not the first species that springs to mind as a faithful tribune of popular perception.
The familiar joke about mystification from the bench as to who is Bruce Springsteen or what is Eastenders may be a caricature but it is a recognisable one.
It is no less accurate than Lord Taylor's evocation of the ‘penologists, criminologists and bureaucrats’ who evidently conspire to hand villains the poor box.
These demons are contrasted with another caricature, that of ‘right thinking people,’ whom Lord Taylor sees as a truer measure of what is just.
Let us pay Lord Taylor the courtesy of assuming that he does not believe the social circle of the average judge to be a complete guide to right thinking.
How is a judge to gauge the popular view?
From the press, perhaps?
Yet, Lord Taylor accuses newspapers of slanting accounts of sentences, of failing to convey salient facts.
That would seem to imply little reliability as either a mirror or informer of public opinion.
Besides, opinion, even of the right-thinking variety, is neither homogeneous nor constant, and would be bigotry if it was.
It moves with events.
Current anxiety about crime no doubt deepens support for harsher sentences.
It has certainly amplified those voices who persistently argue that viewpoint.
Should sentences therefore ebb and flow with the same tides?
Surely, it is better for judges to do what Lord Taylor says the press fail to do, and weigh individual circumstances rather than some abstract impression of public mood.
It may not make them popular, but it will usually make them right.
Sixteen arrested at factory gates Timex dispute flares with violent clashes
By James Rougvie
STRIKERS and their supporters in the increasingly bitter Timex dispute clashed violently with police outside the firm's factory gates in Dundee yesterday morning.
In scenes reminiscent of the miners' strike a decade ago, one policewoman was injured and 14 people were arrested.
Two more people were detained after incidents yesterday afternoon.
Trouble erupted outside the factory gates as buses carrying workers hired to replace the 340 Timex staff sacked at the end of January, tried to break through the picket line.
The tension which had been building up since 7am when the 400 demonstrators began gathering, boiled over as the buses arrived two hours late.
Pickets broke through the police lines and flung themselves into the road in an attempt to stop the vehicles.
The initially slender police presence had been strengthened by reinforcements just before the unmarked buses arrived, but they were unable to stop scores of protesters.
The pickets were dragged away by police but others quickly took their places, and scuffles broke out as strikers attempted to rescue some of those arrested.
During the clashes, the replacement workers sat with their heads bowed and covered in the buses as the vehicles inched forward against the press of bodies.
They could be seen flinching at the hammering of fists against the sides of the buses.
It took the buses nearly 15 minutes to inch through the steel gates, two hours after the day shift had been due to start.
Earlier, other recruits of the 190 brought in by Timex were barracked as they drove through the lines in cars.
A spokesman for the company management said later: ‘Management at the Timex plant in Dundee deplores the activities of protesters outside its plant, tactics which are designed only to intimidate the workers who are coming into the plant.’
Yesterday's mass picket had been fuelled by last week's decision at the Court of Session to allow meetings at the gates, and by the wave of support for the sacked workers at a rally in Dundee on Saturday.
In the wake of the disturbances, union leaders alleged that one of the men arrested, the Scottish Militant leader and Glasgow councillor Tommy Sheridan, had been singled out by police for special treatment, and that the force had been heavy handed.
Later, the shop stewards' vice-convener, Willie Lesslie, told a meeting of the sacked workers: ‘This is a victory for the Timex unions.
This was what management wanted to prohibit but it is a victory for freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.’
The unity of the workers, he said, had prevented ‘scab’ buses from entering the plant for two hours, and he said that the mass picket would continue next Monday.
He later said he had seen people being slapped around and stamped on by police.
A full-time official of the Amalgamated Engineering Union, John Kydd, said his daughter, Margaret, had been ‘decked’ by police.
‘The police were bad.
They went in too heavily.’
A police spokesman said that 14 people had been arrested and a report was being prepared for the procurator-fiscal.
Another two pickets had been arrested during scuffles when the dayshift workers were leaving.
A police spokesman said the two would appear at Dundee Sheriff Court today.
The female police officer who was hurt with a slight ankle injury when a car ran over her foot, was allowed home from hospital after treatment.
A union spokesman said that none of the people arrested were from the sacked Timex workforce.
Henry McCubbin, Labour Euro MP for North-East Scotland, criticised ‘political scavengers’ who infiltrated the Timex picket lines.
‘Until their presence, the demonstration by the sacked workers has been noisy but well-behaved.
Now these troublemakers have given the management the excuse they need to harass the genuine pickets by pursuing further court orders,’ he said.
930322
Recovery hope as trade gap widens
BRITAIN's growing trade gap was hailed as an indicator of economic recovery yesterday.
Imports from countries outside the European Community exceeded exports by £1.334 billion last month compared with £1.060 billion in January — an increase in the deficit of £274 million.
Analysts said this was consistent with recovery as manufacturers bought more foreign materials, exporters switched to home markets and consumers had money for imported goods.
Meanwhile, fears of chaos and civil war in Russia sent a shiver through the capitalist world.
Share prices slumped on all the major exchanges.
Market reaction, Page 25
Hastings to lead Lions on New Zealand tour
GAVIN HASTINGS, the Watsonians and Scotland full-back, was preferred to England's Will Carling yesterday as captain of the British Lions on their summer tour of New Zealand, writes Mike Aitken.
The fourth Scot to captain the Lions since the Second World War, Hastings was one of eight men from north of the border selected in a 30-strong party which includes 16 Englishmen, four Welshmen and two Irish players.
The other Scottish backs are scrum-half Gary Armstrong and Gavin's younger brother Scott.
Five forwards — Peter Wright, Kenny Milne, Paul Burnell, Andy Reed and Damian Cronin — will also take part on the 13-game tour.
Wright and Reed became members of the Scottish international side this season.
Ian McGeechan, who stepped down as Scotland's coach this month, had already been appointed as Lions' coach against the All-Blacks.
Yeltsin seizes control of media
By David Wallen, Diplomatic Editor
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yesterday seized control of the Russian media to stop it falling under the control of hardliners opposed to him as the constitutional crisis deepened.
Soldiers were placed on guard outside newspapers and broadcasting offices.
The prime minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin, backing Mr Yeltsin, warned that Russia faced chaos, anarchy and economic collapse unless there was stability, but the head of the Constitutional Court examining the President's seizure of special powers declared: ‘When the road to compromise is exhausted, then war begins.’
Although the move on the media appeared high-handed the president said he would personally guarantee the freedom of newspapers, radio and television.
He ordered the interior ministry to defend the media physically in the face of threats by Communist hardliners in the Congress of People's Deputies that they would themselves seize control of the press and broadcasting organisations ahead of Mr Yeltsin's planned referendum on his authority on 25 April.
Mr Yeltsin said he would stop outside ‘interference’ in the media by those who wanted to curtail its freedom and take ‘additional measures’against anyone who constrained the work of journalists.
The Russian broadcast media and most newspapers are largely sympathetic to the president and could prove a powerful weapon in the national confidence vote.
The parliamentary chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov, has accused the media of bias and yesterday the parliament kept up its barrage of complaints against the media, saying television programmes closed the eyes of viewers to what it described as the anti-constitutional nature of the president's seizure of new powers.
Western leaders, including John Major, yesterday came out in Mr Yeltsin's defence and the White House made clear that it wanted to go ahead with the planned summit meeting between President Bill Clinton and Mr Yeltsin in April.
Mr Major sent a personal message of strong support, backing the Russian leader's moves towards democracy and economic reforms.
‘Russia needs effective democratic government respecting the rule of law — that is what we support and what you are seeking to achieve,’ Mr Major said.
He told Mr Yeltsin there was very wide support for his reforms in Britain and in Europe and added: ‘We shall continue to make this unambiguously clear.’
In a letter addressed ‘Dear Boris’ and signed ‘Yours John’Mr Major told the Russian president that he supported his emphasis on ‘controlling inflation, completing land reform and helping…businesses’.
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said the West had a duty to back Mr Yeltsin in his power struggle.
‘Anyone who supports the reforms must support the president,’ he said.
Mr Hurd said the choice between Mr Yeltsin and the Congress — a third of whose members he called former Communist ‘apparatchiks’— was between reform and regression.
‘Faced with that choice there can be no doubt what the outside friends of Russia should choose and I hope that will also be the choice of the Russian people,’ Mr Hurd said.
Apology for ‘genetic’ remark
A STRATHCLYDE region official has ‘unreservedly apologised’ for remarks linking genetics and the intelligence of Asian and black children which were condemned last week by community leaders.
David McNeil, who is retiring on Friday as senior depute director of education, admitted to ‘loose and inappropriate’ remarks after The Scotsman disclosed that his department is being investigated by the Commission for Racial Equality.
The CRE is investigating possible breaches of race relations and education laws over the region's testing of black and Asian children with suspected learning difficulties for special needs education.
Lang attacks ‘opt-out parents’
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
‘OPT-OUT parents’ were attacked by the Scottish Secretary yesterday for threatening to create a drop-out generation.
Ian Lang warned them not to let young minds be stupefied by computer games and video nasties, and encouraged local authorities to prosecute parents whose children were regular truants.
The Secretary of State was tackling negligent parents in a wide-ranging, keynote address to Conservative Party members in Aberdeen, designed to set out the Government's renewed — but traditional — agenda for schooling.
He argued there was a need to go back to basic skills and more disciplined teaching, and announced that, within two years, schools inspection teams are to include non-educationists on each visit.
The speech, which was the fourth of five setting out Mr Lang's long-term approach to policy in Scotland, concentrated on establishing discipline and respect for education, through ‘a triangle of trust between parents, teachers and children’.
It went further in tying education into a toughened approach to social policy, stressing that parent responsibilities go with the rights they have recently gained in schooling.
Mr Lang said a minority of parents were undermining schooling for all children through allowing truancy, failing to teach the difference between right and wrong and leaving education to schools.
‘Opt-out parents lead to drop-out children: and as long as we have unfulfilled youngsters, we are breeding a new generation of unfulfilled adults,’ he said.
Claiming truancy has risen significantly and is linked to crime, he encouraged local authorities to prosecute parents who fail to ensure children are at school.
In an interview with The Scotsman, he said: ‘It's an issue which goes wider than education — to family life and social values, and whether we are prepared to accept the responsibilities we have as well as the rights we enjoy.’
Mr Lang said: ‘Home life and school life are two sides of the same coin.’
The Scottish Secretary added: ‘Children have to be taught right from wrong and to value the distinction.
They have to be taught to respect others and to respect themselves.
That is the duty of parents and if they don't teach their children that, no teacher will be able to teach them anything else.’
John McFall, Labour's Scottish education spokesman, commented last night: ‘This is a case of opt-out ministers rather than opt-out parents.
They legislate from a distance and don't trust their own children to the state sector.
Opt-out parents lead to drop-out children: and as long as we have unfulfilled youngsters, we are breeding a new generation of unfulfilled adults.’
Clarke pledges security review after bombings
By Marcello Mega
SECURITY in Warrington is to be reviewed by the Government in the wake of the Irish Republican Army bombings at the weekend which left three-year-old Johnathan Ball dead and 56 people injured.
Amid the revulsion provoked by the attack, hopes grew yesterday that the life of the most seriously hurt victim, 12-year-old Tim Parry, may be saved.
He had not been expected to survive.
The Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, promised a considered review rather than a knee-jerk reaction to the atrocity after his hour-long meeting yesterday with Warrington's two Labour MPs, Doug Hoyle and Mike Hall.
The MPs said Mr Clarke had received them with great sympathy and had promised to take time to consider every possible factor which could strengthen the town's security.
Home Office sources said Mr Clarke intended to visit Warrington soon.
It is understood he initially thought of going there at the weekend but was advised against it by the police.
Last night, Cheshire police began a detailed examination of shop security video films in the search for clues to help trace the bombers.
About 20 tapes have already been handed over and the police hoped there would be more.
All will be meticulously examined to see whether any recorded the planting of the two bombs in litter bins.
Tim Parry, from Great Sankey, Warrington, who suffered terrible facial injuries, remained in a critical condition yesterday.
But he was stable enough to be transferred from the town's general hospital to the specialist Walton centre for neurology and neurosurgery in Liverpool, where he remains on a ventilator.
He was given a brain scan there that showed he did not need immediate brain surgery.
No early attempt will be made to rebuild his face.
‘The next 48 hours are critical,’ said a hospital spokesman.
‘Our mood has swung from deep depression to something approaching optimism.’
An official appeal to help the victims of the bombing has been set up by Warrington Borough Council.
The council's depute chief executive, Dennis Cooper, said donations should be sent to the National Westminster Bank in Sankey Street, Warrington (account number 710 39384, sort code 01-09-17).
IRA blames police, Page 2
Hastings to lead Lions on tour of New Zealand
GAVIN HASTINGS, the Watsonians and Scotland full-back, was preferred to England's Will Carling yesterday as captain of the British Lions on their summer tour of New Zealand, writes Mike Aitken.
The fourth Scot to captain the Lions since the Second World War, Hastings was one of eight men from north of the border selected in a 30-strong party which includes 16 Englishmen, four Welshmen and two Irish players.
Ian McGeechan, who stepped down as Scotland's coach this month, had already been appointed as Lions' coach against the All-Blacks.
Full reports, Page 24
Scots Ferranti boss to quit
GEC Ferranti and the managing director of its Scottish operation for the last five years, Ron Dunn, are to part company, writes Marcello Mega.
Mr Dunn, who is based in Edinburgh and joined Ferranti in 1962, confirmed last night that his departure was imminent but declined to offer any explanation.
Rumours of a split between him and the company had been rife at its plants yesterday.
Asked whether he had been asked to leave, Mr Dunn said: ‘It would not be correct to assume that but I would rather not comment.
I am still discussing the matter with the company and I do not wish to prejudice the outcome of those talks.
Nothing has been decided yet and no action has been taken.’
His departure comes at a time when GEC Ferranti is enjoying considerable success in securing major contracts in the face of stiff international competition.
On Friday, it was announced that the firm had secured a £20 million contract which would safeguard about 100 jobs, most of them in Edinburgh, for the next few years.
The deal involves the development of a laser warning system for the European Fighter Aircraft, Eurofighter 2000, which has been devised by Britain, Italy, Spain and Germany.
GEC Ferranti is already employed on the £300 million contract to create the radar for the EFA, and is among the favourites to win the task of developing an integrated helmet-mounted display system.
Despite the notable successes during Mr Dunn's years in charge, the period has also been a turbulent one with the recession and defence cuts forcing the company to announce hundreds of redundancies.
Ron Dunn: Still discussing the matter with the company
Horse slashed sixteen times
KNIFE attackers who slashed a horse 16 times and bound her legs with rope were being hunted by police yesterday.
It was the second attack on Tilly, a 22-month-old filly, in six weeks at her field in Woodside, Telford, Shropshire.
Police said the severely-shocked horse suffered three deep wounds which needed stitches.
The latest incident follows 24 attacks — one fatal — in Hampshire over the past year.
A Horsewatch scheme to protect animals was started last week.
Rail strike called after ballot on job fears
TRAVELLERS face chaos next week because of a one-day strike called by the biggest rail union.
The announcement yesterday came after members of the Rail Maritime and Transport union voted heavily in favour of industrial action over the threat of compulsory job losses.
British Rail will meet RMT union leaders today to try to head off the planned stoppage on April 2 — the same day as miners are on strike over the coal crisis.
The Association of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen and Transport Salaried Staffs Association have not held strike ballots, but it is highly unlikely any trains will run because RMT members work on the signalling system.
RMT officials selected the Friday strike date, BR's busiest day of the week, after rail workers voted by 26,097 to 16,314 for industrial action.
More than 15,000 trains run every day on BR, with extra services on a Friday.
The RMT general secretary, Jimmy Knapp, said it was possible that more 24-hour strikes would be held unless BR defused the dispute with guarantees of no compulsory job losses.
More than 7,000 rail jobs have been lost this year and 20,000 are under threat, according to the union, which last organised a series of one-day strikes, over pay, in 1989.
‘This ballot was a vote about jobs.
Jobs today are just as important as jobs in the future.
The message from railway staff is clear — enough is enough,’ said Mr Knapp.
He believed the travelling public would understand the reasons for the action.
‘There is an unquestionable link between job losses and deteriorating services.
So many track workers have been allowed to go that in some parts of the country we are not able to put gangs together to work on a proper maintenance programme.’
Mr Knapp said he hoped British Rail would recognise the anger among its 130,000 workers, but added: ‘The board is in danger of making the same mistake as in 1989 of underestimating the mood of its workforce.’
He accused BR of malice by employing contractors on work which could be done by redundant rail employees.
The British Rail chairman, Sir Bob Reid, said last night: ‘We have contacted Mr Knapp for urgent discussions and BR management are meeting him tomorrow with a view to finding a way through this so that we can avoid disruption to passengers.
‘I am hopeful that we will be able to avoid industrial action.
We will be making a very strong plea to them.
It is very important going into Easter that disruption does not take place.
It would be very unhelpful.’
BR said the ballot showed there were real reservations among rail staff over taking industrial action and urged the union to pull back from a strike.
Labour's transport spokesman, Brian Wilson, said: ‘This vote is the response of an industry in which morale is at rock bottom.’
Survey reveals Britain as the old man of Europe
BRITAIN has the highest proportion of over-60s in the European Community, a population survey reveals.
Nearly 21 per cent of Britons — 11,931,000 — are over 60 in an EC where numbers of elderly are soaring as life expectancy increases.
The average British male now has a life expectancy of 77.6 years compared with 75 in 1960, while women are expected to live until 81.7 compared with 78.9 in 1960.
In the last 30 years the number of over-60s has risen by almost 50 per cent in the EC, from 46.5 million to 68.6 million, according to the survey by the EC's statistical office.
By the year 2020 the number is expected to rise by at least the same amount to reach nearly 100 million over-60s in the 12 member states.
By then about 22 million people will be aged over 80.
Currently the highest proportions of over 80s are in Germany and France (3.8 per cent), closely followed by Britain and Denmark (3.7 per cent ).
Only Belgium has as high a proportion of over-60s as Britain (20.7 per cent), compared with the EC average of 19.9 per cent .
Half of all EC citizens over 55 die of circulatory diseases.
Cancer-related diseases are the next biggest killers.
Lung cancer kills 13 per cent of men who die between 55 and 64 in the EC countries, but only 5 per cent of women.
Breast cancer causes 14 per cent of female deaths in the same age group.
The survey, published yesterday, points out that 1993 is the European year of older people and ‘solidarity between generations’.
The statistics show older people are an increasingly significant social force in the Community.
The longest life expectancy in the Community is in Greece for men and France for women.
The Greek male lives on average to the age of 79.2 years and the French woman to 84.2 years of age.
The worst prospects, for both men and women are in Ireland, where the average man lives to 76.6 years of age and women 80.6.
Man jailed for revenge attack
A 23-YEAR-OLD customs man who drugged, bound and indecently assaulted his woman boss in a revenge attack after being passed over for promotion was jailed for seven years at the Old Bailey in London yesterday.
The administrative assistant snapped when he missed promotion after he received bad reports from his 28-year-old superior who, he thought, treated him like dirt, the court was told.
The man, who cannot be named for legal reasons, admitted the charges falsely imprisoning and indecently assaulting his superior on August 9 last year.
He said he got the idea from books he read, including The Red Dragon by the author Thomas Harris.
One dead in school canoe trip accident
AT LEAST one person died and three others were fighting for their lives after a school canoeing trip went disastrously wrong yesterday.
Eight youngsters aged 17 and 18, an instructor and two teachers were lost at sea for hours when their vessels capsized.
Ten of the party were found off Lyme Regis, Dorset, four hours after a major air and sea search.
The 11th member was found an hour later.
They were all taken to Weymouth district hospital, where a spokesman said one had died and three were critically ill.
Four others were suffering from hypothermia.
The accident baffled rescuers, because weather conditions were considered good.
A Royal Navy spokesman said: ‘They appear to have gone off course and were about five miles from shore.’
The canoeists were due to travel along the coastline from Lyme Regis to Charmouth.
The alarm was raised when they failed to turn up at their destination at 1pm.
An empty canoe was found two hours later.
The party, thought to be from the Plymouth area, set off from the St Albans Centre, Lyme Regis, which specialises in school journeys and field trips.
Dublin peace campaigners to target Scotland
By Alison Daniels
PEACE protesters in Dublin are planning to bring their message to Scotland later this year, after the Irish Republican Army attacks in Warrington at the weekend.
The protesters, from the Peace Train Organisation which has run six trains along the Dublin to Belfast line, the main rail link between north and south, were collecting signatures for a peace declaration in Dublin's city centre yesterday.
The group aims to present the Irish president, Mary Robinson, with the petition.
One of the group's founding members, Sean O'Cionnaith, said the majority of the Irish people were absolutely revolted by the Warrington bombing.
He said people in Britain must realise that such attacks did not have the support of the majority of Irish people.
He said the group hoped to run a peace train from Dublin to Scotland to reinforce the message that terrorism would not unite Ireland.
He said the group had chosen Scotland because racism and bigotry needed to be addressed here.
Mr O'Cionnaith said he hoped people both inside and outside Ireland would realise the IRA did not act on anyone's behalf.
He said he hoped the peace train to Scotland would  emphasise this message.
Trawlermen end blockade of Teesport
TRAWLERMEN blockading Britain's second largest commercial port yesterday called off their protest after the port authorities threatened injunctions against individual skippers.
As the boats began to leave the mouth of the River Tees, where they had been barring the way to Teesport, they claimed their eight-hour show of strength had been a success.
More than 60 vessels, mainly from the East coast ports of Whitby, Scarborough and Hartlepool, joined the demonstration against the dumping of cheap Russian fish on British markets.
Richard Brewer, a Whitby skipper and chairman of the Anglo-Scottish Fish Producers Federation, forecast further blockades if the Government ignored their protest.
Solicitors win right to fight fees plan
THE LAW Society yesterday won leave to challenge the Lord Chancellor's decision to change the way solicitors in England and Wales are paid for legal aid work in magistrates' courts.
Lord Mackay's decision to introduce standard fees instead of the hourly rates for legal aid work went against the principle that a solicitor would receive ‘fair remuneration’ for an individual case, Michael Beloff QC, for the society, told the High Court in London.
A full hearing is expected by mid-April.
IRA tries to shift blame on to police for bomb devastation
By Marcello Mega
THE IRA yesterday renewed its efforts to shift the blame for the weekend's bomb atrocity at Warrington, as the police followed up lines of inquiry from 300 calls to a special hotline.
Alarmed by the scale of public outrage over the attack, the Provisional Irish Republican Army accused the police of being more interested in protecting property than saving lives and claimed they had not wanted to hurt anyone.
A spokesman said: ‘Were the IRA seeking to cause civilian casualties, the death toll would be appalling.
You don't provide warnings if it is your intention to kill.’
He claimed half-hour warnings to the Samaritans and police in Merseyside had been made two minutes after the bombs were planted.
The IRA said earlier it had issued two telephone warnings giving the exact location of the bombs.
Police said there was just one warning — to the Samaritans in  Liverpool — which said only that there was a bomb outside an unspecified branch of Boots.
Cheshire's assistant chief constable, Brian Baister, said in response to last night's IRA statement: ‘A warning was given half-an-hour before, but no mention was made of the town of Warrington.
‘If the IRA think they can pass on their responsibility for this terrible act by issuing such a nonsensical statement, then they have sadly underestimated the understanding of the British public.’
The last moments of Johnathan Ball, the three-year-old victim of the bombing, were described yesterday by a nurse who cradled him in her arms as he died.
Karen Taylor was in the town centre when the two bombs went off.
She said: ‘I looked round to see how many bodies there were on the floor.
I just went from person to person and asked if they needed help when a policeman asked me to come and take a look at Johnathan.
‘At the time I got to him there were about four other people with him just trying to resuscitate him, giving him cardiac massage.
I was just sort of helping.
I was with him until he died.
We just helped him as well as we could in the circumstances.
‘I am trained as a nurse.
We just had to cope with it as best we could.
I don't think you are ever trained to deal with the things we saw on Saturday.’
Wreaths to Johnathan and toys marked the spot where the devastation occurred, outside the Boots store in Bridge Street, as Warrington began to pick up the threads of normal life.
Police, firemen and council workers had worked through the night to restore the scene of the atrocity, and fresh paving stones had already been placed over the gaping holes left by the blasts.
By 10am, Bridge Street was bustling with shoppers.
Karen Barnes, from Warrington, took her children Benjamin, four, and Judie, two, to lay teddy bears at the scene.
‘You can't let something like this put you off shopping.
If you give in to them they will do it even more and they will think they have won,’ she said.
Throughout the day, the pile of flowers grew.
Among them was a small cuddly bunny wrapped in a plastic bag against the overnight rain.
A message read: ‘You didn't deserve to die.
Sleep now little boy.
We'll all look after your mummy for you.
‘Night, God Bless, Dawn.’
No connection
A FRONT-PAGE report in The Scotsman last Friday had the heading ‘Auditors clear Lothian Enterprise’.
We wish to point out, as was made clear in the report itself, that the reference was not to Lothian Enterprise — established in 1988 as the venture capital arm of Lothian Regional Council — but to Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise (LEEL).
The two organisations are not in fact connected and we apologise for any confusion that may have been caused.
One dead in school canoe trip tragedy
ONE PERSON died and four others were fighting for their lives last night after a school canoeing trip went disastrously wrong.
The dead man is believed to have been a student.
Four of the others are critically ill, two are in a serious condition and four are stable at Weymouth General Hospital, Dorset.
The party of six teenage girls, two teenage boys, two adult instructors and a teacher spent several hours in the water before being rescued.
They had set off on a sunny morning to paddle their canoes a short distance along the Dorset coastline from the St Albans Centre, Lyme Regis.
A freak wave overturned the flimsy vessels and they were left floating in the water in their lifejackets.
The survivors were all being treated for hypothermia after being picked up by helicopters and coastguards.
A Devon County Council spokesman said the party was from Southway Comprehensive School, Plymouth.
The alarm was raised when the party failed to complete the trip between Lyme Regis and Charmouth.
An empty canoe was found two hours later and a major air-sea search was started.
Ten people were picked up after four hours in the water, and the eleventh after five hours.
Shipowners agree voluntary curbs on tanker routes
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
BRITISH shipowners yesterday announced a voluntary code for the routing of tankers which it is hoped will prevent another Braer disaster.
The proposed code, drawn up by the Chamber of Shipping, has been welcomed by the Government and will be put to the International Maritime Organisation for ratification in May.
If accepted by the shipping community, it will mean masters' taking special precautions in 15 sensitive areas around Britain.
It includes an extension of the no-go areas around Shetland.
Dr Les Atkinson, vice-president of the chamber and chairman of BP Shipping, forecast: ‘Any shipowner who disregards this guidance and causes a pollution incident is going to have an impossible task establishing in the courts that he was operating his vessels in a prudent and competent manner.’
He added that the code addressed just one of the three main causes of tanker pollution, which he listed as poor quality ships, poor quality crews and poor quality operation.
‘It essentially deals with major aspects of poor quality of operation.
Compliance with this is not going to solve all incidents of tanker pollution by any manner of means, but it should help a great deal.’
The proposals fall short of demands made by Scottish Natural Heritage and environment groups, which have called for a ban on tanker traffic in the Fair Isle Straits.
That would be impractical and impossible, a Government spokesman said.
The code stresses the importance of testing ships' systems, passage planning, compliance with routing schemes and voluntary reporting schemes, ‘appropriate margins of safety’ in case of breakdown and prompt reporting when difficulties could lead to pollution.
The document is intended as an interim measure pending the May meeting of the safety committee of the IMO, which should lead to changes in nautical publications and navigation charts.
A spokesman for the Department of Transport last night welcomed the code and said it would be added to the IMO submissions already drawn up by the Government.
It was hoped some aspects of traffic separation would be made mandatory, although he would not specify which.
The DoT said there was as much traffic in three days in the Dover Strait as there was in a year in the Fair Isle Straits, where the Braer came to grief.
Around 1400 tankers pass through the northern and southern Fair Isle channels a year, of which 70 per cent are connected to the Sullom Voe terminal.
The Government has recommended a ‘one-way’ traffic separation scheme, with ships routed either north or south of Fair Isle, and masters are advised to report their movements to Lerwick Coastguard.
Pending IMO measures, all laden tankers are asked to keep to the middle of the two channels.
An extension has been proposed to the recommendation that all ships over 5000 tonnes keep 10 miles off certain parts of Shetland.
It would introduce a no-go area to six sea areas around the islands.
In the Minch, the chamber recommends that all laden tankers over 10,000 tonnes avoid the passage, and all small or unladen tankers report to Stornoway Coastguard.
Environment groups want a total ban on tankers.
The code applies to ships carrying oil or any hazardous cargo in bulk, and it recommends that all tankers of more than 5000 tonnes are provided with electronic and satellite navigation equipment.
Mother admits dropping baby from flat
A BABY boy had an astonishing escape when his mother dropped him from the balcony of a ninth-floor flat.
At the High Court in Glasgow yesterday, the mother admitted causing her 21-month-old son to fall from the verandah to his severe injury and the danger of his life.
The 20-year-old single woman, who had been accused of attempting to murder the baby on 25 November last year, admitted the reduced charge.
The judge, Lord Osborne, who studied psychiatric and background reports, placed the young woman, who cannot be named for legal reasons, on probation for three years.
He also made it a condition that she be treated by a psychiatrist for a period not exceeding one year.
Edgar Prais, prosecuting, said the mother was a single parent and had never been in trouble before.
She lived with the child and her father stayed with them from time to time in the flat on the north side of Glasgow.
That day she was holding her son on the balcony of the flat and she dropped the child to the ground below.
Mr Prais said: ‘Mercifully, not to say miraculously, taking into account the height of the balcony, the child did not die.
It was a further miracle that the child has made a full recovery from the injuries he did sustain.’
Mr Prais said the accused had been receiving treatment for depression at the State Hospital in Carstairs and the Crown's view was that psychiatric help should be continued.
Lucy Keane, defending, said the tragedy arose from the mother's unhappy childhood and adolescence and the unhappy relationship she had which resulted in the birth of her son.
She had also had other family difficulties and this led her to feel increasingly depressed and isolated, and to her abuse of alcohol and drugs.
Matters then came to a head and after dropping her baby the mother was distraught about what she had done to her child.
Since being in Carstairs she had seen the baby twice and the visits had gone well and social workers hoped to continue this.
Now the baby is in foster care and the mother has responded well to treatment she was given at the hospital.
Lord Osborne told the accused that it was a very serious offence and the happy feature of the case was that the baby had apparently not suffered very much at all in the long term — and this could only be seen as a miracle.
Eight new AIDS cases reported
THE NUMBER of reported AIDS cases in Scotland rose by eight in February, bringing the total number of cases to 379.
Three deaths from the disease take the number of people who have died to 256.
Of the 379 reported cases in Scotland, 47 per cent are related to sexual intercourse between men and 32 per cent to injecting drugs.
The comparable figures for the rest of the UK are 78 per cent and three per cent respectively.
Life for man who beat two to death
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A MAN who bludgeoned two youths to death with a baseball bat was jailed for life at the High Court in Edinburgh yesterday.
Michael Maddison had alleged to police that one of the victims had ‘tried it on’ with his fiancee, the court heard.
Maddison, 25, of Findlay Street, Rosyth, Fife, admitted murdering Darren Hall, 20, of Admiralty Road, and Allan Cunning, 21, of Parkside Street, both Rosyth, in his home on 6 December last year.
The advocate-depute, Edward Bowen, QC, said that the dead youths were of good character and had been described as easy-going and likeable.
They had been drinking in the local dockyard club in the company of Maddison and his fiancee, Deborah Scott, 29, and all four had left together.
In the early hours of the morning, the accused and Miss Scott had phoned his sister, who had gone to their home and an ambulance had been called.
Mr Bowen said that ambulancemen had seen the two bodies lying on the living room floor.
They had been trussed up with cord and partly wrapped in polythene bags and blankets.
Each was wearing one half of a pair of tights over his head.
The walls and ceiling were heavily blood- stained.
Police had attended and Maddison immediately had told them: ‘It was me.
I did it.
It was two boys we met in the club.
We were getting on great and at the end they asked if we had drink at home.
I told them I had some wine and we all came back.
‘I went to the toilet and when I came back into the living room, one of them was trying it on with my wife.
I got the baseball bat.
I started hitting them.
‘I knew I had killed them.
I was going to get rid of them.
I just panicked.
I tried to tie them up.’
Mr Bowen said that Mr Hall and Mr Cunning had both died from multiple heavy blows to the face and head.
There was no satisfactory explanation for their wearing the ‘masks’ at the time the injuries were inflicted.
The defence counsel, Robert Henderson, QC, said that Maddison and Miss Scott had a 15-month-old child.
She had been left in the room with the two youths and something had happened.
When the accused entered the room, he had appreciated that something had or was taking place because the youths had been leaning over his fiancee.
‘He told them to leave the house immediately and it would appear that they did not take him seriously but laughed when he said this.
He completely lost the head.’
Mr Henderson said the attacks were out of character for Maddison, who was appalled by what had happened.
Lord Sutherland told Maddison that life imprisonment was the only sentence that could be imposed on a murder charge.
Michael Maddison is led away in handcuffs from the High Court yesterday after being jailed for life for bludgeoning two youths to death with a baseball bat
Fight on to save student unions
By Severin Carrell
STUDENT leaders are to campaign against Government proposals expected today which will curb drastically the powers and public funding of student associations.
Jim Murphy, president of the National Union of Students Scotland, said that delegates to the union's annual meeting are expected to endorse plans for an escalating campaign against proposals to force students to pay individual levies to support campus associations.
This afternoon, the Government is expected to announce in the Commons proposals to reform radically the funding of college student associations and unions, which are currently fully financed through individual college funds.
About 300,000 full and part-time students in Scotland, and 1.2 million in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, will be affected.
The proposals are seen as a pet project of the right wing of the Conservative Party and Conservative students' groups.
Only about between 2 to 5 per cent of student union and NUS activity is political but right-wingers have long complained about what they see as the domination of unrepresentative Labour-supporting and left-wing groups in the NUS's political activities.
The NUS has won the support of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals and other college principals' bodies in its opposition to the proposals.
The NUS expects that core activities such as welfare services, accommodation and catering will be retained as functions directly paid for by college authorities.
Non-core activities will have to be funded through subscriptions from students of roughly £70 a year.
The NUS has put forward counter proposals which it believes meet the Government's central criteria of enhanced financial control of union activities, while securing their funding through college associations.
Bomb alert hits Scottish Office
A BOMB scare in Edinburgh's city centre caused the evacuation of 150 civil servants from a Scottish Office building yesterday.
It followed the discovery of a package that could have caused serious injury, writes Audrey Gillan.
Bomb disposal specialists were called in after the package was found at New St Andrews House, the Scottish Office building near the busy St James shopping centre.
The building was sealed off as the package was made safe.
It is believed that an envelope containing explosive material was delivered to the Scottish Office in the morning.
Examination by a disposal team established that the contents were capable of causing damage or injury.
A Scottish Office spokesman said last night: ‘The police were called to deal with a suspicious package found at a Scottish Office building this morning.
‘A number of staff were evacuated as a precautionary measure.
The police are investigating.’
Staff working in all Scottish Office departments and any other premises have been urged to tell the police immediately if they become suspicious of any package received at their premises.
Trial told of £1.3m ‘insider deal'
AN INVESTMENT analyst went on trial yesterday accused of an insider dealing offence involving £1.3 million, writes John Robertson.
Thorold Mackie was alleged at the High Court in Edinburgh to have used information obtained from a company chairman about an impending profits warning.
A jury was told that the announcement by the waste disposal and construction group, Shanks & McEwan, would have been a ‘bombshell’, causing share prices to plunge.
It was claimed in the indictment that Mackie, an investment analyst with the Edinburgh stockbrokers, Bell Lawrie White, counselled and procured two salesmen in his firm to deal in Shanks & McEwan securities on the London Stock Exchange.
According to the charge, they sold almost two million shares on behalf of clients at prices which realised £1,378,892 in excess of what would have been obtained had the shares been sold after the issuing of the profits warning.
Mackie, of Craigcrook Road, Edinburgh, denied the alleged breach of the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 between 6 and 12 September, 1991.
Peter Runciman, 64, said he was a director and executive chairman of Shanks & McEwan at the time but was now retired from full-time work.
In mid-1991, investment analysts were recommending the company's shares as a good buy and predicting pre-tax profits of about £40 million, but in August it was realised that the estimated profit was unattainable as a major contract was not going to materialise.
Mr Runciman said the first warning of problems came in August when it was realised that a major contract expected in the first half of the financial year was not going to materialise.
There was also a slight downturn in business generally.
The company's three-man executive met on 5 September when it was clear that the estimated profit was unattainable.
The material deterioration in the company's prospects had to be made public under Stock Exchange rules, and it was decided to issue the warning.
Mr Runciman said it was decided to issue a profits warning which would have come as a bombshell.
The price of shares would ‘go down a long way.’
The trial continues.
Call to extend role of the children's panel reporters
By William Chisholm
A CALL for the role of children's panel reporters to be strengthened and extended was made yesterday.
More than 100 delegates at the Association of Children's Reporters annual study conference at Peebles also heard Prof Chris Turner of Stirling University's Department of Applied Social Science call for a fresh look at emergency protection for children, not necessarily because the system had worked unsatisfactorily in Scotland.
‘An issue that is consistently swept under the carpet is the power adults can have over children when they give their stories of what has happened to them,’ said Prof Turner.
‘If we are going to get reliable evidence from children and make our own evaluation of what they are saying then it is absolutely essential the stories are not contaminated by those who are being accused with the responsibility for harm or neglect.’
It was a case of asserting the rights of children while making sure they were less influenced by their parents.
Prof Turner said it was an issue which had to be faced if the system was going to protect children.
The professor who recently returned from an extended visit to Australia and New Zealand said he found very good examples in Australia of what not to do in the field of child welfare.
There were more encouraging examples in New Zealand.
In his view, they should be able to undertake more thorough investigations and be placed in a position to ask children and parents about their plans for the future.
‘The reporter ought to have more say on issues generally safeguarding children's interests and a much more specific remit in cases where further investigations seem warranted.
‘I am quite convinced that in the 1990s reporters will have an expanded role before the courts, and in helping to present expert witnesses and child witnesses.
These are skills that we desperately need in our society.’
In his opening address to conference, the association chairman, John Harris, said there had been much misguided, misleading, and in some cases mischievous comment on child care issues during the last two years.
There had been a plethora of events which had propelled children's reporters and the hearing system into the public arena.
For too many involved with the system there had been a sense of grievance with too much focus on the sensational and too little attention on the steady progress of two decades.
In the majority of cases reporters knew the system to be working well, said Mr Harris.
But it would be arrogant and foolish not to consider the opportunities that change provided.
There was always room for improvement.
Former Tory MP dies
THE former Conservative MP, Michael Clark Hutchison, has died aged 79.
Mr Clark Hutchison, known as an opponent of the European Community and Scottish devolution, represented the Edinburgh South constituency for more than 22 years after winning the seat in 1957.
In a tribute last night, Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, said: ‘Michael Clark Hutchison was a distinguished parliamentarian and a distinguished man who will be very sadly missed.’
MacGregor favours roundabout Chunnel rail link
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
A SLOWER route than previously proposed between Scotland and France is the Government's preferred option for the Channel Tunnel rail link, it was confirmed yesterday.
However, a faster alignment through a new King's Cross station remains a possible alternative in spite of the opposition of the Treasury, which prefers a cheaper but roundabout line into St Pancras.
John MacGregor, the Transport Secretary, told the Commons that the Government's preference was for St Pancras, although King's Cross was an alternative.
He said that a final decision would follow more detailed studies by Union Railways, the British Rail subsidiary which was formed to develop the tunnel link project.
The Victorian terminus was identified as the ideal answer by Norman Lamont, the Chancellor, in his Budget speech last Tuesday.
BR preferred King's Cross.
Trains from Paris and Brussels would reach St Pancras along the congested North London suburban line and a new speed-restricted curve.
Scottish services would have to reverse direction in terminal platforms.
The King's Cross plan would allow direct running onto the Edinburgh line from a high-speed tunnel under east London.
Mr MacGregor said it should be possible to build the 68-mile railway between London and Folkestone by ‘around the turn of the decade’— about seven years after the opening of the Channel Tunnel.
It would create about 15,000 jobs and would cost between £2 billion and £3 billion, considerably less than the previous route.
The preferred line was ‘environmentally sensitive, realistic and financially feasible as a joint venture’ with the private sector.
In response to Labour questioning, Mr MacGregor said: ‘Without any question I am keen to ensure that both from the passenger and freight point of view the north of England and Scotland gain as much benefit as possible from the Channel Tunnel and the Channel Tunnel high-speed link.’
Mr MacGregor said the line would bring great benefits, cutting journey times to 2 hours 27 minutes between London and Paris, and 2 hours 7 minutes between London and Brussels.
Kent commuters would also gain.
Sir Bob Reid, BR's chairman, said he was delighted by the Government's firm commitment to the line.
‘It is an exciting prospect.’
Public consultation would begin next month and involve 700 meetings in six months.
The process might result in local changes to the route.
John Prescott, the shadow transport secretary, said the announcement confirmed ‘further delay, uncertainty and planning blight with the line's completion pushed into the next century, not the end of the decade’.
He added: ‘While Britain will enter the 21st century on the back of a 19th century railway system our French partners, who started at the same time, will have built their modern system ready for the opening of the Channel Tunnel, 10 years ahead of Britain.’
For the Liberal Democrats, Nick Harvey said: ‘The UK has wasted the six years since passing the Channel Tunnel Act.
We have wasted taxpayers’ money on the south London route and the King's Cross option.
Today's statement is about cutting costs.’
Attempt to speed up pit closure white paper
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
JOHN MAJOR sought to break the Cabinet deadlock over the pit closure programme yesterday as Conservative rebels piled pressure on ministers to save at least half the threatened collieries.
The Prime Minister called together ministers at the centre of the dispute in an attempt to speed publication of the delayed white paper on the closure programme.
It emerged that Michael Heseltine, the Trade Secretary, and the Chancellor Norman Lamont are still at loggerheads over how many of the 31 threatened pits should be saved.
Mr Heseltine is also likely to be forced to publish the long-delayed white paper on the coal industry without crucial figures on future coal orders which will underwrite the future of the reprieved pits.
While Mr Heseltine discreetly canvassed back-bench dissidents on a plan to save 13 pits, some for up to only two years, the Treasury was insisting that only eight pits could be justifiably saved.
Mr Major called in the relevant ministers to Number 10 for what his office officially described as an ‘updating’.
With the white paper scheduled for this week, Mr Major is anxious to avoid what could be seen as another Government muddle and a damaging backlash from his own MPs.
The Tory coal rebels are demanding that at least 15 collieries remain open and gave warning that the Government could face defeat if it tried to push through proposals that were significantly out of line with the report of the Commons industry select committee earlier this year.
Mr Heseltine confirmed a stand-off between the Government and the electricity generators, National Power and PowerGen, over the crucial base price for future coal orders.
He told the Commons that he could not force the generators to sign a deal in advance of the white paper.
Intense negotiations continued, with the generators believing that they had the upper hand because of the Government's tight timetable and their insistence that they should not have to sign contracts before seeing the white paper.
The Government wanted the figures on core contracts included in the white paper to underpin the credibility of its assumptions on the fate of pits which might stay open.
The current contracts run out in 10 days and the generators are refusing to say how much they will buy in future.
Elizabeth Peacock, the Tory MP for Batley and Spen and one of the leading rebels who forced a Government rethink on the issue last year, is  pressing for Government intervention in the market to ensure a long-term future for coal.
She said that Mr Heseltine had told the industry select committee that he would consider legislation to change the market.
One of the demands of the coal group of MPs is for an end to cheap imports, strict regulations on open-cast extraction and reductions in the import of high-priced French-generated electricity.
The chairman of the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors Opencast Coal Committee, John Chance, yesterday wrote to Mr Heseltine expressing contractors' fears over unemployment in the industry.
Mr Chance argued that a sustainable UK coal industry needs the financial support of opencast coal, which last year alone produced a profit of £171 million for the British Coal Corporation and, over the past 50 years, has contributed less than £3.7 billion in profits.
Michael Heseltine: discreetly canvassed dissidents
A Government inquiry into the fees paid to Touche Ross was demanded by the Labour MP, Tam Dalyell, yesterday.
In letters to both John Major and Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, he asked for the full cost to be disclosed and expressed concern over the waste of public money.
He said: ‘The Touche Ross fees should be looked at and the whole local government reform plans should be abandoned.’
Heath voices Tories' anger over fuel VAT
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
ANGER among Conservative backbenchers was voiced by the former prime minister Edward Heath last night as Tory MPs appeared to back away from a full-scale rebellion over the imposition of VAT on domestic fuel and power in the Budget.
Sir Edward led an attack on the Government and said that people on social security benefits and those just above benefit level should receive compensation in full for increased fuel costs.
But after a frantic day of arm-twisting by Government whips, it became clear that potential rebels were shying away from voting the whole Budget down.
Instead, they are preparing for opportunities specifically to win concessions for those hardest hit by the VAT rises.
Anthony Bowden, chairman of the all-party pensioners group, said last night that he could not vote against the whole basis of the Budget.
But he warned that if pensioners on income support and others in real need were not compensated in full he would vote against the VAT imposition at the committee stage of the Finance Bill or when Peter Lilley, the Social Security Secretary, makes his announcement uprating benefits in the autumn.
In one of his most critical speeches since John Major took over from Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister, Sir Edward said it was wrong for parties to make pledges on taxation at elections.
He also called for those hit hardest by VAT rises to be compensated, urged that the wealthy be called on to pay more and warned Chancellor Norman Lamont against aiming at a general tax level of 20p, saying it was ‘not manageable’.
Earlier, Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, said he backed the Chancellor's move to raise VAT on domestic fuel and power and would not ‘cop out of the difficult tax decisions’.
Opening the fourth and final day's debate on the budget, Mr Heseltine flatly denied that he and Mr Lamont had fallen out over the VAT rise.
He said: ‘I was intrigued to read in the Observer newspaper that the Chancellor and I were engaged in a furious row on this subject.
‘Apparently I was furious I had not been consulted…
I actually was consulted in an orderly way.
I made no protest for the simplest of all reasons — that I shared the Chancellor's judgment that it was necessary to raise taxes in the Budget.’
Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, said the Government had put forward the biggest tax increases for any Budget in history and described it as a ‘Budget of failure and a Budget of cheats’.
He said the extension of VAT to domestic fuel and power bills would hit the poor hardest and Labour would vote against it.
He added: ‘We will do it to express our derision for this Treasury bench of limpets, clinging on to office after breaking every promise that got them into it.
‘We will do it to stop them making the poorest in society pay for their mistakes and their broken promises.’
Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish National Party, said the underlying message was that Britain was bankrupt.
He said the Budget was anti-poor and anti-Scottish because it cost 30 per cent more to heat homes in some parts of Scotland than the south-east of England.
The increase in petrol would also hit Scots in rural areas hard.
‘This chancellor has aimed and  targeted taxation at those least able to make the choice,’ he said.
Support for Salmond
MOVES within the Scottish National Party to unite behind the leadership have been underlined by a public endorsement of the party leader, Alex Salmond, by the SNP councillors on Motherwell District Council, writes Joanne Robertson.
Despite a call for Mr Salmond's resignation by the Mossend branch in Lanarkshire, the SNP council group backed Mr Salmond and his SNP colleagues at Westminster in a weekend vote.
Although they registered their disapproval at the MPs' vote with the Government, the council group leader, Richard Lyle, said: ‘Alex Salmond has the clear backing of the Motherwell SNP council group as does the SNP parliamentary group.
‘Regret was expressed at the vote on Maastricht amendment 28, although we understand the reasons for it.’
In a further indication of the desire among party members to see an end to the public attacks, David Clark, the convener of Motherwell North SNP — which includes the Mossend branch — called on the party to unite and concentrate its attacks on the Conservatives and Labour.
Mr Clark, who stood as a parliamentary candidate in Motherwell North at the last election, added: ‘I very much welcome the council group decision to demonstrate its confidence in Alex Salmond.’
He has always had the support of Motherwell North SNP despite one of the branches calling for his resignation.’
SNP starts Euro campaign
By Alan Dron
THE Scottish National Party yesterday foreshadowed its campaign for next year's European elections, in an effort to raise Scots' confidence in going it alone as an independent nation.
The announcement was again dogged by the spectre of the SNP's deal in voting with the Government on the Maastricht Bill two weeks ago, with its leaders being asked why voters should have confidence in a party which voted with an administration which strongly advocated the continued Union.
However, the party leader, Alex Salmond, challenged Labour MPs to vote against the Government in forthcoming European votes; they would refuse to do so, in spite of having a chance to defeat the Conservatives, he claimed.
The Independence Works campaign will focus on three main areas: the decline of Britain; the threat of privatisation of Scottish water supplies; and what the party described as the continued failure of the Labour Party to fight Scotland's corner at Westminster.
Publicising the campaign in Glasgow, Mr Salmond said the campaign was intended ‘to give people confidence in independence, to show how it would work for them and for Scotland, and to highlight the increasing level of discontent in the Union.’
Mr Salmond said that recent comments by Labour's shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, that the constitutional issue was not uppermost in people's minds could not be more wrong.
‘The constitutional issue is at the top of Scots’ minds because they are now making the direct link between Scotland's lack of democracy and the theft of our water, the state of the economy and the injustice of Tory plans to tax heating and freeze the poor.’
With the Government increasingly desperate to ‘square the circle’ to finance its borrowing, the steady decline of Britain's economy would drag Scotland down with it.
He added that independent analysts had forecast that the annual growth rate of the Scottish economy over the next five years would be almost double the rate — around two per cent— that was currently estimated if Scotland remained within the Union.
Questioned on whether the party's credibility to campaign on such issues had not been hurt by its vote with the Government in order to secure seats for Scottish representatives on the European Community's Committee of the Regions, Mr Salmond said the SNP was ‘entitled to vote in such a way that secures better representation for the people of Scotland.’
Call for scrapping of reforms after cost error
By David Scott Local Government Editor
PLANS for a radical shake-up of Scotland's council system should be scrapped now that the costings have been discredited, a leading local authority spokesman said yesterday.
Charles Gray, president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, said disclosures in The Scotsman that the Scottish Office now accepted that costs and savings had been miscalculated demanded a rethink of the entire plan to move to single-tier councils.
He added: ‘If Ian Lang is telling the truth in saying there is nothing political about the Government's proposals then there is now good reason to think seriously about cancelling the reorganisation and instead giving consideration to setting up an independent commission.’
Mr Gray was commenting on the Scottish Office's admission that costings made by its consultants, Touche Ross, were being revised.
Some of the figures were under-estimated while others were over-estimated.
Any savings to be made by switching to the new system are now likely to be less than forecast.
It emerged yesterday that officials of COSLA have already told the Scottish Office that it considers the break-even point on costings would come only if the number of new councils was limited to just over 20 and not at 43 as suggested by Touche Ross.
The Scottish Office is understood to be preparing plans for up to 30 councils.
Because of its concerns about the consultants' figures, convention officials have been pressing for an urgent meeting of a joint Scottish Office-COSLA working party on finance since early February but that has not taken place.
COSLA has already been involved in a re-assessment of the figures which it strongly disputed.
A COSLA senior official said yesterday: ‘We are still not convinced that the report is anywhere near a reasonable basis for changing the local government structure.’
Mr Lang acknowledged in an interview with The Scotsman that some of the estimated costs and savings first put forward by the consultants had changed.
He said it was now accepted that a small number of large authorities would produce lower savings than was originally indicated but a large number of small authorities would not add to the cost to the extent that was indicated.
While the differential on the costings of four single-tier options — ranging from 15 to 51 councils — would be less marked, Mr Lang stressed that it was clear there were still savings to be made.
Anna Capaldi, who headed the Touche Ross study, acknowledged yesterday that some of the figures were being revised but she understood that these would still fall within the ‘sensitivity testing’ ranges given in the report.
These gave a range of savings for each of the four options.
For the 15-unit option, it was likely that a lower-range saving would apply.
Ms Capaldi said a considerable amount of work on data had been carried out in the five months since the report was published.
Touche Ross had been involved in discussions with COSLA and the Scottish Office and had provided all of the supporting information and details.
One of the bodies which strongly challenged the costs — the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA)— yesterday called for a new study of the costings.
It said the investigation should not be carried out by the Scottish Office alone but must involve other bodies.
John Lindsay, Scottish vice-chairman, said CIPFA was delighted that Mr Lang was prepared to look at the figures again.
‘We felt that the conclusions were so fundamentally flawed that some other kind of independent study should be carried out.’
He believed attempts should be made to draw together people with a wide range of experience including local government officials covering finance and other areas, academics, the Scottish Office and possibly other interests.
Strathclyde Regional Council, another strong critic of the Touche Ross figures, yesterday issued a statement renewing its call for an independent commission to examine the future of Scottish local government.
Des McNulty, chairman of the council's sub-committee on reorganisation, said the whole consultation exercise was based on a false premise and the admission that the figures were serious flawed was very significant.
‘It leaves the Scottish Office with egg on its face and destroys the validity of responses made during the consultation exercise.’
BCCI losers go on hunger strike for compensation
TWO British depositors of the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International — who collectively lost more than £400,000 — went on hunger strike yesterday in an attempt to win Government compensation.
In an emotional outburst, Homa Shahidi, 50, told a Westminster news conference she now had no life worth living.
‘I want really to die, and I want John Major to see I'm dying because of his and Norman Lamont's fault,’ she told reporters.
Mrs Shahidi, of Herne Hill, south-east London, who lost £121,000, and Moussa Armand, 70, of Acton, west London, who lost £300,000, intend to eat no food for the next seven days as part of the long-running campaign to persuade ministers to provide more help for BCCI victims.
They plan to conduct their hunger strike in parliament's central lobby.
They are two of some 40,000 BCCI account holders in Britain with collective losses amounting to about £2 billion.
Today a cross-party delegation of MPs, led by the Labour MP for Leicester East, Keith Vaz, will press the depositors' case at a meeting with the Chancellor.
It will be their first meeting with Mr Lamont since the Treasury select committee report into BCCI was published.
Mr Vaz said the report ‘very clearly states that the Bank of England acted improperly in the way it conducted supervision of BCCI and puts forward very powerful arguments for compensation.’
He added: ‘We have tried to tell them (Mrs Shahidi and Mr Armand) not to do this but they want to do it.
I will be contacting their doctors so this whole episode will be conducted under medical supervision.’
Mr Armand told reporters he had closed his business.
‘I am just loafing around, there's nothing I can do.
It's very difficult to live with £1 or £2 a day.’
When it was founded, BCCI was worth $2.5 million, but it grew to a value of $20.4 billion (£13 billion) with operations in 60 countries.
Customers allegedly included the world's most wanted terrorist, Abu Nidal, the Panamanian dictator General Manuel Noriega, arms dealers and drug barons.
The bank started to unravel in 1988 when BCCI executives were arrested in Florida and eventually convicted of laundering cocaine profits for Colombian drug barons.
It was closed on 5 July, 1991.
The cause of the crash was a long way from BCCI's original aim of becoming a bank for Muslims which would link the developing world and transfer wealth from the west to the Third World.
Tory revolt on fuel VAT fizzles out
By Chris McLaughlin and Joy Copley
TORY back-benchers last night shied away from a rebellion over the Budget imposition of value-added tax on domestic fuel.
The threatened revolt fizzled out as Conservative critics decided to draw back from voting down the whole Budget, keeping their powder dry for future votes when the issue comes before the Commons in detail.
Comfortable Government majorities on two key motions followed a  searing fightback by the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, during raucous exchanges which saw him at one stage on the ropes in the face of a furious tirade by, alternately, the Labour leader, John Smith, and the shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown.
Mr Lamont resisted  persistent demands from Labour for assurances that pensioners not covered by income support would be fully compensated for the 17.5 per cent increase from April 1995.
He brushed aside charges that the Government had reneged on its election promises last year by comparing the Government borrowing crisis with the early years of the Thatcher Government in which, he said, taxes had to rise before they could be brought down after borrowing was stabilised.
Mr Lamont conceded that the Budget was ‘not designed to curry favour or popularity’ but was intended to meet the needs of the country.
Mr Brown and Mr Smith repeatedly intervened to demand that the Chancellor answer the simple question of whether pensioners would be fully compensated, which Mr Lamont repeatedly ducked, saying only that the worst off would receive help.
Mr Brown claimed that his failure to answer the question directly meant that ‘nobody in this country trusts him’.
Deep-seated concern among Tory back-benchers was reflected in a powerful denunciation of the VAT decision by the former prime minister Sir Edward Heath.
He said that people on social security benefits and those just above benefit level should receive compensation in full for increased fuel costs.
After a frantic day of arm twisting by Government whips it became clear that potential rebels were prepared to back away from a rebellion in the hope of wringing more concessions from the Government before the Finance Bill, which gives legislative authority to the Budget, comes back to the Commons toward the end of next month.
They can also hold their fire until the regulations implementing the decision are introduced in November or December this year.
Anthony Bowden, the chairman of the all-party pensioners group, said last night that he could not vote against the whole basis of the Budget.
But he warned that if pensioners on income support and others in real need were not compensated in full he would vote against the VAT imposition at a later stage.
In his most critical speech of Mr Major's administration, Sir Edward said it was wrong for parties to make pledges on taxation at elections.
He also called for those hit hardest by VAT rises to be compensated, urged the wealthy be called on to pay more and warned Chancellor Norman Lamont against aiming at a general tax level of 20p, saying it was ‘not manageable’.
Earlier Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, said he backed the Chancellor's move to raise VAT on domestic fuel and power and would not ‘cop out of the difficult tax decisions’.
Opening the fourth and final day's debate on the budget, Mr Heseltine flatly denied that he and Mr Lamont had fallen out over the VAT rise.
Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, described the Budget as a ‘Budget of failure and a Budget of cheats’.
The Government won a vote on the VAT rises by 303 to 278, a majority of 25, with just two rebels abstaining.
The Government had a 27 vote majority for the Budget as a whole.
Export drive to go ahead
By Frank Urquhart
ABERDEEN fish processors are to go ahead with an export drive to France this week, in spite of attempts by French fishermen to block the import of supplies.
Representatives of 11 companies operating at Aberdeen Seafood Park are to spend five days promoting their products at a special exhibition in Aberdeen's twin city of Clermont Ferrand, near Lyons.
The mission is the first staged as a co-operative venture by firms at the seafood park.
Iain Christie, chairman of the processing group, said: ‘This promotion was arranged a long time ago, before this import situation surfaced.
‘It is certainly not going to deter us from going, but we are aware that there could be problems.’
He explained: ‘We are dealing direct with merchants over there and as far as we are aware they are very keen to import fish, such as small whiting, which they can't get from their own fishermen.
‘The potential in France is enormous.
People in the Clermont Ferrand area normally get their fish from Bordeaux or Boulogne and a lot of it is actually second hand Scottish fish being bought by agents in Boulogne.’
What we are trying to do is serve them direct and there is no problem as far as transport is concerned.’
LINLITHGOW Man in court on murder charge
A 25-YEAR-OLD man appeared at Linlithgow Sheriff Court yesterday charged with the murder last month of a retired civil servant, Matt Fleming, 54, of Barclay Way, Livingston.
Andrew Deacons, of Granby Avenue, Livingston, made no plea or declaration and was remanded in custody.
MAUCHLINE Gunmen hijack mail van
GUNMEN escaped with a substantial sum of money yesterday after hijacking a Royal Mail van near Mauchline, Ayrshire.
Two masked men appeared from a ditch and threatened the driver and his passenger with a shotgun after the van stopped at traffic lights behind a red Vauxhall Belmont car on the A76 Mauchline to Auchinleck road around 4:45am.
After robbing the van, they made their getaway in the red car, which was  abandoned a few hundred yards away.
It had been stolen in Govanhill, Glasgow, last week.
Lang opens Macaulay Institute HQ
THE SCOTTISH Secretary, Ian Lang, yesterday officially opened the £10 million headquarters of the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute, at Craigiebuckler, in Aberdeen, writes Frank Urquhart.
The institute was formed six years ago as a result of the amalgamation of the Macaulay Institute of Soil Research and the Hill Farming Research Organisation.
It is the only institute in Britain with a specific remit to undertake research on land use.
Mr Lang said that Scottish Office funding for the laboratory complex was firm evidence of the Government's support for the future importance of science and technology.
He said: ‘The Macaulay is a major research facility, established in Scotland, which has the capacity to operate at the leading edge of science and to contribute to the solution of practical problems concerned with the environment.
‘I am sure that the research work will be source of great benefit to land users and rural communities, both in the United Kingdom and the world in general.’
Professor Jeff Maxwell, director of the institute, said: ‘Land use is a global issue, a fact which makes the research programme and objectives at the Macaulay of supreme international significance.
Never before has the way in which we use our global land resources been so critical.’
LAMLASH First of cheaper homes opened
THE first of 30 homes aimed at providing affordable housing for islanders in Arran's dear market was opened yesterday in The Park, Lamlash, by Kirk Care Housing Association, with help of a £1.1 million grant from Scottish Homes.
Labour claims 1.25m caught in Scottish poverty trap
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
ONE QUARTER of people living in Scotland may be living on the breadline according to figures released by the Labour party yesterday.
It claimed 1.25 million people could be caught in the poverty trap.
The shadow social security secretary, Donald Dewar, and Labour's Scottish affairs spokesman, Henry McLeish, described their anger at the worsening situation when unveiling a rolling campaign aimed at highlighting the rising level of poverty across Scotland.
Labour arrived at the figure of 1.25 million Scots living in poverty by combining those on income support, the unemployed, those on low pay and those claiming family credit.
Speaking in Glasgow, Mr McLeish commented: ‘We are talking about anything up to a quarter of our fellow Scots.
Even is we use only the lowest numbers available, based on official statistics, we are still seeing acute poverty for 873,000 people.
‘This is not simply a matter which can be looked at and comfortably quantified as a constant problem.
The poverty figures are still growing at an alarming rate.’
He pointed to the 6.8 per cent increase in the number of income support claimants between 1991 and ‘92 and gave warning of the effect on the poor of the staged increases on valued0added tax on domestic fuel bills.
Speaking in Castlemilk, Mr Dewar said: ‘The disgraceful truth is that the poorest in society became poorer in absolute and relative terms during the 1980s.’
Mr Dewar stressed that in 1979 the richest 20 per cent of households had 37.7 per cent of their disposable income claimed in taxes, which had dropped to 33.5 per cent in 1990.
He compared the cut in taxes for the rich to the bottom 20 per cent which had seen its tax burden rise form 30.7 per cent in 1979 to the present 39.7 per cent.
He emphasised that the real hardship which many families were struggling under would be exacerbated by the proposals to introduce VAT on household fuel bills outlined by the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, in the Budget.
Mr Dewar added: ‘It is a simple revenue raid to compensate for a public sector borrowing requirement spiralling out of control to £50 billion.
‘To dress it up as a ‘green’ tax is humbug and hypocrisy.
This is a tax on fuel which will hit the pensioner and the low paid.
About this there can be no doubt or dispute.’
Helen Guy of Castlemilk Housing Energy Action, set up to combat the high level of fuel debt in the area, described the anger and despair with which people had reacted to the decision to add VAT to their fuel bills.
She explained: ‘People are paying a lot of money for very little heat, they are living on low incomes or benefits in houses with no insulation and poor heating systems.
‘Condensation and damp are constant problems.
It's not just health problems they suffer but many people can get really depressed living in houses where they have to keep washing the mould off the walls.
‘I'm currently advising one single parent who spends £25.90 a week on fuel.
She has two children under five and has just £50 to spend as she is currently paying off a social fund loan.
In two years time, her bill will have risen by £4.50 to over £30.’
More than 870,000 people are living in families on income support in Scotland.
The number of Scottish children on income support has increased by 122 per cent over the last decade.
Deductions are made from 52,000 Scots' benefits to pay off fuel debts.
Between 1991 and 1992, there was a 16 per cent increase in debt enquiries to Citizen Advice Bureaux in Scotland.
In Strathclyde, 130,000 children this year have received clothing and footwear grants.
Laird fined £200 for endangering workers
A HIGHLAND laird has been prosecuted for putting his estate workers in danger during a demolition job.
Simon Fraser, the Master of Lovat and son of the Second World War hero Lord Lovat, admitted at Inverness Sheriff Court breaching health and safety law last September.
He was fined £200.
His estate factor, Malcolm Fraser, of Viewfield Avenue, Beauly, also admitted a breach and was fined £400.
The depute-fiscal, Ron Phillips, said three of the estate workers had been at risk as they demolished a grain store, working on unsecured planks stretched across the top of 20ft deep bins.
There had been no guard rails and the men had had no experience or instructions to carry out the job.
He added their safety instructions had been woefully inadequate.
‘They were only told to be careful,’ the depute fiscal said.
Health and safety inspectors had visited the site after an anonymous phone call from a woman expressing her concern that ‘people in this day and age were exposed to such dangers.’
Mr Phillips said when the inspectors saw the conditions in which the men were working, they said in the event of a fall the chances of survival would be minimal.
A defence agent said the Master of Lovat, who lives at Beaufort Castle outside Beauly, did not personally visit the site, but his factor had put the work into effect.
He added: ‘The boards were heavy and unlikely to slip and although there was no scaffolding or guard rails, there were metal roof trusses which would have prevented them falling.
They were also wearing safety helmets.’
He added that the master was concerned about the welfare of his workers and health and safety inspectors had visited the estate on many occasions without criticism.
‘Their advice was also taken that the job should be done by experts, and a firm of professionals were called in to complete the task.’
Man who used children to peddle drugs jailed
A DRUG dealer who recruited youngsters to sell ecstasy and cannabis in the Highlands was jailed for five years at the High Court in Inverness yesterday.
Malcolm Badenoch, 25, of High Street, Elgin, had brought in local youths, some still at school, to act as dealers for him in the sale of the drugs at all-night raves, Lord MacLean was told.
Payments of more than £2,000 had  been handed over at ‘safe houses’ where the drugs were kept, the court heard.
Badenoch admitted charges of being concerned in the supply of ecstasy and cannabis between October 1991 and April 1992.
The advocate depute, Roderick Macdonald, said: ‘One of the more unsavoury features of this case is that Badenoch recruited a series of sub-dealers from among the youth of the area who were not previously involved in drugs.’
He said that police in Moray had begun investigating the increase of ecstasy use in the area at the beginning of 1992 after parents and teachers had reported their concern.
Badenoch had been targeted by officers as the main supplier and an enquiry named Operation Moray had begun to try to bring an end to the dealing in ecstasy, Mr Macdonald went on.
‘Badenoch was acting as a wholesaler in the operation.’
The defence advocate, James Reilly, said: ‘The prosecution paint the picture of my client being the Mr Big who was single-handedly responsible for the flourishing of ecstasy in Elgin.
‘That is assuming the police are correct and that the witnesses are telling the whole truth.’
He referred to a mysterious Mr Noble as the man who had recruited Badenoch and brought the drugs north for distribution.
And he added: ‘The prosecution is overstating it when they say it was sinister that he recruited young people in the area.
They gravitated to where the ecstasy was to be found.
‘None of them were unwilling participants and my client did not make a handsome profit.’
Lord MacLean told Badenoch, however: ‘You were involved in the wholesale operation and effective in securing the introduction of a dangerous drug into the Moray community.
‘You have a previous conviction for a drugs offence involving cannabis.
Although it appears that you did not make a large sum of money out of your dealing — at least as far as external appearances are concerned — I have to take a serious view of it.’
Malcolm Badenoch: being led from court yesterday
Three years for drug supplier
A FORMER tyre depot manager involved in drug dealing was jailed for three years at the High Court in Aberdeen yesterday.
Alexander Murray, 34, of 30 Bethlin Mews, Kingswells, Aberdeen, was found guilty by majority of being concerned with supplying heroin at Kenway Tyres, in Bridge of Don, and elsewhere following a five-day jury trial.
The jury returned a unanimous not proven verdict on a charge alleging he supplied five men including depot employees with the drug on Hogmanay 1991.
Murray originally faced a total of 13 drug-related charges including allegations he assaulted five men by injecting them with heroin in the tyre depot but 11 of those were dropped during the course of the trial.
The defence advocate, Herbert Kerrigan, QC, said his client, a drug addict, had had considerable difficulties with heroin.
He had lost his job as manager as a result of his arrest and was now unemployed.
Jailing Murray, Lord Kirkwood described the charge he had been convicted of as a very serious offence.
Uproar as Argyll tourist boards merge
PROPOSALS to join two Argyll area tourist boards were voted through amid uproar yesterday.
Plans to merge Dunoon and Cowal with neighbouring Isle of Bute to form one area tourist authority were thrown out last month, but a special meeting was convened yesterday in Dunoon to discuss the issue again.
During a heated debate, accusations of lack of democracy and ‘Ku-Klux-Klan-type secrecy’ were levelled at the executive members of Dunoon and Cowal Tourist Board.
Tourist board members were further angered when the board's chairman, Douglas Campbell, announced that proxy voting would be allowed.
Most local  hoteliers and guesthouse owners, who said they had not been told of this, left before the vote was taken.
In the absence of the hoteliers, Mr Campbell announced that the merger proposals had been accepted by 111 votes to 22 and that plans to unify the two area tourist boards would now proceed.
The Dunoon and Bute tourist authorities were linked until 1976, when arguments by officials over policy forced a split.
The recent merger proposals were in response to the Secretary of State's consultation paper on the future of tourism in Scotland.
Joe McGoran, a local hotelier and member of the Dunoon and Cowal Hoteliers Association, commented: ‘It is we the hoteliers who spend thousands of pounds each year to bring the tourists to Dunoon and Cowal, not the traders.
But here we have a situation where proxy votes from the manager of Woolworths and the local Boots the Chemist, have steamrollered through this motion.’
Official apologises for ‘genetic’ comment
By Severin Carrell
A SENIOR Strathclyde education official has unreservedly apologised for his ‘loose and inappropriate’ remarks last week linking genetics and nutrition with a high level of black and Asian children in special schools.
David McNeill, senior depute director of education with Strathclyde region, last night unconditionally withdrew his comments, which provoked a barrage of highly critical and angry complaints from black community groups and Asian leaders last week.
Mr McNeill's statements arose as he sought to counter allegations that a very high over-representation of children with English as a second language were in acute categories of special needs classes because the region had failed to judge their intelligence accurately.
The claims, first raised by a Scottish Office Education Department report in 1991, have led to the Commission for Racial Equality launching a formal investigation into the region's assessment procedures for bilingual children.
Mr McNeill, who was responsible for co-operating with the CRE inquiry on behalf of the region, said last week he thought ‘a multiplicity of other factors, possibly malnutrition when young, or genetic factors’, could be responsible.
The CRE's findings and recommendations are expected to go to the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, for approval and action if its inquiry upholds complaints that the region's methods may be in breach of race relations and education law for failing to test in a child's first language.
Amid calls for Mr McNeill's dismissal, the depute leader of Strathclyde Regional Council, Gerald McGrath, and the council's chief executive, Neil McIntosh, ordered an immediate investigation into the affair, conducted by Frank Pignatelli, director of education.
Yesterday, Mr Pignatelli reported that Mr McNeill said he had oversimplified ‘the very complex matter of possible factors affecting the occurrence of handicap’ to make it more easily understood by the public.
‘In so doing, he employed loose, inappropriate and, in places, inaccurate language which conveyed a message which has been seen as deeply offensive,’ he continued.
‘Mr McNeill has confirmed that he is well aware of the discredited 1970s debate on intelligence, race and genetics and the associated nature-nurture debate and he would wish to make clear his deep concern that his comments have been construed as relating to these debates.’
Stating that Mr McNeill ‘apologises without reservation for the offence caused by his remarks’, Mr Pignatelli said his deputy would further explain himself to the council's advisory group on racial equality and the Strathclyde Community Relations Council on Thursday.
Mr Pignatelli added: ‘I will ensure the most urgent and open co-operation with the CRE in their investigation into the matters raised in the research study mentioned.’
A Strathclyde spokesman said the region now believed the matter was closed, and saw no reason for any disciplinary action.
He said he could not offer any explanation as to exactly what Mr McNeill meant by his remarks as that could prejudge his statements on Thursday.
A CRE spokesman said yesterday the commission could not discuss Mr McNeill's comments because of its investigation.
But he added: ‘The fact that Mr McNeill has said this doesn't come as a surprise to me.
What surprises me is that he said it in public.’
Last night, Bashir Maan, chairman of Strathclyde Community Relations Council, said he was not prepared to comment in detail about the controversy until Mr McNeill had his opportunity to put his case.
But he confirmed he would be asked to clarify what his remarks were intended to mean.
Mr Maan added: ‘I'm very delighted to hear that Mr McNeill has apologised publicly.
This is what I had set out for last week.’
He said he hoped his contrition would end the controversy as ‘dragging on such issues always does more damage than good’.
Saroj Lal, director of Lothian Racial Equality Council, said, however, that Mr McNeill's comments might have caused greater harm than could be offset by an apology.
‘I don't accept that this is an issue about the oversimplification of a debate — these theories of race and intelligence have no place in public discussion, particularly when they are being used in an attempt to discredit an argument about racial discrimination.’
Tobacco case man too ill for court
By Susan Dean
THE SPECIAL hearing to allow a dying lung cancer victim, Alfred McTear, to give evidence for his £500,000 court action against a tobacco company has ended because Mr McTear is too ill to continue.
A commission appointed by the Court of Session was due to resume yesterday at his home in Beith, Ayrshire, to hear testimony in advance of a full court hearing which is unlikely to take place for two years.
Doctors say Mr McTear will not live until then.
Yesterday Mr McTear, who has developed pneumonia, remained unable to continue giving evidence under cross-examination and his doctor advised that the hearing be ended indefinitely.
Mr McTear, 48, gave evidence on the first day but proceedings were stopped short on Wednesday, second day of the hearing.
A former 60-a-day-smoker, Mr McTear is suing Imperial Tobacco for damages, claiming he would not have taken up the habit in the 1960s had there been health warnings.
By the time these were published, he had become addicted.
His case, if successful, could open the flood gates for thousands of similar claims.
His solicitor, Cameron Fyfe, said yesterday that Mr McTear's wife Margaret, 47, will continue the fight as executrix and the judge would make a decision on the value of testimony already given in due course.
Alfred McTear: Too ill to continue evidence
TROON Police hunt for sex attacker
A SEX attacker who pounced on a woman early on Sunday in Troon as she walked home from a night out is still being hunted by police.
The 28-year-old woman was walking alone in the town's Templehill area at around 12:30am when she was grabbed from behind outside a funeral parlour and indecently assaulted her before escaping on foot.
The woman was shaken but unhurt.
The man was described as aged 30, 5ft 7in to 5ft 8in, of stocky build with dark hair.
He had a distinctive hooked gold earring in his left ear, wore a blue denim jacket and jeans and may have had a chipped front tooth.
Marina plan for Gourock approved
A CONTROVERSIAL proposal for a £15 million marina complex at Gourock on the Clyde was last night approved by Inverclyde District Council's planning and development committee.
Inverclyde Waterfront Developments Ltd was seeking permission to provide a 300-berth marina, 100-bed hotel and 150 houses on a prime site at Cardwell Bay on the waterfront there.
In spite of objections from hundreds of residents who signed protest petitions and wrote to oppose the scheme, councillors voted by seven to four in its favour.
Objectors claimed the development would destroy the foreshore, spoil scenic views, have an adverse effect on wildlife and result in the loss of moorings and slipways.
Planning permission for a similar project was refused almost two years ago but in a 19-page report on the latest proposals Inverclyde's director of planning and technical services, Tom Ridings, recommended approval in outline.
A development study on the Cardwell Bay site commissioned by the local authority a year ago concluded: ‘While the outlook from the bay at Gourock is a significant asset on a national scale, there is also an air of neglect in the area.’
The item will now go before the full district council for ratification on Thursday.
Spain frees hashish smugglers
THREE Glasgow men jailed last week for four years for bringing hashish into Spain have been released because of the time they spent awaiting trial, it was revealed yesterday.
James Jeffrey, 50, Charles Smith, 50, and Kevin Thorn, 33, were arrested in November 1990 after being under surveillance for several months.
They were caught red-handed as they carried part of a 200kg haul, worth £264,000 on the streets, into a warehouse near Madrid.
The three did not come to trial until last week when they were each imprisoned for four years.
The justice ministry said yesterday, however, that because they had been held for more than two years without trial, they were released.
It was not known yesterday if the three had returned to Scotland or to the Costa del Sol where they had been living before their arrest.
Beauty queen's father jailed for blaze plot on house
THE FATHER of a former Miss Scotland beauty queen was jailed for 18 months yesterday after being convicted of conspiring to defraud an insurance company and setting fire to his partly-completed house in Argyll.
Last month a jury at Oban Sheriff Court found Iain Swan Ferguson, 50, of 2e Scalpay Terrace, James Smillie, 34, of 28e McCaig Road, both Oban, and Frederick Vennard, 45, of 11 Lorn Road, Dunbeg, guilty of conspiring to defraud the Sun Alliance Insurance Company by setting fire to Ferguson's partly-built bungalow at Taynuilt.
During five days of evidence, the jury heard that during the two weeks previous to the fire, the three men had been heard in an Oban pub discussing burning the house and how Ferguson and Vennard talked about the splitting of the insurance money.
The jury heard how Ferguson and Smillie collected two five-gallon drums of diesel from Oban railway pier on the day of the fire, 12 May last year, and were seen delivering it to Ferguson's house.
Just before the blaze at 11pm, Vennard was seen walking away from the house and later admitted that he had set fire to it.
Ferguson, whose daughter was Miss Scotland in 1990, had received an advance of £38,000 from the Northern Rock building society, but had made only one repayment in the previous year.
The house was insured for £64,000, although it transpired that insurance for a completed house and contents had been issued, and the house was not in fact covered.
Yesterday, sentencing Ferguson, Sheriff Colin MacKay described him as the prime mover.
Taking into account Ferguson's health, age, and the fact he had not previously been in prison, he jailed him for 18 months.
Vennard got 18 months for ‘a deliberate and dangerous act’ and Smillie was sent to prison for nine months.
Italians win A74 upgrading deal
TWO Italian civil engineering firms have won a £23.4 million contract to upgrade part of the A74 Glasgow to Carlisle route, the first a major motorway contract awarded in Scotland to European companies.
The four-mile route between Eaglesfield and Kirkpatrick Fleming will be upgraded to motorway standard by a joint venture formed between Impresa Castelli Costruzioni Edilizie and Girola.
The work will be managed by their subsidiary, Castelli Girola UK.
The three-lane motorway will run close to the existing line of the A74 between the Annan to Eaglesfield Road (B722) in the north and Kirkpatrick Fleming in the south where it will join the section of motorway recently completed between Kirkpatrick Fleming and Gretna.
Work on the scheme, which has been designed by the Glasgow consulting engineers, Babtie Shaw & Morton, will start today.
It is due for completion in November 1994.
The Glasgow firm will also supervise the construction work, which includes 1.5 miles of all-purpose road and 2.5 miles of side roads.
Also included are four overbridges, a four-way interchange at the B722 Eaglesfield Junction and a bridge over the London-Glasgow railway.
Time bar sees Flash Harry keep his name
THE IDENTITY of Flash Harry the bull was challenged at Perth Sheriff Court yesterday.
But the case was dismissed because of delay in getting it to court.
Robert Bishop Graham, 22, of Allanwater Apartments, Bridge of Allan, was charged under the Trade Descriptions Act.
The Crown claimed a Limousin bull he supplied to a Thurso farmer, William Oak, was falsely described in an auction catalogue as Strathallan Flash Harry.
The offence was alleged to have been committed in Perth on 4 February of last year but the defence counsel, Graham Bell, QC, pointed out that the complaint had not been served until 14 February this year.
As this was ten days outside the period allowed for raising such a case, he submitted it was time-barred.
Sheriff John Wheatley agreed there had been ‘undue delay’ and dismissed the charge.
Monktonhall men get pay cheques boost
MINERS at Monktonhall colliery have received their first pay cheques for almost two months but uncertainty continues to surround the pit's future, writes Marcello Mega.
The 160 mineworkers, who formed a consortium to reopen the pit, each investing £10,000 in the venture, were surprised to find that half a month's salary had gone into their bank accounts at the weekend.
One of the miners, Jim Hunter, said last night that it had given the men a tremendous boost.
‘Some of the lads had been feeling it and this gave them the chance to pay some of the bills that had been piling up.
‘The spirit has been good through all these bad days we've had lately, but it was even better today and everyone hoped the money was a sign things are turning round.’
We have been taking a lot of coal out these last few days, everyone has been putting the hours in.
If it was just a question of effort, the pit would be in no danger.’
The Bank of Scotland had frozen the overdraft of Monktonhall Mineworkers Ltd some weeks ago when it emerged that debts of about £1.7 million had accrued.
Further concern was generated by the failure to keep up with major orders secured by the consortium due to production difficulties.
The bank is believed to have relaxed its stance as a result of talks with the consortium's board.
The board has also been having ongoing talks with potential investors, but it was understood last night that the present worrying situation remained unchanged.
Parents claim school's temporary move is closure by back door
By William Chisholm
THE FIVE pupils attending Heiton primary school in the Borders have been told they will be educated in Kelso next term, although councillors have yet to decide the fate of their local village school.
Angry protesters, campaigning to keep the Borders' network of rural primaries open, claim the move is closure by stealth and makes a mockery of the consultation process with parents.
There was a robust denial of those allegations from Borders Regional Council's assistant education director, Kenneth Paterson, who said the temporary closure did not necessarily mean a permanent shutdown.
Senior officials in Borders education department will be challenged today at an education committee meeting to justify termination of the Heiton teacher's contract at the end of next week.
Pupils will go to Edenside School, Kelso, after Easter.
Parents were given details of the switch in letters from the school.
The children will visit Edenside later this month for two ‘familiarisation’ days in the classrooms at Kelso before returning to Heiton for the last day of term.
One Heiton parent said: ‘What has happened to the consultation process?
Once this move is made there is little chance the village school will ever reopen.’
She said moving the pupils back and forward was bound to be unsettling and confusing for them.
‘We are fighting for future generations.
For all the babies, and toddlers, and pregnant mums in this area.
Projections show the roll at Heiton will rise to 19 in four years time.’
Jock Houston, secretary of the Borders branch of the Educational Institute of Scotland, said: ‘Discontinuing or changing the site of a school does require consultation under 1981 regulations.
Parents at Heiton may have a case for taking out an interim interdict to stop the council closing their school at the end of the term.’
Mr Paterson said the formal consultation process on permanent closure of Heiton would be carried out over the summer.
If councillors decided the school should remain open a new head teacher would be sought.
Asked for his reaction to claims Heiton school was being closed by stealth, Mr Paterson replied: ‘The system doesn't work like that.
There are no formal arrangements for temporary closure, but there are rules and regulations when permanent closure is being considered.
Those processes are being followed in this case.’
Last class: the five pupils from Heiton primary school
Man jailed over insurance fire death
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A BOARDING house owner who killed his friend when they set fire to the building for the insurance was jailed for five years yesterday.
A jury at the High Court in Edinburgh convicted James Sutherland, 50, of Gilmore Place, Edinburgh, of the culpable homicide of Bernard Buckley, 44, of Prince Regent Street, Leith.
The court heard that on 10 April last year, with intent to defraud the Sun Alliance Insurance Group, the two men started a blaze which caused an explosion and destroyed the house at Pilton Drive North, Edinburgh.
Mr Buckley died under tons of rubble but the jury deleted from the charge an allegation that after staggering clear, Sutherland had pretended to the emergency services that there was no-one inside.
The accused had bought the property in 1989 and rented out rooms to Department of Social Security tenants.
However, after changes in the housing benefit regulations, his substantial income dropped and he fell into arrears with mortgage payments.
The house was left empty and was often a target for vandals and Sutherland was unable to sell it.
The defence counsel, Robert Henderson, QC, said that Mr Buckley's death had been a great shock to Sutherland who had been very lucky to escape with his life.
Lord Sutherland said that the accused had not intended to cause death or even serious injury but he had shown reckless disregard for Mr Buckley's safety.
The judge did not regard the case as one at the higher end of the culpable homicide scale but a human life had been taken and he jailed Sutherland for five years.
£600 fine for triple attack
A YOUNG mother claimed yesterday that justice has been done after her former boyfriend was convicted of assaulting her three times in one night.
Stuart Ferrier, 24, was fined £600 at Linlithgow Sheriff Court for the attacks on Sharon Brady, 20, last August.
Ferrier hit Miss Brady in his mother's home in Blackburn, West Lothian, and then twice in the house he shared with her and their two children at Mosside Drive, Blackburn.
After the first attack in their own home, Miss Brady sent for the police, who took Ferrier away.
But he soon returned and attacked her again.
When police failed to prosecute Ferrier, Miss Brady threatened to bring a private prosecution.
An new investigation led to Ferrier's being charged with assault.
After the case Miss Brady said: ‘I am happy that the decision was finally made to prosecute and I am delighted that justice has been done.’
Lothian and Borders Police later said that an inquiry had been held into the actions of officers that night and a report sent to the procurator-fiscal.
RAF man tells court of A1 death crash
AN RAF man told a court yesterday how he had fallen asleep at the wheel of a Land-Rover before his friend died in a head-on crash with a lorry on the A1.
Haddington Sheriff Court heard that the left-hand drive Land Rover driven by Timothy Taylor collided with a ten-ton lorry on the Edinburgh-Newcastle road near Spott, East Lothian, while their 18-man team were returning to Germany from training in the Highlands with the Royal Marines.
As a result his friend Shean Kearney, 23, who was sitting in the front passenger seat was fatally injured.
Taylor, 31, of 1 Sqn A Flight, RAF Laarbruch, Germany, admitted carelessly driving on September 26, last year, and colliding with a lorry driven by Alex Baillie of Golf Drive, Port Seton, East Lothian.
‘I can best say sir, I fell asleep.
I have no recollection of seeing the lorry until we actually hit it,’ Taylor told Sheriff George Presslie.
‘I tried everything I could to keep Kearney alive,’ he added.
Sheriff Presslie told Taylor: ‘The consequences of the accident will obviously bear heavily on you and nothing will take it away.’
Sheriff Presslie fined him £300.
Colour coding
COLOUR, as an antidote to psychological and circumstantial greyness, is used to maximum effect by Christine McArthur in her exhibition of oil paintings, pastel drawings and water colours at the Ancrum Gallery, near Jedburgh.
The majority of the work is domestic, both in scale and content.
Still life compositions predominate, and contain many objects common to home life: fruit, flowers, furniture, bottles and shells.
Careful attention has been paid to the arrangement of the objects themselves and this is further emphasised by sharp tonal contrasts, in which the artist delights.
In Oranges and Lemons, the colours of the fruit are juxtaposed with the vivid turquoise of a table top, so that the composition vibrates harmoniously.
A strong compositional sense is complemented by an almost naive approach to perspective.
True proportions are denied in favour of an intuitive rather than a rigorously intellectual style.
Many of the objects are sharply emphasised with thick, dark lines, implying perhaps, a need for order and an attendant insecurity.
There is an interesting contrast between still lives in pastel and those in oil paints.
While the former adhere more closely to a direct representation of the objects at hand, the latter tend more towards  abstraction and rely more on memory than imagination.
Some of McArthur's recent work offers a change of subject as well as a change of media.
Several small landscapes of central France retain the ‘primitive’ perspective and sharp delineation of the still lives, while emphasising a clarity of light rarely found in Scotland.
Other works, for example Beehives, which appear at first sight to be silk screen prints are revealed as watercolours, where bleach has created a subtle monotone effect.
This is a welcome stylistic development and provides a balance to the rest of the work.
19 more die in South African race violence From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
IN the third attack by black gunmen in four days on white South Africans, a 55-year-old man was shot dead yesterday near Boipatong.
Elsewhere at least 18 black South Africans were murdered by gunmen.
Four black men armed with AK47 rifles killed the white man, Tony Concer, as he was being driven to work at a steel mill by a friend.
Boipatong was the scene of a massacre of more than 40 supporters of the African National Congress by followers of the rival Inkatha Freedom Party nine months ago.
Last Friday black men in a car sprayed white motorists with AK47 fire on a southern Johannesburg highway, killing a woman and her 14-year-old son.
Clare  Silberbauer , 13, who was shot in the brain, died on Sunday night.
An 18-year-old white student was shot dead in a bar on Saturday night in the small Eastern Cape town of Fort Beaufort when black gunmen broke in and peppered clientele with AK47 fire.
The Azanian People's Liberation Army, military wing of the radical black nationalist Pan Africanist Congress, claimed responsibility for Friday's attack and a police spokesman said the other two attacks also bore APLA hallmarks.
In one of yesterday's attack on blacks, a member of the white ultra-rightwing Wit Wolwe (White Wolves) shot a five-year-old black girl in the mining town of Nigel yesterday in what a Wit Wolwe spokesman said was a revenge attack for APLA's killings of whites.
The condition of the child was not immediately known.
Some 400 members of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) yesterday demonstrated at the scene of Friday's killings.
AWB ‘General’ Johan ‘Hagar’Thompson said white people were getting shot and the government was doing nothing.
‘We will be forced to grab our weapons to protect that which belongs to us,’ he said.
‘We accept APLA's declaration of war and will fight them with everything at our disposal.’
In Natal Province, scene of a virtual civil war between the ANC and Inkatha, seven black people were shot dead yesterday.
Four died when gunmen opened fire on a pick-up truck loaded with people near Port Shepstone in southern Natal.
Eleven blacks, including a child, were killed when men riddled a bus with gunfire in the ‘independent’ Transkei homeland.
At least four other black civilians were shot dead in Natal and the Transvaal.
A constable was shot dead yesterday in Alexandra, a Johannesburg township, bringing to 42 the total of SAP men assassinated on active duty so far this year.
Rabin wins vote over bloodshed
AN Arab stabbed and wounded six Israelis in a Jerusalem schoolyard yesterday and soldiers shot dead three Palestinians in the occupied Gaza Strip as violence continued unabated.
In parliament, Mr Rabin's Labour Party defeated by 50 votes to 41 a right-wing no-confidence motion prompted by the bloodshed.
Angry Israelis blocked Jerusalem's main street and called for the prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, to resign.
The Arab man charged yesterday morning into a high school in Jewish West Jerusalem with a kitchen knife shouting ‘Allahu Akbar’(God is Great).
He stabbed and slightly wounded five students and the principal.
Police stopped a crowd from lynching the attacker, aged 22.
In the Gaza Strip soldiers shot dead three Palestinians, bringing the number of deaths there in recent days to 11.
In the Gaza refugee camp of Rafah soldiers shot dead 11-year-old Mohammad Jarbou.
UN officials said he was shot leaving school during stone-throwing protests.
In the town of Khan Younis, soldiers shot dead a muezzin, a Muslim who calls worshippers to prayer at the mosque, local sources said.
They said an army sniper aimed a rifle with a telescopic sight at Jihad Mustafa Ali Sadek, 22, and shot him in the back while he was at the top of his mosque's minaret.
In the Nusseirat refugee camp soldiers shot Yasser al-Majdalawi, 23, in the chest after dusk as Muslims broke the daytime fast for the holy month of Ramadan, Palestinians said.
He died of his wounds in Shifa hospital, they said.
The army said it was checking the reports.
Students took to the streets after the Jerusalem stabbings and threw stones at Arab-owned vehicles.
Mr Rabin cut short a US trip on Friday because of the wave of violence.
Two Israeli soldiers were killed in ambushes and troops shot dead four Palestinians over the weekend in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Mr Rabin said Palestinians would get nothing from Israel with violence.
He told parliament the government must work towards peace with the Arabs.
But Palestinians say they cannot return to the Arab-Israeli talks until the issue of the deportation of 415 Palestinians is resolved.
Mr Rabin said their exile would curb violence, but Israelis have since killed 69 Arabs and Palestinians 12 Israelis.
— Reuter
Test of unity likely as French right celebrates From Diana Geddes, Paris
RIGHT-WING parties were yesterday celebrating what could turn out to be their biggest victory in a French election since 1815 — and secretly worrying that the size of their crushing win could soon pose problems of its own.
Final results of Sunday's first round of voting, as given by the ministry of the interior, showed that the conservative alliance of the neo-Gaullist RPR and the centrist UDF had won 39.5 per cent of the vote (44.2 per cent if parties grouped together as the ‘diverse right’ are included).
The Socialists and their allies had 23 per cent, the extreme right National Front 12.4, the Communists 9.2 and the ecologists a mere 7.6.
On the basis of that vote, the UDF-RPR alliance is expected to win more than 80 per cent of the 577 parliamentary seats, leaving the Socialists with only 60 to 80 of their previous 265 seats.
The Communists would have around 15, the National Front one or two and the Ecologists none.
A total of 81 conservative candidates, including Jacques Chirac and Valery Giscard d'Estaing, leaders respectively of the RPR and the UDF, have already secured their seats by winning more than 50 per cent of the vote in Sunday's first round.
Not a single Socialist candidate managed to do so.
Many of the Socialist ‘heavyweights’, such as Michel Rocard (the official Socialist presidential candidate), Pierre Beregovoy (the outgoing prime minister), Jack Lang (outgoing culture and education minister) and Roland Dumas (outgoing foreign minister), are likely to find themselves in severe difficulties in the second round of voting next Sunday.
Any candidate who has obtained more than 12.5 per cent of the registered vote (around 18 per cent of the actual vote cast) is eligible to participate in next Sunday's run-off.
After suffering their worst defeat in any general election since 1968, the Socialists yesterday repeated their call, to disillusioned left-wing voters and those who had abstained to turn out in force on Sunday, to block too sweeping a right-wing victory.
They said such a win could deprive France of an effective opposition in parliament.
But they are unlikely to be able to save more than a dozen or so seats.
On the conservative side yesterday there were largely unspoken fears that it will be difficult for the new government to impose its discipline on 450 or so deputies, many of whom may be tempted to form separate parliamentary groups.
Despite their electoral alliance, the UDF and RPR remain divided on many points of policy, not least in the two key areas of Europe and the economy.
Keeping an appearance of unity will not be helped by the fact that the two party leaders, Mr Chirac and Mr Giscard d'Estaing, are bitter rivals in the presidential stakes.
Furthermore, many conservatives are wondering whether they are inheriting a poisoned chalice by taking over the government at this time, with the economy moving into a recession, unemployment teetering on the brink of three million, public spending deficits soaring and the franc under renewed attack on the foreign exchange market.
Other time bombs await them in the form of the dispute over the GATT farm trade deal, French involvement in Bosnia, proposed constitutional reforms and, not least, how to handle the approaching period of ‘cohabitation’ with an ageing, isolated and deeply unpopular, but  nevertheless still extraordinarily wily, Socialist president.
Party piece: Valery Giscard d'Estaing and his wife join supporters at UDF headquarters at Clermont-Ferrand
‘Time running out’ on Bosnian peace talks
AN peace talks appeared near collapse yesterday and a United Nations Security Council vote to enforce the no-fly zone over the region was delayed.
In Bosnia itself the Serbs said they would open an air link to the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica and halted an offensive that brought their forces within a mile of its outskirts.
In New York the Bosnian Serbs hinted that they would walk out of the peace talks if the Security Council called for military action to ground their aircraft.
No talks with Bosnian Serb, Muslim or Croat leaders were scheduled, and Fred Eckhard, spokesman for the two international mediators, Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, painted a bleak picture of prospects for agreement.
‘The feeling is that time is running out on the talks,’ Mr Eckhard said.
He told reporters that Mr Vance and Lord Owen were ‘not throwing up their hands’ but there was ‘a question as to how many days they can keep going with a negotiating process which is not getting anywhere.’
A Security Council vote to enforce its no-fly zone declaration had been expected as early as yesterday but it was postponed because of arduous negotiations over a final text, including the grace period before shoot-down or other orders could be issued.
Political turmoil in Russia also was considered partly responsible, since Russia, a Serbian ally, is a permanent member of the Security Council.
Military enforcement of the no-fly zone would be implemented to prevent Serbian war planes from attacking Muslim villages.
Bosnian Serbs deny responsibility for the attacks, which have continued since the UN declared the no-fly zone last October.
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, yesterday ordered his forces to open a helicopter corridor to evacuate refugees from Srebrenica, the Bosnian Serb news agency SRNA said.
A fierce tank battle raged in the western approaches to the Bosnian capital Sarajevo and Bosnian radio reported that 18 children had been wounded and one killed when a shell hit their school.
Two Sarajevo hospitals reported seven killed and 61 wounded in fierce shelling yesterday.
A French soldier was flown out of Sarajevo after being shot in the arm.
The UN protection force, Unprofor, and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees had called for an air corridor after reports that refugees in Srebrenica were dying at a rate of 20 a day from exposure and starvation.
Mr Karadzic, who was in New York for the peace talks, said in an open letter to the UN Security Council that the ‘Serbian side will freeze all military activities around  Srebrenica and will react only in self-defence’.
He said Muslim civilians could be evacuated or were free to stay in the enclave and Serb forces would allow the sick and wounded to leave the area.
UN helicopters, Mr Karadzic said, were ‘free to perform their humanitarian functions regarding food and evacuation’.
A UNHCR official, Larry Hollingworth, who returned to Sarajevo yesterday, said 160 male war wounded remained in Srebrenica but no one was now dying from malnutrition.
The four-kilometre (2-mile) wide corridor would be opened for five days from Tuesday, SRNA said, adding that the time limit could be extended at Unprofor's request.
In Tuzla, UN aid workers were preparing to evacuate Serb civilians as part of attempts by the Unprofor commander in Bosnia, French General Philippe Morillon, to restart aid convoys.
— AP and Reuter
Nuclear subs from Russia and US collide
RUSSIAN and US nuclear submarines collided in Arctic waters this weekend but the crash, 105 miles off Russia's northern coast, caused little damage to either craft, officials said yesterday.
Russian naval commanders accused the US boat of carrying out dangerous manoeuvres.
Defence Department officials in Washington said the US regretted the incident.
A spokesman in Moscow said the Russian craft suffered minimal damage and no radiation leaked after the accident on Saturday.
He said weapons carried on board were not damaged, but declined to specify if the boat was carrying nuclear or conventional missiles.
The nuclear reactor which propels the submarine was not damaged, he added.
The Russian statement said the incident happened when the Russian vessel was on manoeuvres in the Barents Sea, outside its territorial waters.
The Russian submarine has returned to its base on the Kola peninsula.
Russian officials did not name the submarine involved in the weekend collision, but the US Pentagon said the American boat was the attack submarine Grayling.
The US said an investigation was underway.
‘The United States regrets the incident,’ a brief statement said.
The incident was the second U.S.-Russian submarine collision in 14 months.
In February 1992, the US nuclear submarine Baton Rouge damaged a Russian nuclear submarine in the Barents Sea.
The collision comes at a difficult time for Russian President Boris Yeltsin, who is defending a decision to impose presidential rule in parliament and in the Constitutional Court.
— Reuter
Hardliners in parliament and in the Russian military say the president is making too many concessions to the West.
They view a planned April 4 summit between Yeltsin and US President Bill Clinton with deep mistrust.
‘It is evidently necessary to note both the low levels of responsibility and of readiness of captains and crews of foreign submarines on observation trips.
This is the second such incident in the last two years,’ the statement said.
Neither the U.S. nor Russian statements made clear whether the crash occurred on or beneath the surface.
But U.S. attack submarines, designed to hunt and destroy other subs and surface ships, seldom move on the surface of the ocean.
The U.S. vessel suffered no damage or injuries.
Russian press reports said at the time the CIS vessel suffered damage to its sail, periscope and bridge.
Both submarines were nuclear powered and carrying nuclear weapons.
Exodus from sect camp is limited
US AGENTS voiced disappointment yesterday that only seven members of a Texas religious cult left their barricaded compound on Sunday, saying authorities had been led to believe a significantly greater number would emerge.
‘Even though we remain hopeful I'd have to characterise yesterday as disappointing,’ FBI agent Bob Ricks said at a daily news briefing on the 23rd day of the stand-off between cult members and federal authorities.
Asked if he felt the cult leader, David Koresh, was manipulating agents, Mr Ricks replied: ‘As far as being jerked around, we are not going to be jerked around.’
Seven cult members, most of them elderly, left the compound in Waco, Texas, on Sunday in three groups, the largest number to be released since the first week of the siege when two adults and 21 children left.
One of the first two women, who left shortly after midnight on Sunday, was identified as Victorine Hollingsworth, 59, a British citizen.
Officials said Ms Hollingsworth was from London, but left there 30 years ago.
She has an adult son and daughter in London.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said last week that up to 30 cult members inside the compound had expressed interest in leaving if they received assurances about their legal rights.
It is believed that 96 followers of Koresh, including 17 children, remain inside the compound.
The compound has been ringed by police and federal agents since a 28 February shoot-out that erupted when agents sought to arrest Koresh for alleged firearms violations.
Four federal agents and perhaps up to 15 cult members died.
Koresh's followers believe he is the Messiah and that the end of the world is near.
Federal agents bathed the cult compound with bright lights and played tapes of previous negotiations over loudhailers early yesterday in efforts to end the siege.
— Reuter
US says support for Yeltsin is ‘challenge of our time'
THE US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, yesterday called Russia's move to democracy and free markets the ‘greatest strategic challenge of our time’ and said the United States could help underwrite a bigger international aid programme.
Mr Christopher's speech had been planned well in advance but it had the effect of underscoring US support for the Russian president as he battled with hardliners in parliament.
Yesterday, as the country's Constitutional Court weighed the legality of his weekend move in declaring emergency rule, Mr Yeltsin asserted control over the Russian media to safeguard it from a hardline takeover.
Mr Christopher acknowledged in his speech to the World Affairs Council of Chicago, that ‘any realistic programme to assist Russian democracy won't be cheap’.
‘But there's no question that our nation can afford its fair share of an international effort.
We can't afford to do otherwise,’ he said.
Calling it ‘the greatest strategic challenge of our time,’ he said that ‘bringing Russia — one of history's most powerful countries — into the family of peaceful nations will serve our highest security, moral and economic interests’.
Mr Christopher's speech came less than two weeks before a scheduled introductory summit meeting between President Bill Clinton and Mr Yeltsin.
Administration sources made it clear yesterday that Mr  Clinton was ready to go to Moscow for the 3-4 April meeting, whose present venue is Vancouver.
But the sources said that so far there had been no change of plan.
The secretary of state's address was intended to send yet another signal of support for Mr Yeltsin and his reform efforts.
Referring to the latest crisis, he said the administration wanted to ‘reiterate our concern that the current situation in Moscow must be resolved peacefully and in a way consistent with respect for civil liberties’.
The speech was also was meant to lay the groundwork for what Mr Christopher said would be a comprehensive strategy to support Russia's transition to democracy and free markets.
Mr Clinton was expected to unveil that strategy at the summit.
‘For America and the world, the stakes (of successful Russian reform) are monumental,’ Mr Christopher said.
‘If we succeed we will have established the foundation of our lasting security into the next century.
But if Russia falls into anarchy or lurches back into despotism the price that we pay could be frightening.’
He cited among other threats the loss of Russian central control over the former Soviet Union's vast nuclear arsenal.
He argued that Yeltsin is in political trouble now specifically because he and other  democrats have demonstrated their commitment to reform by expanding civil liberties, cutting the military budget and freeing prices.
‘We stand again at a historic crossroads…
We must redouble our efforts to help the Russian people as they struggle in an effort that has no historical precedent,’ he said.
Christopher did not give details of the US aid programme, but he offered some general ideas.
‘Our bottom line is that we will be increasing and accelerating our support for Russia's democracy,’ he said.
‘We cannot do it alone but we must be prepared to do our part.’
Christopher added that, as one step, Washington had endorsed holding a special meeting of the foreign and finance ministers of the world's seven leading industrial countries, the Group of Seven, later in April to co-ordinate joint efforts to assist Russia's  transformation .
Among other things, Christopher said Western assistance must be better co-ordinated and targeted where it can have the greatest impact.
Christopher also seemed to indicate that the United States and its allies were considering a programme to provide Russia a kind of social safety net as it moves to free markets.
‘It will be vital (for Russia) to reduce the budget deficit, control the money supply, stabilise the rouble and close down inefficient factories,’ he said.
‘But these are also the steps that will cause the greatest human pain and political risk.
Again, Russia needs our help.
The West must find a way to respond.
And the response can't be limited to big promises with little delivery.’
Christopher added that ‘we are now engaged in intensive consultations with our partners from the leading industrial democracies to develop a joint programme of assistance’.
In Moscow yesterday Mr Yeltsin — whose mother died at the weekend — stayed out of public view for the second day, letting his aides keep up the political pressure.
But he released a decree placing the media under his protection and ordering the ministry of the interior to take ‘necessary measures’ to defend the state-run television, radio and information agencies.
His decree appeared designed to prevent a proposed takeover of the media by the Congress of People's Deputies.
At the end of an emergency session of Congress on 13 March the parliamentary speaker, Ruslan Khasbulatov, who is Mr Yeltsin's main rival, ordered the preparation of legislation to put the media under parliamentary control.
The president, through his spokesman, also lashed out at the chief justice, Valery Zorkin, for publicly opposing his weekend speech before the Constitutional Court began formally to review the case yesterday.
In a six-point statement, Mr Yeltsin's spokesman, Vyacheslav Kostikov, said Mr Zorkin's position was ‘hasty and unilateral’ and was ‘contrary to legal ethics.’
He also praised the military remaining above the political fray, and said support for Mr Yeltsin was growing.
After hours of deliberation the court failed to rule on the constitutionality of Mr Yeltsin's measures.
If it should rule that the president's actions were unconstitutional it would be a big step toward his impeachment by Congress.
Mr Zorkin said the court would continue its deliberations and expressed the hope that ‘the president would revise his attitude to the Constitutional Court and the Congress of People's Deputies.’
‘The road towards a compromise has not been exhausted,’ Mr Zorkin said.
‘When the road to compromise is exhausted, then war begins.’
The justice minister, Nikolai Fyodorov, who did not back the president at a weekend cabinet meeting, resigned yesterday.
— Reuter and AP
Workers warned of grim times ahead
THE International Labour Organisation today predicts bleak times for the world's workers in the late 1990s amid rising competition for jobs and mounting pressure by employers to keep wages down.
In its annual World Labour Report, the United Nations' agency says the power of trade unions to protect their members is eroding even in developed countries, while in the major new economies of Asia they are under outright attack.
In an introduction to the 100-page report, the ILO says labour markets around the world are afflicted by persistently high unemployment, trade unions under pressure, a struggle for social protection in developing countries, the grim reality of modern-day slavery, and an epidemic of stress.
It suggests there is little prospect for radical change between now and the end of the century.
At a news conference held to launch the report, its editor, the ILO economist Wouter van Ginneken, said yesterday that he believed workers in the richer countries might have to accept lower salary levels as international companies looked more to poorer states for their work force.
The immediate challenge to present Western labour standards, he said, could come from the former communist states, where unemployment was growing rapidly, creating a pool of accessible labour willing to accept low pay.
From the start of 1990 to March 1992, the report says, registered unemployed in Eastern Europe rose from 100,000 to over four million.
Across the major developed economies of Europe, Australasia, North America and Japan, unemployment rose from 7.4 per cent of the work force in 1991 to 8.2 pct in 1992, bringing the total out of work in these countries to 32.3 million.
The ILO report says that while world trade expanded dramatically in recent years, many working people who contributed to the process did not receive the full benefit.
‘This is partly because employers searching for cheap labour have imposed restrictions on the freedom of trade unions in the countries in which they have invested,’ it says.
Army spied on Martin Luther King
A SON of Martin Luther King and a number of the assassinated civil rights leader's associates yesterday described as ‘frightening’ and ‘sick’a newspaper report that the US army spied on King using informants, spy planes and elite troops.
Andrew Young, a former UN ambassador and one of King's leading aides in the black civil rights movement, called the report in Sunday's Memphis Commercial Appeal on alleged army spying ‘kind of sad’.
‘It just shows that the level of racial sickness was pretty deep in some circles,’ he said.
The report, published two weeks before the 25th anniversary of King's assassination in Memphis on 4 April, 1968, said army units used informants to spy on the King family and other US black leaders starting in 1917.
The paper said the army spy operation first took notice of King in 1947.
U-2 spy planes monitored civil rights demonstrations in the 1960s and an elite army Green Beret unit was in Memphis when King was shot and killed.
King's son, Martin Luther King III, an elected county commissioner, said yesterday he had heard that the FBI and the CIA routinely spied on his father, but ‘when it comes to an extensive military intelligence operation with Green Berets and U-2 planes, that's frightening.’
The report said army intelligence officers started spying on black Americans out of fears they were susceptible to being influenced by German agents in the First World War, then by Communist and Japanese agents and opponents of the Vietnam War.
Strathclyde University honorary degrees
LORD Stockton, president of publishers Macmillan Ltd, Professor Kenneth Calman, chief medical officer at the Department of Health, and Magnus Magnusson, the Mastermind presenter and chairman of Scottish Natural Heritage, are to be honoured by the University of Strathclyde.
They will receive honorary degrees at the university's Commemoration Day ceremony in the Barony Hall next month.
Lord Stockton will receive an honorary degree of Doctor of the University and Prof Calman a Doctor of Science degree.
Mr Magnusson, who presented two editions of the Mastermind television programme from the Barony Hall this month, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters.
Professor Edward Wragg, director of Exeter University School of Education, and Professor Francine Vaniscotte, a leading European educationalist, will each receive the honorary degree of Doctor of the University.
Big world chess bid revealed as phoney
A £4.1 MILLION bid to stage the world chess championship has turned out to be phoney.
It was the highest of five bids opened yesterday by the world champion, Garry Kasparov, and his British challenger, Nigel Short.
The ten million German mark bid was made on letter-headed paper of a company called Investment Chartwork.
Short told a London news conference it was ‘fascinating and intriguing’, but inquiries later revealed the truth.
It was made by Noel Alms, of Whitley, near Warrington, who said he made it ‘out of a warped sense of humour’.
The two players had invited offers after rejecting a bid to stage the match in Manchester under the auspices of the International Chess Federation (FIDE).
When Mr Alms was contacted by the legal adviser to the breakaway Professional Chess Association, set up by Kasparov and Short, he said he meant reichmarks, a worthless pre-First World War currency.
Mr Alms, who described himself as retired but who runs Investment Chartwork, a firm of ‘economic forecasters’, said: ‘I suppose you could say I made it out of warped sense of humour.
‘I take an interest in chess and I have met both the players.
But why shouldn't I have a sense of humour?’
The PCA legal adviser, Bob Rice, said: ‘Reichmarks are totally worthless so it will obviously not be considered as a valid bid.’
That leaves four.
Kasparov and Short said they would spend up to two weeks carefully examining them.
The bids include a £1.4 million offer from the Brain Trust, a charity founded to ‘maximise the ability of each and every individual to unlock or deploy the vast capacity of his or her brain’, to stage the event in London.
The Brain Trust bid said it would like the event shared with other cities, including Birmingham, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Liverpool and Manchester.
The other bids were:
A £2 million offer from the London Chess Group to stage the event in London.
A £1.7 million offer from Times Newspapers and the Rotterdam-based Teleworld Holdings (no stated preferred venue).
A £1.2 million bid from the catering organisation Monsi for a London match.
Both Kasparov and 27-year-old Short, the first British player in the championship final this century, said they rejected the earlier £1.2 million bid from Manchester because they said they were not consulted properly by FIDE.
Kasparov said he had been negotiating with the FIDE president, Florencio Campomanes, for several days to try to persuade him to transfer the federation's rights to stage the championship to the PCA and make Manchester a ‘transitionary’ match.
‘He had been making promises earlier in the week and then he rejected the idea yesterday.’
He added: ‘I believe Manchester is an injured party — I do not believe it is the fault of the city.
In the last few days they have behaved impeccably and had tried to get FIDE to give the rights to the new organisation.’
Tony Ingham, a spokesman for the Manchester consortium, said: ‘We have no comment at the moment.
It is up to the players.’
Check mates: All smiles as Garry Kasparov (left) and his British challenger, Nigel Short, meet the press yesterday
Michael Clark Hutchison: former MP
By Joanne Robertson
MICHAEL Clark Hutchison, who was Conservative MP for Edinburgh South for more than 22 years, has died aged 79.
A staunch opponent of the European Community and Scottish devolution, he was often described as an independently minded MP who remained untamed by the whips, voting according to his conviction rather than following the party line on a number of issues.
Last night, Ian Lang, Secretary of State for Scotland, said: ‘Michael Clark Hutchison was a distinguished parliamentarian and a distinguished man who will be very sadly missed.’
Born in Edinburgh on 26 February, 1914, Mr Clark Hutchison followed the family tradition and entered the House of Commons in May 1957.
His father, Sir George Clark Hutchison, KC, represented the parliamentary seat of North Midlothian in the 1920s and his brother, Sir Ian Clark Hutchison, was the MP for West Edinburgh from 1941-59.
Educated at Eton and Cambridge, Mr Clark Hutchison was called to the English Bar in 1937 and worked in South America and Australia until volunteering as a private soldier in the Australian Army in 1939.
During the Second World War, he saw active service in North Africa, the Middle East and Pacific.
He was mentioned in despatches and was discharged with the rank of major.
Between 1945-46, he served on a military mission to Washington.
After the war, he joined the Colonial Administrative Service and spent two years in Palestine before serving six years as political officer and assistant secretary in the then Protectorate and Colony of Aden.
In 1955, he resigned from the colonial service to concentrate on politics and unsuccessfully contested Motherwell in 1955.
He took up a post as an executive with a engineering firm before winning the South Edinburgh seat in a by-election in 1957.
In 1976, Mr Clark Hutchison underlined his opposition to the establishment of a Scottish assembly by making an unsuccessful attempt to block Government plans to spend £1 million on the purchase and conversion of the Royal High School, Edinburgh, to house the Scottish assembly.
At the height of the Government's trials on the devolution bill in the late 1970s, Mr Clark Hutchison declared: ‘Devolution is a dead duck.’
His fierce anti-Common Market views led to a challenge to his candidacy for the South Edinburgh seat in 1973 which he successfully fought off.
In 1975, he helped to found a new anti-EEC party, Scottish Conservatives Against the Treaty of Rome, and was appointed an honorary vice-president along with his then fellow Scottish Tory MP, Teddy Taylor,
In an article in The Scotsman in June 1975, he stated: ‘Great emphasis is being laid on the generous donations and loans from EEC funds.
Where do you think this manna money comes from?
It comes from you.’
He was an active campaigner for an improved transport system for Edinburgh during his years as an MP and supported proposals to establish a light rail system around the capital.
In 1972, his long-time interest in Benjamin Disraeli, the 19th-century prime minister, resulted in a display of his Disraeliana collection in Edinburgh which included sketches, prints, cartoons and busts.
In 1937, he married Anne, the younger daughter of the Rev AR Taylor, of Aberdeen, who studied English at Girton College, Cambridge.
She died in 1989 and was extremely supportive of her husband's career.
The couple had a son and daughter.
Mr Michael Clark Hutchison with his wife Anne after he had retained his Edinburgh South seat in the general election of February 1974
40 teams in fund-raising contest
By Liz McGowan
LAST year, the British Bridge League was appealing for funds to meet the cost of sending two teams to the World Championships in Japan in 1991.
They hope not to have that problem this year when the World Championships are in Santiago in Chile.
As part of the fund-raising effort, the Scottish Bridge Union ran a National Spring Swiss Teams and this was such a success that it was repeated this year.
There are very few free weekends for serious bridge players in spring, but 40 teams turned up to enjoy their eight matches.
The winners — Charles Outred, Vi Mitchell, Ian Howie and Mike McGinley, of Glasgow — had an unassailable lead with one match to go and relaxed to record their only loss in the last round.
Runners-up were the Edinburgh team of John Hamilton, Mike Young, Duncan Cursiter and Duncan MacDonald and third were Jim Hay, John Simpson, Bill Innes and Finlay Marshall, of Aberdeen and Edinburgh.
Report backs local housing companies
By David Scott Local Government Editor
BILLIONS of pounds could, it is claimed, be released to tackle Britain's housing crisis if councils transferred ownership of their estates to new-style social housing companies.
The assertion follows a study commissioned by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
It suggests that huge amounts of extra money could be made available for the homeless, improving the condition of houses and tackling the growing shortage of affordable homes for rent if local housing companies were created.
According to a report on the study published yesterday, those companies would still allow a substantial degree of council involvement.
They would have the advantage of being able to operate outside public expenditure controls.
The study suggests that in England alone, the proposed system would result in net public expenditure savings of £16 billion.
Money released on that scale could make a vital contribution to closing a gap of about £3 billion a year in investment in affordable, rented accommodation over Britain as a whole, the report states.
Although case studies were carried out in Scotland as well as in England, the report makes no estimate of the level of investment that could be released north of the Border.
One of the authors, John Perry, director of the Institute of Housing, said yesterday that it had not been possible to calculate a Scottish figure because of differences in the financial systems.
The study, carried out by researchers led by Steve Wilcox, of Cardiff University, shows that council housing transfers to other bodies have been taking place in England on a much larger scale than has happened so far in Scotland.
The report points out that the idea of local housing companies as landlord bodies for social rented housing originated in Glasgow.
One of the earliest examples was the Glasgow City Improvement Trust established under a local act of parliament in 1866.
Mr Wilcox said that at a time of increased pressures to reduce public spending, new strategies on housing were needed urgently.
‘Local housing companies provide a viable vehicle for taking council housing outside those  constraints on public spending,’ he said.
STRATHCLYDE Stop and search weapons haul
POLICE have stopped and searched 9,124 people in Strathclyde during the past three weeks as part of Operation Blade and found 126 carrying knives and 66 other types of weapons.
Assistant Chief Constable Peter Gibson said: ‘Despite our warnings, 192 are still prepared to carry offensive weapons.
This demonstrates the need for us to continue to stop and search people if we are to make the streets safe.’
Grounds for saying coffee perks you up
COFFEE can help you think more quickly, boost the memory and improve powers of reason, according to a new survey.
Long-time coffee drinkers continue to get the benefits and the effect is more marked among older people, said the Health and Lifestyle Survey published in the journal Psychopharmacology.
A cup of tea also has an effect, though not as powerful as coffee, which makes psychologists think it is the caffeine in both which counts.
The results have been backed up by the Medical Research Council and the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.
More than 7,000 people in England, Scotland and Wales were asked about their coffee and tea-drinking habits and given simple tests of their reaction times, memory and reasoning.
Dr Martin Jarvis, of the Institute of Psychiatry in London, found coffee drinkers did better in tests than tea drinkers.
They were also younger, of higher social class, better-educated and more likely to own their homes.
They also smoked and drank more.
People who drank six cups of coffee a day had reaction times 6 per cent faster than non-coffee drinkers and they did 4-5 per cent better on memory and reasoning tests.
Song may lure six whales from Scapa
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
FEMALE whale song will be used today — weather permitting — in an attempt to entice six male sperm whales out of the confines of Scapa Flow.
Loudspeakers will be lowered into the water from a pilot boat, and the whales will be played recordings made off the Azores last year by a Bangor University marine biologist, John Goold.
If the plan is successful the 45ft long whales, which may be 20 to 40 years old, will follow the boat past South Ronaldsay to the open sea.
The technique has never been used before and, if necessary, will be attempted again tomorrow.
If it fails, a riskier operation will begin on Thursday with about a dozen boats trying to shepherd the animals to safety.
The sperm whales, which are deep sea creatures, have been in Scapa Flow for a month and experts are convinced they are facing starvation and could become stranded.
It has not been possible to assess the state of their health, but fishermen have advised marine biologists that the area contains very little food.
The whales favour large prey, including squid, cod and sharks.
Tony Martin, a whale specialist from the Government's Sea Mammal Research Unit in Cambridge, will arrive in Orkney today in preparation for the whale drive through the Sound of Hoxa.
He said the operation would be timed to coincide with the maximum tide speed through the southern entrance, the only channel deep enough for the whales.
‘If we can't drive them out they will starve to death.
We can be reasonably sure after a month that they are stranded there.
If we can get them lined up at the entrance, they should be sucked through like water through a plug hole.
And our boats will be sucked through with them.’
The rescue co-ordinators include Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals abandoned plans to use whale song on Sunday, when Mr Goold found he needed stronger amplification of his recordings.
The necessary equipment was found on the islands and will be ready for use today.
Jail for rock concerts fraud
A MAN who advertised a series of non-existent concerts by the American rock superstar Bruce Springsteen was jailed for 12 months yesterday at Nottingham Crown Court.
When police raided a shop in Mansfield Road, Nottingham, in January 1992, they found a room full of innocent telephone operators taking bookings, the court heard.
In just two hours of operation, more than £3,000 of business had been done.
Philip Coles, 37, of Clackmannanshire, had pled guilty last month to conspiracy to obtain money by deception.
Sentence had been adjourned until yesterday for reports.
His sister, Moira Coles, 34, of Mapperley, Nottingham, admitted her part in the conspiracy but was said to be a small cog in the operation.
She was  sentenced to 120 hours' unpaid community work.
She had run a sportswear business from a shop in Nottingham and allowed her brother to use the premises, the court heard.
Four concert halls had been booked, the first in Livingston, and advertisements placed in regional newspapers.
The halls were much smaller than the rock star could have filled and concert hall operators became suspicious.
Judge Keith Matthewman said it was a well-planned scheme and if it had worked thousands of people would have lost money.
Traditional values supreme in Lang's vision of education
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
RESPECT for education, teachers and discipline lies at the heart of the strongly traditionalist proposals for Scottish education laid out yesterday by Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary.
He stressed that he sought consensus among teachers, parents, local and central government, in place of the confrontation of recent years — a clear reference to the controversy which surrounded Michael Forsyth's time as education minister from 1987 and last year.
But there remained large elements of his speech to Aberdeen Conservatives which are likely to be seen as a challenge to modern classroom practice and a potential increase in political interference in Scotland's new curriculum for children aged between five and 14.
Mr Lang said, in comments to The Scotsman: ‘The statistics suggest that, with more people achieving more qualifications than ever before, this is the golden age of Scottish education.
But I don't believe that is so because I believe education is not held in as high respect as it was in the past.
There are still people whom the system is failing.’
For them, he said, there was a need to go back to the basics of spelling, grammar, punctuation and arithmetic.
He argued that the evidence for that came from employers, school leaving qualifications, the dole queue and failures on training schemes.
‘One of the tragedies we have to deal with is the large numbers of young Scots who leave school unable to read, write or add up.
They don't even have the tools to do jobs of yesterday, never mind tomorrow.’
Mr Lang said that the first priority of Scottish teachers should be to ensure their pupils were literate and numerate.
‘That ought to be a blinding glimpse of the obvious, and it should also be obvious that it will only happen through disciplined and focused teaching.
He added: ‘I'm not going to prescribe the exact way teachers should teach children.
They are trained professionals but they shouldn't lose sight of the importance of getting children to accept the discipline that comes with education.
‘One of the fundamentals is that children have to be taught.
It can't be assumed that they will just learn and pick things up as they go along.
There is a discipline element in education and both parents and teachers have a role to play in asserting the right habits and respect for education.’
The comments come just ahead of two key decisions by Scottish Office ministers which will set the tone for the new curriculum and could damage the wide agreement over its introduction.
One decision is whether history, geography, science and health should be taught in separate primary lessons or if the modern practice of learning them together, through environmental studies project work, should continue.
There is also to be a document on structure and balance in the curriculum, in which ministers will draw together the different strands.
The fear, following fierce controversy over political interference in England's separate curriculum by ministers south of the Border, is that the document will also be used to put a political stamp on the Scottish scheme.
Mr Lang once more backed self-governing schools, saying he was relaxed about the lack of take-up from Scottish parents.
He also said he had no desire to tackle the principle of comprehensive education: ‘I don't see any need for it at the present time.
It's not something I'm thinking about.’
Videos focus on school identities
By Graeme Wilson
ALL PRIMARY and secondary schools in Scotland are to be given videos illustrating methods of creating a stronger school character.
The Taking Account programmes, publicised yesterday, are the latest step in a consultation process to gauge the opinions of pupils, parents and teachers which began last year with the production of information packs and questionnaires.
The videos illustrate a framework for consultation and show how self-evaluation can be carried out at schools and the benefits that can be achieved.
The programmes, funded by the Scottish Office, are described as promoting school ethos.
At yesterday's promotion, the Scottish education minister, Lord James Douglas- Hamilton, acknowledged that was not an easy concept to define.
He added: ‘A good ethos is associated with a sense of identity and pride in the school, a welcoming environment, high pupil and teacher expectations as well as strong and purposeful leadership.
‘It also involves a positive attitude towards pupils, a recognition of the motivating effect of priorities and a concern to work with parents and the wider community.
‘There is no doubt in my mind that a good school ethos allows learning and teaching to thrive and helps pupils to achieve high standards.
‘In schools where these factors combine, pupils are more likely to attend regularly, achieve high performance, be less involved in discipline and respect the rights of others in society.’
A pilot project involving 23 schools helped to develop and refine Taking Account.
The shorter of the two videos is about 20 minutes long and is aimed at school boards and parent-teacher groups.
The second one, which is two hours long, is designed for teachers, college lecturers and in-service training.
Scottish Office and inspectorate officials hope that the feedback from parents, pupils and teachers will be used to construct school development plans.
Royal portrait marks club centenary
THE QUEEN chose Salisbury Crags and Arthur's Seat for the background to this portrait of her unveiled last night at the Caledonian Club in London.
The artist Alexander Goudie, from Paisley, whose commissions in the past have included Lord Mackay of Clashfern, the climber Christian Bonington, former Chief of the Defence Staff Lord Bramall, and Billy Connolly, painted her in the robes of the Order of the Thistle on a raised foreground above Holyroodhouse to mark the centenary of the club.
The painting was unveiled by Lady Ramsay, wife of the chairman of the Caledonian Club.
Investigation
As a result of an error on my part, a mistake appeared in your report (18 March) covering our formal investigation into Strathclyde Regional Council education authority.
When the Commission for Racial Equality carries out a formal investigation and finds unlawful discrimination, it usually has the power to issue a non-discrimination notice insisting on changes in practices.
The exception to this is the maintained sector of education.
In such a case, the commission refers its findings to the relevant Secretary of State, who may then issue instructions.
This would apply should discrimination be found in the Strathclyde investigation.
My apologies for having caused this mistake in an otherwise excellent report.
SNP move towards Europe of regions concept entirely understandable
With regard to the vote in the House of Commons on the proposed European committee of the regions, although I can have no sympathy for anyone who votes with the Tory Government I can understand the SNP's attempts at embracing reality and moving towards the concept of Europe of the regions.
It is the direction in which things are heading.
The SNP has indeed come a long way since Jim Sillars, as vice-president of the SNP, in a section of his Independence in Europe pamphlet (June 1989) entitled ‘The David Martin formula’, referred to Europe of the regions as a ‘nebulous concept’.
I have always argued that although the committee of the regions is not in itself Europe of the regions, it could be an important stepping stone on that road and could, eventually, develop into a second chamber to the European Parliament.
It now appears that the SNP shares that view.
Perhaps the SNP is moving in the same direction as its Welsh colleagues and is preparing to become a ‘post nationalist party’ that fully embraces the concept of Europe of the regions.
Point of no return
BORIS Yeltsin crossed his personal Rubicon last weekend when he declared special presidential rule until a referendum in late April — effectively slicing through the tangle of his constitutional power struggle with parliament.
Under normal circumstances that would be a thoroughly anti-democratic development, to be roundly condemned.
But conditions in Russia at present are anything but normal.
It has to be remembered that both the much tinkered with constitution and the parliament date from Soviet times.
As Yeltsin never ceases to point out, he is the one who has been legitimised by the Russian people in free elections, not parliament.
Indeed, ideally, there should be new parliamentary elections.
But the attempt to hold them would lead to an even bigger crisis between president and legislature.
Yeltsin argues that his aim, contested by parliament, of holding the referendum on who should ultimately rule the country and also on a new constitution, is in fact to save democracy for Russia and to safeguard economic reform.
Under these circumstances, Yeltsin has, at present, to be given the benefit of the doubt.
The division of powers between president and parliament needs to be clarified.
At the same time a referendum on his rule should determine the extent of parliament's legitimacy.
Unfortunately, however, things are not quite that simple.
For a start, a number of regions had, by yesterday, already declared their unwillingness to accept Yeltsin's decrees under special rule.
It will be difficult for him to enforce his writ in the far-flung reaches of the country.
And, looking ahead, his strategy will only work if there is a clear decision in the referendum in favour of either the president or parliament.
If there is not, or if it went against him, what would his next move be?
There could certainly be no return to the status quo ante.
The temptation simply to continue with presidential rule would be enormous and another authoritarian regime would be born.
How would the military behave under such circumstances?
It would probably divide its loyalties between the competing political authorities, leading in the worst case to civil war.
Russia is going through a critical phase which will determine its political future.
Yeltsin, as he is inclined to do when backed into a corner, has taken a high-risk gamble.
The president must be given every assistance — political and economic — to cement democracy and make his gamble pay off.
Anything else must be vigorously rejected.
Behind the rhetoric, Grachev's relations with Yeltsin and the army itself, are dangerously ambiguous Which way will the general strike?
As the prospect of civil war in Russia becomes an increasing threat, Andrei Martov examines the uncertain future of Boris Yeltsin's beleaguered minister of defence
IN the tense situation pending a solution of Russia's constitutional crisis all eyes must be on the army, and above all the defence minister, General Pavel Grachev.
On Sunday Grachev joined other ‘key’ ministers in pledging his loyalty.
But behind the rhetoric, his relations with Yeltsin and the army itself, are dangerously ambiguous.
Every day, at 10am, Grachev picks up the telephone to Yeltsin and speaks for five minutes.
Their personal contact goes back to June 1991, when Yeltsin, newly elected Russian president but under threat from the Soviet army and KGB, was seeking the support of reliable elements as he set about forming a government.
He was already thinking of the creation of a Russian army, but had no idea how to go about it.
Grachev helped him.
As a paratroop commander, Grachev reasoned that a sovereign Russia would need an army, and therefore a defence minister.
In June he put on a military demonstration for Yeltsin, and out of this grew friendly relations.
Then came the August 1991 putsch.
Grachev was caught undecided.
If he backed his superior, Marshal Yazov, and the putschists, he might expect promotion; but he would still be far from the top.
If he backed Yeltsin, he might do much better.
Rather than make a decisive choice, he played a double game.
Obeying Yazov, he sent a force of paratroops to Moscow with far from clear orders.
At the same time, communicating with Yeltsin behind Yazov's back, he agreed to send some tanks to the White House.
In this way he looked like defending it, though it would have taken only seconds to turn their guns in the opposite direction.
When it was clear that the putsch had failed, Yeltsin made Grachev a hero and even proposed (what was not yet properly in his gift) the post of Soviet defence  minister but its leaders were still at large, Yeltsin offered Grachev the future post of Russian defence minister, at the same time asking him to help arrest the plotters.
Grachev agreed.
In the event, the plotters were arrested without him.
But this did not stop Yeltsin from making Grachev a hero and even proposing (what was not yet properly in his gift) the post of Soviet defence minister.
Grachev declined, saying he was not ready for such a responsibility.
Instead the post was given to the anti-putschist air force general, Yavgeni Shaposhnikov, with Grachev as his deputy.
In the following months, as the Soviet Union broke up and morale in the army deteriorated, Grachev remained on the sidelines, charged with preparing a military reform programme.
His chances of gaining Russia's top military job were temporarily eclipsed by those of other generals — Shaposhnikov, Konstantin Kobets (another defender of the White House), and Vladimir Lobov, the army chief of staff.
But early last year, when all three of the latter fell out of the running, Grachev's way to the defence ministry was unopposed.
Shaposhnikov became commander of the purely strategic troops of the new Commonwealth, Lobov was sacked, and Kobets spoiled his prospects by quarrelling with colleagues.
At first his appointment, last May, raised hopes that the new Russian army would become an island of internal stability.
He instituted an eight-year restructuring plan, and called for improvements in social conditions, including decent accommodation for troops repatriated from abroad.
But, drawn willy-nilly into the political ring, he went, like an amateur boxer with insufficient professional coaching, from one blunder to another.
The first crisis was a backhanded present from Yeltsin himself.
An agreement had been reached with the government of Latvia for the withdrawal of Russian troops there.
But the troops rebelled and refused to leave during the winter.
Grachev was attacked for having put his signature to the timetable.
A second crisis was when he was accused (with Yeltsin's compliance) of failing to check the high level of desertions, the bullying of young soldiers and other irregularities within the province of his promised reforms.
In the latest stage of the power struggle, starting last autumn, Grachev, sought to redeem his standing with Yeltsin by declaring that the defence ministry and army supported the president — not (be it noted) the Russian constitution, or parliament, or people, but Yeltsin in person.
Though Yeltsin dropped his idea of a party, Grachev found himself targeted by the anti-presidential opposition at a moment of acute crisis.
At the seventh Congress of People's Deputies in December, deputies fearing a snap declaration of presidential rule summoned key ministers to say where they stood.
Grachev was sick, but was sent for from hospital.
In front of the congress, he quickly took stock of the situation, and forgetting his allegiance to Yeltsin, pledged loyalty to parliament, the constitution and the people.
Early this year Grachev came under attack in a more organised fashion, from both the Left and the Right.
In February elements of the radical Right combined with communists and national-patriots in holding an illegal all-army officers' meeting.
The gathering, organised by the Union of Officers under Col Sviatcheslav Terekhov (ret), declared Grachev responsible for dismantling the country's defences, allowing the break-up of the armed forces, and betraying national interests.
It proposed bringing him before a tribunal of officers.
In March, members of the radical Left, led by Lt-Col Vitaly Uraitsev, organised an extra-parliamentary hearing.
At this, Grachev was attacked for failing to carry out reforms, allowing the spread of corruption in the army, and hiding statistics about crime.
The hearing ended with a demand for his resignation.
The worsening of the crisis has led many politicians concerned about keeping the country from anarchy, to look for a stronger defence minister.
But who?
The Left would like a civilian, but if there is a candidate it is keeping him under wraps.
The ‘Army Reform’ group, organisers of the 1 March hearing, would like Lobov.
The Right has a ‘ministerial alternative’ in Colonel-General Vladislav Atchalov, a pro-communist national-patriot who barely escaped trial after the putsch.
The Right is better organised than the Left, and has already started forming volunteer paramilitary groups.
But neither side is yet strong enough to  install its own candidate.
As Grachev himself has warned — in this case convincingly — unless a constitutional solution is quickly found the army is liable to split, with the imminent danger of all-out civil war.
Yeltsin fights on after court defeat
THE chairman of the Russian parliament, Ruslan Khasbulatov, called openly for the first time yesterday for Boris Yeltsin's impeachment after the Constitutional Court had ruled that the president had acted in contravention of the constitution.
The court ruled by a 9-3 majority after an all-night sitting that Mr Yeltsin's declaration of ‘special rule’ in a television address on Saturday violated five or six points of the Soviet-era constitution.
The court made no recommendation that this could be used as a basis for impeachment, however, and Interfax news agency said a reference on these lines had been deleted.
A judge of the court — one of the three who voted in favour of Mr Yeltsin — said the ruling could be enough to clear the way for impeachment proceedings.
‘Formally, no other decision is needed (from the court),’ Judge Ernest Ametistov told a news conference.
‘They (the Congress of People's Deputies, the supreme legislature) can take a decision on impeachment on the basis of this ruling.’
Mr Khasbulatov accused the president of attempting a coup and called for an emergency session of the Congress to dismiss him.
But when parliament met later in the day to summon Congress formally, Mr Khasbulatov for the second time in three days stepped back from delivering the final stroke.
After just 17 minutes he talked the house into adjourning until today on the grounds that it would be improper to attack a man on the day of his mother's funeral.
Mr Yeltsin's mother Klavdiya, who died of a heart attack on Sunday, was buried in a Moscow cemetery.
Apart from his appearance at the funeral Mr Yeltsin kept a low profile yesterday.
But his office issued a decree he had signed on Monday containing a strong warning to all regional government officials that he would hold them personally responsible for obeying his orders.
Mr Yeltsin's strategy centres on a referendum on 25 April on who rules Russia but many local councils, sympathetic to parliament, are likely to try and thwart it.
While the Constitutional Court was ruling against him in Moscow, the Russian leader received a ringing declaration of support yesterday in Washington.
President Bill Clinton, giving his first formal press conference since he took office two months ago, said Mr Yeltsin had shown a great deal of courage in standing up for democracy, civil liberties and market reforms.
‘He deserves our support for that.’
Mr Clinton also disclosed that he intended to offer what he called ‘an aggressive and quite specific plan’ of aid when the two men meet next month.
Washington has expressed its willingness to change the venue for the summit from Vancouver to Moscow if the Russian side makes such a request, but Mr Clinton said he was working on the assumption that it would take place in Canada as planned.
Mr Yeltsin's foreign minister, Andrei Kozyrev, arrived in Washington yesterday for talks with Mr Clinton and other senior figures in the administration.
Before meeting the secretary of state, Warren Christopher, Mr Kozyrev, speaking of the situation at home, told reporters: ‘Everything will be under control.
Be alert, but don't worry.’
Mr Yeltsin meanwhile sent a message to John Major expressing his gratitude for the Prime Minister's support and understanding.
The message, delivered to Downing Street, was in response to Mr Major's letter of support earlier this week.
— Reuter and AP 
Clinton's support, Page 9
Knife-carriers could face two years' jail
TWO-YEAR jail sentences and unlimited fines will face Scottish knife-carriers under Scottish Office plans announced yesterday to toughen up the proposed law.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Scottish home affairs minister, said the penalties for carrying knives would be the toughest in Britain after the changes.
John McFall, a Labour home affairs spokesman, had pressed for the proposed penalties, a six-month jail sentence or a fine of up to £1,000, to be increased.
Mr McFall said that had to be done because it was vital that the knife carrying culture in Scotland was stamped out.
Full report, Page 6
Multi-million loss may be behind Ferranti departure
By Peter Woodifield, Business Editor
GEC-FERRANTI seems likely to lose money on its £300 million contract to design and develop a radar for the European Fighter Aircraft as a result of a multi-million pound cost overrun.
The extra costs are thought to run into tens of millions of pounds and appear to lie behind the imminent departure of Ron Dunn, managing director of GEC-Ferranti in Edinburgh, and a small number of other senior managers.
The losses look likely more than to wipe out the projected profits on the ECR90 project.
Military design and development contracts generally have comparatively thin profit margins, and while an allowance for unexpected extra work will have been built into the contract price, it appears as if GEC-Ferranti seriously underestimated the work involved to make the radar operationally acceptable.
It is understood that Mr Dunn's position became untenable when GEC-Ferranti's initial budget for the coming year — which revealed the extent of the cost overrun — was rejected a few weeks ago by Derek Dickinson, chief executive of GEC-Marconi Avionics, the division to which GEC-Ferranti belongs.
After an investigation, a revised budget is understood to have been accepted.
Both GEC-Ferranti and GEC-Marconi refused to say anything about either Mr Dunn's departure or the reasons behind it.
‘I am afraid I cannot comment at all,’ said Sir Donald Hall, deputy chairman of GEC-Marconi.
One source said last night: ‘To a large extent Mr Dunn had been squeezed out.’
He is expected to leave within the next couple of weeks, and his lawyers are understood to be negotiating a settlement.
Mr Dunn has had operational responsibility for GEC-Ferranti's five Scottish factories.
It is not clear whether his successor will have the same remit or whether the individual plants will be divisionalised within GEC.
Link to water protest suspected SNP hits out at letter bomb attacks
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
LETTER-BOMBERS who sent a package which exploded at the Cambridgeshire headquarters of Anglian Water yesterday have been roundly condemned by Scottish National Party leaders.
An 18-year-old woman post room worker escaped uninjured when the package she was handling went off at the offices which were occupied by SNP demonstrators last week.
Last night police were also investigating a letter bomb delivered to the Dounreay nuclear plant in Caithness and rendered safe by a bomb disposal team.
It was unclear whether it was linked to the device sent to Anglian Water which Cambridgeshire police said arrived in a Jiffy bag with a Scottish postmark and a stencilled address.
Police said, however, they were investigating possible links with a letter bomb defused at the Scottish Office in Edinburgh on Monday.
They believe these two devices are connected with protests against water privatisation.
The Edinburgh letter was addressed to water officials.
Though no-one has been injured, the incidents are potentially damaging to the SNP which has not ruled out civil disobedience as part of its campaign against water privatisation.
Yesterday party leaders voiced their total opposition to violent acts and one SNP MP, Andrew Welsh, claimed he had been misquoted at a recent press conference when he apparently would not rule out sabotage.
Mr Welsh said: ‘I unequivocally and utterly condemn any acts of violence in pursuit of political aims.
No cause on this earth can justify the risk of maiming or hurting individuals.
Such obscenities have no place in politics.’
Asked whether he now regretted remarks at a press conference two weeks ago where he refused to rule out sabotage, he said: ‘I certainly regret inaccurate press reports of my remarks.
I have never advocated violence in my life.’
Mr Welsh said that in response to reporters' questions he had refused to rule out any tactic because the party had not decided what its strategy on civil disobedience might be.
A reply giving a general definition of sabotage as ‘everything from turning a tap off to blowing a pipe up’ had been juxtaposed to questions on party strategy, he said, adding that it was ridiculous to imply that he had supported violent acts.
The letter bombs were also condemned by one of the organisers of the occupation last week of the Anglian Water offices by eight SNP members from Inverness.
Ross and Cromarty district councillor Rob Gibson, the party's policy vice convener, said: ‘The peaceful demonstration carried out last week was the hallmark of the party's campaign of peaceful civil disobedience if necessary.
The device found at Anglian Water has no part in democratic politics.’
The discovery of the three devices in the past two days may mark a reappearance of the ‘tartan terrorism’ which flared in the 1970s and mostly disappeared as the perpetrators of various bank robberies and explosions were jailed.
However letter-bombing has been a consistent feature — one device addressed to the then Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, in the mid 1980s injured a Downing Street worker.
Yesterday's Anglian Water incident was in the Huntingdon constituency of John Major.
Police in Cambridge said that the explosion was minor, adding: ‘To say it exploded is correct but putting it strongly — it apparently fizzed.’
The device sent to the Scottish Office was described by Lothian and Borders Police as capable of causing serious injury.
Yesterday civil service union leaders complained that security staff had initially treated it as a hoax.
Robin McKendrick, president of the Scottish Office branch of NUCPS, said that it was not until security staff had taken the package from the Engineering, Water and Waste Directorate in Perth Street to offices in James Craig Walk that police and a bomb disposal team were called.
He said that Scottish Office management had undertaken to review procedures after a meeting with the unions.
A Scottish Office spokesman declined to comment.
Two-year reprieve ‘likely for 13 pits'
REPORTS that the Government plans to save about 13 of the 31 coal mines threatened with closure — but only for about two years — were dismissed as speculation by Downing Street last night.
MPs believe this was the outcome of a meeting at No 10 headed by the Prime Minister, John Major, and including most members of the Cabinet.
But ministers were remaining tight-lipped about the reports, which, if true, would probably not satisfy Tory rebels and the package would be unlikely to get through the Commons.
MPs are expecting an announcement within the next few days.
Officials reported that ‘good progress’ had been achieved at the meeting and the package would go before the full Cabinet tomorrow.
Winston Churchill, MP for Davyhulme, a leading Tory rebel, said: ‘The report is that the White Paper says that 13 pits are going to be saved for two years and then have the chop.
If it was nothing other than a short-term political fix…and then all of the 31 pits that had been threatened were to close, that would be completely unacceptable.’
The coal industry White Paper will be published soon after a deal is settled.
It is expected to rule out many of the recommendations of the trade and industry select committee.
That cross-party committee urged a multi-million pound subsidy and other measures to save half of the pits earmarked for closure last October.
Rescue teams hunt eight Skye climbers
AN RAF helicopter and three mountain rescue teams were called out last night to search for eight climbers reported missing on Skye.
Six men and two women, all university students from Bangor, North Wales, left Sligachan yesterday morning to climb in the Cuillin.
Late last night they had still not returned.
A Sea King helicopter from Lossiemouth took eight Royal Air Force mountain rescue team members from Kinloss.
Other members of the Kinloss team were travelling by road.
Members of the Skye mountain rescue team were also called out by police at Portree.
Rescuers said there was good visibility with clear skies but the freezing level was down to 2,000 feet.
The eight were reported to be well- equipped but had no overnight gear.
Controllers at the air-sea rescue control centre at RAF Pitreavie in Fife expected the search to last all night.
Lenny named personality of the year
LENNY HENRY was yesterday named BBC Personality of the Year by the Television and Radio Industries Club.
Henry beat hot competition from Lovejoy Ian McShane and Noel Edmonds, whose TV show Noel's House Party picked up a BAFTA award.
The veteran comic and singer Des O'Connor was named ITV Personality of the Year after beating Clive Anderson and last year's winner, Michael Barrymore.
Love Hurts, starring Zoe  Wanamaker and Adam Faith, was BBC Programme of the Year.
The Cook Report, in which the reporter Roger Cook risks life and limb to investigate fraudsters, won the ITV Programme of the Year class.
TV's Mr Grumpy — Victor Meldrew, played by the actor Richard Wilson — was left gasping: ‘I don't believe it’ after One Foot In The Grave and Absolutely Fabulous, starring Joanna Lumley and Jennifer Saunders, lost out to Birds of a Feather as sitcom of the year.
Lesley Joseph, sexy Dorien in the show with Linda Robson and Pauline Quirke as the wives of two jailbirds, was there to pick up the award.
Trevor McDonald was named newscaster of the year, Desmond Lynam won sports presenter, and Gloria Hunniford was top radio personality.
New station Classic FM won its first major award as Radio Programme of the Year for ‘an outstanding contribution in all areas of its programming’.
John Spearman, Classic FM chief executive, said: ‘We are very pleased to have been presented with this prestigious award just six months after going on air.
It is a wonderful endorsement for the station, our programming and our presenters.’
Paul Merton, one of the stars of Have I Got News For You, was named New TV Talent of the Year.
Sky News was satellite TV programme of the Year for its 24-hour news coverage.
Tomorrow's World was best science programme and The Good Guys was best TV theme.
The awards, hosted by Sir David Frost, were presented today at a star studded lunch at London's Grosvenor House attended by the celebrity winners and nominees.
Lenny Henry said later: ‘It's not often you get two awards in one day, but I am really pleased with both of them.
We seem to be into the season of awards and I was here only the other night for the Bafta awards, so I'm making a habit of it.’
Fiona Armstrong, who recently left morning TV station GMTV, presented ITN's Trevor MacDonald with his newscaster award.
She said: ‘Everybody else says they are very pleased to be here in fact I am very relieved to be here because another TV station was at my home in Dumfriesshire this morning to try to speak to me and I am thankfully in London so I missed them.’
She will be continuing her TV career with a new series of Fantastic Facts and has received several offers from other companies.
Wimbledon ticket supply not unfair
THE All England Club has been cleared of unfair trading practices over the sale of Wimbledon tickets.
The Office of Fair Trading, which investigated the supply of tickets, said yesterday that it would not be referring the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Mike Burton, the former England rugby player, had accused the club of operating a cartel to try to dominate the secondary market in tickets for the two-week event.
Bereft father tells IRA: Give up
THE heartbroken father of a three-year-old boy murdered by the IRA yesterday called on the terrorists to lay down their arms.
Struggling to contain his emotions, a shattered Wilfred Ball said of his son Johnathan's death: ‘This should be the last tragedy of all.’
His appeal came as another father caught up in the Warrington bomb tragedy said he felt the whole country was urging his son, the critically injured 12-year-old Timothy Parry, to survive.
Mr Ball, 58, told a news conference: ‘There are no words that can fit it — for what they have done.
They have taken my life away, my young child from me that I have always wanted, and after just three years and ten months.
He's priceless.
He was a beautiful angel.’
Mr Ball, speaking at Warrington's Stockton Heath police station, said: ‘This is not the way to express their religion.
They can never win — they have been at it 23 years.
How much longer before they get some sense into them?
‘I do not think there is any punishment in this world that would fit what they have done.
If it was me I would do the same to them but two wrongs don't make a right.’
‘He was an angel.
He was beautiful.
He was a lovely, innocent child and he was just beginning to enjoy life.’
Referring to Samantha Thompson, the teenager who was injured as she took Johnathan shopping for Mother's Day gifts, he said: ‘To injure a young innocent girl as well who went everywhere with him — that girl Samantha was like a mother to him.
The only thing I can say is for them to lay down their arms and stop it right now.
This should be the last tragedy of all.
Why should we have any more of it?’
Mr Ball said the support from all over the world was overwhelming although he was too distressed to read all the letters.
‘I had a nice one from the people of Ireland that care.
There is bad and good in all people.’
He added: ‘Johnathan's photograph should be all over the world.
Let the world see what is going on with these nasty people.’
Johnathan's mother Marie, 37, was too distraught to attend the news conference.
The funeral is to be a private ceremony at St Wilfred's Church, Grappenhall, Warrington, on Friday.
The parents of Timothy Parry said yesterday they did not hold ‘the Irish nation’ responsible for the bombing.
Colin Parry, 37, a personnel officer, wept as he said his 12-year-old son would never be the way he was but they wanted him to live and they would make a life for him.
Mr Parry was speaking with wife Wendy, 35, at his side after seeing their son in the intensive care unit of the Walton centre for neurology and neurosurgery in Liverpool.
Mrs Parry said: ‘We have got some lovely letters from Irish people.’
Her husband nodded and said: ‘First rate.
They feel a sense of outrage like English people and they feel guilt over all this.
‘We have tried to explain our views.
We do not hold the Irish nation responsible.
There is good and bad in every nation.’
The couple said some of Timothy's bandages had been removed and they had been relieved they could still recognise him in spite of his severe facial injuries.
Mr Parry said the surgeon, John Miles, had told them that today would be ‘the critical time when they will see if he can breathe unaided.’
He added: ‘People from all over the country, people we have never heard of, have been good enough to sit down and write lengthy letters, to send flowers at great expense to a boy, just saying Tim Parry, Warrington, Cheshire, and it is getting to the house.
‘We feel that the whole country is willing Tim to win this battle and it really does help us because without that we would have started to disintegrate over this last couple of days.
‘He was a lovely, innocent child and he was just beginning to enjoy life.’
Bombers will be hounded, says Major
THE IRA bombers responsible for the Warrington outrage will be ‘hounded for the rest of their days,’ the Prime Minister pledged yesterday.
Mr Major promised the Commons: ‘No effort will be spared within the rule of law to bring the people responsible to justice.
If there were a shred of humanity in the IRA, they would hand those killers over for justice without any delay.’
The explosions in the busy town centre claimed the life of three-year-old Johnathan Ball and injured 56 other people.
The boy seriously injured in the blast, 12-year-old Timothy Parry, remained in critical condition and was due to have another brain scan today.
Mr Major said at question time: ‘Decent families everywhere will have been sickened by that cold-blooded attack on innocent people going about peaceful business on a spring Saturday lunchtime.’
The Social Democratic and Labour Party MP John Hume told him: ‘My constituents, who know exactly what the people of Warrington have experienced, would join totally in agreement with what you have just said.’
Last night, on a visit to the scene of the bombing, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr George Carey, condemned the inhuman act which had destroyed people's lives.
The bombers ‘must surely know this does nothing but cast a terrible scar on all they stand for.’
Dr Carey was met on his arrival in the town by the Bishop Suffragan of Warrington, the Rt Rev Michael Henshall; the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Liverpool, the Most Rev Derek Worlock; the Bishop of Liverpool, the Rt Rev David Sheppard; and the Free Church moderator, the Rev John Newton.
The church leaders walked down Bridge Street to the shrine of flowers where Dr Carey led a tearful gathering of mothers, fathers and children in prayers.
Before leaving the scene he described the flowers as a wonderful symbol of a living community.
In Dublin the Irish Premier, Albert Reynolds, led Irish politicians in condemning the bombing.
‘The perpetrators stand condemned by the government and by the people of Ireland,’ Mr Reynolds told the Dublin parliament.
Opposition leaders urged that any loopholes in British-Irish extradition laws should be closed to ensure the Warrington bombers could not find a refuge in Ireland.
John Bruton, head of the Fine Gael party, declared: ‘There must be no hiding place anywhere in a civilised world for people who are willing to commit atrocities of this kind.’
The Irish President, Mary Robinson, had earlier said she shared the sorrow and anguish of the people of her country.
Fourteen people injured in the explosions were still being treated at Warrington general hospital yesterday.
The two most seriously hurt, Bronwen Vickers, 33, who had a leg amputated, and Stephen Clague, 21, who suffered arm, elbow and hip injuries, were said to be stable.
A Roman Catholic was badly injured in one of two booby-trap grenade attacks by Loyalist paramilitaries in north Belfast.
It exploded after he picked up the device which had fallen from underneath a car outside a house on the Antrim Road.
A second grenade went off under another vehicle as army explosives specialists tried to defuse it in the nearby New Lodge Road district…
Son hoped Allen would commit suicide, court told
THE 14-year-old adopted son of Woody Allen had his dreams dashed by Allen's affair with his 21-year-old sister and thought the film director should consider suicide, according to a letter read in court in New York yesterday.
The letter was read by Eleanor Alter, attorney for Mia Farrow in the bitter child custody dispute between Farrow and Allen.
Alter said it was written by Moses, the oldest of three adopted children whose custody is being considered by the court.
Allen's side contests the letter, saying it was either written by Farrow or coerced by her.
‘You've done a horrible, unforgivable, needy, ugly, stupid thing.
You have changed over the last month.
You are hostile and anxious,’ the letter said.
‘I hope you are so humiliated that you commit suicide.’
Allen is in his second day of cross-examination in the custody hearing over Moses, the adopted daughter Dylan, 7 and biological son Satchel, 5.
Farrow had alleged that Allen sexually molested Dylan, but Allen was cleared of the accusation last week by a team of investigators.
The hearing at the New York State Supreme Court has focused on Allen's affair with Soon-Yi Previn, Farrow's 21-year-old adopted daughter.
Allen said that he called Previn at summer camp in 1991, using the name George Simon.
He had previously denied making such calls.
He previously said they became involved in autumn, 1991.
It was the discovery of Allen's nude photographs of Previn in January 1992 that led Farrow and Allen to split up after 12 years together.
Allen said in evidence on Monday that the affair with Previn was a mistake, but he said he still loved her.
During Allen's second day in the witness box, he admitted taking the nude pictures but denied they were pornographic.
‘They are are certainly not (pornographic).
They are erotic pictures, graphic…there is no action in them,’ Allen, 57, said.
Allen said Soon-Yi had asked him to take the nude photos.
‘I said, ‘Sure’,’ he told the court.
‘Did you say to her that was wrong?’ asked Ms Alter.
‘Not at all.
We were two adults and we don't think that way,’ he said.
The director said she removed her clothes while he ‘bumbled’ with the Polaroid camera.
‘I posed her on the sofa.
I said: ‘Lay back and give me your most erotic poses.
Let yourself go’.’
Allen said he first had sex with Soon-Yi in the autumn of 1991.
The photos were taken in December.
He claimed he and Farrow had not had sex since the birth of their biological son Satchel, aged five.
Allen said he tried to ‘de-escalate’ the battle with Farrow but she became enraged after learning of his affair with Soon-Yi.
He claimed she retaliated by turning the children against him and threatening to kill him, at one point sending him a Valentine's Day card with skewers and a knife stuck in it.
— Reuter.
He said he did everything he could to calm Farrow down, including on two occasions taking her to the exclusive Carlyle Hotel and sleeping with her after she begged him to do so.
Allen said he agreed not to bring the children to his house and abided by her rules, including only visiting the children in the hallway of Farrow's flat.
But he said his efforts were futile and Farrow would say ‘terrible things’ about him to the children.
— Reuter.
Belfast Sunday paper to close
THE Belfast-based Sunday News, which has been published since 1965, is to close.
John Barons, chief executive of the owners, Century Newspapers, blamed economic difficulties.
About 18 staff are to be absorbed into the group's sister newspaper, the News Letter, the UK's oldest morning daily.
Circulation, which peaked at more than 100,000 at the height of Ulster's violence, had fallen to around 20,000 after the rival Sunday Life, owned by Thomson Regional Newspapers, started publishing a few years ago.
Ford strike on promotion day for Mondeo
FORD car workers will strike tomorrow — the day the Mondeo model is promoted — after talks over compulsory job losses ended without agreement yesterday.
Union leaders representing more than 8,000 white-collar staff gave warning of more stoppages and said the company was on a collision course.
Ford refused to rule out compulsory redundancies during talks with the union Manufacturing, Science and Finance and the Transport and General Workers' Union.
Jim Thomas, chief Ford negotiator for the MSF, said he was ‘bemused’ that Ford was taking a tough line after achieving most of the 2,200 job losses wanted.
It was just 88 short with a week to go but refused to back down.
Probation for forging bet worth millions
A FIXED ODDS punter who attempted a huge swindle with a forged coupon was placed on probation yesterday.
Brian McGregor, 24, of Fisher Place, Buchlyvie, Stirlingshire, forged his coupon to ‘predict’ the results of all 61 league matches played on Boxing Day.
He walked into a Ladbrokes betting shop at Hexham, Northumberland, six days later and demanded his winnings, unaware that the payout for the bet would have totalled a staggering £3,826,470,000,000,000.
The astonished cashier told McGregor, an unemployed woodcutter, to come back later — then called the police.
McGregor had admitted forging the coupon at an earlier hearing which was adjourned for reports.
Hexham magistrates yesterday placed him on probation for 12 months and ordered him to pay £20 costs.
The court heard he had placed the original bet for a £1 stake and paid 10p tax at Ladbrokes in his home town.
He did not realise when he forged his ‘winning’ lines that the original had been photocopied.
His solicitor, Andrew Travers, said: ‘This was very much a one-off offence and he had no idea of the amount he stood to collect.
He never had a chance of getting the money, which would have been between 10 and 12 times the amount in circulation in the UK at the moment.’
Two accused of killing sergeant
TWO PEOPLE were last night charged with murdering police sergeant Bill Forth, who was killed in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, on Saturday.
Paul Weddle, 25, of Gateshead, Wear, will appear before magistrates today with a 15-year-old youth.
Sgt Forth, 34, was killed while answering a routine call on a housing estate.
He was beaten with a fence post and stabbed.
Inverness case
IN our report of a High Court case at Inverness in which Malcolm Badenoch was jailed for five years after admitting being concerned in the supply of Ecstasy and cannabis, we stated that some of the local youths he recruited to distribute drugs were schoolchildren.
They were in fact over school-age and only involved in the distribution of Ecstasy.
Laura Davies faces another transplant
LAURA DAVIES, the four-year-old Manchester girl who underwent life-saving organ transplants in the United States last year, has returned to Pittsburgh for the possible removal of another organ, an enlarged spleen.
She was admitted late last night for observation at the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh.
Bank staff protest over redundancies
A PROTEST by members of the Banking Insurance and Finance Union will be held today outside selected branches of the Royal Bank of Scotland.
They are among 1,500 staff of the bank who are facing compulsory redundancy.
They will leaflet customers to ask for their support in the campaign to halt compulsory sackings.
The union is trying to persuade the bank to offer redundancy to staff who have already volunteered.
Henry is TV personality of the year
LENNY HENRY was yesterday named BBC personality of the year by the Television and Radio Industries Club.
He beat hot competition from Lovejoy Ian McShane and Noel Edmonds, whose TV show Noel's House Party picked up a BAFTA award at the weekend.
The singer Des O'Connor was named ITV personality of the year after beating Clive Anderson and last year's winner, Michael Barrymore.
Love Hurts, starring Adam Faith and Zoe Wannamaker, was BBC programme of the year.
The Cook Report won the ITV programme of the year.
Trevor McDonald was the newscaster of the year, Desmond Lynam won the top sports presenter award, and Gloria Hunniford was top radio personality.
The new station Classic FM won its first major award as radio programme of the year.
Sky news was satellite TV programme of the year for its 24-hour news coverage.
Major hits at incomer pickets at Timex
By Ewen MacAskill Political Editor
THE Prime Minister yesterday branded some of the protesters outside the Timex plant in Dundee on Monday as ‘rent-a-picket’.
John Major told the Commons at Prime Minister's Question Time that none of the 16 arrested at the factory, where 340 had been sacked at the end of January, had been a Timex worker.
His statement was greeted with cries of mock astonishment and indignation by Tory back-benchers.
Mr Major, reading from briefing notes, said: ‘I believe the ex-convener at Timex said those dismissed never called for a sit-down demonstration and do not sponsor violence.
It does seem that rent-a-picket is back and I do not think that is in the interests of the workers at Timex.’
He was replying to Ernie Ross, Labour MP for Dundee West, who said the workers had lost their jobs after a disputes procedure which had followed the Government's employment law to the letter.
He asked Mr Major to intervene and ask the company to go to the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service to settle the dispute.
Mr Major replied: ‘Workers who choose to go on strike have always faced the risk of being dismissed without the right to claim unfair dismissal.
That was the case under legislation enacted by the last Labour government.’
Sheriff's orders, Page 7
Trial told of death threat to lorryman in robbery
A LORRY driver told the High Court in Inverness yesterday of the night he had been masked, bound and abducted by two men who had threatened to shoot him after his load of spirits, tobacco and foodstuffs had been stolen from Inverness.
The court heard of the early hours of 10 June last year from Donald Beaton, 46, a lorry driver for 26 years.
His ordeal came to an end, he told Lord MacLean, only when his abductors burst through a road-block north of Perth and dumped him on the roadside after a high-speed chase along the A9 towards Stirling.
Murdo MacIver, 29, whose address was given as c/o 471 Maryhill Road, Glasgow, denies, while acting with others, assaulting and robbing Mr Beaton of his lorry and trailer.
He also denies assaulting and abducting Mr Beaton while acting with others.
A plea of guilty to stealing the lorry and trailer was refused by the Advocate Depute, Roderick Macdonald.
Mr Beaton told the court that he had been asleep in his cab when two men with Glasgow accents woke him up by placing a bag over his head.
‘They said they had a gun and stuck an object into my side, threatening to shoot me if I did anything stupid.’
He said they had forced him into a car and he had heard the lorry start up behind him.
‘They pushed me to the floor and stuck what I thought was the gun to my knee-caps and threatened to blow them off if I moved.’
He described his frightening journey down the A9 when at one stage the ‘gun’ had been stuck to his head and they had threatened to kill him.
‘About two hours later — it seemed like a life-time, my legs had cramp and I was sore all over — the car slowed down.
‘I thought it must have been a road block because one said to the other: ‘Go for it’ and they speeded up.
There was a bump as we must have crossed the central reservation and then one said I was going out.
‘I thought they were going to throw me out while the car was moving and I asked them to stop.
They did and I was dragged out and thrown on to the grass.
Then the car sped away.
I managed to pull off my mask and see it was a white car.’
PC Andrew Ness, of Tayside Police, told how he had been on the road block looking for another vehicle when a white Cavalier had burst through.
They had chased the car at speeds of up to 90mph but lost it, and they had picked up Mr Beaton near Windyedge Farm, between Perth and Stirling.
He had had only one shoe, and the court heard his other shoe had been found in the Cavalier later.
The trial continues.
Cancer victim who sued tobacco firm dies
By Denny Macgee
ALFRED McTEAR, the first Scot preparing to take a tobacco company to court blaming it for his lung cancer and claiming compensation, has died at his Ayrshire home.
However, the £500,000 legal action which has already started against the Imperial Tobacco Company in Mr McTear's name will continue in spite of his death.
His widow, Margaret, said: ‘Alfred told me that I should carry on with the case if he died, and that is exactly what I will do.’
In an interview with The Scotsman in July last year, only weeks after he was diagnosed as having an inoperable bronchial tumour, Mr McTear, who smoked between 40 and 60 cigarettes a day for 30 years, said he did not expect to get anything out of the legal action.
‘I won't be here.
What I am doing is for the youngsters.’
It was a sentiment he held until he died.
Last week Mr McTear, who was 48, began giving evidence in the case the end of which he knew he would never see.
Although he had had a smoker's cough for many years, it was less than a year ago that he was diagnosed as having incurable lung cancer.
His illness had advanced so rapidly that he was unable to move outside his Beith home to give evidence.
The court, therefore, went to Mr McTear, his living room turned over to a commission appointed by the Court of Session to hear his evidence.
Mr McTear managed to give most of his evidence to the commission, although even at the beginning of the proceedings his poor physical condition was apparent with his breathing laboured and his voice feeble.
The hearing was abandoned half way through the second day on medical advice when Mr McTear contracted pneumonia and became too ill to carry on.
The commission was due to resume on Monday, but Mr McTear was too ill to resume.
He died early yesterday morning.
His lawyer, Cameron Fyfe, praised Mr McTear's determination in pursuing the legal action.
‘He genuinely felt that by doing this he was helping others, and something good might come out of his suffering.’
Mr Fyfe said that, although in great pain, he put up with press and television interviews, most recently immediately before the start of the commission to which he gave evidence, in the belief that it was a good cause.
‘He has been absolutely stoic all the way through.
He felt that every time he spoke on the subject or appeared on television, some young person might stop smoking or might be persuaded not to even start.
‘I am pleased he managed to give most of his evidence to the commission.
That, more than anything, was what he wanted and it means that we will be able to continue with the action, with Mrs McTear taking over,’ he said.
It is likely to be another two years before the case goes before the Court of Session.
Mr Fyfe added: ‘If we are successful in this case, it will be due to Alfred's courage and determination to put his evidence down on record, even though he was obviously in a great deal of distress.’
We all liked Alfred very much, and our sympathy goes out to all his family.’
Mr McTear is survived by his wife, Margaret, three grown up children and four grandchildren.
Allison Hillhouse, the Scottish director of Action for Smoking and Health, which backed Mr McTear's legal action, described him as a very brave man and said his death was a sad event to everyone.
‘It took a great deal of courage for one man to stand up to the tobacco industry.
‘He was a young man, and I am sure that his message got through to a great many people.
Someone, somewhere, sometime will win a case against the tobacco industry.
It would be nice to think that the case Alfred McTear began might be the one.’
A spokesman for Imperial Tobacco said: ‘We are very sorry to hear of Mr McTear's death.
Our sympathy goes out to his family.’
The company had no comment to make on the legal action.
Crown gaffe frees animal-cruelty culprit
A MAN convicted of abandoning and ill-treating a prize greyhound will go unpunished because the papers for his case have been lost.
Kevin McPhee (48), of Monklands View Crescent, Bargeddie, Lanarkshire, was found guilty after trial of dumping a greyhound, Shiloh, in Strathclyde Park in August.
The dog was found with its front paws tied together, ravenous and in great pain.
One leg was broken and the wound was untreated and crawling with maggots.
The mix-up at Hamilton Sheriff Court means that Kevin McPhee will have the conviction lodged against his name but no punishment is possible under Scots law.
The sheriff who heard the trial was Sheriff Peter Hamilton, who deferred sentence for background reports.
He had warned McPhee then: ‘I am seriously considering a prison sentence.’
Because Sheriff Hamilton is a floating sheriff, the case had to be put back several times to allow him to pass sentence when he was next at Hamilton.
Last Thursday the case was due to call for yet another routine deferral.
But a spokesman at the procurator fiscal's office in Hamilton said yesterday: ‘The sheriff clerk's office has mislaid the principal papers in this case.
It could not be called and therefore it falls.
‘The conviction against Mr McPhee will stand, but it is not legally possible to take the case any further so he will not be sentenced.’
The SSPCA said it was distressed that an extreme case of animal cruelty has failed due to a procedural error.
It plans to write to the Crown Office to seek an assurance that a similar incident would not occur.
Supt Ron Grant said: ‘I am absolutely disgusted that this man got away scot free.
This was an appalling offence against an animal and the accused — who has already been found guilty — cannot now be punished.’
The trial, on 4 February, heard that Shiloh had been running in a race at Carfin dog track in August last year when he broke his leg.
Four days later a pensioner, Robert Clarke, 65, of Cunningham Street, Motherwell, was walking his dog in Strathclyde Park when he heard howling.
He found Shiloh lying in some bushes.
His front left paw was broken and crawling with maggots.
The dog was taken to a Hamilton vet, Ian Megahy, who found he was over five kilos under weight.
Amazingly, the dog survived, but he needed several operations and more than £1,000-worth of treatment.
McPhee (48) told the trial that he had given the dog away to a man he knew vaguely outside the track as Shiloh was no use to him.
Sheriff Hamilton told him: ‘You are a sanctimonious liar.
Your behaviour towards the dog was callous and inhumane.’
He found McPhee guilty of abandoning the dog and wilfully neglecting him by failing to provide veterinary treatment.
McPhee was cleared of tying the dog's paws together.
He was unavailable for comment at his home yesterday.
Shiloh, now renamed Blackie, is still being cared for at the Bothwellbridge Animal Welfare Centre at Hamilton.
A spokesman said: ‘He is in fairly good condition considering what he has has been through.’
Better times: Blackie, the greyhound, in good health again, with the SSPCA's Bothwell Bridge Animal Welfare Centre's assistant manager, Linda McNeill
Vital questions asked after deaths of canoe teenagers
THE deaths of four teenagers on a school canoe trip were last night baffling investigators.
The four died in Lyme Bay, Dorset, on Monday near the shore and when sea conditions were described as fine for sailing.
Four other pupils and a teacher were injured as well as two canoe instructors when they all capsized on a trip from Lyme Regis to Charmouth.
The victims came from Southway Comprehensive School in Plymouth, Devon.
The four who died were Simon Dunne and Claire Langley, both 16, Rachel Walker, 16, and Dean Sayer, 17, all from the Plymouth area.
The surviving pupils are Emma Hartley, 16, who was last night said to be improving in intensive care in Weymouth General Hospital; Joanna Willis, 16, Samantha Stansby, 17, and Marie Rendle, 17, all listed as stable and comfortable.
An instructor Karen Gardner, 21, was said to be stable and the other instructor, Anthony Mann, 23, stable and comfortable.
The accompanying teacher was Norman Pointer, 49, from the Saltash area of Plymouth.
His condition was also stable and comfortable.
The inquiry was being undertaken by Dorset Police's marine section.
Among the questions being asked were:
Why were the children allowed on to the open sea?
Why did no one raise the alarm when they failed to arrive at Charmouth?
Why were the coastguards not informed of the trip?
Were the supervisors sufficiently qualified?
Was a rescue mounted quickly enough?
The district controller of the Portland Coastguard, Donald McDonald, said he had not been told of the trip by the canoeing group but that the sea conditions were ‘quite favourable’ and should not have caused any problems.
The two instructors accompanying the party were qualified, their employers insisted last night.
A spokesman for Active Learning and Leisure Ltd, the parent company of the St Albans Centre where they are based, said: ‘As far as we are concerned they are all properly trained.’
As the search started for the cause of the tragedy, the Prime Minister offered his sympathy to the families but stressed there was no evidence that precautions were ignored.
The group of eight pupils had joined Mr Pointer and the two instructors at Lyme Regis on the first full day of their week-long stay.
They intended to canoe the three miles to Charmouth but it was up to four hours after they were due to arrive that a huge rescue operation was mounted.
Four died in hospital and Emma Hartley, one of the survivors, was trying to come to terms with that.
Her father, Trevor Hartley, a boatbuilder, said she had described how the canoes drifted out to sea and filled with water.
Element of risk, Page 11
Claire Langley, one of the four classmates who died
Study claims TV violence concerns only 11% of viewers
By Gary Duncan
CLAIMS of mounting public concern about violence on television following real-life crimes like the murder of the Liverpool two-year-old James Bulger have been answered in a research study published yesterday.
The research, carried out for the Independent Television Commission, asserts that most television viewers are not offended by what they see on Britain's four main channels.
Violence is a worry to no more than 11 per cent of viewers of any channel.
In spite of those findings, the ITC's chief executive, David Glencross, accepted that the public's mood can and did change.
‘What we are seeing now is a public revulsion against violence in society which is feeding through to a desire for greater sensitivity by programme makers,’ he said.
An examination of television schedules did not show an unending stream of violent programmes, Mr Glencross said.
But he expressed concern about the development of programmes like Michael Winner's True Crime and Crime Story in which real crimes were used to create drama-documentaries.
The ITC was carrying out an immediate two week survey designed to analyse the frequency and nature of violence on ITV, Channel 4 and BSkyB, he added.
Asked about BBC1 and 2, ITV and Channel 4, more than two-thirds of respondents in the ITC study said in each case they had not been offended by the channel in question.
Of those who have been offended, bad language was the most frequently given reason, followed by sex and violence.
On ITV, for example, the channel which caused most concern, 17 per cent said they had been offended by bad language, and 11 per cent each by scenes of sex or violence.
None of the figures for any of the four main channels shows a significant increase in the number of people offended.
In the case of ITV and BBC1 there has been a decline in numbers.
Interestingly in the light of the Bulger case, however, about one in 20 respondents expressed concern about viewing something which ‘set a bad example to children’— a trend which first emerged in last year's edition of the annual survey.
Older viewers and those in the professional or middle classes were more likely to be offended than those who were younger or working class, the study found.
Women were also more likely to have been offended.
Curiously, while there was no marked difference in opinion about bad language or violence between those who did or did not have children, viewers without children were almost twice as likely to be offended by sex scenes.
The childless were also more concerned about items which they thought would set a bad example to children while nearly all parents were aware of the 9pm watershed for more adult programming.
New group revives Orkney abuse row
By Tom Morton
CHILD-welfare specialists are considering the unprecedented step of releasing unpublished medical evidence to counter a campaign for the return of seven Orkney children to their mother's care.
The high-profile campaign is being run by a new organisation called the Orkney Seven Action Group.
It has taken up the cause of a South Ronaldsay mother, seven of whose children have been in care since November 1990.
Their father was jailed in 1986 after being convicted of serious sexual crimes against his children.
Allegations made subsequently by some of the children led to the ‘dawn raids’ a few months later.
Their father was jailed in 1986 after being convicted of serious sexual crimes against his children.
Allegations made subsequently by some of the children led to the forcible removal of a further nine Orkney youngsters in the so-called ‘dawn raids’ a few months later.
The campaign, run by a Sussex antique dealer, Andrew Fenton, and a St Andrews doctor, David Reid, is supporting the mother — known only as Mrs W for legal reasons — in calling for the immediate return of all seven children.
Dr Reid, author of a book on the Orkney case, claimed: ‘There is not a shred of evidence of any form of abuse, physical or sexual, since the children's father was taken out of circulation.’
However, The Scotsman has learned of the existence of considerable amount of unpublished medical evidence which may now be released by care workers concerned that the campaign to return the children home will succeed.
Care workers involved in the case are so concerned at the possibility of the children being returned home, they are considering a move to have this evidence made public.
Trident sub jetty hailed as jewel in programme
By Alan Dron
THE WORLD'S largest floating concrete dock was officially completed for the Royal Navy yesterday, as an admiral disputed the amount by which its costs had overrun.
The explosives handling jetty at Coulport, on Loch Long, will provide a shelter within which the new Vanguard-class submarines will load their Trident missiles and torpedoes under cover both from the weather and overflying spy satellites.
It is the height of St Paul's Cathedral, the length of Wembley Stadium and, at 85,000 tonnes, it is 18,000 tonnes heavier than the QE2.
Built around two, 200-metre-long concrete pontoons, it is linked at one end and has a floating gate at the other which closes when a submarine is inside.
It is designed to withstand the sort of storm that statistically would be expected to occur once in every 10,000 years.
It was yesterday hailed by the man who latterly oversaw its construction as ‘one of the jewels in the crown of the Trident programme’.
Sadness was expressed that security considerations meant that the achievement of its construction could not be more fully made public.
Last April, The Scotsman revealed Treasury figures which estimated that the cost of the jetty, originally budgeted at £119 million, had soared by £155 million, to £274 million, and that the project was a year late.
However, Vice Admiral Sir Neville Purvis, the chief of fleet support, said yesterday that while the cost had risen ‘to more than £200 million…it's not double the cost’.
When it was pointed out that the figure of £274 million had come from the Government's Supply Estimates, he said he was not familiar with such a figure in relation to the jetty.
He accepted that such facilities were expensive.
‘The cost is well-spent in the overall context of the Trident programme, and in providing the security that the Trident programme does for the nation.’
Commenting on the cost and time overruns, Peter Pawsey, managing director of PSA Projects, which oversaw completion of the construction, said the size and nature of the project had raised a number of issues never faced before which had required time for reconsideration.
For those reasons, some delay was ‘perfectly reasonable’.
He paid tribute to those who had constructed the jetty, ‘often in appalling weather conditions’.
Security was tight at yesterday's ceremony, with press photographs banned and a single TV cameraman shepherded around by two naval security officers, who had to view his film before releasing it for public consumption.
Ironically, Russian oil tankers pass the jetty's open doors en route to BP's Finnart terminal further up the loch.
PERTH Two jailed on forgery charges
TWO men were jailed at Perth Sheriff Court yesterday on forged £20 bank notes charges.
John Johnston, 35, of Mount William, Sauchie, and Edward Carroll, 27, of New Mills, Tullibody, were each jailed for three months.
They denied being caught in possession of 17 counterfeit notes and passing two others at shops in Crieff and Auchterarder, but were found guilty after trial.
ORKNEY Council elects vice-convener
HUGH Halcro Johnson, a farmer at Orphir, has been elected the vice-convener of Orkney Islands Council.
He replaces Alistair Scholes, who died suddenly last month while representing the council at an energy conference in the Canaries.
Greens appeal to BR boss on rail crossing
BRITISH Rail is depriving Highland communities of a modern rail service by not investing in a Dornoch Firth crossing, according to the Scottish Green Party.
The Greens say BR should be grasping the advantage offered by the expected award of extra European Community cash.
The Highlands is in line for priority Objective I status funding which could offer 75-85 per cent contributions to infrastructure projects.
In a letter to the BR chairman, Sir Bob Reid, the party's transport spokesman, Murray Falconer, wrote: ‘By not putting forward already established plans for a Dornoch firth rail crossing, BR is deceiving the people it should be serving…
Objective 1 status would provide 53,000 people from Dornoch northwards with a modern rail service, not one held back in the 19th century.’
Last week Sir Bob said demands for a Dornoch crossing were a red herring and it was not vital for the North line to survive.
NEWHOUSE Seven hurt as van overturns on M8
SEVEN men were injured when the van in which they were travelling skidded and overturned on the M8 near Newhouse, Lanarkshire, yesterday.
The driver, Brian Smillie, 33, of Thornbridge Road, Glasgow, and three of the six passengers, all from Glasgow, were detained in Monklands General Hospital.
The other three were treated for minor injuries.
HOLYTOWN Warning over laser left in stolen car
POLICE gave warning yesterday that a scientific instrument in a car stolen in Lanarkshire, could blind if handled the wrong way.
The optical gas laser was in a small white box in a dark brown Vauxhall Astra car, B319 DNS, stolen from Louis Gardens, in Holytown.
Police fear the instrument may have been dumped and could be picked up by an unsuspecting member of the public.
CLYDEBANK Replica guns stolen from car
THE THEFT of three replica guns yesterday from a car in Dumbarton Road, Clydebank, is being investigated by police.
The guns, which can take blank ammunition and are used in country and western events, were in a case left in the car when the owner parked it outside the Boiler Makers' club.
Minutes later the owner returned and found the rear window of the car smashed and the case stolen.
The thieves also made off with seven American flags and a three-figure sum of money.
ORKNEY Weather stalls whale song ruse
SCIENTISTS on Orkney will today attempt to use sexual attraction to lead six male sperm whales to freedom by playing them female whale song to tempt them into the open sea.
The recording and amplifying equipment was tried out underwater yesterday, but bad weather prevented the users' sailing out on Scapa Flow.
If the ruse, which has never been tried before, fails a flotilla of small boats will be used in horseshoe formation in an attempt to shepherd the whales to safety.
£200,000 research project into children's hearing system
By William Chisholm
THE effectiveness of the children's hearing system in Scotland will be put to the test in a three-year research project, commissioned by the Scottish Office at a cost of £200,000.
Details of the major study, together with an assessment of secure accommodation for severely disruptive youngsters, were revealed yesterday by Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, Scottish home affairs minister.
His announcement at the annual conference of the Association of Children's Reporters in Peebles received an immediate welcome from childcare agencies.
The hearings system is claimed to have turned thousands of youngsters away from a life of crime over the last 20 years, but because of the confidential nature of the work done by reporters and panel members, much of the evidence is anecdotal.
Lord Fraser expressed the government's confidence in the system, and confirmed that the important task of considering compulsory measures of care would remain firmly with the children's hearing.
He gave warning that complacency could easily result in slippage of standards and loss of sensitivity to the complex needs of children and their families.
The research project would not simply be an audit, nor was it being commissioned as an expression of lack of confidence.
Main areas to be targeted by the research team would be decision-making by reporters and hearings on the children referred to them.
The impact on the care and future lives of children from the decisions made by the hearings will also be assessed.
Lord Fraser said: ‘This is the first systematic research for a number of years on the operation of the hearings system.
It will include study of how children and families perceive their experience of reporters and hearings.’
In Scotland there is a total of 84 beds in secure accommodation, the minister said.
That is a higher proportion of beds in relation to population than in England.
The secure places are fully used, but secure accommodation is an expensive resource and one which has its role to play in the full range of provision.
Scottish Secretary Ian Lang would be reviewing the use of secure accommodation based on an analysis of demand and use.
The standard of provision would also be assessed by the Social Work Services Inspectorate.
Alan Miller, secretary of the reporters' association, said there had already been talks about a major research project into the hearings system, and they welcomed Lord Fraser's announcement.
‘There has been very little objective research into the work done by reporters and its effectiveness,’ said Mr Miller.
‘We think it is absolutely essential for the development of the service and for public confidence that we should have a sound research base.
We will be happy to co-operate in the project and build on its findings.’
Earlier conference delegates heard Fife's director of social work, Allan Bowman, claim juvenile crime had always been an area where facts were rarely permitted to obscure the more sensational aspects.
The Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke had referred to the need to do something about the really persistent, nasty little juvenile offenders.
But Mr Bowman said Home Office figures showed there had been a 43 per cent reduction in crime by under-14s.
‘Panics over juvenile crime have been a recurrent feature in Britain for at least the last 150 years,’ Mr Bowman claimed.
‘Each panic harks back to a mythical age of contentment and social order.’
Nowadays, there was an expressed desire for a return to the values of the 1950s.
Yet anyone who read the popular literature on the subject from the 50s found a massive denunciation of the welfare state which was blamed solely on the growing decline in parental responsibility.
Mr Bowman warned a moral panic not based on a real perception of the situation, could lead to bad or ineffective legislation.
ENDS.
Councils misled Lang, says official
By Marcello Mega
ACCUSATIONS that district councillors in the Highlands used distortion to mislead the Scottish Secretary have been made by the region's planning chairman, Francis Keith.
Mr Keith claimed yesterday that at a weekend presentation before Ian Lang on local government reform, the Association of District Councils sought to sway the argument in favour of smaller authorities.
He said they used a map with incorrect information on it to suggest that travel times by road in the vast region were greater than they actually were.
‘It was a deliberate attempt to try to distort the size of Highland Region, he said.
‘It is bad enough doing that to the uninitiated, but to do it to the Secretary of State is really beyond the pale — it's quite pathetic.’
Mr Keith cited three examples of information on the map, prepared for the association, which he disputes: that it takes four-and-a-half hours to travel from his home town of Durness, in Sutherland, to Inverness; that from Dunvegan, on Skye, to Inverness, via Portree, takes four hours 45 minutes, and that Inverness to Dalwhinnie takes one hour 25 minutes.
He said that the map showed the route from Durness to Inverness as passing by Dounreay, Thurso and Wick, a journey he would never undertake ‘not even to boost my travel allowance.’
He added that he could choose from several routes which allowed him to halve his travelling time.
Of the time estimated for Inverness to Dalwhinnie he said:’ It's unrealistic unless you are travelling in a dustcart.’
He was critical of the three councillors who made the presentation to Mr Lang — Alison Magee, convener of Sutherland district, Isobel Rhind, who serves on Ross and Cromarty District Council as well as the regional council, and John Young, the Caithness convener.
Yesterday, Ms Magee said: ‘Keith is clutching at straws in an effort to win the argument for a large authority.
I don't find the sniping between regions and districts particularly helpful.’
Ms Rhind said: ‘I find it quite incredible that any authority or any member of an authority has to sink to such depths in order to try to make a case.’
Last night, a spokesman for the association conceded that the map had contained a number of errors.
He said: ‘New figures have been submitted today to Ian Lang.’
£250,000 backing for start-up fund
By Frank Urquhart
A LEADING north-east businessman has committed £250,000 to a scheme offering start-up finance to local entrepreneurs in Grampian.
The money has been donated by Andrew Salvesen, former chief executive and chairman of the oil field services division of the Christian Salvesen Group, and has been matched by a £250,000 investment by Grampian Enterprise.
The money has been used to establish the Head Start Capital Fund, which will provide loans of up to £30,000 for individual projects at competitive rates.
Ken Murray, chairman of Aberdeen Enterprise Trust and of the fund, said yesterday that Mr Salvesen's substantial personal commitment would provide a major boost to small and medium-sized businesses in the area.
‘In many cases, a good business opportunity is not bankable because of lack of security or because of lack of personal finance.
The fund will give businesses a chance to develop which might otherwise not get off the ground.’
Mr Murray explained that the aim would be that loans should be repaid within a relatively short time.
He stressed: ‘We want this money to circulate and develop.
We certainly don't see it being frittered away, giving soft loans to inappropriate ventures.’
MPs attack Lang over trust sackings
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
THE Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, was accused yesterday of acting like Pontius Pilate in washing his hands of the controversy over a hospital trust which wants to sack staff and reduce wages.
Mr Lang came under sustained pressure from opposition MPs at the Scottish Grand Committee to intervene to stop what one MP said was sheer gangsterism in Ayrshire.
The North Ayrshire and Arran NHS Trust has told 51 of the 719-strong workforce at three Ayrshire hospitals, which it takes over next week, that their fixed, short-term contracts will not be renewed on 31 March.
It has added a rider that the 51 would be reinstated immediately if all 719 staff formally agreed to reduced wages and conditions.
Mr Lang angered opposition MPs when he said of the sackings: ‘That is a matter for the trusts.’
Tom Clarke, the shadow Scottish secretary, urged him to intervene and to stop denying responsibility.
‘It is not enough for the Secretary of State to wash his hands in this Pontius Pilate way and say he has no responsibility for what is happening.’
Ayrshire's four Labour MPs — George Foulkes, Willie McKelvey, Brian Wilson and Brian Donohoe — all attacked the Scottish Office's lack of intervention.
Mr Wilson, the MP for Cunninghame North, said it was gangsterism and claimed that people were being blackmailed to accept lower terms and conditions.
He said the NHS trust guide, underwritten by Mr Lang, said that existing staff would be transferred on the same conditions.
That should include those on short-term contracts, he added.
A Scottish Office spokesman said the guide stated that ‘existing permanent staff have a statutory right…to transfer to trusts on existing terms and conditions, unless otherwise negotiated’.
He drew attention to the words ‘unless otherwise negotiated’.
Andrew Welsh, the Scottish National Party MP for Angus East, said the situation was unacceptable.
It was a recipe for low morale and a drop in standards.
Archy Kirkwood, the Liberal Democrat MP for Roxburgh and Berwickshire, said some of the worst aspects of adversarial management seen in English trusts were being imported north of the Border.
Strathclyde told it could do better with green policies
By Alan Forbes
SCOTLAND'S biggest council yesterday received a ‘could try harder’ comment from a leading environmentalist for its attempts to become a green giant.
Strathclyde Regional Council invited Kevin Dunion, director general of Friends Of The Earth Scotland, to the promotion of its Charter for the Environment.
Mr Dunion praised the charter's sentiments but criticised its lack of a firm action plan.
The council, which runs a fleet of 3,000 vehicles, heats more than 1,000 buildings and has one of the largest purchasing budgets in the country, has laid down objectives on reducing energy consumption and waste and using recycled materials wherever appropriate.
FOE has praised Strathclyde for its decision to dispose of sewage sludge to land rather than using incinerators.
Mr Dunion said, however, that the council should be using its purchasing power to influence suppliers and other organisations to produce and purchase more recycled products, especially paper.
The event was held at to recognise the work by pupils of Stonelaw High School, Rutherglen, to improve their local environment.
The school captain, Imran Kausar, explained that the school had started an environmental group five years ago, and members had highlighted local chromium dumping and the need for recycling and ‘green’ consumerism.
Taking soundings: A student at Stonelaw High School, Rutherglen, monitors noise levels in its environmental project
Three men cleared in card fraud case
THREE Chinese restaurant owners who admitted passing bogus credit card bills worth nearly half a million pounds through their books, walked free from court yesterday after a jury failed to reach a verdict.
Glasgow restaurateurs, Kee Lee and Yam Fat Tsim said triad gangs had forced them to take part in the million pound world-wide credit conspiracy.
The prosecution offered no evidence after their second trial ended with a hung jury at Knightsbridge Crown Court in London yesterday.
Not guilty verdicts were recorded against nine charges that they conspired with persons unknown to commit fraud between October 1989 and July 1990.
A third defendant, a Glasgow Chinese restaurant owner, Kam Law,.
was acquitted by a majority verdict on two fraud charges after the 47-day trial.
Their defence of duress would not have been acceptable to a Scottish court.
The court heard that forged American Express and Visa Gold cards were used to run up huge bills at the restaurants.
Kee Lee, 34, of the Panda House Restaurant, in Uddingston, passed bills totalling £123,000; Kam Law, 33, of the New Panda House, Greenock, presented bills worth £61,000.
Yam Tsim, 42, of the Sunflower restaurant, Rutherglen, passed £140,000.
They did not contest that they participated in the crime ring, but said they had no choice because of pressure from Chinese secret societies.
Bank raider jailed for five years
SCOTLAND'S senior judge gave warning yesterday of severe sentences on bank raiders as he jailed a man for five years.
Anthony McDonald, 29, of Deanston Road, Shawlands, Glasgow, admitted wearing a mask and presenting an axe at an employee of the Bank of Scotland, Kilmarnock Road, Glasgow, and attempting to rob him on 20 January.
The High Court in Edinburgh was told that McDonald was under the influence of drugs when he entered the bank and vaulted a counter.
After seeing that a drawer was empty, he fled.
Lord Hope, the Lord Justice-General, said: ‘Banks in this country and their employees are entitled to expect support from the court and they will receive that support.
People who carry weapons into bank premises and threaten to use them must receive a severe sentence.’
Legal challenge to tourist board link
LAWYERS acting for enraged Dunoon hoteliers and guest house owners have written to Cowal Tourist Board chiefs demanding that Monday's vote for a merger with neighbouring Isle of Bute be declared null and void.
Furious at what they call roughshod treatment at the hands of their area tourist board executives over the merger issue, members of the Dunoon and District Hoteliers Association have taken legal advice which they say has confirmed that rules have been violated.
At Monday's special tourist board meeting in Dunoon, the chairman of the Dunoon and Cowal Tourist Board, Douglas Campbell, took advice from the board's solicitor that proxy voting over plans to link with Bute should be allowed.
Uproar ensued and many members stormed out in protest, including 21 local hoteliers and guesthouse owners.
Now, lawyers acting for the hoteliers have written to the tourist board officials asking them to retract their statement on proxy voting and to declare Monday's decision to merge with Bute null and void.
The president of Dunoon and District Hoteliers Association, Bill Taylor, said last night: ‘The Dunoon Area Tourist Board is due to be dissolved at the end of March and this must not be allowed.
We have taken the necessary legal steps and are now awaiting the board's reply.’
Race row official to quit this week
By Alan Forbes
THE SENIOR Strathclyde education official who faced calls for his dismissal after linking ‘genetic factors’ to the school performance of black and Asian children is to retire early on Friday.
David McNeill, 59, senior depute education director, will receive a lump sum of at least £74,000 and an annual pension of more than £24,000 in the deal, which was arranged some months ago.
Mr McNeill will spend his final evening in-post tomorrow by talking to members of Strathclyde Community Relations Council about his comments, which brought accusations of his holding blatantly racist views.
He has unreservedly apologised for last week's remarks, which he said were loose and inappropriate.
Commenting on an investigation by the Commission for Racial Equality into a very high over-representation of children with English as a second language in special need classes, he thought a ‘multiplicity of other factors, possibly malnutrition when young, or genetic factors’ could be responsible.
An announcement by the council, dissociating itself from the comments and stressing its anti-racist policy, failed to quell a storm of protest over Mr McNeill's remarks.
Controversy has also surrounded the terms under which Mr McNeill and four other senior education officials have been able to retire early.
Staff unions and many councillors last year attacked large pay increases for senior staff in all departments.
Frank Pignatelli, the education director, will next week find his salary rise to £88,200 compared with £73,578 a year ago.
Mr McNeill's lump sum payment and pension will be based on the best pay of any year of the last three years of his career.
Pat Watters, chairman of the personnel services committee which yesterday agreed to the early retirements, said that the council can base the payments on the salary Mr McNeill would have received from 1 April.
That would have been £66,150, an increase of about £4,500, dated from 1 April.
The other education officials retiring early are Phil Drake, depute director responsible for quality assurance, John MacPherson, depute director responsible for further education, Dick Louden, Dumbarton divisional education officer, and Joe Hogan, Lanark DEO.
Frenchman urges Law Society to help refute allegation of violence
By Denny Macgee
A FRENCH citizen living in Glasgow claims he has been ‘given the runaround’ by the Scottish legal system in his attempts to right a legal error which has resulted in a serious slur on his character.
George Vafa says that in spite of a six-year campaign and taking up his case with a number of legal firms, the Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish legal ombudsman and the Faculty of Advocates, he has failed to gain justice and has been treated like a criminal.
Mr Vafa has again asked the Law Society of Scotland to look into his grievance.
Mr Vafa, 46, claims that the imposition of an interdict in the Court of Session as part of a divorce decree ten years ago was done wrongly because his solicitor at the time failed to represent him.
As a result, Mr Vafa, who was living in France at the time, says that allegations of violence made against him by his former wife and her family went unchallenged and resulted in the interdict preventing him from molesting and attacking his wife or members of her family.
The Glasgow-based solicitor was later suspended for five years for ‘an exceptional catalogue of delay, neglect and deceit’ in a number of cases, including Mr Vafa's.
Although in November 1986 Mr Vafa succeeded in having the original decree totally recalled, an unusual move, the terms of the interdict were erroneously incorporated in the new decree.
That occurred although Lord Morison, the Court of Session judge who issued the new decree, made it absolutely clear after listening to all the evidence, that he did not consider any of the allegations made by Mr Vafa's former wife, or her father, to have been well founded or substantiated.
Now Mr Vafa's only legal recourse to set the record straight is to take his case to the Nobile Officium of the Court of Session.
That is likely to cost several thousand pounds, and the Scottish Legal Aid Board has already rejected his application to do that.
‘The fact that there is a piece of legal documentation saying I must not molest or attack my ex-wife or her family is a slur on my name and gives the impression that I am a violent person.
That is absolute nonsense.
‘This situation has meant me not being able to get the sort of access to my daughter I want because the fact that the interdict is still in place has been used to prevent me from getting increased access.’
Jura death crash pilot was told of dangerous weather
A PILOT who died with his three passengers when his plane crashed on Jura last August had twice been warned against flying north to the Inner Hebrides because of bad weather.
A fatal accident inquiry at Dumbarton Sheriff Court yesterday was told that the pilot, Robert Watts, 53, had been advised not to try to fly to Mull if he could avoid it.
Hours later, his single-engined aircraft crashed near the summit of the 1,500ft Glas Bheinn on Jura.
He and his three passengers were all killed instantly.
The three passengers were a company director, Trevor Balmforth, 60; John Greenwood, 46, a builder; and Iain Shaw, 53, a fishmonger.
All lived near Clitheroe, Lancs.
Mr Watts had phoned a Mull shopkeeper, David Howitt, 55, minutes before setting out from Blackpool Airport.
Mr Howitt is retained by Strathclyde Regional Council to give weather advice to pilots on the island.
He told the hearing: ‘I told him: ‘Don't come until this weather clears, unless you have to’.’
He said he had checked with the weather centre on neighbouring Tiree and told Mr Watts that the weather was ‘marginal’.
‘It was getting worse and there were dangerous cross winds on the Mull airstrip.’
He had heard nothing more of the plane until a newspaper phoned him the following day, Sunday afternoon.
The weather adviser on Tiree, Alexander MacArthur, said Mr Watts had phoned Tiree Airport.
Mr MacArthur said: ‘The pilot said he had been told the weather was bad on Mull and that he might fly on to Tiree.
I told him that the weather was horrendous on Tiree also, with cloud and heavy rain, and getting worse.
I was trying to discourage him from coming, but he seemed determined to make the flight.’
Sheriff Principal Robert Hay was told how Mr Watts, of Preston, Lancs, had set out on a week-end jaunt on the fatal day.
He owned the plane and had 300 hours' flying experience.
The hearing was held in Dumbarton instead of Campbeltown to to make it easier for relatives from England to attend.
The sheriff returned a formal verdict.
Council faces legal action on Waterfront
TAYSIDE Region, one of the original partners in the largely-aborted £50 million Dundee Waterfront redevelopment, may be sued for £2.7 million.
Scottish Enterprise, the successor to the Scottish Development Agency which was the driving force behind the plan to bring in leisure and commerce to the Waterfront, has given the council seven days to pay for extensive infrastructure works or face court proceedings.
Early plans for what was called the finest waterfront site in Europe included a heritage centre, now nearly complete, and a leisure complex with bowling alley, cinemas, food stores and  nightclub , none of which have been attracted to the site.
The council economic development convener, George Hood, said yesterday that its commitment had been on the basis of the original development, which had never materialised.
He said that the council hoped for an amicable solution.
Doomed helicopter squadron honoured
By James Rougvie
FIFE Regional Council last night honoured the search and rescue crewmen of 22 Squadron at RAF Leuchars, which is due to be disbanded next week.
For the past two years, a cross-party section of politicians, mountaineers, hillwalkers and fishermen has lobbied the Ministry of Defence to retain the unit at Leuchars, which since its inception in 1955 has carried out 2,731 rescues.
Ironically, this year had the makings of one of the busiest for the Wessex  helicopter crews with 40 call-outs so far.
The Leuchars squadron is to be replaced by Sea Kings operating from RAF Bulmer and RAF Lossiemouth, in spite of claims that the longer response times for fishermen in trouble in the Forth and climbers in peril north of the line of the Tay could mean lives being lost.
The council convener, Robert Gough, who presented a plaque to the crew, said it was with regret that they said goodbye to the squadron, which had been of great comfort to people in difficulty on land and sea.
Councillor James Braid, of St Monans, said the squadron had been destroyed by an MoD accounting exercise and fishermen reassured by the nearby presence of the yellow helicopters faced greater peril.
Fire attacks on schools cost £45m
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
ONE in eight schools suffers from fireraising each year, according to a report published yesterday.
The attacks throughout Britain, with an above average number in Scotland, cost £45 million last year.
Recent incidents include £2 million fire damage to Bellahouston Academy in Glasgow.
West Lothian suffered 10 school fires last year, after the destruction of Williamstown primary, Livingston, which is costing more than £1 million to replace.
For Strathclyde, the damage through school fires varies widely from year to year, but rose to £6 million in 1991.
It is part of a broader vandalism problem in the region's schools, costing about £10 million a year to prevent and repair.
Yesterday's report, by the London-based Arson Prevention Bureau, was part of a new campaign to halt the thousands of fire attacks on schools each year.
It is aimed at educating pupils, teachers and communities to protect a vital but often vulnerable community resource.
The bureau's survey found that 71 per cent of school fires are believed to be deliberate.
Head teachers told researchers the acts were not usually pre-planned or designed to destroy the building, but they suspected pupils or former pupils were often responsible.
Their motives were seen as malicious damage or play rather than mental disorder or the settling of grudges.
One of the responses recommended in the report was improved counselling for offenders, with teachers urged to get help for any young person having a particularly strong interest in fire.
In Strathclyde schools, the problem is being tackled through an anti-vandalism strategy within the curriculum and local communities.
‘This is not a problem we are going to solve at a desk in the education headquarters,’ said David Montgomery, depute director of education.
‘We have to win hearts and minds, and community support for the school as an asset.’
A spokesman for Lothian education authority said the evidence pointed to pre-teen fireraisers being involved, as well as older youths.
‘It is a terrible waste of resources and heart-breaking for the local community,’ he said.
‘And apart from the expense, there's all the disruption, with arrangements for children to be educated elsewhere.’
Law lords rule father guilty of assault on baby
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A FATHER had committed an assault by slapping his baby daughter on the bare bottom in a fit of temper, three appeal judges ruled yesterday.
He had been driven to distraction when the five-month-old girl would not settle and struck her, causing extensive bruising, the Court of Session heard.
After the incident, the infant had been taken into care but a sheriff held she had not been the victim of an offence and dismissed a referral to a children's hearing.
Now, that decision has been overturned although the appeal judges spoke of strong mitigating factors in the case.
The girl, referred to as L, had been born in January last year and had breathing difficulties at night.
One night in June her mother twice had to settle the baby, taking up to an hour on each occasion.
One day in June, L's father looked after her and she had been restless.
Her parents had taken her to the doctor because of breathing problems and after being sent to hospital it was discovered L had extensive bruising across the buttocks.
A consultant paediatrician said the bruising would have caused a degree of distress when inflicted but it would have been temporary.
Social workers had been called after the incident and L had been put into the care of foster parents under a place of safety order.
Her parents had not accepted the grounds of referral to a children's hearing, that L had been the victim of an offence, and the case had gone before Sheriff Sir Stephen Young at Greenock Sheriff Court.
He had found the father had forcibly struck his daughter but refused to hold the grounds of referral established.
By then, L had been in foster care for about a month.
The sheriff had said the most likely explanation was that the father had become exasperated.
‘In vain he tries everything he can think of to try and quieten the child.
In such a situation it is possible for the parent's self control to snap and in a moment of aberration he may strike the child in a manner that is instantly regretted and most unlikely ever to be repeated.’
Evil intent was an essential element in the crime of assault, the sheriff said.
‘I am very far from saying that in every case in which a child is proving difficult to manage, a parent is entitled to strike the child so hard as to cause injuries of the kind in this case.
However, the devoted and caring father was not the type who would have deliberately harmed his child even in a fit of temper.
‘I do not consider that it can be said that at the moment of striking the child, he [the father]had the necessary evil intent or wilfulness to justify a finding either that he assaulted the child or that he wilfully ill-treated her.
It was for this reason that I decided that the grounds of referral had not been established.’
The reporter to Strathclyde's children's panel had appealed the decision and giving yesterday's judgment, Lord Murray, sitting with Lords Osborne and Wylie, said it had been pointed out that the sheriff had excluded any question of reasonable chastisement in this case.
Lord Murray said the only reasonable inference was that the blows had been struck deliberately.
If so, evil intent was sufficiently established for those blows to constitute assault in the absence of evidence of justification or any other exonerating factor.
‘The sheriff was reluctant to take the final step of formally attributing assault to a caring father who had a moment of aberration when he was driven to distraction by a situation with which he was unable to cope.
‘It may well be that the factors which influenced the sheriff are strongly mitigating and should be given proper consideration by the children's hearing when they come to consider the future arrangements for L on the footing that the grounds of referral are now held to be established.’
Collapse in dock halts frauds trial
A 37-year-old woman accused of mortgage frauds totalling more than £1 million yesterday collapsed twice in the dock as the case got under way.
Mrs Sandra Lamb, also known as Sandi Baxter or Sandi Lamb, slumped to the floor in the dock as a jury was selected for the trial at Edinburgh Sheriff Court.
She collapsed again as the 22-page indictment was read to a jury of 12 men and three women.
The court, still crowded with about 78 people cited for jury service, was adjourned on both occasions.
Lamb, of 34A Howard Place, Edinburgh, has denied the allegations, which cover a four-and-a-half year period between 1985 and 1988.
She has also pleaded not guilty to attempting to pervert the course of justice and to charges brought under the Companies' Act.
A co-accused, Raymond Mejka, of 3 Trafalgar Street, Edinburgh, who appears on four of the mortgage-related fraud charges, has also pled not guilty.
Mejka has denied attempting to pervert the course of justice and two offences under the Companies' Act.
Sheriff Andrew Bell adjourned the trial, which is expected to last for two to three weeks, until tomorrow.
KIRKCALDY Limited reprieve for 60 workers
SIXTY of the 200 employees at Kirkcaldy's GPT electronics factory will keep their jobs until late summer instead of joining the dole queue at the end of this month.
But the rest will be made redundant at the end of next week.
Closure of most of the manufacturing operation will go ahead as planned at the end of the month, when production of mobile phone equipment will transfer to other GPT factories, but a small facility will continue to meet demand for handsets.
Study ordered on Forth bridge project
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
CONSULTANTS have been appointed by the Scottish Office to conduct feasibility studies into the proposed second Forth road bridge and the Fastlink route between the M8 and A74.
The Government wants both projects to be developed by the private sector.
The consultants working on the Fastlink plan will define the terms of a competition to encourage interest among private companies.
The scheme for a toll road from near Whitburn, West Lothian, to Douglas, Lanarkshire, appears to have been in the doldrums since the Scottish Office accepted the concept in 1990.
The Forth studies will include other transport developments proposed last month in the Government's response to consultation on possible improvements to road, rail, bus, traffic management and public transport west of Edinburgh and between Lothian and Fife.
The transport consultants Oscar Faber TPA will develop work already carried out for a study on short-term measures in the Forth area.
The firm will investigate detailed requirements for new roads and wider issues across the central Scotland road network.
The MVA consultancy, transport planning specialists, will move on from the Joint Authorities Transport study in Edinburgh to consider the local effects of public transport and new roads.
G Maunsell & Partners, in association with Kirkpatrick & Partners, has been appointed as engineering adviser.
The ERL consultancy will study environmental aspects.
West Merchant Bank is financial consultant.
The joint Fastlink consulting team is headed by West Merchant Bank and includes Kirkpatrick & Partners, Rendel Palmer & Tritton, Ironside Farrar, Oscar Faber TPA, SIAS and Ryden & Partners.
Scotland's transport minister, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, said: ‘Both of these major projects will form part of the Government's private finance initiative which seeks to increase the use of the resources of the private sector in key infrastructure projects.’
METHIL Rig yard hopeful of major contract
ONE OF Britain's most successful offshore construction yards is in with a good chance of winning a major order that could secure its future for a year.
Alex Dawson, director and general manager of RGC, based at Methil, Fife, was cautiously optimistic the yard would win an order — expected to be awarded on Friday — for a 2,000-tonne rig structure for an independent oil company, LASMO.
Even if the company wins the order, however, it will be too late to stave off 300 redundancies.
Surgeon chosen as Euro candidate
THE Conservative candidate for the Lothians seat in the European parliamentary elections next year will be Dr Patrick McNally, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon with South Ayrshire National Health Service Trust.
Forum for fresh political ideas
A NEW think-tank, Demos, was formed last night aimed at encouraging fresh political ideas that are independent of both Right and Left.
Demos takes in figures from the business, trades union and academic worlds as well as journalists.
Among them are Jack Dromey, of the Transport and General Workers Union; Martin Jacques, former editor of Marxism Today; and Gerald Holtham, an economist with Lehman Brothers.
Labour move for national water vote
By David Scott Local Government Editor
ATTEMPTS to persuade councils to organise an all-Scotland referendum on water privatisation will be made today at talks involving Labour group leaders.
Lothian Regional councillors will put forward a case in favour of a postal referendum when the issue is discussed at a meeting of Labour groups at the start of the annual conference of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in Dunblane.
The proposal is likely to divide the group since some councils are voicing doubts about whether a referendum is the best way forward.
Keith Geddes, leader of the Lothian Labour group, said legal opinion showed that local authorities would be justified in conducting a referendum on a firm proposal at the stage when the Government publishes a white paper on the future of water and sewerage services.
Mr Geddes added that his group was of the view that the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, had failed to consult the Scottish people about water privatisation and was pursuing the matter in spite of it not being included in the Conservative election manifesto.
Meanwhile, there were further calls yesterday for the scrapping of local government reform following the disclosure that the Scottish Office accepted that errors were made in costings by its consultants, Touche Ross.
Tom Clarke, shadow Scottish secretary, said Mr Lang's justification for dismantling the present system was to bring about savings.
‘Since it is clear that the level of savings throw into doubt any possible benefit, Ian Lang should scrap his plans now.’
Clarke announces big police reform
THE most important reform of the police for 30 years was announced by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, yesterday.
He told the Commons his programme for the future of the service included creating ‘more powerful and business-like’ police authorities; giving chief constables greater freedom in deciding how to spend their money; and setting national objectives and performance standards.
He stopped short of announcing any amalgamations of forces, however, despite recent speculation that he intended cutting the 43 forces in England and Wales to 25.
He said his programme, coupled with radical changes to the disciplinary system and recommendations from the Sheehy Inquiry, which is due to report on rank, pay and conditions of service in May, would constitute ‘the most important reform of the police service for 30 years’.
North of the border, the Scottish Office emphasised that Scotland would find its own solutions to reform.
However, the Secretary of State, Ian Lang, made clear that chief constables were likely to be given greater control over resources.
A possible overhaul of the structure of the Scottish forces and their overseeing boards would have to await decisions on the reform of local government.
Reforms of ranks, pay and conditions would also have to await the Sheehy inquiry, Mr Lang added.
Police leaders broadly welcomed Mr Clarke's proposals but councillors warned that changes to police authorities were a ‘dangerous erosion’ of local democracy.
The shadow home secretary, Tony Blair, claimed the plans were going down the road of centralised policing when the reverse was needed.
Mr Clarke told MPs his objective was to encourage forces to devolve responsibility to local units which would be directly accountable to their communities.
On police authorities, Mr Clarke said he expected them in future to have a mix of eight elected councillors, three magistrates and five members, including the chairman, appointed by the Home Secretary.
Mr Clarke explained he wanted to remove politics from police authorities.
Cabinet battling for deal on pits
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
JOHN Major presided over a special Downing Street summit of ministers last night to thrash out a solution to the Government's deadlock over the pit closure programme.
He called a meeting of senior Cabinet members and energy ministers in an attempt to get agreement on the proposed white paper on energy, which has been delayed for more than two months.
The talks took place as a new union study suggested that it would cost more in the long-term to close pits than to keep most of them open.
The Treasury is understood to be insisting that only eight of the threatened 31 pits remain open.
The Prime Minister wants the white paper to be approved by the full Cabinet tomorrow but differences between Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, and the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, over the number of pits to be saved has prevented agreement.
Mr Heseltine has been forced to pull out of a Birmingham conference on global technology today as a contingency to allow the final details to be tied up in time for presentation to the Cabinet.
Last night, he told colleagues at a meeting of the economic and domestic policy sub-committee that he remained locked in a game of brinkmanship with the electricity  generating firms who are reluctant to sign firm contracts on coal purchases until after seeing the white paper.
The current contracts run out at the end of the month.
A Trades Union Congress study published today shows that it would cost the Government significantly more to implement its pit closure programme than it would to keep the mines open.
The analysis is based on the projections for 1995/96 made by the Government's own consultants.
It shows it would cost the taxpayer between £8 million and £10 million a year less to keep a pit open than the continuing Exchequer cost of closure.
This takes account of all costs including unemployment benefit and tax lost.
Lang adds £28m to community care cash
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
AN EXTRA £28 million is to be provided by the Scottish Office for the transfer of 600 people a year from long-stay hospitals to appropriate care in the community.
The Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, yesterday announced the cash was to help health boards to meet transitional costs of reducing the size of long-stay institutions.
He told the Scottish Grand  Committee : ‘The days of the Victorian mental institution are coming to an end.
We can begin to  foresee the time when old people will not spend their last years in large wards which lack privacy or any pretence at being homely.’
The £28 million brings the total for bridging finance up to £61 million, of which a total of £27 million has so far been allocated.
Mr Lang was accused of merely carrying out a public relations exercise, however.
The shadow Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, said the amount would do precious little to help.
He said people were being thrown out of psychiatric hospitals into ‘care’ that did not exist.
‘The £28 million will not even look at the gap between the obligations of the local authorities and what they are expected to do,’ he said.
Mr Lang also told the grand committee that figures due out this week, covering the year to December 1992, would show marked improvements in the length of time National Health Service patients spent waiting for treatment; a record number of patients and that the Government was on course to meet the guarantee that virtually no-one would have to wait more than 18 months for treatment.
BCCI aid ruled out
THERE will be no Government compensation for depositors of the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, told MPs last night.
About a dozen MPs, led by Keith Vaz, Labour MP for Leicester East, spent 45 minutes with Mr Lamont at the Treasury, pressing the case for Government help.
Later, Mr Vaz said the Chancellor, though sympathetic, ‘was not prepared to depart from the Government's view that there would not be any compensation’.
He said the campaign would continue.
Two depositors, who together lost £400,000, have gone on hunger strike at Westminster over the case.
Keith Vaz and Tory MP Sir Rhodes Boyson after the meeting
Knife law carries two-year jail sentence
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
KNIFE carriers in Scotland will face two-year jail sentences and unlimited fines after the Scottish Office agreed to toughen up proposed legislation yesterday.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Scottish home affairs minister, said the penalties for carrying knives would be the toughest in Britain after the changes.
The pressure came from John McFall, a Labour home affairs spokesman, who put forward an amendment to the Carrying of Knives etc (Scotland) Bill calling for the planned six-month jail sentence or fine of up to £1,000 to be increased to two years or an unlimited fine.
Mr McFall said the penalties had to be increased because it was vital that the knife carrying culture in Scotland was stamped out.
‘The message is that the culture must be broken and that if anyone is found carrying a knife it must be viewed very, very seriously,’ he said at the committee, which swiftly completed its stages last night.
Lord James said the Government accepted the increased sentences, adding: ‘There is a rising crime rate and rising public concern that it is necessary to obliterate the knife culture and the vicious circle involved therein of knife-wielding thugs.’
Phil Gallie, Tory MP for Ayr, who was sponsoring the bill, said that he was happy to accept harsher penalties.
He would have liked to have gone even farther, including imposing some form of ‘demonstrable disapproval’ in public.
He nodded when one MP called out: ‘You mean the stocks.’
Mr McFall also pressed the Government not to exempt folding pocket knives from the bill even if their blade edges did not exceed three inches in length.
Lord James promised to monitor the situation and to bring legislation forward if it were proved it was needed.
Mr McFall held up a penknife with a three-inch blade and said it could exact terrible injuries and that post-mortem examinations last year at the department of forensic medicine and science at Glasgow University showed that in 18 out of 31 stabbings, the wound was three inches or less.
The bill, which makes it an offence to carry a knife and puts the onus on the carrier to prove he had good reason to carry the knife, will have its third reading on Friday and could now become law before summer after the Scottish Office accepted a Labour amendment that the act should come into force on the day it is passed rather than at the end of a two month period.
John McFall: amendment called for stiffer penalties
Biggest police shake-up for 30 years unveiled by Clarke
THE most important reform of the police for 30 years was announced by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, yesterday.
He told the Commons his programme for the future of the service included creating ‘more powerful and business-like’ police authorities; giving chief constables greater freedom in deciding how to spend their money; and setting national objectives and performance standards.
He stopped short of announcing any amalgamations of forces, however, in spite of recent speculation that he intended cutting the 43 forces in England and Wales to 25.
He said his programme, coupled with radical changes to the disciplinary system and recommendations from the Sheehy Inquiry, which is due to report on rank, pay and conditions of service in May, would constitute ‘the most important reform of the police service for 30 years’.
North of the border, the Scottish Office emphasised that Scotland would find its own solutions to reform.
However, the Secretary of State, Ian Lang, made clear that chief constables were likely to be given greater control over resources.
A possible overhaul of the structure of the Scottish forces and their overseeing boards would have to await decisions on the reform of local government.
Reforms of ranks, pay and conditions would also have to await the Sheehy inquiry, Mr Lang added.
Police leaders broadly welcomed Mr Clarke's proposals but councillors gave warning that changes to police authorities were a dangerous erosion of local democracy.
The shadow home secretary, Tony Blair, claimed the plans were going down the road of centralised policing when the reverse was needed.
Mr Clarke told MPs his objective was to encourage forces to devolve responsibility to local units which would be directly accountable to their communities.
On police authorities, Mr Clarke said he expected them in future to have a mix of eight elected councillors, three magistrates and five members, including the chairman, appointed by the Home Secretary.
Mr Clarke explained he wanted to remove politics from police authorities.
Minister reassures rail pensioners
BRITISH Rail pensioners will be safeguarded after privatisation, the transport minister, Roger Freeman, said yesterday.
The declaration came as hundreds of retired rail workers lobbied MPs at Westminster over Government plans for their pension scheme.
Labour's deputy shadow transport secretary, Brian Wilson, accused the Government of ‘writing for themselves a plunderers’ charter’.
‘Their central aim is to split up the railway pension fund under the cover of privatisation and take half of it — more than £4 billion — straight into the Treasury.’
He added that ‘the Coal Board and Post Office pension funds would certainly follow’.
Mr Freeman, in the Commons, declared the ‘funds will be used…for pensions, and for no other purpose’.
Major attacks rent-a-picket at Timex
By Ewen MacAskill Political Editor
THE Prime Minister yesterday branded some of the protesters outside the Timex plant in Dundee on Monday as ‘rent-a-picket’.
John Major told the Commons at Prime Minister's Question Time that none of the 16 arrested at the factory, where 340 were sacked at the end of January, had been a Timex worker.
Mr Major said: ‘It does seem that rent-a-picket is back and I do not think that is in the interests of the workers.’
He was replying to Ernie Ross, Labour MP for Dundee West, who said the workers had lost their jobs after a disputes procedure which had followed the Government's employment law to the letter.
He asked Mr Major to intervene and ask the company to go to the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service.
Mr Major replied: ‘Workers who choose to strike have always faced the risk of being dismissed…
That was the case under legislation enacted by the last Labour government.’
Court ticking-off over Clockwork Orange
A FORMER cinema manager was convicted of breach of copyright yesterday after showing the banned cult film, A Clockwork Orange.
Jane Giles, 28, a former programme manager at London's Scala cinema, was conditionally discharged and ordered to pay £1,000 towards £3,300 prosecution costs.
A magistrate, Ian Baker, said the case had aroused a great deal of interest because of the film.
It was withdrawn in Britain in 1973 by its director, Stanley Kubrick, after it was blamed for a string of violent crimes.
Mr Baker said he was concerned solely with whether Miss Giles knew or believed she was infringing copyright by showing it.
‘At the end of the day, I'm not satisfied either with her evidence or with her claim that she had no belief that copyright would be infringed,’ he said.
Miss Giles had earlier told Wells Street magistrates that she had not considered the film to be ‘a very hot potato’ and had not realised she was breaking the law when she showed it to about 120 people last April.
She made no comment as she left court in a taxi.
John Blair-Gould, defending, told the court she had left her £15,000-a-year job with a film distribution company a few weeks ago and would be working as a freelance, reviewing books and films.
Reginald Dixon, director general of the Federation Against Copyright Theft, which brought the prosecution, said: ‘The fact that it was A Clockwork Orange had nothing to do with it.
‘We would have taken the same action and taken a prosecution if it had been any other film which had been shown without the consent of the licence-holder.’
Miss Giles said she booked the film to fill a mid-afternoon slot after a man calling himself Jean-Marc Brennez phoned and offered it.
He could not guarantee he would be able to deliver it on the day and she billed it as a surprise film so she could show a reserve if it failed to arrive.
The prosecution claimed Jean-Marc Brennez was somebody Miss Giles had made up and the reason it was billed only as a surprise film was because she knew she did not have the right to show it.
Miss Giles said she knew nothing about copyright and admitted: ‘I could have checked and I should have checked.’
Mr Blair-Gould said: ‘The prosecution clearly suggest…that she is some kind of dreadful rebel on a crusade against censorship.’
He added: ‘One can't imagine a feebler way of making a protest or trying to gain by showing A Clockwork Orange…at four o'clock in the afternoon at the Scala cinema on a weekday and advertising it as a surprise item.’
Trial told of share sales ahead of profit warning
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
ALMOST two million shares in a company were sold within days of an investment analyst being given highly confidential information by its chairman, a court heard yesterday.
Thorold Mackie had been told that it would be extremely serious if there had been a leak and he had replied: ‘I hear what you're saying,’ it was alleged at an insider dealing trial at the High Court in Edinburgh.
Mackie, of the Edinburgh stockbrokers, Bell Lawrie White, has denied using information about an impending profits warning by the waste disposal and construction group, Shanks & McEwan.
The charge under the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 alleges that between 6 and 12 September, 1991, he counselled and procured two salesmen in his firm to deal in Shanks & McEwan shares.
They are said to have sold almost two million shares on behalf of clients at prices which realised £1,378,892 in excess of what would have been obtained had the shares been sold after the warning.
Peter Runciman, 64, former executive chairman of Shanks & McEwan, said it had been decided to issue the profits warning to the stock exchange at a meeting of the company's three-man executive committee on 5 September.
The next day, Mackie, of Craigcrook Road, Edinburgh, had attended a meeting at Mr Runciman's office so the investment analyst could update his notes on the company.
‘I told him there would be a profits warning,’ Mr Runciman said.
‘At the end of the meeting I said the information could not be used until he had clearance from me.’
The information had been highly confidential and price sensitive.
The advocate-depute, Ann Paton, QC, asked if, as a result of what he had told Mackie about the profits warning, Mr Runciman had expected him to go and deal in Shanks & McEwan shares or communicate with others in such a way that they would deal in shares.
Mr Runciman replied: ‘No’.
Asked why not, he said: ‘Because it would have been use of inside information.’
Mr Runciman said he had prepared a draft statement on the profits warning and the company's corporate finance advisers, Hoare Govett, were to advise on the wording and timing of the statement.
It was to have been discussed at the next Shanks & McEwan board meeting in early October.
Three days after the meeting with Mackie, Hoare Govett had rung to say there had been a very substantial sale of shares through Bell Lawrie White.
His first reaction was that there had been a leak and he had phoned Mackie about the large sale of shares.
‘I said that if there had been a leak it would be an extremely serious matter.
The response was: ‘I hear what you're saying.’'
Cross-examined by the defence QC, Donald Macfadyen, Mr Runciman disagreed that after the executive committee meeting, while he had decided a profits warning should be issued, the two other members had not made up their minds.
Mr Macfadyen put it to him that at the meeting with Mackie the next day he had not advised him that Shanks & McEwan intended to issue a profits warning.
‘I am afraid that is not so,’ he said.
Asked if at that stage no decision to issue a warning had been reached, again Mr Runciman replied: ‘I am afraid that is not so.’
The trial continues.
Sheriff orders Sheridan to to keep away from Timex
By James Rougvie
ELEVEN demonstrators arrested on the Timex picket line in Dundee on Monday were yesterday ordered by a sheriff to stay out of the city until their trials.
Five others, including the Scottish Militant leader Tommy Sheridan, were banned from going within a mile of the factory.
Of the 16 appearing in court, 14 including Sheridan and Tommy Burn, the Scottish Communist Party leader, denied charges of breach of the peace which alleged that they formed part of a disorderly crowd, shouted and swore, jostled police and prevented traffic from proceeding.
They are:
Edward Gribben, 22, Hapland Road, Pollok; Garry Kelly, 29, Craighead Way, Barrhead; Brian Smith, 36, Dormanside Road, Pollok; Keith Baldassaran, 36, Calfhill Road, Pollok; Thomas Burn, 34, Paisley Road West, Glasgow; Ross Rintoul, 31, Henderson Street, Leith; Ewan McGregor, 30, Saracen Street, Possilpark, Glasgow; Thomas Sheridan, 29, Linthaugh Road, Glasgow; George McNeilage, 29, c/o Cryans, Linthaugh Road, Glasgow; Paul Donaldson, 26, Muirhouse Gardens, Edinburgh; Catrina Grant, 23, West Pilton Drive, Edinburgh, Dominic Shields, 21, c/o Cyrenians, Broughton Place, Edinburgh; Colin McGregor, 19, Dormanside Road, Pollok, and David Coull, 16, Langhame Road, Murray Lane, Montrose.
Grant and Shields further denied charges of police assault, and Baldassaran and McNeilage denied a breach of the Bail Act.
Steven Holt, 25, St Fillan's Road, and David Goodfellow, 21, Turnberry Avenue, both Dundee, denied a charge of vandalism by recklessly damaging a car.
Smith, Baldassaran, Burn, Rintoul, Ewan McGregor, Donaldson, Grant, Shields, Colin McGregor, Kelly and Gribben were ordered by Sheriff Alastair Stewart, as part of their bail conditions, to stay out of Dundee until the date of their trials.
An agent said Sheridan had a difficulty with a ban from Dundee, in that he was convener of the Scottish Militant Labour Party and was involved in a forthcoming by-election in Dundee.
An agent for McNeilage said his client was in similar difficulties, and both men were ordered to stay a mile from the Timex factory until their trial.
The ban also applied to three others.
Trial for the 16 was set for 11, 18, 21 and 22 June.
Afterwards, Mr Sheridan said that if he had been banned from the picket line, he would ensure that at least 50 to 100 supporters would take his place.
‘I am glad the strikers themselves have supported the call for more mass pickets and I am sure there will be an even bigger mass picket next Monday.
We will stop the scabs going into the factory.’
About 150 pickets mounted a peaceful, if noisy, vigil at the Timex factory gates yesterday morning.
Buses carrying replacement workers for the 340 sacked strikers entered the gates on time for their day shift.
£4m grant boost in community care package
By David Scott Local Government Editor
SCOTTISH Homes is to provide £4 million in extra grants for the management of community care initiatives, the agency announced yesterday.
The special needs allowance package is a grant which will be available to housing associations and co-operatives to help finance some of the additional costs needed to provide support accommodation.
It is part of a package of measures, outlined in a Scottish Homes care in the community policy document.
Other measures include a special needs capital grant to be aimed at projects provided by voluntary organisations and private sector care providers.
According to the document, people with special needs, including those with physical handicaps and the elderly, should be more involved in the planning, design and management of their own houses.
Bob Millar, the director of strategy, policy and planning, said that until now, too little importance had been given to the role of housing in community care.
While the local authorities and health boards were the key agencies, housing was an essential component in  community care planning.
‘Our policies now demonstrate the contribution we will make to expand the number of high quality projects across the country.’
The grants will contribute towards the cost of financing extra time spent helping people with special needs to sustain their tenancy.
Assistance will include advice on housing and related benefits and help with rent and repairs.
Up to £2 million has been budgeted for the special needs grant but the amount spent will depend on the take-up.
Students back fight over union funding
STUDENTS' leaders in Scotland yesterday agreed to oppose ‘by any means necessary’ the Government's plans to make student union membership voluntary.
At their annual conference in Edinburgh, members of the National Union of Students Scotland agreed to demonstrate against the Government measures, which the union says would sap funds from all kinds of student activities.
Jim Murphy, NUS Scotland president, said that a campaign encouraging students to demonstrate would not just include placard-waving but discos and possibly even classes in the history of demonstrations.
Helicopters to begin Srebrenica relief today
A UN AIRLIFT to evacuate wounded Muslims from the besieged Bosnian town of Srebrenica will begin early this morning, a senior UN officer announced yesterday.
British Brigadier Roddy Cordy-Simpson, chief of staff at the UN military command in Bosnia, sent a letter to the head of the Bosnian Serb army, General Ratko Mladic, telling him the helicopter air bridge would start at 7am.
The commander of the UN peacekeeping troops in Bosnia, General Philippe Morillon, said he had finally reached agreement with local Muslim authorities to begin evacuating Serb families from the Muslim city of Tuzla in northern Bosnia.
Bosnian Serbs had insisted on the evacuation of Serbs from Tuzla as a condition for allowing aid convoys into Bosnian Muslim towns and the evacuation of Muslims from Srebrenica.
The Yugoslav news agency Tanjug said 46 Serbs would be flown out of Tuzla today.
Earlier Gen Morillon had accused Tuzla's Muslim authorities of bad faith in blocking the evacuation and asked Bosnia's Muslim vice-president, Ejup Ganic, to break the impasse.
The general also said the Bosnian Serbs had agreed to observe a ceasefire around Srebrenica starting from today.
Srebrenica has been under Serb siege since the Bosnian civil war began 11 months ago.
Conditions for the tens of thousands of refugees there have been described in harrowing terms by UN officials who have visited the town.
Earlier this month, people were reported to be dying at the rate of 30 a day from hunger and the effects of Serb shelling.
A report from the Srebrenica Press Centre received in Sarajevo yesterday said the Serb offensive was continuing and Serb forces had advanced another half a mile into the area held by Bosnian forces.
It said the nearby village of Osmace had been encircled.
There was fierce hand-to-hand fighting and the area was coming under heavy tank and artillery shelling.
In one village, three people had been killed during the distribution of aid.
The statement said the people of Srebrenica appealed to the presidents of the United States and France to help halt the offensive.
A UN spokesman said the air bridge between Srebrenica and Tuzla would be operated by British and French helicopters.
In his letter, Brig Cordy-Simpson said that since Gen Mladic had not replied to UN proposals on how the airlift would be managed, it was assumed that he had agreed to them.
Brig Cordy-Simpson said the airlift was being initiated on the basis of an agreement in principle for such an operation given by the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, in New York on Sunday.
Officials of the UN Protection Force, Unprofor, said earlier that the airlift would be carried out by six helicopters which could each make six trips a day, carrying six stretchers and four other wounded people.
They said Unprofor had proposed that the corridor run east from Tuzla to the border town of Zvornik and then south to Srebrenica and that there should be no military operations in the corridor while the air bridge was in place.
Gen Morillon was also negotiating with local commanders yesterday to try to get aid convoys moving again in eastern Bosnia.
However, an aid convoy and a French field hospital trying to reach Srebrenica remained blocked yesterday while trucks intended for the Muslim town of Zepa were ordered to return to Belgrade by the UN after being stalled for six days.
The convoy's Canadian military escort had refused to allow Serb forces to make an inventory of their arms and ammunition.
Another convoy, carrying supplies for UN forces in Sarajevo, was also turned back by Bosnian forces.
Serbs found it was carrying more ammunition than was listed on the manifest, a Bosnian Serb officer said.
The UN Security Council was planning to vote last night to adopt a resolution enforcing its ban on flights over Bosnia.
Bound Arab youth shot dead
A JEWISH settler shot dead a Palestinian teenager yesterday while he was bound hand and foot by other settlers for a stabbing in the occupied West Bank, the army said.
The incident began when two settlers picked up the Arab, 19, in their jeep at the edge of Susiya settlement.
When he stabbed and lightly wounded the driver, they tied him up and took him to the settlement.
There a resident of another settlement who heard about the incident came by.
He went up to the Palestinian and shot him at close range, the army said.
Reserve general Ori Orr, chairman of parliament's foreign affairs and defence committee, told army radio: ‘In this case people apparently killed a man and put him on trial before he was accused.’
The army said the dead man was Jawad Jamil Hoshiyeh of Yatta village near Hebron.
Some settlers said Hoshiyeh had a hand grenade on his belt and was on his way to attack Jews.
But the army said it was investigating whether he had a grenade when he was shot.
The driver of the jeep said they picked up the Arab for questioning because he could not explain what he was doing in the area.
The army said 60 sheep had been stolen from the settlement the previous night.
The Arab was standing by the jeep, surrounded by settlers, when a man from another settlement shot him.
The army said the gunman came from nearby Maale Hever settlement.
Piling on the agony as party is Left in the cold
FRANCE's ruling Socialists had long been expecting the deb∘acle.
But when it came, it was even worse than most had feared.
No Socialist bastion remained intact, no government minister or party leader unthreatened.
The party which had ruled France for ten of the past 12 years was in a state of ruin.
‘I am sad,’ Michel Rocard, former prime minister and Socialist presidential candidate, said as he surveyed the scene of devastation after the first round of voting in the general election on Sunday night.
‘Whatever our mistakes — and we made some — I truly do not think we deserved this.’
Mr Rocard has more reason than most to feel sad.
Not only is the seat he has held for the past 15 years, in the Yvelines to the west of Paris, now under serious threat, but so too is the whole political future and his dream of a new social democratic movement.
Although he had deliberately distanced himself from the government since being ‘sacked’ as prime minister nearly two years ago and although he personally remained untainted by the multiple scandals which have beset the Socialist Party, he found himself caught up in the great tidal wave of rejection of the Socialists, which has swept the country.
Mr Rocard won just 27 per cent of the vote on Sunday — 20 points less than in the last general election five years ago, and 11 points behind his right wing rival.
There is now a good chance that he will be beaten in the run-off next Sunday unless he can persuade enough first-round abstentionists to turn out to support him.
Last month, Mr Rocard caused a great frisson of excitement to run through the deeply-dejected Socialist ranks by calling for a political ‘big bang’ to allow the creation of a new centre left movement consisting of progressive-minded Communists, Ecologists, Centrists and what remained of the Socialists.
Suddenly, there was a chink of light at the end of what had previously looked like a dead-end tunnel.
Hope returned of a new life beyond the slaughter which was being widely predicted for the March election.
When Mr Rocard made that speech, the  ecologists were being credited with almost 20 per cent of the vote.
That, together with the 20 per cent or so the socialists were hoping to pick up, plus a few more votes taken from the Communists and the Centrists, could have made a respectably sized movement.
But the Green vote has disintegrated.
The two main Green parties, the Verts and Generation Ecologie, obtained less than 8 per cent of the vote in Sunday's first round.
Only two of their candidates have even made it through to the second round.
One of the main potential pillars of Mr Rocard's new movement has simply collapsed.
The Socialists have been plunged back into gloom.
With just 20 per cent of Sunday's vote they have registered their lowest score in any general election since Mr Mitterrand founded the party 22 years ago.
They will be lucky if they retain as many as 80 of their present 265 parliamentary seats.
The mainstream right already controls the Senate, almost all the regional councils (19 out of 21), three-quarters of the departmental councils and a majority of the municipal councils — and now it looks likely to win at least 75 per cent and possibly as much as 85 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly.
The Socialists have been liquidated.
True, France still has a president who is Socialist in name.
But he is old, deeply unpopular, and increasingly isolated from his own party.
Furthermore, he has at best only two years of political life ahead of him.
(His second term of office is due to end in May 1995).
Is this the end of French socialism?
Some of the French editorialists certainly think so.
But they were probably saying the same thing at the end of the 1960s after the Socialist Party of the day, the Federation de la Gauche Democrate et Socialiste, had won a mere 16.5 per cent of the vote in the 1968 general election and Gaston Deferre, their candidate in the following year's presidential election had polled just 5 per cent.
Twelve years later, the new Socialist Party founded by Mr Mitterrand on the ruins of the old, was swept to victory on the crest of a tidal wave.
It was the first time in more than quarter of a century that the socialists had been returned to power.
If Mr Mitterrand could do it, why not Mr Rocard?
Miracles can happen in French politics.
But time is against Mr Rocard.
He has at most two years before the next presidential election in which to try to put together a new centre left movement capable of carrying him into the president's seat.
By then he will be 64, the same age as when Mr Mitterrand was first elected.
He has already made three unsuccessful shots at the presidency.
He knows this will now probably be his last chance.
For the moment, Mr Rocard is probably just praying that he can hold on to his seat in the Yvelines.
Lockerbie links investigated
UNITED STATES officials are still investigating the possibility that Iran and Syria may have been involved in the 1988 Lockerbie bombing, along with Libya, a senior US counter-terrorism specialist said on yesterday.
‘We continue to pursue that,’ the expert told a small group of reporters, under ground rules that barred identifying him or his organisation.
Scotland and the US had charged two alleged Libyan operatives with planting the bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie on 21 December, 1988, killing 270 people.
Before the US Justice Department brought its indictment of the Libyans on 14 November, 1991, the intelligence community's working theory was that the bombing of the Boeing 747 had been a co-ordinated effort of Syria, Libya and Iran.
Vincent Cannistraro, chief of operations at the Central Intelligence Agency's counter-terrorism centre at the time of the bombing, said there was evidence Iran may have hired out the operation to both Libya and to the Syria-based Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC).
Iran, Syria, the PFLP-GC and Libya deny involvement in the bombing.
Smith's moral sentiments pointless
That Labour leader John Smith should try to take advantage of the current tide of moral unease in Britain is perfectly understandable, since his party's policies generally are hard to distinguish from those of the Liberal Democrats and even of the Conservatives.
You rightly say in your editorial today (‘Moral fabric in need of repair’) that the sentiments he expresses are not the sole property of democratic socialists.
But what is almost laughable is his ascribing ‘the strength of our intellectual case’ to the tired old-hat waffle you print in the article today, ‘Onward Christian socialists’.
Mr Smith assures us that this ‘strength’ is because the Labour Party owes more to Methodism than to Marxism.
It shows.
His moral sentiments are unexceptional, but as a contribution to the ‘battle of ideas…at the centre of the political struggle’, they are null and quite beside the point.
He would do well to have a quick refresher on Marxist economics.
Marx's central contention is that the capitalist economy sows the seeds of its own destruction, that it cannot help creating the forces that will destroy it as a product of its own internal contradictions.
That thesis is still true.
One has only to look at the contradictions between the rich north and the starving south; between capitalist industry's ceaseless drive for higher productivity and the health of the biosphere; those contradictions at the heart of the EC (the ERM, the battles over farming and fishing, etc); and the fierce struggle over world trade in GATT, which will soon break out again.
In this real world context, which will powerfully affect Britain, Mr Smith's ‘luvvie’ proposals are about as useful as a powder puff to a man with chronic heart disease.
Trident costs
David Wallen (11 March) gave us an interesting account of a series of blunders revealed to the Parliamentary Defence Committee at its annual consideration of the Trident programme.
Not only had £250,000 worth of equipment fallen off the back of a submarine, but the torpedo firing system and the periscope were out of commission as well!
Despite, or perhaps because of, these mishaps, estimates for Trident running costs are now revealed to be £5.7 billion over 30 years, on top of £10.5 billion construction costs.
Trident seems to occupy a blind spot for a Government otherwise over-enthusiastic about cutbacks in public expenditure.
The size of the Trident bill is particularly galling in view of the Budget decision to tax gas and electricity.
When will the Government, or at any rate the Opposition, take a leaf out of President Clinton's book and realise the opportunities presented by the peace dividend?
No service to Kenyans
THE decision by the Kenyan president, Daniel arap Moi, to abandon economic reforms demanded by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank represents a serious blow to the prospects of eastern Africa's biggest economy.
On the face of it, it is easy to sympathise with the president's view that ‘as a sovereign state,’ Kenya will no longer accept ‘any form of economic arm-twisting from any quarter.’
This is particularly the case as the IMF has been open to criticism that it ignores the social impact of its prescriptions, which create hardship and the potential for popular unrest as its free-market measures begin to bite.
But in abandoning the reforms, Kenya is also throwing away its chance to begin to rid the economy of the tight centralised government control — and the opportunities for corruption which that presents — which will undermine any chance of recovery.
It also deprives the country of aid programmes of about $350 million a year, a modest sum in itself; but as it represents IMF endorsement it is the key to unlocking further substantial bilateral aid to support the economy.
In the past ten years there has been no major new investment in Kenya, a country previously regarded as an oasis of economic success in east Africa.
During the same period, there has not been one prosecution for corruption, although it is no secret that the economy is dominated by powerful politicians with access to cheap state funds, import licences and influence.
The IMF has spoken of fundamental weaknesses underlying an economy dependent for survival on aid and dragged down by graft.
Kenya's attempt at economic change did not last long.
It is only a month since the president introduced the measures to free the exchange rate, reform banking and farm policy and remove price controls on a number of basic commodities, which he has now cancelled.
The political opposition — aid donors made further assistance contingent not only on economic reform, but also on moves to political pluralism — has described Moi's decision as catastrophic.
At yesterday's opening of the first multi-party parliament in 26 years, the president said that the management of the country was the responsibility of Kenyans and no-one else, and promised that his government would present its own economic strategy.
That is no doubt awaited with interest.
It is most certainly true that Kenyans must decide their own future, but in this case the Kenyan president has taken a decision which does not serve his people well.
The terrorist contradiction
A YOUNG boy fights for his life in a Warrington hospital, a young mother buries her soldier husband in Edinburgh, a young worker opens a package with a Scottish postmark at an office in Huntingdon and it explodes in her hands.
What do they have in common beyond their youth and innocence?
The answer is that they are the victims of a strategy which is as bankrupt intellectually as it is morally.
Some might see little comparison between the systematic gangsterism of the IRA and the inadequates who, unless appearances deceive, expect to prevent the privatisation of Scottish water by posting letterbombs to the Scottish Office and Anglian Water.
But at root, the distinction is only one of degree.
Both are prepared to kill or maim innocents in pursuit of a cause.
And both are gripped by the same dogmatic delusion.
The delusion is that their means can achieve their ends.
It could not be more wrong.
There is a theory that democracy increases the temptation to terrorism, since the cause which fails to secure the legitimacy of ballot box consent has few other outlets available to it.
It is a theory which, though true to a point, is too easily stretched into an excuse.
But it does carry a corollary which is fundamental: namely, that for democracy to give in to terrorism is to undermine its own deepest foundation.
There was a time when the provisionals sought to ride both horses simultaneously, fighting elections and plotting murder.
Rejected in the former, they press on with the latter.
It should have told them something, but it has not.
What it should have told them is that terrorism makes it harder, not easier, to gain a hearing in a democracy.
If they understand that, they have yet to devise a strategy to meet it.
There is a perfectly respectable case to be made for Irish republicanism, and one which, as it happens, has some penetrating things to say about democracy as it has operated in Northern Ireland.
But it is a case that cannot be heard above the din of bombs and bullets.
For as long as they continue they are the issue, rather than a grievance for which many people might instinctively have some sympathy.
Exactly the same argument applies to those who, it would seem, are crass enough to defend Scottish water by bomb.
There is a powerful — in our view, conclusive — case against privatising Scotland's water industry.
Its strength is that it is a democratic case, founded on popular disapproval.
But those who choose violence set themselves on the opposing side from democracy.
Democracy includes, incidentally, the SNP.
No-one should be tempted to make causal connections between these outrages and the SNP's recent demonstration at the Warrington office or Andrew Welsh's ill-guarded remarks about direct action.
The SNP has always been unswerving in its condemnation of violent tactics and its alienation of those who flirt with them.
Like the other parties, it knows full well that extremism is the worst thing that can happen to a good cause.
The idiots sending these devices are a danger to more than just the public.
University honour for Dalai Lama
HIS Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama, Tanzin Gyatso, is to receive an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of St Andrews on 14 May at a special ceremony in the Younger Graduation Hall.
The Dalai Lama, the spiritual and political leader of the Tibetan people, has been living in exile at Dharamsala, India, since 1959.
Although he describes himself as a simple Buddhist monk, he has become an international figure, touring the world to give talks and also meeting many world leaders, dignitaries and religious figures.
He has gained numerous honours and awards, most notably the Nobel Peace prize in 1989, as well as the Albert Schweitzer Humanitarian Award and the Lincoln Award for leadership in the service of freedom.
He is also the author of many books, including Kindness, Clarity and Insight and his second autobiography, Freedom in Exile.
Dr Hugh Richardson, of St Andrews, an honorary graduate of the university, spent a number of years in Tibet in charge of the British mission at Lhasa, where he first met the Dalai Lama in 1939.
Since then, Dr Richardson has met him on many occasions, and he conveyed the university's invitation to the Dalai Lama.
WEATHER OF FEBRUARY Benign month that broke records
THE MEAN pressure at, for example, Aberdeen and Glasgow in February 1993 was some 22 millibars higher than the previous month's values, resulting in docile weather for much of Scotland for most of the month, in stark contrast to January's storms.
For most of the first week of February high pressure was centred to the southeast or south of Scotland giving a generally cloudy, mild, southwesterly flow over the country, although the month started with a sharp frost in central and southern areas.
The 1st was the coldest night of the month in some places, vying with the last two nights of February, with very few really frosty nights in between.
Frontal systems encroaching into the Western and Northern Isles early in the month gave quite wet and windy conditions, with 70mph gusts on the 3rd and 4th.
A number of northwestern stations recorded around 25-30mm of rainfall on the 4th, with similar values on the 5th at southwestern sites.
By the end of the first week an intensifying anticyclone over Ireland introduced an even warmer, humid airstream over Scotland.
In the early hours of the 6th the temperature at Aberdeen Airport rose to 13.9C.
This was a good example of the Fohn effect, whereby descent of air in the lee of hills warms and dries the atmosphere.
On the following day Eskdalemuir, in the Southern Uplands, reached its highest ever February temperature of 14.0C (in a record going back to 1914).
The Aberdeen value of 16.0C was fractionally below the previous warmest February temperature.
On the 8th, with a blanket of low cloud over most of the country, the mountain tops protruded into warm, sunny air with the temperature on Cairn Gorm Summit reaching 10.7C.
As the centre of high pressure moved into the North Sea a southeasterly airstream affected the country giving mist and, occasionally, thick fog (at Edinburgh Airport on the 9th for example).
The airstream veered again on the 11th as high pressure moved south over the near continent and the generally settled, quiet weather persisted until the 14th, with several frosty nights in the glens.
Glasgow Airport recorded its 11th sunfree day in succession on the 14th but the pattern changed as a cold front made eastwards progress across the country.
The second half of February was much more unsettled as an area of high pressure persisted in the eastern Atlantic, allowing frontal troughs to topple over its northeastern flank into Scotland.
The airstream was still generally mild and the 17th was one of the best days with pleasant sunshine and temperatures around 14C in many places.
On the 18th a cold front moved southeast and several days of cold, windy weather followed, with heavy, wintry showers, particularly in the north.
Gusts of 65-80mph were widespread on the 18th, with the Northern Isles experiencing 80-90mph gusts on the 19th and 20th.
The airstream warmed again from the west after the passage of a warm front on the 22nd and pleasant conditions prevailed, particularly in the east.
The pattern changed again on the 25th as a strong, cold northwesterly dug in behind a complex series of troughs, the precipitation turning increasingly wintry.
As the airstream veered into the north, February ended on a very wintry note in the far northeast of the country.
By the morning of the 27th the Aberdeen area had received 10cm (4in) of snow and many roads in Grampian were blocked as strong winds exacerbated the situation.
Sharp frosts, with daytime temperatures barely rising above freezing in the Highlands, served as a reminder that winter wasn't quite finished.
The accompanying maps indicate that February 1993 was considerably drier, duller and warmer than normal.
Even the ‘sunnier’ east received only 70 per cent of normal sunshine and Stornoway's 22.9 hours represented the second dullest February on record (since 1881), the dullest being 1943 with 21.7 hours.
The mean temperature of 4.6C at Braemar (4.2C above average) was the second highest on record (since 1856 with a break from 1906-1911), the warmest being 5.3C in 1868.
The area between the Tay and Forth experienced less than 10 per cent of normal rainfall.
The total of 3.8mm at Leuchars (with a record from 1922) was beaten by 1.8mm in 1932 and 3.0mm in 1934.
A DRAMATIC mission to rescue desperate Bosnian Muslim civilians was suspended yesterday after Serb forces opened fire on unarmed United Nations helicopters, killing at least three people and wounding six others.
Two Canadian soldiers were among those hit by shrapnel.
The operation into the embattled Bosnian town of  Srebrenica was halted by the UN authorities after two Royal Navy helicopters had braved renewed Serbian shelling to remove the wounded Canadian peace-keepers, one of them in critical condition.
The two Sea Kings narrowly escaped being hit as shells crashed around the landing zone in the Srebrenica football stadium.
The Serbs fired two artillery shells as the helicopters landed and sporadic firing continued as the wounded were carried on board.
‘Luckily, they managed to get out without a scratch,’ said a spokesman for the UN Protection Force, Unprofor.
There was strong condemnation of the Serb actions from a senior British officer with Unprofor, Brigadier Roddy Cordy-Simpson.
‘This is the ultimate in despicable behaviour,’ he said.
The UN secretary general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, called on Bosnian Serb forces to halt what he called their ‘unjustifiable’ attack on Srebrenica.
Lord Owen, co-chairman of the Bosnia peace conference, protested directly to the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, telling him the shelling was ‘outrageous’.
Last night, however, the Bosnian Serbs denied firing on the UN helicopters, which they accused of dropping explosives.
In a pugnacious statement, the Serb military commanders claimed the UN was trying to infiltrate soldiers into  Srebrenica to ‘save Muslim criminals who committed genocide against the Serb population’.
The UN rescue operation had begun soon after dawn when three French Puma helicopters flew into Srebrenica from the north-east Bosnian Muslim stronghold of Tuzla.
They were greeted by a rousing reception from the town's starving inhabitants, who have been under siege since the war erupted 11 months ago.
At one point earlier this month townspeople were reported to be dying at the rate of 30 a day from shellfire and starvation.
The French arrived carrying only a doctor and two other medical staff and safely evacuated 21 wounded Muslims.
One of them, 30-year-old Habib Omerovic, sobbed later: ‘I can't believe this has happened to me.
It is hell in there.’
Just moments after the French left, the Serbs fired ten shells into the landing zone wounding the two Canadians and a young Muslim girl.
Two of the three British Sea Kings assigned to the operation then returned to  Srebrenica with the sole objective of rescuing the Canadians, coming under renewed Serb fire as they did so.
The senior pilot in the operation, Lt Cmdr George Wallace, told how a ground fired missile passed within 1,000 yards of one of the Sea Kings as they approached  Srebrenica .
‘The missile was so close that the warning system in the cab illuminated and fired off defensive flares,’ he said.
Last night UN officials were accusing the Serbs of deliberately sabotaging the humanitarian rescue mission as their forces closed in on Srebrenica.
It had been hoped to make six trips a day with each helicopter carrying six stretchers and four other wounded civilians.
The UN said that despite undertakings from Serb commanders the helicopters would be given safe passage it appeared Mr Karadzic and General Ratko Mladic, the Serb commander, could not control their troops of the ground.
The UN made it clear that the operation would resume only if Serb forces stopped the artillery barrage on the town, which is packed with 60,000 more wounded, starving or sick people.
There was also concern for a British journalist, Maggie O'Kane of the Guardian, and for a BBC cameraman, Brian Hulls, who were being held by Serbs after covering the airlift.
But a Ministry of Defence spokesman said last night that neither was in immediate danger.
They are expected to be released as soon as UN monitoring officers cross the frontline to bring them back to Tuzla.
The German government agreed yesterday to join the United States in dropping aid to the Bosnian Muslims and NATO allies discussed final plans for enforcing a no-fly zone.
In the Hague, the International Court of Justice said it would sit on 1 April for the first public hearing in a war crimes case Bosnia has brought against Serbia and Montenegro.
Police blame ‘rogue loner’ for letter bomb attacks
By Frank Urquhart
A LONER operating from the north-east of Scotland may be responsible for the spate of letter-bomb attacks in Cambridgeshire, Edinburgh and Dounreay, it was revealed yesterday.
The nationwide hunt for the maker of the explosives is centred in Grampian, where detectives are also investigating a possible link with last week's elaborate hoax which brought chaos to Aberdeen.
It emerged yesterday that all three letter bombs were contained in Jiffy bags and were of similar construction.
At least one of the devices — the bomb mailed to Dounreay — was in a package bearing an Aberdeen postmark.
The others are also understood to have passed through the main sorting office in Crown Street.
Aberdeen is used as the main processing centre for letters and parcels posted in towns and villages throughout the north-east and Shetland.
All the mail handled at Aberdeen carries the city's postmark and the letter bombs could have been posted anywhere in the area.
A teenage mail-room worker at the Anglian Water headquarters in Huntingdon narrowly escaped injury when the package she was handling exploded.
Similar bombs were sent to the Dounreay nuclear plant in Caithness and to the Scottish Office in Edinburgh.
No person or group has claimed responsibility or given any reason for the attacks.
Detectives are working on the theory that a rogue loner, rather than a terrorist cell, is responsible.
Grampian detectives are working with officers in Cambridgeshire, Lothian and Borders and Northern Constabulary.
Det Insp Bob Duncan, the officer leading the Grampian investigation, confirmed that detectives are investigating links between the bombs and the four suspect devices at the centre of the hoaxes at oil offices in Aberdeen
Det Insp Duncan said: ‘We are obviously aware of the circumstances surrounding all these incidents.
It is a case of keeping an open mind to see if they are connected.
‘There are some similarities in all of these incidents which we are aware of, so that is obviously uppermost in our minds.’
He said there was no evidence that an organised group was involved.
Det Supt Bob Wordsworth, who is heading the Cambridgeshire investigation, said: ‘The same person may be responsible.
We aren't ruling anything out.’
However, David Capitanchik, an international terrorism expert, said last night that a small group of environmental activists, rather than nationalist extremists, could be responsible because of the range of institutions targeted.
He warned: ‘Once somebody gets hooked on this sort of thing they may step it up.
If a terrorist group is operating in the area then the sooner they are stopped the better.’
Last night a Scottish Office spokesman said security precautions there had been stepped up and staff had been advised on the need to be more vigilant.
The way in which the recent incident was handled is the subject of an internal inquiry to ensure that ‘any appropriate lessons are learned and, where necessary, existing procedures are improved’.
Germany win Ibrox friendly
A MISTAKE by the acting Scotland captain, Craig Levein, gave Germany victory in the friendly match at Ibrox last night.
Levein, leading a patched-up side, missed a long clearance from Guido Buchwald in the 20th minute and Karl Heinz Riedle slipped the ball past Nicky Walker.
Scotland had made an encouraging start, never giving the world champions time to settle on the ball.
Duncan Ferguson produced a spectacular strike from a chest-high cross: the Dundee United forward, with his back to goal, hit a perfect overhead scissors kick which Andreas Kopke tipped over.
Full report, Page 24
New inquiry into girl missing for 36 years
By Denny Macgee
POLICE have reopened the file on a 36-year-old mystery surrounding the disappearance of a Lanarkshire schoolgirl.
Moira Anderson vanished without trace in a snow storm while running an errand for her grandmother on 23 February 1957.
Moira was 12 at the time.
Although police believe the schoolgirl was almost certainly murdered, her body was never found and no-one has been prosecuted in connection with the case.
However, more than three decades after Moira disappeared, senior detectives from Coatbridge last week travelled to the North of England to interview a man in connection with the disappearance, which is still officially being treated as a missing person inquiry.
The Crown Office is being kept informed of the developments.
The original inquiry also took detectives to the North of England.
Officers went to Doncaster to interview a lorry driver after he reported having seen a young girl whose appearance was similar to Moira's, in the company of two other lorry drivers the day after the Lanarkshire schoolgirl disappeared.
Moira, one of three sisters, was never found in spite of one of the largest inquiries in the Lanarkshire area.
Not even her grandmother's Co-op book, which Moira was carrying when she left the house to go to the shop, was uncovered.
The latest developments in the inquiry have emerged a year after police in Coatbridge received surprising new information about the case.
It is believed that information relates to confirmed sightings of Moira on the night she disappeared.
As a result police now say they are following a definite line of inquiry.
Detective Inspector Jim McEwan, who has been studying the case files for a year, confirmed that he and another senior detective, Chief Inspector Ricky Gray, had travelled to England as a result of the information to interview a man who they believed could help them with the inquiry.
The man was being treated as a witness who may have information about Moira's disappearance.
Police have also tracked down one local man who gave a statement at the time of the disappearance.
Mr McEwan said police had so far been unable to trace any members of the missing girl's family still living in the Coatbridge area.
He believed her parents, James and Marjory, were now dead.
However, Moira had two sisters, Marjory and Jeanette, who were 14 and seven respectively at the time of the disappearance.
One is believed to live in England, the other abroad, although police do not know in what country.
‘We very much need to speak to them, and to anyone else who lived in the area at the time or thinks they know anything,’ Mr McEwan said.
Police issued a telephone number for anyone with information.
It is Airdrie 762222.
How The Scotsman reported the story when Moira went missing in February 1957
Prince pays tribute to IRA bomb victim's bravery
THE Prince of Wales last night paid tribute to the courage of a mother who lost a leg in the IRA bomb blast in Warrington on Saturday.
It came as the parents of 12-year-old victim Timothy Parry — hanging on to life by a thread in a Liverpool hospital came to terms with the fact that he is unlikely to survive.
The prince was visibly moved by the bravery of Bronwen Vickers, 33, a mother of two, from Knutsford, Cheshire, as he sat at the foot of her bed at Warrington General Hospital.
Mrs Vickers' husband Paul, 37, and four-year-old daughter Hannah were injured in the blast.
Her two-week-old baby Harriet escaped unscathed.
But yesterday she vowed that the tragedy would not ruin their lives.
She said of the IRA: ‘I can only think they are a dumping ground for psychotics and maniacs.
I can't see how they achieve anything.
‘I am not bitter…we are just going to get on with our lives.’
The prince said: ‘I was very impressed by the attitude of all the patients — particularly Mrs Vickers.
‘It has made my day meeting her.
She had this wonderful, positive attitude — she is determined to get herself back again.’
Meanwhile, Colin and Wendy Parry, of Great Sankey, Warrington, saw hopes for their son Tim snatched away with the news that his condition has deteriorated in the intensive care unit of Liverpool's Walton neurosurgical centre.
A consultant neurosurgeon, John Miles, told them that Tim had shown no brain response after being taken off sedative drugs.
The youngster was also unable to breath without a ventilator.
Doctors are keeping Tim on the life support machine for 24 hours to make sure the drugs have worked out of his system and have not ruled out all hope.
Mr Miles said: ‘Nobody would be wanting to keep machinery going if there is no hope for Tim's survival.’
The shrine to three-year-old Johnathan Ball who died in the blast as he shopped for a Mother's Day gift, grew yesterday.
More than 50 people were injured in the terrorist attack on the town.
As well as Tim, another 14 victims are still in hospital.
Yesterday the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, pledged every effort to bring the bombers to justice as he visited the Cheshire town.
As the huge hunt for the bombers continued, Mr Clarke talked to senior officers leading the investigation.
He said after visiting the police incident room: ‘Every inhabitant of this country feels very deeply over this quite senseless attack on a town which has no involvement whatsoever in whatever crazy cause the people involved thought they were pursuing.
‘Everything will be done to bring those responsible to justice and every effort is being put in to make sure that we do.’
By Denny Macgee
POLICE have reopened the file on a 36-year-old mystery surrounding the disappearance of a Lanarkshire girl.
Moira Anderson vanished without trace in a snowstorm while running an errand for her grandmother on 23 February, 1957.
Moira was 12 at the time.
Although police believe Moira was almost certainly murdered, her body was never found and no-one has been prosecuted in connection with the case.
However, senior detectives from Coatbridge last week went to the north of England to interview a man in connection with the disappearance, which is still officially being treated as a missing person inquiry.
The Crown Office is being kept informed of the developments.
The original inquiry also took detectives to the north of England.
Officers interviewed a lorry driver in Doncaster after he reported having seen a girl who resembled Moira with two other lorry drivers the day after she disappeared.
Moira's disappearance led to one of the largest inquiries in the Lanarkshire area.
The latest developments have emerged a year after police in Coatbridge received new information about the case.
It is believed that information relates to confirmed sightings of Moira on the night she disappeared.
As a result, police say they are following a definite line of inquiry.
Detective Inspector Jim McEwan, who has been studying the case files for a year, confirmed that he and Chief Inspector Ricky Gray had gone to England as a result of the information to interview a man who they believed could help them with the inquiry.
The man was being treated as a witness who may have had information to give them concerning Moira's disappearance.
Police have also tracked down one local man who gave a statement at the time of the disappearance.
Mr McEwan said that police had been unable to trace any members of the missing girl's family still living in the Coatbridge area.
He believed that her parents, James and Marjory, were now dead.
Moira had two sisters, Marjory and Jeanette, who were 14 and 7 respectively at the time of the disappearance.
One is believed to live in England, the other abroad, although police do not know where.
‘We very much need to speak to them and to anyone else who lived in the area at the time or thinks they know anything,’ Mr McEwan said.
Lost in a blizzard, Page 4
How The Scotsman reported the story when Moira went missing in February 1957
Germans win Ibrox friendly
A MISTAKE by the acting Scotland captain, Craig Levein, gave Germany victory in the friendly match at Ibrox last night.
Levein, leading a patched-up side, missed a long clearance from Guido Buchwald in the 20th minute and Karl Heinz Riedle slipped the ball past Nicky Walker.
Scotland had made an encouraging start, never giving the world champions time to settle on the ball.
Duncan Ferguson produced a spectacular strike from a chest-high cross: the Dundee United forward, with his back to goal, hit a perfect overhead scissors kick which Andreas Kopke tipped over.
Full report, Page 24
Huge Dublin protest over Warrington outrage
MORE THAN a thousand peace campaigners crowded into Trinity College, Dublin, last night to spell out one of the Irish capital's most eloquent protests against IRA terrorism.
University lecturers, politicians, trade unionists and showbusiness figures rubbed shoulders with the citizens of Dublin in an attempt to drive home a message of peace to the men of violence.
At a rally orchestrated by a housewife and inspired by last weekend's IRA bombing in Warrington, a series of speakers echoed pleas for an end to more than two decades of terror.
The meeting was organised by Susan McHugh, a mother-of-two, who was sickened by the Warrington incident in which three-year-old Johnathan Ball died while shopping for a Mother's Day present.
She successfully sought a venue for the meeting at the university and then called a phone-in Irish radio chat show to recruit support.
Mrs McHugh said last night she had been overwhelmed by the response.
Earlier, more than 2,500 people signed a book of condolence within an hour of its opening in Dublin.
Many queued for up to 30 minutes for a chance to add their signature.
Similar gestures of sympathy were being made in Cork and Galway, where newspapers also opened support funds for the bombing victims.
Meanwhile, the Prince of Wales last night paid tribute to the courage of a mother who lost a leg in the bombing.
He was visibly moved by the bravery of Bronwen Vickers, 33, a mother of two from Knutsford, Cheshire, as he sat at the foot of her bed at Warrington General Hospital.
Mrs Vickers's husband Paul, 37, and four-year-old daughter Hannah were injured in the blast.
Her two-week-old baby Harriet escaped unscathed.
But yesterday she vowed that the tragedy would not ruin their lives.
She said of the IRA: ‘I can only think they are a dumping ground for psychotics and maniacs.
I can't see how they achieve anything.
I am not bitter.
We are just going to get on with our lives.’
The prince said: ‘I was very impressed by the attitude of all the patients — particularly Mrs Vickers.
It has made my day meeting her.
‘She had this wonderful, positive attitude — she is determined to get herself back again.’
However, the parents of 12-year-old victim Tim Parry — hanging on to life by a thread in a Liverpool hospital yesterday came to terms with the fact that he is unlikely to survive.
His condition has deteriorated in the intensive care unit of Liverpool's Walton neurosurgical centre.
Tim showed no brain response after being taken off sedative drugs.
The youngster was also unable to breathe without a ventilator.
More than 50 people were injured in the terrorist attack.
As well as Tim, another 14 victims are still in hospital.
Yesterday the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, pledged every effort to bring the bombers to justice as he visited the Cheshire town.
After visiting the police incident room he spoke of the country's revulsion at the bombing and said: ‘Everything will be done to bring those responsible to justice and every effort is being put in to make sure that we do.’
Crown Office
WE have been asked to point out that the Crown Office — which is in charge of prosecutions in Scottish courts — does not run the courts, which are the responsibility of the Scottish Courts Administration.
An article in yesterday's editions of The Scotsman about papers being mislaid in the sheriff clerk's office at Hamilton should have been headed ‘Court gaffe frees animal-cruelty culprit’ and not ‘Crown gaffe…
‘. The absence of the papers meant that a man convicted of abandoning and ill-treating a prize greyhound could not be sentenced.
Two in court over policeman's death
A 25-YEAR-OLD man and a schoolboy were yesterday remanded in custody charged with murdering a policeman, Sgt Bill Forth, who died of stab wounds on Saturday night as he answered a 999 call in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.
The 34-year-old Northumbria force officer was a father of two from Sunderland.
Paul Andrew Weddle, of Southend Road, Gateshead, and the 15-year-old boy were remanded in custody for a week by the town's magistrates.
£84,000 gets Annie's gun
A RIFLE owned by the Wild West heroine, Annie Oakley, was sold at a London auction for £84,000 yesterday — five times its expected price — to a private collector from San Francisco.
Greg Martin also paid £1,380 at the Christie's sale for a 1890 halfpenny coin shot through the centre by the legendary sharpshooter with her Winchester.
The rare smoothbore Winchester rifle fired tiny particles of shot rather than a single bullet.
Outlawed loyalists gun down Sinn Fein activist
A MEMBER of the Irish Republican Army political wing, Sinn Fein, was shot dead in west Belfast yesterday, hours after a bomb attack on the home of one of the party's local councillors.
The outlawed loyalist Ulster Freedom Fighters claimed responsibility for the murder and the bomb attack on the home of Gerard McGuigan.
Peter Gallagher, a 44-year-old Catholic, was killed as he arrived for work at the West Link Enterprise Centre off the Grosvenor Road.
Police said a lone gunman hiding in undergrowth fired through the security fencing and hit Mr Gallagher in the back several times as he got out of a builder's van.
The father-of-six and grandfather of one was employed by a construction company carrying out renovation work on houses for the Northern Ireland Housing Executive.
Local people said he had been working on the site for two years and was very popular with them.
The killer made off through rush-hour traffic on a bicycle, later found abandoned a short distance down the road.
A gun was found lying in bushes at the spot the killer fired from.
Mr Gallagher came from Toombridge, Co Antrim, and worked in the area for Sinn Fein.
A party colleague, the South Antrim representative Henry Cuchinan, said: ‘Peter Gallagher had been a valued member of Sinn Fein in Toome for many years.
He was a decent hard-working man who will be sorely missed.
‘His death is part of the ongoing campaign against members of Sinn Fein which also saw last night's murder attempt on the family of Councillor Gerard McGuigan.’
Mr McGuigan and his family escaped injury early yesterday when a bomb was thrown through the bedroom window of his house in the Ardoyne area.
His wife, Rosemary, was sleeping in the room when the bomb exploded, blowing a hole in the floor, but she and three children in the room next door were unhurt.
All were treated in hospital for shock.
Mr McGuigan was watching television downstairs when the bomb went off.
It was the second attack on his Elmfield Street house.
Last year, the UFF mounted a gun and grenade attack on it.
A fellow Sinn Fein councillor, Joe Austin, said the attack might not have happened had Mr McGuigan been allowed a licence for a gun to use for his personal protection.
He said Mr McGuigan had applied for a weapon and been turned down by the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
The subject was currently a matter of appeal.
Tea and coffee seen as health hazards too
TEA, coffee, sugar and alcohol are ‘social poisons’ which should pose as many health fears as cigarettes, it was claimed yesterday.
The warning by a health advice group follows a unique experiment in which a doctor switched to a diet including the average adult consumption of the country's favourite drinks, plus cigarettes.
The results, published in a book, The Vitality Diet, show the dramatic effects of a change in diet.
Dr Alan Stewart describes how in six weeks he suffered from headaches, nausea, loss of libido, and physical and mental fatigue as his levels of vitamin B and zinc fell quickly.
His wife Maryon, co-author of the book, said: ‘Alan is usually so energetic and light-hearted.
The experiment resulted in some noticeable changes.
He felt tired, lacked concentration and was short-tempered.
‘Fortunately, after eight weeks of being back on his normal diet, his nutritional levels returned to normal and…
I got my husband back.’
Mrs Stewart is senior adviser to the Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, based in Lewes, East Sussex, which published the book.
Porn channel allowed to challenge decoder ban
THE owners of the pornography satellite channel, Red Hot Television, yesterday won the right to a High Court review of the Government's plan to outlaw the sale of decoders for the films being beamed into Britain from Denmark.
A judge said it would be a ‘bit bleak’ if the authorities could not stop pornography coming into the country but agreed there was an arguable case for judicial review.
Red Hot's parent company, Continental Television, is challenging the intention of the Heritage Secretary, Peter Brooke, to outlaw the sale of decoders, though anyone who already has one can carry on viewing.
Mr Justice Macpherson of Cluny ordered that case should be heard urgently.
David Pannick, QC, for Continental, told the judge the case raised a matter of general public importance concerning the powers of a Secretary of State to restrict reception of satellite broadcasting programmes that had been transmitted from other European Community member states.
Mr Pannick said he would argue at the full hearing that Mr Brooke had no power under EC law to do that.
The Government was claiming it was entitled to intervene under an EC directive which allowed it to impose restrictions on ‘retransmissions’ of broadcasts from other member states.
But, said Mr Pannick, there was no retransmission of Red Hot Television programmes.
Mr Pannick said those who had drafted the relevant EC directive in 1989 had ‘in their wisdom thought there should be freedom of reception throughout the EC and one should rely upon the state from which the signal emanates to exercise appropriate controls’.
He told the judge he might think that was ‘a very sorry state of affairs’ but that was Community law.
Agreeing the case was arguable, the judge told Mr Pannick he would rely on him very carefully to consider whatever documents came from the Government, not represented in court yesterday, when considering whether to continue pursuing the challenge.
He suggested something might also result from talks between the Government and the European Commission concerning the status of satellite broadcasts.
Later, Continental's executive consultant, Mark Garner, said he was delighted the challenge would go ahead and with the big boost to the sales of decoders for Red Hot Television from publicity given to the controversy.
Parents describe teenagers' attempts to save each other THE BRAVERY of the four teenagers who died in the Dorset canoe tragedy emerged last night as the parents of one victim spoke of how they all tried to help each other survive.
‘The strong helped the weak, then the weak helped the strong,’ said Noel and Sylvia Dunne.
Their son Simon, 16, was one of four sixth-formers to die in the school outing tragedy at Lyme Regis on Monday.
They said: ‘They were so brave.
It would have been easy for any of them to say: ‘I'm swimming for shore, it's every man for himself’ sort of thing, but they didn't.
They thought of each other.’
Mrs Dunne said: ‘It was quite choppy.
The canoes were taking in water and sinking.
When that happened, the others, those whose canoes sank, tried to hold on to the canoes that were still afloat.
But the extra weight of the kiddies holding on to them, they sank as well.
They ended up with one canoe.’
The parents were speaking as five survivors of the tragedy left hospital amid emotional scenes, and an inquest was opened into the deaths of the teenage victims.
As two of the young survivors, Joanna Willis, 16, and Marie Rendle, 17, left Weymouth and District Hospital they exchanged hugs with the staff nurse who had cared for them.
Three other survivors, the teacher Norman Pointer, 49, and instructors Karen Gardner, 21, and Anthony Mann, 23, were allowed home later.
Meanwhile, in Blandford, the inquest opened on the four sixth-formers from Southway School, Plymouth, who died in the tragedy as the 11-strong party paddled from Lyme Regis to Charmouth.
The West Dorset coroner, Michael Johnston, was told that one of the victims, Rachel Walker, would have been 17 today.
The others who died were Dean Sayer, 17, of Silver Birch Close, Woolwell, and Claire Langley, 16, of Clittisford Road, Southway, all Plymouth.
Before adjourning the inquest to a future date, Mr Johnston said: ‘I am very upset that four children should have died.
Every parent knows how desperate it must be to lose their child.’
The two other survivors of the tragedy who remain in hospital, Samantha Stansby, 17, and Emma Hartley, 16, are said to be in satisfactory condition.
At Southway School yesterday the mountain of flowers outside the gates continued to grow and a number of pupils shed tears as they read the many messages of sympathy.
Dorset Police said its investigation into the tragedy would look at whether there were any grounds for criminal proceedings.
A survivor, Marie Rendle, is helped from hospital yesterday.
Two others are still detained.
Boys arrested after school rape claim
AN URGENT review of safety procedures has been started at a London comprehensive school after two teenage pupils were questioned by detectives investigating the alleged rape of a 27-year-old teacher.
An emergency meeting of governors has also been called at the school in Southwark, south-east London, after the arrest of the boys, aged 13 and 14, on Friday.
The two, who cannot be named for legal reasons, were released on bail pending further inquiries, Scotland Yard said.
It is believed the woman teacher was attacked after keeping the two boys in detention.
MPs want new press rules and law on privacy
By David Wallen
SWEEPING changes to the regulation of the press, including legal aid for libel actions, compensation for press intrusion and a powerful new law on privacy, were proposed yesterday by a cross-party committee of MPs.
The National Heritage Select Committee believes everyone is entitled to ‘an area of privacy’ and that the press is not keeping its promise to bring its own house in order though the Press Complaints Commission.
The committee says its measures are aimed at protecting the privacy of ordinary people who come into contact with the press as well as being targeted at recent revelations in tapes involving the Royal Family.
The MPs oppose a statutory complaints tribunal — as proposed by the Government-sponsored Calcutt report — unless future events made it ‘utterly unavoidable’.
But they say legal aid should be available for proceedings under their Protection of Privacy Bill as well in libel cases.
With 43 recommendations, the report, which took four months to prepare, admits that ‘a free society requires the freedom to say or print things that are inconvenient to those in authority, whether they be members of the Royal Family, ministers, MPs, local councillors or public officials’.
But the committee chairman, the Labour MP, Gerald Kaufman, said: ‘Either changes are made, I hope along the lines that we recommend, or I very much fear statutory regulation to which I am very, very much opposed.’
The Government is preparing its own white paper on regulation of the press for this summer and the MPs hope many of the measures they propose will be included.
Their proposed bill would make it a criminal offence to plant surveillance devices on private property to gain personal information, and an offence to take long-distance photos of people on private property — such as those of the Duchess of York topless with her ‘financial adviser’, John Bryan, last year.
Entering personal property to gain information would be an offence.
It would also be an offence to publish, buy or even hold material such as the tapes concerning the Princess of Wales and Prince Charles.
The defences against those crimes would be that they were in the public interest.
The Press Complaints Commission should be turned into the Press Commission to reflect its wider role, say the MPs.
It should have powers to order compensation for the public and add an office in Scotland to look after Scottish complaints.
Journalists should be compelled to produce proof of identity and the Code of Practice should be written into contracts of employment and agreements with freelances.
Overseeing all this should be a press ombudsman, monitoring potential failures by the Press Commission and in the ways newspapers behave, with his own powers to levy a fine.
Magnus Linklater, editor of The Scotsman, said: ‘The recommendations are expensive, bureaucratic and in my view over-complicated.
It would certainly create more work for the lawyers but would not add a great deal of protection for the ordinary person.
The Press Complaints Commission as it presently exists could easily do the work required without having to introduce a completely new layer of restrictive legislation.’
Andrew Neil, editor of the Sunday Times, described it as a ‘busybody's charter’ and added that while the MPs said they were trying to protect small people they were really protecting themselves.
The Sun's assistant editor, Chris Davis, said the recommendations reeked of hypocrisy with MPs trying to look after themselves.
‘We will continue to publish what we believe our readers have the right to know.
If they don't like it — hard luck.’
Pre-birth injuries case given go-ahead
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
THE parents of a baby boy who died from injuries suffered before birth won a historic legal victory yesterday when three judges allowed their damages action against a health board to go ahead.
It was the first appeal court ruling that relatives had a right to claim compensation over damage to a foetus which later caused the child's death.
There had been conflicting opinions by individual judges on whether injuries must be sustained by a living person before next-of-kin could sue.
The mother in yesterday's case, Audrey Hamilton, said she was pleased at the outcome but knew that it may take the country's highest civil court, the House of Lords, to resolve the issue finally.
In 1976, she gave birth to a son, David, at Craigtoun Maternity Hospital, St Andrews, but he survived for only three days.
Mrs Hamilton, 35, of Barnett Crescent, Kirkcaldy, and the baby's father, John Watson, of Simpson Court, Crail, each sued Fife Health Board for £20,000 alleging negligence by doctors.
They maintained that David's death had resulted from damage done by forceps before his birth.
Under the 1976 Damages (Scotland) Act, relatives have a claim when a person dies from injuries caused by someone else's negligence.
Before any evidence was heard at the Court of Session on the issue of negligence, Lord Prosser dismissed the action after holding that ‘person’ did not cover an unborn child.
He was satisfied that what parliament had in mind when passing the act was that there must be a person in life when the injuries were sustained.
In a later case, Lord Morton took the opposite view and awarded £17,000 to a couple whose baby died from brain damage suffered before birth.
Mrs Hamilton and Mr Watson challenged Lord Prosser's ruling and their appeal was upheld by Lords McCluskey, Caplan and Wylie.
The 1976 act spoke of a person who died from ‘personal injuries sustained by him’ and Lord McCluskey said: ‘In my view it is clear that the whole phrase is perfectly apt to include injuries inflicted to the person of a child immediately before his birth and continuing to have their effects on him by impairing his physical condition at and after the time of his birth.
‘I am not persuaded that the use of the personal pronoun ‘him’ in the phrase ‘sustained by him’was intended by parliament to have the bizarre result that there was no-one to injure or to sustain injuries in the few days before the child was born.
‘It is perfectly common in ordinary speech to refer to the child in utero as he, she, him or her and I do not feel driven by the use of such ordinary parlance in this section (of the act) to the view which Lord Prosser accepted, that parliament envisaged a person sustaining injuries meaning a person enjoying legal personality.’
(It was accepted by both sides in the case that legal personality started at birth and not before).
Lord McCluskey added: ‘It was this child who sustained injuries to his person and who died in consequence of personal injuries sustained by him.’
Lord Caplan said: ‘A parent who loses a young infant will experience the same sense of loss irrespective of whether the injuries causing death originated shortly before birth or shortly after birth.’
‘It is therefore difficult to know what policy objective could have prompted the legislature to confine entitlement to claim compensation to post-natal injuries in a case where the fatality has been caused by the negligence of a third party.’
Lord Wylie agreed that the case should be allowed to proceed and the next stage, if there is no appeal to the House of Lords, is likely to be a legal debate on whether it is time-barred.
Mrs Hamilton said that she did not discover that she might have a legal action until 1988.
She went on: ‘I am very pleased at what has happened today but there is always the fear that they will want to take it further.
‘It is now about five years since this all started and it has been quite stressful but I feel pretty strongly about what happened to me and my child and I am determined to see it through.
It is something you never forget.
‘And as it is the first case to come up in Scotland, it could help other people in the same circumstances.’
A spokesman for Fife Health Board said it would have to take legal advice before any question of an appeal was considered.
Audrey Hamilton: ‘It is something you never forget’
Prison for doorway sex attack on couple
A MAN who forced a teenage couple to strip naked and then  sexually assaulted them in a bank doorway was jailed for seven years yesterday, writes John Robertson.
A judge told James Storrie, 23, of Ardmaleish Road, Castlemilk, Glasgow, that it had been a quite extraordinary and vicious episode.
Storrie admitted that in the early hours of 17 May last year he robbed the two 19-year-olds of £7 and a watch after seizing the man in Wilson Street, Glasgow, and threatening to stab him.
He forced the couple into the vestibule of a bank in Brunswick Street where he made them take off their clothing.
He attempted to rape the woman and forced the man to commit sex acts with him.
Lord Coulsfield was told that the victims believed that the 6ft 2in, 15st Storrie had a knife and were too frightened to resist him.
Their ordeal ended when a bank security guard spotted something suspicious on a television monitor and raised the alarm.
Storrie fled but was later traced to Blackpool.
The defence counsel, William Totten, told the High Court in Edinburgh that Storrie had been under the influence of drink and drugs at the time of the offences.
He was now genuinely remorseful.
Jailing Storrie for seven years, Lord Coulsfield said: ‘The robbery by itself would have been a serious matter but what followed in the shape of the sexual assault was a quite extraordinary and vicious episode.’
Scientists record a failure
By David Hartley
SCIENTISTS yesterday played the sound of female whales to the six male sperm whales trapped in Scapa Flow, Orkney.
But they were forced by bad weather to abandon their efforts to entice the marooned males out into the safety of deep water.
It is now more than four weeks since the whales were sighted in the enclosed natural harbour.
Biologists believe that they are unable to find a way out on their own and that the ‘acoustic option’ is the safest way to lure them to safety.
Yesterday a team aboard a high-powered pilot launch was guided close to the school of whales by a spotter plane.
The whales showed themselves briefly.
The head of one appeared close to the vessel as others shot jets of water into the air through their blow holes.
A hydrophone — an under-water microphone — was then lowered over the side as the launch pitched violently in a heavy swell and winds gusting to more than 40 miles per hour.
‘We're managing to pick up the sound of one of the males,’ said a marine biologist, Vassili Papastavrou, as he listened intently through a set of headphones.
‘It's making a clicking sound — the sort of sound you make when you click your thumb and forefinger together — but the others are remaining silent.’
That was the moment to lower an experimental Ministry of Defence underwater loudspeaker into the water.
Whale music — a recording of a group of socialising females made off the Azores — was then broadcast to the males.
‘We are hoping to hear a change in the clicks made by the males,’ said a research student, John Goold, who made the recording.
‘What we are looking for is some sign that the whales are responding.
‘If we can get them interested in the source of the sound there is then the chance that we gently lead them out into deeper water.
But all we can hear after turning off the recording is the sound of the same male making the same clicking sound.’
As weather conditions deteriorated the scientists suffered a setback when the spotter plane had to be grounded.
‘We need air cover both to help us locate the whales and to watch for changes in their behaviour,’ said Mr Goold.
‘They may be large — around 40 feet long — but like icebergs 90 per cent is under the water and that is making them incredibly difficult to see among the waves.’
After several attempts to play the sound of the females the rescue effort was abandoned.
Scientists will now decide whether to try again if the weather improves or attempt to shepherd the whales out of Scapa Flow using a flotilla of ships.
Opt-out vote first for Dunblane primary school
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
PARENTS at a small church primary in Dunblane yesterday voted to become the first in Scotland to take over the running of their school.
By a 54-16 margin, St Mary's Episcopal primary is the only school to have backed the Government's opt-out schools policy while not facing closure.
Parents argued they want to keep their school at its 60-pupil size, providing ‘old-fashioned education with the three Rs and prayers in the morning’.
Two previous primary school ballots, in Edinburgh and Clydebank, last year favoured self-governing status but were vetoed by Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, as both were facing closure by their education authorities.
He opted to support the councils in reducing surplus places.
Parents at the 150-year-old Dunblane school took the action because Central Region planned to reduce pupil numbers from 60 to 36, with a cut from three teachers to two.
They have been fighting to keep their current size for more than three years, claiming that they wish to keep the school open to all-comers, rather than limit it to the number of children in Episcopalian families.
As space is limited, parents had offered to raise up to £10,000 to provide an extra classroom in the playground.
When the region turned them down last summer, they began the opt-out move.
However, Central this month brought out plans for a new primary building for the town, replacing St Mary's and the 640-pupil Dunblane primary school.
Parents have criticised the move as a tactic to wreck their self-governing move.
Alan Bateman, the school board chairman, a medical equipment engineer who has two children at the school, said: ‘We have no fears about running the school.
Teachers will run day-to-day management, and the school will just run itself.’
Godfrey McIvor, Central Region's education convener, expressed disappointment at the parent ballot, and said a strong case would be made to the Scottish Secretary to keep St Mary's in local authority control.
‘We believe opting out is not in the best long-term interests of either the children at the school now, or for the future of primary education in Dunblane,’ he added.
There are differing opinions on opting out in the Scottish Episcopal church, with backing from the local parish and the education board, but a possible objection from Michael Hare-Duke, bishop of Dunblane, Dunkeld and St Andrews.
The next stage of the process is for the school board to present a plan for running St Mary's, with a two-month period for objections to be raised.
In Glasgow, another ballot of parents, at St Gerard's Roman Catholic secondary, returned a 97 per cent‘no’ vote on opting out.
It was part of a strategy to thwart Strathclyde Region's closure plans for three RC schools in the city's south side.
Further opt-out votes for other schools may soon be brought forward to delay the plans more.
On-spot fines for Scots drivers given go-ahead
By Gary Duncan
DRIVERS in Scotland caught committing a range of traffic offences are to be given the option of agreeing an on-the-spot penalty with police.
In a move designed to save on court time, the Scottish Office yesterday confirmed that from 1 April motorists will be offered the chance to accept a fixed penalty notice requiring the payment of a fine within 28 days.
For more serious offences, drivers' licences may also endorsed with penalty points.
Drivers who refuse to accept the on-the-spot penal-ties will, as at present, face court action following a report by the police to the procurator-fiscal.
It is expected that the scheme, under the 1991 Road Traffic Act, will cover offences such as speeding and vehicle defects.
More serious matters will continue to be dealt with in court.
The move was supported last night by the Automobile Association which said the system already worked well in England and Wales.
TURRIFF Long-serving councillor dies
HARRY Sim, one of the longest-serving councillors in Grampian, died yesterday in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, aged 69.
Mr Sim, of Kingsmill, Turriff, was a councillor in the North-east for 38 years, first with Aberdeen County Council and then with Grampian Regional Council.
He was deputy convener of the region for 12 years and leader of the Conservative Group for ten years.
Popular even among his political opponents, Mr Sim served on a wide range of public bodies, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Valuation Advisory Committee and the North east River Purification Board.
Mr Sim was chairman of the North east Water Board from 1970-75 and played a crucial role in the authority's  response to the needs of the developing North Sea oil industry.
He was an Honorary Vice President and Past President of Banff and Buchan Conservative Association and an active member of the Scottish National Farmers Union.
Councillor Bob Middleton, the Labour convener of Grampian Region, paid tribute to Mr Sim's tremendous contribution to local government over the past four decades.
He said: ‘He was a kenspeckle figure who was regarded with special affection and respect by all sides on the regional council.
He had the happy knack for a politician of making friends, not enemies of those who disagreed with him.
He will be missed by a wide circle of friends in public life.’
LANARKSHIRE Man is hurt in explosion
A 64-YEAR-OLD man was injured yesterday in an explosion at his home at Skylaw Terrace, Forth, Lanarkshire.
Henry Ferris was treated at Law Hospital for face and body injuries.
The house was damaged in the explosion, which is believed to have involved bottled gas apparatus.
KILSYTH Car injures playing boy
A TWO-YEAR-OLD boy was seriously ill last night after being hit by a car while he was playing in Dumbreck Terrace, Queenzieburn, by Kilsyth.
Brian Craig, of Rennie Road, Kilsyth, was taken to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children in Glasgow suffering from head and arm injuries.
Last night he was in intensive care.
Head of home accused of hurting elderly
THE operator of a residential home for the elderly at Moffat, in Dumfriesshire, has been accused in court of assaulting and causing unnecessary pain and suffering to two women, one now aged 93 and the other 84.
Ann Ellis, 40, of Warrender House, Haywood Road, Moffat, pled not guilty to the charges at Dumfries Sheriff Court and trial was fixed for June.
The charges allege that on various occasions over the 14 months to August last year at the home, she assaulted one woman by throwing her from her bed on to a chair then a commode, putting her in a bath against her will and pulling her along a corridor, and of assaulting the second woman in a similar manner by throwing her from her bed on to a wheelchair and then a commode, dragging her across a room and tying her to a chair.
In each charge there was an alternative alleging that she cruelly and unnaturally treated the two women in her care, to which she also pleaded not guilty.
Most advanced artificial arm in world made in Scotland
By Graeme Stewart
THE WORLD'S most advanced prosthetic arm made its public debut in Glasgow yesterday at the Scottish Naidex'93 exhibition.
The electric arm has a powered shoulder and is covered with a lifelike silicon skin.
It is the closest thing to a real arm available in medical science.
The arm was developed at the bio-engineering centre at the Princess Margaret Rose Orthopaedic Centre in Edinburgh, which has a world-wide reputation for the quality of specialist clinical care it provides for people with severe or unusual physical disabilities.
Several devices are now being produced  commercially at the centre, including a novel mobility aid for children with neuromuscular conditions such as  cerebral palsy, a low-pressure air bed to stop patients developing pressure sores, a realistic silicon covering for artificial hands and a special frame to assist plaster room staff with the application of children's leg and body casts.
David Gow, assistant director at the centre, said the prosthetic arm worked by a complex mechanism operated by shoulder movements.
‘Naturally we at the centre are very pleased at having developed the most advanced bionic arm in the world.
Experiments show that the user can master the use of the arm very quickly — in fact within 15 minutes.
It is now our aim to make the bionic arm available on the National Health Service,’ he said.
On show: the prosthetic limb developed at the Princess Margaret Rose Orthopaedic Centre, Edinburgh
Move to end clubs' bias against women
A CAMPAIGN to force sports clubs to end sex discrimination is being instigated by Strathclyde Regional Council, writes Alan Forbes.
The move was announced yesterday by John Mullin, chairman of the finance committee, after publicity about golf and bowling clubs in the region which refused to make women full members.
The finance committee has discretion to give clubs rates relief, but this is based only on income at the bar and other sources.
Mr Mullin said that any attempt to persuade clubs to end discrimination by blocking their entitlement to rates relief was illegal.
He added: ‘It is scandalous that some sports clubs in the region are happy to have women make the tea and coffee and provide home baking, yet they won't allow them to be full members.’
These are clubs which get money out of the public purse in the form of rates relief.’
Strathclyde's finance committee supported his suggestion that the Scottish Office should be asked to change the law so that sex discrimination be outlawed.
The regional council will also call on the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Equal Opportunities Commission to support its campaign.
The problem of sex discrimination in sports clubs was recently highlighted by a Strathclyde bowler, Christine Latta, who campaigned successfully against ‘two-tier’ membership at her club.
Chance meeting led to hijack confession, court is told
A YOUNG policeman helped to crack a lorry hijacking, the Crown claimed yesterday, because he had been in school with the man accused of abducting the driver and stealing spirits, food and tobacco.
The High Court in Inverness heard that PC John Smith's curiosity had got the better of him when he learned that a Murdo MacIver from his home town of Stornoway was in custody.
He had gone down to the cells to have a look and discovered that the prisoner was his former schoolmate.
It was alleged that MacIver, who gave his address as c/o 471 Maryhill Road, Glasgow, had told PC Smith he wanted to give a full statement.
Lord MacLean heard that MacIver had earlier refused to ‘grass’ on his accomplices in the alleged robbery.
MacIver denies assaulting and abducting a 46-year-old Ross-shire man, Donald Beaton, while acting with others, by hooding, binding and threatening to shoot him and robbing him of his load of spirits, tobacco and foodstuffs.
In a taped voluntary statement said to have been given by MacIver, a lorry driver, he told Inspector Angus Chisholm he had been approached two weeks earlier in a pub by a Glasgow taxi driver he knew called Joe Hughes.
Hughes had asked him if he would help him steal a lorry.
MacIver had said he knew of a double-deck trailer which went every week from Cumbernauld to Stornoway, via Inverness, carrying £300,000-£600,000 worth of spirits, groceries and tobacco.
A week later, the trial was told, MacIver had hired a car and followed the lorry to Inverness to prepare for the robbery.
Then he, Joe Hughes and a man called ‘Peter’ had driven a white Vauxhall estate to Inverness.
MacIver had told police: ‘I just made sure no-one was about while the other two men went into the cab, got the driver and drove off.’
He denied any guns had been involved in the raid although Mr Beaton had said earlier in the trial he had been told he would be shot if he tried anything stupid.
He said he was to get £30,000 to £40,000 for his role, and added: ‘I went down the A82 via Fort William before I was stopped by police at Doune.’
He said he was to have met another man at a school on Garscube Road in Maryhill and go on to an unknown warehouse.
Earlier, the trial had been told that police had set up road blocks north of Perth as part of another inquiry when the white Cavalier containing what police described as ‘seasoned criminals’ had burst through.
It was their panic which had resulted in the raid being bungled.
Mr Beaton had been dumped by a road-side and picked up by police who had been alerted to the hijack and had eventually stopped MacIver in the lorry at Doune.
The trial continues.
Study will show impact of VAT on power users
By Eric McKenzie
THE Government's decision to levy value-added tax on domestic fuel and power has prompted ScottishPower to carry out a review over the next 12 months to determine the possible impact the tax will have on its 1.6 million domestic customers.
Hammie Smillie, head of ScottishPower's customer service, said in Glasgow yesterday that the introduction of VAT had come as a surprise.
Next year an 8 per cent tax would be levied on bills and the following year that would more than double to 17.5 per cent.
‘Eight per cent is bad enough but then it goes up to 17.5 per cent so therefore we have got to prepare ourselves for the impact of that and try to minimise the impact on our customers.’
He said 8 per cent was bad enough, but with it rising ScottishPower had to try to minimise the impact of that on its customers
Mr Smillie was speaking at the official promotion of ScottishPower's ‘Carefree Register’ for elderly and disabled customers who require special treatment by the company, from meter readings and payment of bills to special reliance on power for such things as dialysis machines.
Fatalities caused by hypothermia will lead to the Government's imposition of VAT on fuel being seen as a death tax, the Confederation of Health Service Employees claimed yesterday.
After carrying out a survey of the number of people who have died of it over the past three years, COHSE's Scottish regional officer, Jim Devine, said the union believed many low-paid workers and pensioners were forced to make a choice between eating and heating.
Task force set up to tackle Glasgow's health gap
THE latest statistics show that a man retiring in Edinburgh is likely to live four years longer than his counterpart in Glasgow, it was stated yesterday.
George Forwell, Glasgow's director of public health, said that the official gap between the city's health and that of the rest of Scotland is growing worse.
He was being questioned about Glasgow's declining health standards by worried councillors.
Members of the council agreed to set up a joint initiative involving all public agencies.
It is hoped that the body will target particular projects that can be begun in the field of public health.
Dr Forwell's annual report, for 1991-92, went before Greater Glasgow Health Board last December and its contents then created city-wide controversy.
The document includes tables of statistics which are used by the medical profession as yardsticks in the area's public health progression.
Dr Forwell told yesterday's meeting that the statistical evidence was ample and was not disputed.
It provided year-by-year evidence of prevailing trends in public health.
It was not so much a case of Glasgow getting worse as one of the rest of the country improving faster.
Infant mortality figures, he pointed out, showed that death rates had halved in the city in the last 20 years.
That was commendable, he said, but rates elsewhere had improved more.
Likewise, said Dr Forwell, a study of life expectancy tables showed that men in Edinburgh after retirement could expect to live on average four years longer than their counterparts in the city of Glasgow.
Dr Forwell blamed social problems such as poverty, deprivation, bad housing, unemployment and the local lifestyle.
They were reasons ‘which are not new — they've always been recognised’.
Phil Hanlon, director of health promotion with Greater Glasgow Health Board, said the medical profession was alarmed at the statistical trend.
‘We are not attempting to act as party politicians,’ Dr Hanlon, stressed.
‘But we are prepared to put our heads above the parapet.
The Government's current policies are leading to these problems.’
He said that the deteriorating trend became apparent throughout the 1980s and coincided with the Government's economic policies and their effect on the city.
As each year passed, the gap became wider between people living within the city boundary and families living in the relatively affluent suburbs of Greater Glasgow.
Date set for testing Clyde trawler safety device
By Eric McKenzie
THE first practical testing of a sonar device to help submarines detect the presence of fishing boats in the Firth of Clyde is expected to be carried out over the weekend of 3 April.
The acoustic device, a ‘pinger’, is attached to fishing nets and emits a signal which can be picked up by a submarine.
A two-year trial of the effectiveness of the device was announced last summer by the Ministry of Defence.
The trial follows the Antares tragedy in which four fishermen drowned after a submarine snagged its nets in the Firth of Clyde.
Next month's test will involve a trawler, out of Girvan, and a single submarine.
If successful, it is intended that the test will be extended to involve about 100 members of the Clyde Fishermen's Association.
Patrick Stewart, secretary of the CFA, however, said yesterday that it should be made clear that the pinger was not the answer to the problem of submarines operating too close to fishing vessels.
While it might help submarines to detect fishing activity, it should not be seen to take the onus of avoiding fishing vessels away from submarines.
Mr Stewart added: ‘If there is a snagging and should the fishing vessel not have a pinger attached to its gear, that should not be taken some way as meaning that the fishing vessel having contributed to her own misfortune.
‘But if it helps the Royal Navy achieving their duty of keeping their submarines clear of fishing vessels then that's fine.
The question of whether it will be effective or not will not be determined until the trials are finished.’
Bedsit group gets council safety warning
RESIDENTS barricaded in a condemned block of bedsits have been told that they stay there at their own risk.
Last Friday, a sheriff at Kilmarnock granted Cunninghame District Council an eviction notice on the nine men and a woman living at a house in Gladstone Road, Saltcoats, Ayrshire.
They have defied bailiffs by blocking the entrance to the building.
Bernard Devine, the council's chief executive, said: ‘If they continue to occupy the house, they must accept liability for their own safety.’
One resident, John Morell, 30, said: ‘We were told by the council that we had to be out within 48 hours.
But nobody had any other place to live.’
Council inspectors said that the building was a fire hazard.
GLEN COE Climber plunges 300ft to his death
A CLIMBER was killed yesterday when he and a companion plummeted 300ft down an icy gully at Coire nan Lochan in Glen Coe.
When the accident happened at around 4:15 yesterday afternoon, it is thought the two men had already passed the most arduous section of what is regarded as only an averagely difficult ice climb route.
The name of the dead man is being withheld until relatives have been informed.
The second man was unhurt.
Country-wide pressure group for patients set up
SCOTLAND has its first country-wide patients' association.
The brainchild of the Central Scotland Patients' Association, the group is recruiting members and hopes to be operational by the end of the year at the latest.
Margaret Davidson, chief executive of the Stirlingshire-based Central Scotland Association, claimed widespread dissatisfaction with health boards and health councils was behind the move.
‘Health is such a serious issue and people want to have their say, but so many feel the appointed health councils and health boards are able to ignore them and their wishes.
‘The new association will provide, for the first time, the opportunity for people from throughout Scotland to find out what is going on elsewhere,’ she said.
‘It will provide Scottish patients with a very powerful voice on health — a national voice.’
The hope is to set up groups across Scotland to discuss health issues on a local level and it is for them that the recruitment drive has been started.
The local groups will be able to send delegates to the association's central committee to pass on details of complaints, campaigns and victories.
In turn, they would receive information from elsewhere in Scotland and be able to call upon the association's greater muscle to aid their local fights.
The idea was born from the success of the Central Scotland Association, which generated increasing interest as it took on health boards over matters as diverse as single-sex lavatories in an Edinburgh hospital to provision of extra female doctors in the village of Auchterarder.
Mrs Davidson, of Stirling, said that so many people had contacted them that the association's annual meeting had decided the only way to raise its profile and make a difference for patients was to set up a body covering Scotland as a whole.
‘The new association will be a monitoring body and a pressure group for patients throughout Scotland.’
£5.5m Hearts stadium plan agreed
PLANS by Hearts to redevelop their Tynecastle Park ground were given the go-ahead yesterday, writes Audrey Gillan.
The £5.5 million development plan was passed unanimously at a meeting of Edinburgh District planning committee.
The football club will now remove existing terracing and erect three grandstands to meet the Taylor Report demand that grounds be all-seated by August 1994.
Hearts, who have been at Tynecastle since 1886, decided to redevelop their existing stadium after plans to move to a greenfield site at Hermiston or Millerhill had been rejected by Lothian Regional Council.
The two new stands at the Gorgie Road and school end of the ground will each seat 3,550 fans and the stand at the Wheatfield side of the ground 5,900.
The redevelopment means a reduction in the capacity of the new all-seated, all-covered ground from 25,177 to 18,500.
Work is to start at the end of the present season with the Wheatfield stand in place by August 1993 and the whole project completed for Spring 1994.
The pitch will be moved 15 feet closer to the existing stand and the dimensions increased so that the ground will meet all the requirements needed to stage international fixtures.
New 150,00 watt floodlights will be installed in concrete wing walls at the four corners of the stadium.
Hearts' director Jim Clydesdale, who was at yesterday's meeting, declared himself ‘delighted with the result and very pleased that the club can now proceed.’
There were, he said, ‘a variety of packages to be put together’.
Forth ferries change to different route
By Allan McLean
A FERRY company which revived the traditional Burntisland-Granton crossing of the Firth of Forth two years ago is to operate on a different route because passenger carryings were lower than expected.
Forth Ferries will provide weekend sailings between North Queensferry and Granton, Edinburgh, instead of from Burntisland when services resume on 10 April after the winter break.
Depending on passenger numbers, a daily timetable will operate from 1 July to mid-September with the catamaran Spirit of Fife, which can carry more than 200 passengers.
The company said the position would be kept under review, and if there was enough support it would run from Burntisland.’
He blamed a poor take-up on the Burntisland crossing, which had been aimed at commuters as well as tourists and day trippers.
‘If we could run a commuter service we would be delighted but the number of people using the boat — we need 130 morning and night — has been insufficient,’ he said.
Row grows over BMW perk in officials' pay
A ROW over the allocation of BMW cars to senior staff with Lothian Health Board escalated last night when Labour MPs tabled a motion in the House of Commons condemning the action.
Alistair Darling, Labour MP for Edinburgh Central, singled out for particular criticism the general manager of the Royal Hospital for Sick Children, who was provided with a BMW saloon.
The motion called attention to the fact that the same hospital had to raise £10 million from public appeal in order to build a vitally-needed extension.
The motion said: ‘The same hospital was begging for money for baby heaters.
Baby heaters come before BMWs.’
A spokesman for Lothian Health Board said last night that an appropriate salary package was needed to attract the right calibre of staff.
He said: ‘The cars referred to are part of that package.
At no time has the hospital begged for money for baby heaters.
The unit general manager responsible for that hospital has made it clear more than once that if additional baby heaters were needed they would be purchased out of the hospital budget.’
However, Mr Darling maintained that the hospital had written to a number of public bodies — including Lothian Regional Council — asking them to advertise in a children's book, the proceeds of which would go to the purchase of baby heaters.
‘The public will find it incomprehensible to include a BMW in a general manager's pay package,’ Mr Darling added.
‘Particularly since the public rose to the occasion when the Sick Kids appealed for £10 million.’
Insider dealing trial told of share selling after warning
By Severin Carrell
A DIRECTOR of a leading Edinburgh stockbroker told an insider dealing trial yesterday how his firm had acted on allegedly confidential information about a Scottish company by selling 1.8 million of its shares.
The High Court in Edinburgh heard that an investment analyst with the stockbrokers Bell Lawrie White had received information from the chairman of the waste management and construction group, Shanks&McEwan, that profits were going to be lower than City expectations.
The firm over three days of trading advised clients to sell shares in the company.
The disclosure came at the trial for insider trading of Thorold Mackie, an investment analyst and director of Bell Lawrie White.
Mackie, of Craigcrook Road, Edinburgh, denies a charge under the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 that between 6 and 12 September 1991, he counselled and procured two institutional salesman in his firm to deal in Shanks&McEwan shares.
Their dealings for clients at premium prices realised £1,378,892 more than would have been obtained if the shares had been sold later.
Yesterday, Frank Malcolm, 49, a director and stockbroker at Bell Lawrie White, confirmed that Mackie had immediately told his colleagues after a meeting with Peter Runciman, former executive chairman of Shanks&McEwan, that he had been warned that company profits would be lower than first thought.
Mr Malcolm, questioned by the advocate depute Ann Paton, QC, for the prosecution, said his firm then had sold 1.8 million shares on Monday 9 and Tuesday 10 September.
After Mr Runciman had complained that it appeared the firm was acting on privileged information, Mr Malcolm had instructed his salesmen not to initiate any further sales.
Cross-examined by Donald Macfadyen, QC, for the defence, Mr Malcolm read from a note he had written for the firm's compliance director which said Mackie had asserted he had made no mention of an impending profits warning.
Gilmour Thom, 51, an institutional salesman with Bell Lawrie White, told the court that after Mackie had briefed him on his meeting with Mr Runciman, he had sold about 1.5 million Shanks & McEwan shares at prices ranging from 305p to 318p.
After the profits warning was announced, the shares had slumped by up to 100p.
Questioned by Mr Macfadyen, he said that at no time had Mackie used the phrase profit warning or give the impression such an announcement was about to be made.
The case continues.
LOTHIAN Cash limit threat to road plans
A £28 MILLION project to upgrade the A71 west of Edinburgh has been put at risk because of Scottish Office limits on road development spending by Lothian Region, the council's transport chairman claimed yesterday.
Ron Muir said the council sought consent to invest £18.16 million in transport in 1993-94, but was allowed £15.3 million.
For following years, with the council bid in brackets, consents were: 1994-95, £15.9 million (£28 million) and 1995-96, £15.8 million (£29.67 million).
Adoption groups toughen stand on smoking parents
By Audrey Gillan
SMOKERS will find it harder to adopt children under two under guidelines published yesterday.
Aimed at safeguarding children from the harmful effects of cigarette smoking, the guidelines of the British Agencies for Adoption and Fostering suggest that babies under two and children with respiratory problems should not be placed in smokers' homes.
The guidelines are in response to what BAAF claims is overwhelming evidence that babies and children with respiratory illnesses are particularly at risk from passive smoking.
However, Anne Moody, Scottish representative of the Freedom Organisation for the Right to Enjoy Smoking Tobacco, FOREST, says the guidelines imply that smokers are dirty and uncaring and unable to look after children.
Mrs Moody says the guidelines are an impertinence because there are good parents and bad parents.
She claims that smokers are just as responsible as any other parents.
‘Responsible parents don't keep babies in smoke-filled rooms.
Responsible parents don't smoke while they are near their baby,’ she said.
‘I have had four children myself and I was a smoker before they were born.
I really resent the fact that I have been labelled a bad mother because I smoke.’
According to BAAF's evidence, when mothers smoke up to nine cigarettes daily, the risk of cot death is doubled.
Consumption of ten or more trebles the risk.
Infants whose parents smoke run an increased risk of bronchitis and pneumonia, which is doubled in the first year and is highest when both parents smoke.
BAAF suggests that those involved in the adoption process balance the positive qualities of prospective adopters and foster carers who smoke against the adverse effects of smoking on children.
Applicants who smoke should be encouraged to give up.
‘It is essential that all decisions are made with the child's best interests at heart and agencies must perform a careful balancing act, weighing up the known disadvantages of a smoking environment with the positive qualities a particular family has to offer,’ said Marion Miles, chairwoman of BAAF's medical group.
‘There are many more suitable applicants than there are babies needing new families.
With strong evidence to show that children under the age of two are at considerable risk from passive smoking, smokers are putting themselves at a disadvantage because agencies can select from equally suitable candidates who do not smoke.’
Attack in pub brings 12-year sentence
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A MAN was jailed for 12 years yesterday and two others each sentenced to nine years after being convicted of what a judge described as a cowardly and vicious attack on a helpless victim.
Keith McPhilips, 35, was drinking in the Restalrig Inn, Edinburgh, when he was repeatedly struck with pool cues, hit with a chair, punched and kicked and had his head jumped on in a sustained attack.
John Stewart, 33, of Lochend Gardens, Neil Munro, 24, of Lochend Drive and Steven Leslie, 19, of Lochend Gardens, Edinburgh, were all found guilty of attempting to murder Mr McPhilips on 30 October last year.
Sentencing the three at the High Court in Edinburgh, Lord Milligan said that the helpless victim could easily have died.
‘It is his good fortune that he is still alive today and also your good fortune that, through no result of fine judgment on your part, you have not faced a charge of murder.
It is the court's duty to protect the public against such cowardly, vicious and sustained attacks.’
Stewart, who was also convicted of two other assaults, was jailed for a total of 12 years.
Munro and Leslie each received nine-year sentences.
Alexander Hoggan, 41, of Sleigh Drive, Edinburgh, was jailed for 30 months for assaulting Mr McPhilips to his severe injury.
Study faults assessment of Asian pupils
By Severin Carrell
SERIOUS problems in Strathclyde Region's testing of Asian and black children for special schools which were high-lighted by a Scottish Office report have been independently verified, the Commission for Racial Equality has said.
In a letter to The Scotsman, Dr Peter Sanders, the commission's chief executive, confirms publicly for the first time that the report ‘reveals distorted representation of children from ethnic minorities living in Glasgow, in special educational needs categories’.
He continues: ‘The commission has had the significance of this research confirmed by independent analysts, which leaves a serious problem to be explained and solved.’
The report, published in 1991, uncovered statistical evidence that children who spoke English as a second language were heavily over-represented in the two most acute categories of special needs schools in the region's Glasgow district.
The research for the Scottish Office Education Department also found that bilingual children were under-represented in the milder categories, raising further questions about the accuracy, and legality under race relations laws, of the methods employed by the region.
The Scotsman disclosed last week that the CRE had begun a formal investigation into the issue, the first of its kind in Scotland.
The region could face action for breaches of race relations and education acts if the commission upheld complaints it has received.
After promising full co-operation with the inquiry, the region then became involved in a fierce and  embarrassing controversy over remarks by a senior education official that malnutrition when young or genetics could be important factors in the issue.
Dr Sanders said the comments by David McNeill, senior depute director of education, and the official responsible for handling the CRE investigation, ‘emphasises the importance with proceeding with this investigation with all possible speed and effectiveness’.
No-one from Strathclyde was available for comment last night.
Points of view, Page 10
Borders workers win fight for benefit cash
By William Chisholm
A FOUR-YEAR fight to win compensation for 175 Borders textile workers has ended in success after the chief executive of the Employment Service admitted his staff had made mistakes and given incorrect advice.
Many of the former employees of Laidlaw & Fairgrieve's Tweedvale spinning mill at Walkerburn had not bothered to claim unemployment benefit when the company closed the factory without warning in August 1988.
They had been told they did not qualify for 13 weeks' money under benefit regulations.
Now an appeal has gone out for more than 100 of the former workers to lodge applications for payment, no matter the circumstances of their claim.
Administrative blunders and a four-year delay in settling the dispute were described yesterday as a scandal by union leaders involved in the battle.
Many of the workers are expected to claim interest on the payments, averaging £500 each.
Dave Herriot, now 67, convener of shop stewards at Walkerburn when the mill crashed, said: ‘Everyone has been sickened by the way the system has treated us.
The money should have been there four-and-a-half years ago when we needed it most.
I have already staked a claim for interest.’
A further attempt by Government officials to prolong the procedure after earlier defeats at tribunals was due to be heard in Edinburgh earlier this week.
But Mr Herriot said: ‘The proceedings lasted three minutes.
The Employment Service threw in the towel and that was it.’
Rab Stewart, Scottish textile organiser for the Transport and General Workers' Union, said the Employment Service had withdrawn its objections to payments being made, and was now supporting all the claims.
According to his records, about 50 workers had been compensated, which meant 125 people had still received nothing.
In his view it was disgusting that the union had been forced to battle for four years to win the day.
Gerry Skelton, Borders district secretary of the TGWU, said that when the benefits agencies had mistakenly paid out extra money to claimants they had not been prepared to wait four years for the cash to be handed back.
Walkerburn  families had experienced severe poverty when the factory closed, yet the welfare state had failed to come to their rescue.
The Employment Service chief executive, Mike Fogden, in a letter to the Borders MP Sir David Steel, accepted errors had been made in the case of the Laidlaw & Fairgrieve workers.
Mr Fogden wrote: ‘It has been possible to identify four distinguishable groups.
Those who made claims for UB (unemployment benefit); those who did not claim as a result of incorrect advice by my people in local offices; those who, following agreement among themselves, were represented by a colleague, and those who chose, of their own accord, not to make a claim.
He said: ‘Under normal circumstances claims for compensation would only be considered from people who acted on incorrect advice from my people.
In the exceptional circumstances of this case, however, claims will be considered from all groups.’
Rail track supremo named in run-up to sell-off
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
A FRESH move towards the privatisation of ScotRail was made yesterday with the creation of a Glasgow-based management post to prepare for the establishment of Railtrack, the state company which will take over railway infrastructure next year.
Paul Prescott, ScotRail's planning and marketing manager, has been appointed as the Railtrack zonal director for Scotland.
Cyril Bleasdale, who is preparing plans to bid for a franchise to operate Scotland's passenger trains after a proposed management buy-out, remains as director of ScotRail.
He believes that ScotRail's 9 per cent increase in revenue over the past year has helped strengthen his case for a buy-out.
Mr Prescott, 42, will set up the track organisation in Scotland, work out its commercial and planning structure and how it will relate to the train operating company and any remnants of BR.
In an earlier step in the privatisation plan, Alex Lynch, Mr Bleasdale's senior finance manager, was recently appointed as franchise development director of ScotRail.
It was confirmed last night that Mr Lynch will work with Mr Bleasdale to plan the structure, budgets and contracts required for the ScotRail operating franchise — one of the first due to be set up under the privatisation plans.
Mr Prescott said: ‘I am delighted that I will be working closely with both Cyril Bleasdale and Alex Lynch in creating successor bodies to ScotRail.’
He added that he hoped ScotRail's achievements would be preserved and strengthened in the new structure of the railway industry.
Railtrack will own the infrastructure but the successful bidder for the franchise will run the trains.
Strathclyde Regional Council has won the right through its passenger transport executive to be part of the franchising process for local trains in the Glasgow area, which receive £30 million annual subsidy from the council.
Picket-line violence deplorable, Timex chief says
By Eric McKenzie and James Rougvie
RECENT violent scenes outside the Timex plant in Dundee were condemned yesterday by the vice-president of Timex Corporation and chairman of Timex Electronics Corporation, John Dryfe.
Mr Dryfe said: ‘The violence which has occurred during the last several weeks outside the factory gates and the damage done to the property of several of our employees is deplorable.
In particular, we consider the assaults committed against some our employees are disgraceful.’
He stressed the need for economies after accumulated serious losses over the last seven years.
However, a new ‘team spirit’ was being created between management and the new workforce.
Mr Dryfe said the main reason for past losses was the combination of higher labour costs and restrictive work practices with lower productivity compared with the company's UK competitors.
On the current dispute, he explained that to stem continuing losses, the company had to make a proposal that included temporary layoffs, a wage freeze for 1993, a reduction in fringe benefits, and an enhanced profit-sharing plan which could offset part or all of these reductions.
‘Unfortunately, the company's proposal was rejected twice by its hourly-payed employees which forced the company to take the action it did in hiring new employees.’
A large number of pickets have manned the factory gates over the last eight weeks.
The dispute erupted into violence on Monday when several people clashed with police as attempts were made to stop buses carrying workers getting through the gates.
A total of 16 people were arrested.
Yesterday morning one man was arrested on the picket line.
Buses and cars carrying replacement workers and staff who have worked throughout the dispute went to the gates on time despite the presence of around 150 pickets.
Police said one man had been charged with breach of the peace and a report was being sent to the procurator fiscal.
Four contest Lib Dem post
FOUR people are standing for the chairmanship of the Scottish Liberal Democrats.
They are Sandra Grieve, a party vice-chairman, Rhona Kemp, a Grampian regional councillor, Marilyne McLaren, a Lothian regional councillor, and Alan Reid, a Renfrew district councillor, writes Peter Jones.
The election, caused by the resignation of Ray Michie, MP, for family reasons, will be by postal ballot of party members, with the result being announced on 21 April.
Teaching ‘devalued under Tories’
By Our Local Government Editor
TEACHING is being deprofessionalised by Government policies, Elizabeth Maginnis, chairman of Lothian's education committee, said yesterday.
She told the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities conference at Dunblane that this week's speech by Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, on the need for more emphasis on the three Rs and other traditional teaching methods was yet a further move which would demoralise teachers.
She said she would not blame teachers for concluding that their profession was being utterly deprofessionalised after Mr Lang's suggestion that schools could be run by parents and local busy-bodies.
‘The implication is that the profession does not know what it's about.’
In his keynote speech in Aberdeen, Mr Lang announced plans to bring in non-educationists in every school inspection team within two years.
Mrs Maginnis said: ‘We don't have patients running hospitals and we don't have neighbours living in the vicinity going in and testing that intestines have been put back properly by the surgeon carrying out the operation.
‘The idea that people with no professional expertise in education could go into schools and have relevant things to say about the teaching methodology seems patent nonsense.’
Mrs Maginnis claimed that Mr Lang, rather than trying to find a consensus and a way forward, was introducing another element of aggravation and difficulty into the work of teachers and local authorities.
One of the teacher unions, the National Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers also attacked the announcement on school inspection teams yesterday.
A Scottish official, Jim O'Neill, said it was just more political dogma imported from England without thought to its impact.
Labour council chiefs agree to hold vote on water
By David Scott Local Government Editor
LABOUR group leaders in Scotland have agreed in principle to hold a local authority referendum on the future of water and sewerage services.
They decided at a meeting of the Labour group of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in Dunblane yesterday to set up a working group to prepare for a referendum.
It may be held around September or just before the Queen's Speech at the opening of the session of parliament.
By then it will be clear whether Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, intends to proceed with water privatisation, one of eight options he is examining.
The decision to agree in principle came at a Labour group meeting at the start of COSLA's annual conference.
The proposal, put forward by Lothian, has the strong support of other big Labour council groups like Strathclyde and Tayside.
Central and Fife are understood to be less enthusiastic but agreed to support the idea.
The working group will look at ways of organising the poll and will also examine the legal issues.
Lothian has estimated that it would cost the region £140,000-£160,000 to carry out the exercise by post whereas a referendum through the ballot box would cost £270,000-£320,000.
After the Labour group meeting, which was held in private, Councillor Keith Geddes, leader of the Lothian administration, said the referendum depended on the proposals put forward in a white paper which Mr Lang was due to publish.
Even if Mr Lang decided on a form of franchising rather than the formation of privatised companies, that would be seen as privatisation by the back door.
Mr Geddes said that counsel for Lothian and Tayside had advised that a referendum could be held within certain legal parameters.
It was intended to hold meetings of regional councils and officials in the next two weeks to discuss the mechanics and legal issues surrounding the proposal.
He added: ‘We are very hopeful that all of the Central Belt regions will take part and we also hope that Grampian and Dumfries and Galloway will come on board as well.’
Jean McFadden, leader of the COSLA Labour group, said she believed water privatisation was an issue which the Scottish public would see as being equal in importance to the poll tax.
Of the possibility that regions outwith the Central Belt might not take part, Mrs McFadden said: ‘We would prefer it to cover the whole of Scotland, but Strathclyde and Lothian cover the majority of the population.’
COSLA's non-aligned group councillors, who represent mainly rural areas not controlled by political parties, decided not to oppose publicly the idea of a referendum.
Peter Peacock, of Highland Region, the secretary of the group, said it did not wish to be the cause of disunity over the water issue.
But he pointed out that Borders and Highland regions had already agreed not to back a referendum and he did not see that position changing.
Stressing the group's opposition to water privatisation, he said its decision not to support a referendum was purely on grounds of tactics.
There were doubts about the practicalities and about what would happen if there was a poor turnout.
During a full meeting of the convention later, Councillor John Connolly, of Central Region and chairman of the COSLA water and sewerage committee, said that since a great deal had been heard about taking stock it was time Mr Lang faced up to the fact that he had completely lost the argument for privatised water and sewerage services, including a franchise arrangement.
In view of the massive public opposition it was difficult to understand how a ‘listening’ minister could continue to pursue his own ideology at the risk of his own political execution.
The president of COSLA, Charles Gray, made a renewed call for an independent commission to examine the future of local government.
That was even more urgent now that Mr Lang had admitted that council reform cost estimates by the consultant, Touche Ross, were wrong.
Mr Gray said a new attitude would be needed from Mr Lang if he wanted to fulfil his recently stated aim to have a new and better relationship with local government.
Over the years councils had been forced into deep conflict with Scottish ministers over matters which were too often more akin to right-wing dogma than to relevance.
These were also too much related to the exercise of political power than to the compassionate provision of local services.
MP wants violent criminals put in TV ‘stocks’
By Our Parliamentary Correspondent
VIOLENT criminals should be paraded on television in a modern-day version of the stocks, Phil Gallie, the Conservative MP for Ayr, demanded yesterday.
Mr Gallie wants to see a daily television slot where people who have committed violent attacks or murders have their faces unveiled.
‘The one thing that bullies do not like is being humiliated and degraded.
They like to be seen as the hard man or the macho man and not to be ridiculed,’ he said last night.
‘This modern-day alternative to the stocks could help to curb the atrocious rise in vicious crime that is becoming part of our daily lives.’
Mr Gallie, who is sponsoring the Carrying of Knives etc (Scotland) Bill, to outlaw carrying knives in public, has asked Lord James Douglas Hamilton, the Scottish home affairs minister, for his comments and to inquire if such a television programme would contravene European law.
‘I know the civil liberties people will not like it, but to some degree they have got us into this mess and we have been listening to them for too long,’ said Mr Gallie.
He suggests that there should be a television programme devoted to unmasking criminals such as those who violently attack frail elderly women.
A photograph of the man could be flashed up on one side of the screen with a contrasting picture of his frail victim on the other side.
‘The voice-over could say something like: ‘This is the man who mugged this 80-year- old lady’,’ he suggests.
Mr Gallie's letter follows his call in the committee stage of the Knives Bill this week for ‘demonstrable disapproval’ in public of criminals.
Unemployment equals manufacturing job total
SCOTLAND'S industrial base has shrunk so dramatically that there are almost as many people unemployed as working in manufacturing, previously unpublished figures showed yesterday, writes Joy Copley.
Henry McLeish, Labour's Scottish economics spokesman, said that manufacturing jobs outnumber Scottish unemployment by just 2 per cent.
Fresh figures from the Commons library show that 348,000 people worked in manufacturing in December 1992 and there were 342,092 unemployed Scots looking for work in February 1993.
Mr McLeish said: ‘These are alarming figures and underline the rapid deterioration of our industrial base over the last decade.’
He has called on the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to ensure that the Scottish Office or the Department of Trade and Industry urgently investigates the condition of the Scottish manufacturing base.
The figures show that manufacturing jobs in Scotland have declined by 257,000 since 1979 (42 per cent) and by 28,000, or 7 per cent , since last year.
Government statistics show that the February 1993 seasonally unadjusted figure for unemployment in Scotland stood at 257,092: 85,000 unemployed were not claiming benefit in the four weeks before the Government's February figures, but were also seeking work, according to the Labour Force Survey.
Mr McLeish said that Scottish industry's capacity to train was withering and the loss of skills training was deadly for the economy.
New figures show that the number of apprentices north of the Border has fallen from 13,600 in March 1981 to 6,300 in March 1990.
Legal aid changes savaged by top lawyers
By Joy Copley, Parliamentary Correspondent
SCOTTISH lawyers' leaders made a blistering attack on changes to the civil legal aid system yesterday, declaring that access to justice for about 250,000 people will be severely restricted.
Alan Johnston, the Dean of the Faculty of Advocates, and Brian Adair, the president of the Law Society of Scotland, told the Scottish affairs select committee in London that the changes were unjustified.
Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, the Scottish Office minister, who was later questioned separately by the committee, said that the 250,000 figure was wildly exaggerated.
He said that about 100,000 people would be outwith the new eligibility levels but that of those only about 7,500 were ever likely to seek legal aid.
Mr Johnston said: ‘I do honestly think that the proposals the Government has brought forward seriously endanger the fabric of our social existence.
‘People will not get their legal rights as citizens of the country and they should…and if that means one less nuclear submarine then so be it.’
The Law Society has urged the Government to postpone the changes in civil legal aid for one year because it believes the rise in spending on it is a temporary blip.
Lord Fraser said that the Scottish Legal Aid Board's best estimates indicated a continued rise in caseloads and expenditure.
Asked outside the committee if he felt uncomfortable about the Scottish Office plans being so heavily  criticised by the legal profession, he said: ‘No.
They would, wouldn't they?
It's just good trade union stuff.’
Lord Fraser told the committee that a consultation paper on the Government's review of eligibility of criminal legal aid, the costs of which have spiralled faster than civil costs, would be published in the summer.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn, a former Solicitor-General for Scotland, said some lawyers were deliberately spinning out cases and were on to a meal ticket.
Earlier Mr Johnson had agreed and said he wanted more professional discipline.
Lord Fraser was pressed by MPs with examples of rises in contributions that people would have to pay towards legal aid and said: ‘I am not shrinking from the fact that there will be increases in the contribution for some people.’
He acknowledged that in some cases it could be hundreds of pounds extra but argued that people would still be allowed to go to law.
Mr Johnston said: ‘Strict financial limits are not the way to deal with the problem and that is why the whole Government approach is wrong.’
He said the way to cut the legal aid budget was to reduce crime, costs and legal fees and not to cut civil liberties.
‘This is not addressed by hitting people hardest who need most help,’ he said.
Mr Adair said: ‘A responsible and properly run society needs a system of legal aid to enable those of poor or moderate means to have access to justice.’
He forecast that lack of access to legal aid could lead to people's taking the law into their own hands, doing their own litigation or doing nothing to defend themselves.
He was particularly worried about family law and about children who would not be protected if parents lost their right to legal aid.
He said the changes were unjustified because civil legal aid spending in Scotland had not increased in real terms from 1987-88 to 1991-92.
He acknowledged that from April to December 1992, expenditure had increased from the 1991-92 total of £16.5 million to £23.4 million.
But he said it was a temporary blip arising from greater throughput of cases in the civil courts; increased efficiency at the Scottish Legal Aid Board and solicitors submitting their accounts more speedily because of the recession.
Tory rebel warning against quick fix on pit closures
By Our Political Correspondent
THE Government refused yesterday to rule out legislation to ensure that coal has a better domestic market by requiring electricity generators to buy more.
The move is being considered as part of the review of the coal industry, which is to be published today amid speculation that up to 13 of the threatened 31 pits south of the Border could be reprieved.
Changing the law to place NationalPower and Power-Gen under a legal obligation to agree fixed contracts for specified tonnages over a longer period than the current year was hinted at by Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, in evidence to the energy select committee last year.
Downing Street yesterday refused to dismiss the possibility, although the Government may assess the impact of the white paper before deciding on whether to proceed.
Fixing the market through fresh legislation would be seen as a signal that the privatisation of the electricity industry was flawed.
The Cabinet is set to approve the white paper setting out the Government's view of the long-term future for coal and other energy resources this morning.
Ministers were confident that a legally binding agreement would be secured before publication of the details, although firm contracts on coal purchases which will underwrite the reprieved pits are unlikely to have been signed.
Mr Heseltine will make a Commons statement on the white paper today.
Details of pits to be saved will be disclosed by British Coal, although no colliery will be firmly picked for closure until a further review is complete.
The document is likely to be wreathed in legal safety clauses because the Government cannot take decisions that are legally the responsibility of British Coal, which is a private company.
Potential Tory rebels are threatening to withhold support for the Government in a future vote on the white paper if it does not give a firm long-term guarantee for the reprieved pits.
According to some reports, the Government plans to limit the reprieve for some pits to just two years.
Winston Churchill (C, Davyhulme) said: ‘If it was nothing other than a short-term political fix I do not believe it would get through the House of Commons.
If it were a two-year wonder, and then all of the 31 pits that had been threatened were to close, that would be completely unacceptable.’
Mr Churchill said he would welcome a change in the law to steer the market in favour of coal.
A reprieve would be acceptable if there was a ‘firm commitment to widen the market for coal’.
Richard Alexander (C, Newark) told World at One on Radio 4 that a short-term political fix without a long-term strategy for coal would mean he would not support the Government when the vote comes.
A Commons debate and vote on the white paper are expected before Easter.
Ministers on alert for Maastricht showdown
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
MINISTERS and MPs were on alert for a late night Commons showdown as the Maastricht treaty bill rumbled into its 17th day.
Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, was among Government members forced to delay foreign trips for a crucial attempt to speed progress on the troubled European Communities (Amendment) Bill.
The Government's chances of forcing debate into the small hours against Labour and rebel Tory opposition were boosted when the Liberal Democrats threw their weight behind the procedural Commons motion.
Charles Kennedy, the Liberal Democrat president, said his party was anxious to achieve progress, with 17 of 20 MPs joining the Government in the lobbies.
Mr Kennedy said that no deal had been done with the Government other than on an understanding that today's scheduled business should not be knocked out by allowing yesterday's session to continue beyond lunchtime today.
Controversy over the Scottish National Party's decision to do a deal with the Government over seats on the EC committee of the regions resurfaced.
The SNP refused to support the Government in last night's vote in spite of claims from Government sources that the deal two weeks ago went beyond the single vote on the EC committee and that it covered timetable motions too.
Plaid Cymru, which did a similar deal, was preparing to vote with the Government.
Maastricht gamble pays off for ministers
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
THE Government gambled and won a test of strength in the Commons over Maastricht last night.
After a tactical switch by the Liberal Democrats, the Government pushed through a vote to speed progress on the troubled bill, with the prospect of a possible all-night sitting.
The showdown followed three earlier occasions when Government whips took the issue to the brink before backing down in the face of certain defeat by the combined ranks of the Opposition and Conservative rebels.
But after the Liberal Democrats pledged the support of 17 of their 20 MPs, ministers took a calculated risk and won a symbolic victory by 17 votes.
If the Liberal Democrat support on the timetable holds, the bill will make substantially quicker progress.
Even with an all-night sitting, the Government and the Lib Dems are agreed that another full day on the bill today should not be wiped out.
After the vote last night, in which 26 Tories, including Bill Walker (Tayside N), voted against the Government, Labour was flagging a new amendment which it claims will put the Government on the spot over the social chapter of the Maastricht Treaty.
However, there is increasing discontent in Labour ranks from pro-Maastricht MPs tiring of what they see as time-wasting tactics.
Tory rebels believe they have found a legal way of spoking the wheels of the bill's passage by calling for a judicial review of the constitutional implications of the European  Communities (Amendment) Bill, which today enters its 18th day in the Commons.
Controversy over the Scottish National Party's decision to do a deal with the Tories over seats on the EC committee of the regions resurfaced.
The SNP refused to support the Government last night in spite of claims from government sources that the deal two weeks ago went beyond the single vote on the EC committee and that it covered timetable motions too.
Plaid Cymru, which did a similar deal, voted with the Government, acknowledging that its deal did go further.
De Klerk admits South Africa built A-bombs From Fred Bridgland Johannesburg
PRESIDENT FW de Klerk revealed yesterday that South Africa had built six nuclear bombs, each equivalent in power to that which destroyed Hiroshima, for delivery to targets by aircraft.
But he said all had been totally dismantled since he came to power in 1989 and all South African nuclear facilities were open to scrutiny by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), whose inspectors were in the country at the moment.
‘They [the inspectors]should be fully in a position to satisfy themselves that there is nothing, nothing, hidden or to hide,’ Mr de Klerk told a special session of parliament.
It was the first time South Africa has admitted it possessed nuclear weapons, though the United States government suggested as long ago as 1979 that Pretoria might possess an atom bomb after a satellite detected two nuclear-like flashes over Antarctic waters to the south of Cape Town.
Mr de Klerk said the National Party government decided in 1974 to develop a nuclear capability when Soviet expansionism under the late President Leonid Brezhnev was a growing threat in southern Africa.
The objective had been to build seven nuclear bombs — the minimum necessary for testing purposes and for the maintenance of a credible deterrent capability.
However, when the threat abated in 1989 with a ceasefire in Angola, which saw Cuban forces retreating to Havana, and the end of the Cold War, the decision was taken to terminate the programme.
Only six bombs had been completed by then.
The president said he had decided to go public because criticism and disbelief from some countries and influential commentators had threatened the republic's commercial nuclear programme.
‘It had become necessary to dispel these doubts so that, with full trust restored, South Africa's people could benefit from the technological development that has taken place as a result of this process.’
He said none of the South African bombs had been tested.
The chief executive of South Africa's Atomic Energy Corporation, Dr W Stumpf, said there was no reason to believe the bombs would not have exploded had they been delivered in anger.
The foreign minister, Pik Botha, said Pretoria signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1991 and ‘not just every kilogram, but every gram, of enriched uranium used in the (bomb) programme’ had been accounted for.
Roger Jardine, a nuclear physicist who is the science affairs spokesman for the African National Congress, contested Mr Botha's claim.
‘I don't think we can really say their (the government's) hands are clean,’ he said.
‘We reckon some 300 to 400 grammes of nuclear weapons grade uranium is still not accounted for.
And there is still a raging controversy over the double flash in 1979 over Antarctic waters which Washington believes was a test explosion of a South African nuclear device.’
Mr de Klerk also told parliament of plans for a government crack-down on the Azanian Peoples' Liberation Army (APLA), the military wing of the radical black nationalist Pan Africanist Congress, and of the possibility that the death penalty would be reintroduced after a recent wave of political violence in which victims have included both white and black children.
The president said 18 APLA guerrillas had been arrested in the previous 24 hours.
He said the government had evidence that APLA operated out of bases in the ‘independent’ homeland of Transkei.
An explanation had been demanded from the Transkei government before Pretoria proceeded with the next stages of its plan to neutralise APLA.
The President said Parliament would be allowed a free vote on the reintroduction of the death penalty, which de Klerk suspended three years ago.
He said he would vote for its reintroduction.
The International Atomic Energy Agency welcomed Mr de Klerk's offer to allow inspection of its nuclear facilities and said it would send inspectors to verify the end of the nuclear weapon programme.
Right shows strain as French Socialist reign ends in tears
FRANCE'S outgoing Socialist cabinet held its last session yesterday as the centre-right opposition, heading for a landslide win in next Sunday's general election run-off, showed fresh signs of friction.
At the presidential palace some ministers were said to have wept in the cabinet room.
As they left afterwards, they had to run the gauntlet of television cameras and reporters.
President François Mitterrand, who chaired the cabinet meeting, will have to ‘cohabit’ for his last two years in office with a conservative government with a giant parliamentary majority.
One forecast estimated the right-wingers could clinch up to 500 of the 577 National Assembly seats.
But in the latest sign of strife among the victors, the former president Valery Giscard d'Estaing rebutted a call by the Gaullist leader, Jacques Chirac, for Mr Mitterrand to resign.
Mr Giscard d'Estaing, leader of the centre-right Union for French Democracy (UDF), allied to Mr Chirac's Rally for the Republic (RPR) in an electoral pact, said: ‘Constitutional rules must be respected.
We are not a country without laws and a constitution.’
The justice minister, Michel Vauzelle, confirming earlier statements from the presidency, said Mr Mitterrand would not leave ‘because in a democracy, there must exist balancing factors without which liberty is not possible.’
Speaking on state radio, Mr Vauzelle said Mr Mitterrand was ‘determined to stay because he is a man of duty.
The nation gave him a seven-year mandate and he will not leave a minute before.’
Mr Giscard d'Estaing, who was president from 1974 to 1981, said Mr Mitterrand must allow the new government to implement its programme fully ‘without obstacles and without traps’.
Referring to the last time a conservative government led by Mr Chirac shared power with Mr Mitterrand, he said: ‘We need a code to avoid relapsing into the problems of 1986-88 when France showed up [at international meetings]like a two-headed monster.
‘We must take France's dignity into account…
There can only be one representative of our country.
At major gatherings that is normally the president,’ he told Europe-1 radio.
The Socialist party leader, Laurent Fabius, said Mr Chirac's call for Mr Mitterrand to quit showed that the RPR, which he called ‘the party of arrogance’, was trying to seize a monopoly of power.
Political analysts said Tuesday's outspoken comments by Mr Chirac — like Mr Giscard d'Estaing a candidate for the presidency — seemed to be a tactic to dissuade Mr Mitterrand from offering him the premiership rather than an attempt to force the president out immediately.
Political sources said that Mitterrand loyalists were already in touch with Gaullist Edouard Balladur, 63, widely expected to head the next government, to discuss the handover from the present prime minister, Pierre Beregovoy.
They said the appointment could be announced as early as Monday.
Yeltsin moves fail to halt campaign for impeachment
RUSSIA'S leaders vacillated between confrontation and compromise yesterday as President Boris Yeltsin softened his claim to special powers and parliament called an emergency session of the Congress of People's Deputies to try to oust him.
Members of the parliament demanded in a 135-34 vote that Mr Yeltsin appear at the Congress tomorrow, when they may vote to remove him from office for declaring emergency rule and calling an April referendum.
Mr Yeltsin's spokesman, Vyacheslav Kostikov, told reporters that the parliament, formally known as the Supreme Soviet, was trying ‘to use any means to remove the lawfully elected president and open the way to power for the forces of revenge and totalitarian restoration.’
In parliament a senior deputy urged his colleagues to give Mr Yeltsin a chance to reconsider before summoning Congress.
Ramazan Abdulatipov, chairman of one of the parliament's two chambers, later told journalists: ‘We should not pretend we are heroes.
That is the kind of heroism that could destroy Russia.’
Earlier in the day Mr Yeltsin had seemed to be inching toward compromise with his critics.
He issued the text of his decree calling for a nationwide vote of confidence, and it omitted any reference to the special powers he had claimed on Saturday during a televised address.
He also had a private meeting with the speaker of parliament and the  president of the Constitutional Court, two of his leading opponents, in an attempt to seek a compromise.
But they failed to reach agreement, and the speaker, Ruslan Khasbulatov, said impeachment proceedings would go forward.
Under Russian law, the vice-president, Alexander Rutskoi would take power if the Congress ousted Mr Yeltsin.
Mr Rutskoi, a former ally of the president, has opposed some market reforms and denounced his weekend speech.
Mr Yeltsin's aides have said he would ignore a vote to remove him by the Congress, which was elected before the collapse of the Soviet Union.
After the president's office had released his controversial decree without any reference to a ‘special order’ of rule — the provision that had most alarmed the legislature — observers said it was not clear whether he had revised the decree to meet the demands of the Constitutional Court and parliament or had exaggerated its harshness in his weekend speech.
Mr Yeltsin then met Mr Khasbulatov and the Constitutional Court chairman, Valery Zorkin, for private talks.
Afterwards Mr Khasbulatov reconvened the Supreme Soviet and told members that Mr Yeltsin did not ‘clearly understand the situation in the country.’
Hr criticised the president's decrees as badly drafted, and he proposed early elections of both the president and the parliament instead of the April referendum.
The reaction from Mr Yeltsin was sharp.
‘The decision to convene the 9th emergency Congress of People's Deputies, taken hastily and practically without any discussion, brings the country to a new level of political tensions,’ his spokesman said.
Last night Mr Yeltsin sent a formal message to parliament bemoaning the country's Soviet-era constitution.
‘The constitutional situation of the country is very shaky today,’ he said.
‘It's no secret to anyone that our constitutional foundations are contradictory…
The same action can be found both constitutional and unconstitutional.’
Outside the parliament building several hundred diehard Communists shouted anti-Yeltsin slogans and waved red flags.
One Yeltsin supporter ventured into the crowd with a picture of the president.
Several men tore the photo from his hands, ripped it up and stamped on it before police led the man away, apparently for his own protection.
In Washington Mr Yeltsin's foreign minister, Andrei Kozyrev, told an audience there was no reason ‘to panic or to predict civil war’ in Russia.
He was speaking before a meeting at the White House with President Bill Clinton.
In Moscow, Yeltsin spokesmen said the president was awaiting the outcome of Mr Kozyrev's US visit before deciding whether to ask Mr Clinton to transfer their planned Vancouver summit meeting next month to Moscow.
John Major and President Clinton discussed Russia's economic plight during lengthy telephone call yesterday.
They agreed the best way to help was in a manner which was visible to the population of Russia.
— AP, Reuter and PA
Love is…a danger to morals of Czech youth
STATE-RUN Czech television has banished the country's most popular rock music video to late-night viewing after deciding it ‘massacres the morals of our youth’.
In the first such move since the 1989 ‘velvet revolution’ against communism, the administrative board of Czech television recommended that the video of the song Laska je Laska (Love is Love) not be shown before 10pm.
The video won the local equivalent of a Grammy award as best Czech video in 1992.
It shows a succession of unlikely lovers — a policeman and a jogger, Santa Claus and the Devil — cavorting on Prague's traditional lovers lanes on Petrin Hill.
The board's objections hinge on the lyrics: ‘Love is love when boys go out with girls, boys with boys and girls with girls.’
That, the board found, ‘massacres the morals of the youth…and endangers the mental and moral development of the young’.
‘Nonsense,’ said Lucie Bila, who sings the track and was named last year's best Czech singer, accusing the board of lacking a sense of humour.
Gabriela Osvaldova, author of the lyrics, said the decision smacked of the censorship that was routine in four decades of communist rule in Czechoslovakia.
— Reuter
‘We were shocked by the ethical immaturity of the board members,’ she said yesterday.
‘It seems that our society will again be usurped by narrow minds and puritans.’
Volcano erupts 26 times
MAYON volcano in the central Philippines erupted 26 times yesterday, forcing thousands of villagers to flee to evacuation centres already teeming with refugees.
The evacuees included 3,000 who had returned to their homes on Monday but had been driven back to the centres by the volcano's sulphurous stench.
Erupting more than twice an hour, Mayon sent clouds of red-hot ash up to four miles into the air, to fall like showers on villages 50 miles away.
No casualties were reported.
Disaster relief officials said that over the last three days another 12,000 people had been evacuated to join 45,000 already crammed into the centres after an eruption killed 75 people on 2 February.
Vulcanologists said Mayon had erupted 26 times during yesterday's 11 daylight hours — well up on the 15 eruptions in the previous 13 hours.
At least 260 earthquakes shook the volcano between Tuesday evening and yesterday morning, in what scientists said was a sign that its condition was deteriorating.
Israel elects new president
EZER Weizman (above), a former fighter pilot with a sharp tongue and a passion for peace with the Arabs, was elected Israel's seventh president yesterday.
Mr Weizman, 68, an ex-general who helped forge peace with Egypt and favours talks with the PLO, beat the former parliament speaker Dov Shilansky 66-53 in a parliamentary vote to fill the largely ceremonial post for the next five years.
Mr Weizman, who will succeed Chaim Herzog on 13 May, has often ruffled feathers with his outspoken style during nearly three decades in the military and two decades in politics.
He hinted he would do more than host formal functions and represent Israel on state visits: ‘I hope I will be able, through the efficient work of the government, to play a role in developing the Middle East peace process.’
In a separate countrywide vote, Israel's former spokesman at Middle East peace talks Benjamin Netanyahu, 43, was favoured in a four-way race to succeed the ousted prime minister, Yitzhak Shamir, as head of the opposition Likud party.
FBI holds trade centre bomb suspect
US federal agents took custody yesterday of a man arrested in Egypt who they believe may have masterminded the bombing of the World Trade Centre in New York.
Egyptian intelligence handed over Mahmud Abu Halima, 34, to the Federal Bureau of Investigation agents, said a security source, and they had already left Egypt for the United States.
An FBI spokesman in Washington reluctantly confirmed yesterday that the Egyptians had arrested Abu-Halima.
He is the fourth man of Arab origin arrested in the case.
All of them are suspected of links with Sheikh Omar Abdel-Rahman, a blind Egyptian preacher who lives in New Jersey and urges an Islamic holy struggle against the West and the government of President Hosni Mubarak.
Abu-Halima's brother, Mohamed, said in New York that Mahmud was arrested after arriving in Egypt on 11 March to visit their family.
He denied his brother had any role in planting the car bomb that ripped through the garage of the twin skyscraper complex on 26 February, killing six people and injuring more than 1,000.
Basinger to pay £6m in dispute over film
A JURY in Los Angeles yesterday ordered the actress Kim Basinger to pay Main Line Pictures $8.9 million,(around £6 million) finding that she reneged on a contract to play the leading role in the film Boxing Helena.
Basinger had testified in the civil lawsuit that no contract existed and that she had chosen not to appear in the unreleased film because she would have been required to perform in gratuitous sex scenes.
But Main Line, an independent filmmaker, contended that it had reached an oral agreement with Basinger, a standard Hollywood handshake deal, and that she had later backed out of it.
The company's lawyers contended during a trial in state court that Basinger, 39, whose credits include Batman and My Stepmother Is an Alien, had caused it to lose $5-10 million.
Main Line argued that Basinger was talked out of the project by her new agent because the $60,000 commission on the deal had gone to her previous agent.
Basinger evaded reporters and cameramen as she left the courthouse Wednesday, leaving by a sidedoor and rushing off in a black sedan.
Rescue pilots tell of narrow escapes
BRITISH helicopter heroes described last night how they braved shell fire to rescue wounded war victims from the besieged Bosnian town on Srebrenica.
Two Royal Navy Sea Kings narrowly escaped being hit when Serb guns opened up as they flew in.
Shells crashed around the football stadium landing zone while the injured were being carried on board.
One British crewman on a French helicopter described the moment he realised he was too late to save a young child.
Lt Tim Kelly, 45, a specialist in mobile air operations, said: ‘I looked for a little girl who had been injured by shrapnel so I could have her winched aboard.
Sadly, her mother and father indicated that she was dead.
You could hear them wailing above the noise of the aircraft.’
He added: ‘We were planning the next evacuation when the shelling began…we were flat on the ground on the landing zone when the last shell impacted about 20 yards from us, injuring two Canadian UN soldiers.’
Senior Sea King pilot Lt Cmdr George Wallace spoke of the shelling as he picked up the two injured men.
‘My No 2 in the other Sea King, Lt Kevin Smith, was orbiting above when a projectile from the ground exploded within 1,000 yards of the aircraft.’
Helping where needed
IT IS often said that the collapse of the Soviet Union left the US as the only superpower.
But while Russia may not be able to compete any longer in that league, the concern which the current power struggle in Moscow has called forth in other capitals demonstrates clearly enough the impact which events in that country still have internationally.
If Russia collapsed in turmoil, the consequences would be incalculable.
The manoeuvring goes on: Boris Yeltsin appears to have backtracked slightly on the powers he has assumed to by-pass the Supreme Soviet, although he still intends to hold the planned referendum; meanwhile the parliament has called a full session of the Congress of People's Deputies to impeach the president, but there is uncertainty about whether the hardliners can actually muster a sufficient majority.
At the same time, however, there is a new urgency to the West's  response to events in Moscow.
President Clinton has promised to present Yeltsin with ‘an aggressive and quite specific plan’ when the two men meet at the beginning of April; the Group of Seven leading industrial nations is discussing ways to help; and yesterday the EC Commission floated the idea of offering Russia the prospect of greater trade access when its political and economic circumstances allow.
The Commission wants permission from the member states to widen the terms of its mandate to negotiate a partnership agreement with Russia and other former Soviet republics.
That is not something which will happen straightaway.
Russia has made clear that it would like longer-term credits and money to help finance such programmes as a social safety net for workers who lose their jobs due to the reforms.
In that it has some support from the International Monetary Fund, whose managing director has urged the G7 to come up with at least $5 billion or $6 billion in special funding for Russia this year for such projects, as well as for Russian companies restructuring their operations and for further reform in such key areas as energy.
Western countries can do little to influence the political power struggle currently going on in Moscow.
Indeed, too overt an attempt to so could well be counterproductive and lay them open to the charge of meddling.
But what they can do is to ensure that the additional factors of instability, caused by the economic hardship produced by the moves to a market economy, are kept to a minimum.
Scotland should have its own national heritage fund
As a member of the National Trust for Scotland for nearly 58 years, and having from time to time been involved in its affairs, I want to add my personal support to Douglas Connell's proposition (Points of View, 15 March) that the functions of the National Heritage Memorial Fund (in so far as they relate to Scotland) should in future be carried out by a new body established in Scotland.
There could be no better name for such a body than the National Heritage Memorial Fund for Scotland.
In support of his proposition, Mr Connell refers to the Government's proposals to transfer responsibility for the Scottish Arts Council from the Secretary of State for National Heritage to the Secretary of State for Scotland.
There is a parallel with the Historic Buildings Councils.
These councils were set up in 1953 following the report of the Gowers Committee of 1950 into what could be done for the preservation of houses of historic interest.
Ernest Gowers, a very far-sighted man, had no hesitation in suggesting a separate council for Scotland and this is what happened; it is now inconceivable that there could be any other arrangements.
Were a fund such as the National Heritage Memorial Fund to be established today, there would undoubtedly be a separate fund for Scotland — especially in the light of the Government's intention to transfer some decision-making powers from London to Scotland.
There are similar analogies with the National Trust (1895) and the National Trust for Scotland (1931), the Royal Fine Art Commission (1924) and the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland (1927), and the Countryside Commission (1969) and the Countryside Commission for Scotland (1968).
I am not suggesting that Scotland has ‘lost out’ over the past 13 years from the fact that there was only one fund based in London.
Scotland has had its full share of the ‘cake’ and I would imagine that the National Trust for Scotland is grateful for all the help it has received.
I think the time has now come for the National Heritage Memorial Fund to be split and a separate body established for Scotland.
Water rights
I read with dismay the remark attributed to the Central Scotland Water Development Board in your report today that ‘water required powerful law’, otherwise, the water authorities ‘would never get anything done’.
This is the language of the dictator and it is exactly why those who manage land are so concerned at the activities of the water authorities, even more so if they become commercial profit-orientated concerns.
There is a recognised case for the utilities to have a right of compulsory acquiring the use of land.
It is difficult, however, to see why water alone of the utilities should have the right to use private property without paying for it.
Losing sight with short-term aims
TWO Scots took the opportunity to analyse Scotland's educational ills this past week.
The Scottish Secretary, echoing his English counterpart, emphasised shortfalls in basic literacy and numeracy, lack of respect for discipline, lack of parental control over truancy.
He harked back to the golden age of a be-blazered world where all God's children had the basics banged into them, and video nasties were confined to close encounters with beasties in biology lessons.
It was the kind of speech which plays well to the gallery of bemused parents in a violent world.
John Ward had a rather different audience.
IBM's resident director in Scotland and the North of England is also vice-chair of the CBI in Scotland.
By definition therefore, neither a government-perceived merchant of gloom from the commentating classes, nor a trendified member of the teaching trades.
And, with considerable passion, he was addressing a mixture of the business and university communities in the annual Trades House lecture sponsored jointly by Strathclyde University and Glasgow's Trades House.
The burden of John Ward's argument is that to a large extent, political complexion is a secondary factor to core industrial philosophy.
Given that Scotland has little going for it in the way of geography, nothing special in the natural resources department compared with the seriously oil-rich countries and now a minimal industrial base, he argues that the asset in which we have consistently under-invested is our people.
The raw material doesn't lack initiative, inventiveness, intellect or integrity, he suggests.
But as a result of suppressing these qualities, managers have ensured that we have built a low-wage, low-skilled workforce lacking in self-reliance and self-esteem.
For too long, says Ward, we have persisted in the Henry Ford myth that only a genetically privileged few can do joined-up thinking, and the rest are fit for manual tasks so simplified that they produce that brand of mind-numbing tedium which is the most fertile soil for industrial unrest.
The comparisons he drew with our most successful rival trading nations were as instructive as they were, viewed collectively, alarming.
Over two thirds of Japanese car workers operate in multi-skilled teams, compared with just 10 per cent in the UK, and the land of the risen yen puts in two and a half times as many hours training its new workers in those skills.
He cited too a McKinsey report examining the common differential between the most and least successful companies.
And the most productive had fewer managers and six times the training component of those at the bottom of the league.
And even though we're finally making strides at the secondary education stage, says Ward, the fact remains that 40 per cent of tomorrow's talent still leaves school at 16 against just 4 per cent in Japan and 10 per cent in Germany, France and America.
Worse still, engineering and manufacturing are still not viewed as sexy by ambitious youngsters.
Of every 200 16-year-olds just a couple plump for an engineering degree, and only one of those becomes an engineer.
Not a comforting thought for a country with a £17 billion trade deficit.
In fact when men like John Ward start drawing Scotland's profile in a series of sharp statistics, the urgency of the policy re-think becomes all too apparent.
Given the twin facts that our economy is now heavily reliant on light industries, financial services and oil, and that in our newer industries we actually make very few of the components we assemble and distribute, we are especially vulnerable, as recent events have shown, to companies deciding to re-locate in other countries.
It is, says Ward, the classic branch manufacturing economy with Scotland playing the same role as the Pacific rim under-developed countries where Japan has traditionally sub-contracted its less complex work.
The contrast is that these Pacific rim countries are investing in tomorrow at a rate of knots.
South Korea has committed $5 billion over ten years to investing in new technologies, Ward reminded his audience, and Singapore and Taiwan attach the same importance to staying at the cutting edge.
Japan invests two and a half times per head more than the UK.
Part of the reason for that, he contends, is our acute short-termism which could prove terminal.
British companies take out 50 to 70 percent of profits in dividends, twice as much as Japan and nearly three times as much for Germany.
Meanwhile we're impatient for a larger return on investment.
A four-year investor is looking for a 25 per cent return here, against a Japanese counterpart only asking for 7 per cent over 14 years.
There's nothing very miraculous about the German and Japanese post-war economic performances in Ward's view.
They've earned success on the back of prudent and adequate investment in a high skill level — the factor which decides above all else where you come to rest on the continuum from the under-developed third world economies, to the high performing advanced nations.
But underpinning everything, he said, was the empowerment of people to reach their full potential, set their career sights high, and expand their educational horizons.
He stressed that we must capitalise on the traditional Scottish capacity for inventiveness and recognise that education itself is always an investment rather than an on-cost.
And then when the graduates from that process come up with the goods, invest in their innovative ideas.
Too often, he says, we only recognise an opportunity when it arrives back on our doorstep as an import.
All in all, a powerful voyage round our inadequacies by a Scotsman whose perceptions have undoubtedly been broadened and sharpened by the transatlantic philosophies of his company.
And the kind of penetrating insights on which Mr Lang and his Cabinet colleagues might usefully go to school.
Heseltine heads off pits revolt
By Chris McLaughlin and Joy Copley
MICHAEL Heseltine bought off a Conservative revolt and salvaged his own political career yesterday with a reprieve of 12 pits threatened with closure.
In a tactical retreat which largely quelled back-bench dissent, the President of the Board of Trade announced a two-year breathing space for the collieries at a cost of £500million in government subsidies.
Amid charges of a short-term political fix from Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the remaining handful of diehard Tory dissidents, Mr Heseltine said the mines would be given a new chance to compete and eased the way for full privatisation of the coal industry.
In spite of cross-party criticism that the long-awaited white paper on the prospects for coal failed to deliver a long-term, coherent Government energy policy, Mr Heseltine achieved a political success by rallying the Tory Party.
Any chance of a Government defeat when the white paper is debated in the Commons on Monday has now been averted with even the majority of hardcore rebels threatening to abstain rather than vote against the Government.
In the short term, two of the 21 pits under the Government review — Bolsover and Sharlston — will close.
The 10 pits excluded from the inquiry, though technically under independent review, have no future.
British Coal estimated the number of job losses at 5,800.
During rowdy scenes and Labour calls for his resignation, Mr Heseltine gave warning that there could be no guarantees over the future of the pits earmarked for closure last October.
‘The market for coal is complex and unpredictable,’ he said.
‘I have done all that I reasonably could, consistent with economic realities and legal constraints, to increase the opportunities for British Coal.’
Mr Heseltine said the electricity generators and the regional electricity companies had formally confirmed orders for 160 million tonnes of coal over five years in a contract worth £5.5 billion for BC.
He said BC had been authorised to negotiate for future contracts on the basis of supplying at a world market related price.
The Government was prepared to subsidise the difference between this price and BC's cost of production.
Robin Cook, the shadow trade secretary, said: ‘This mix of short-term subsidy and long-term betrayal may be enough to buy off the rebels on your own benches.
‘It will not buy off the nation, who will not forgive this Government for abandoning Europe's richest coal reserves.’
He criticised Mr Heseltine for failing to find a market for one single extra tonne of coal while Richard Caborn, the Labour chairman of the Commons energy select committee, claimed that all 31 pits would be closed within three to four years.
Six of them — Bevercotes, Clipstone, Easington, Rossington, Shirebrook and Westoe — are to be mothballed on a care and maintenance programme but producing no coal.
The rescued pits, most of them in Yorkshire, are Bentle, Hatfield Kiverton, Prince of Wales, Calverton, Billsthorpe, Frickley, Wearmouth, Silverdale, Markham and Rufford.
One, Maltby, near Rotherham, is to put on a development basis without production.
In the long term, Mr Heseltine said that privatisation was the only hope for the industry.
One of the leading dissidents reflected the wider view, when Winston Churchill thanked Mr Heseltine for the ‘considerable distance’ he had travelled since last year.
Nicholas Winterton, who is planning to abstain in next week's vote, described it as a short-term fix rather than a long-term solution.
British Coal welcomed the ‘chance to fight for a competitive future’.
The two major electricity generators, PowerGen and National Power, declined to comment until they had assessed the white paper.
Smoke alarms pledge after five die in fire
By Alan Dron
LEGISLATION making the fitting of smoke alarms compulsory in all new Scottish houses will be brought in as soon as possible, the Government pledged last night.
The assurance came after the deaths of a father and his four young children in a house fire in Greenock early yesterday morning.
The Strathclyde Firemaster, John Jameson, said at the scene of the tragedy that the family had lost their lives for the price of a £5 smoke alarm.
He attacked the local authority for failing to fit detectors in all of its homes.
Firemen found the bodies of Paul McPherson, 4, and his brothers Hugh, 3, and James, 1, in their beds in their flat in the town's Auchendarroch Street.
Their four-month-old sister Ashley Anne was in her pram in the living room, and their father, Hugh, 29, on the floor beside her.
The children's mother, Anne-Marie Baillie, 23, was on a rare night out when the tragedy happened.
Last night she was under heavy sedation.
The Leader of the Commons, Tony Newton, said: ‘Strathclyde fire brigade is investigating the full circumstances relating to the incident.
‘Mr [Ian]Lang has this issue very much under consideration and will bring forward regulations as soon as possible to make the fitting of wired-in smoke detectors compulsory in all new dwellings which are built.’
Mr Jameson said: ‘There is absolutely no doubt whatsoever that they died for £5 — because one smoke detector would have alerted them.’
He accused the local council of allowing a needless tragedy, through a policy of not fitting smoke detectors to council houses.
‘Had Inverclyde had a policy of installing smoke detectors, and had this house been fitted with them, you and I would not be here today talking about this.’
Mr Jameson went further and called for smoke detectors to be fitted to all homes in the private and publicly-rented sector.
He said the tragedy was all the more desperate because the fatal blaze had been a minor one in firefighting terms.
‘This was a very slow-developing fire, with very little fire damage but immense amounts of smoke, and it's probable they died of asphyxiation.’
The blaze investigation is concentrated around a cooker.
The major factor in the deaths seems to have been polystyrene ceiling tiles in the kitchen and living room.
Peter Marsden, Inverclyde's director of housing, said the decision not to fit the £5 alarms was not attributable to any single factor, although the council had to set funding priorities, such as keeping houses watertight.
Although the alarms looked inexpensive, there were concerns that providing them would saddle landlords with ongoing maintenance costs.
Installation costs would have to be recouped from rents.
People were encouraged to buy their own alarms.
He pointed out that a government-funded voluntary organisation, the Inverclyde Home Safety Group, was providing smoke alarms in some of the district's more deprived areas.
While he was sure yesterday's tragedy would lead to a call for a review of the council's policy, he was uncertain whether it would change.
A recommendation to demolish the block of 1930s-vintage flats where the family lived is due to go to the council's housing committee on 5 April.
As friends and neighbours left flowers on the steps leading to the flat, it emerged that Ms Baillie would be unable to have more children, having been sterilised on medical advice after Ashley Anne's birth.
Neighbours recalled how Ms Bailey was overjoyed at the birth of her daughter.
Two small bunches of carnations and daffodils lay in the common close entrance yesterday, bearing the simple messages ‘Sorry to hear the sad news,’ and ‘Rest in peace’.
Two children aged 12 and 3 were rescued yesterday by firefighters from the top-floor of a tenement in Gairbraid Street, Maryhill, in Glasgow, after a fire broke out in a flat below.
Seven residents of the block were taken to hospital as a precaution.
Picture, Page 5
Divisional fire officer John Martin with a lifesaving £5 smoke alarm
Whistle-blower suspended in Monklands
A REGIONAL councillor has been suspended from his job as a caretaker with Monklands District Council.
Councillor John Murphy told The Scotsman last week that he had proof to back up ‘jobs for the boys’ claims in Monklands.
Councillor Murphy, Labour regional member for Coatbridge North and Glenboig, was suspended on full pay yesterday after a meeting with officials of the housing department, including the depute director, James McCarrell.
The decision was taken pending a full disciplinary hearing.
Councillor Murphy works as a caretaker for flats in Coatbridge.
Mr Murphy, who works for the housing department as a caretaker for a group of flats in Coatbridge and is a shop steward for the National Union of Public Employees, said at the time that he could ‘name names’ and that elected members had told him that they had been put under pressure when short-leeting jobs.
The councillor, who also spoke out to the local newspaper to counter what he said were council leader Jim Brooks' unfounded assertions that jobs for the boys claims were simply smears, also called on other party members in the area to step forward  publicly with any information they had on malpractice.
Mr Murphy, who is being represented by a full-time NUPE official and fellow Strathclyde Labour regional councillor Douglas Hay, declined to comment last night.
However, one party source said:’ The gloves are off.’
Monklands' Housing Convener Councillor Elizabeth Leitch said last night she was unable to confirm Mr Murphy had been suspended.
‘I haven't a clue about it and it would be a matter for management anyway,’ she said.
However the latest development is sure to create new storms within the troubled Labour party in the area, where divisions are still deep over the so-called ‘Monklands Mafia’ affair which has brought out claims not only of jobs favouritism but accusations of sectarianism and abuse of power.
Labour's Scottish Executive attempted to dampen down the controversy with a report which imposed new machinery, such as new standing orders, to tackle what executive chair Anne McGuire described as ‘old-fashioned’ practices.
But its decision to step back from examining the authority's employment practices has disappointed several party members in the area, even though a report is being prepared by independent management consultants into the authority's current and historic recruitment practices.
One of the so-called rebel councillors, Peter Sullivan confirmed after last night's full meeting of Monklands District Council that Mr Murphy had been suspended on full pay pending a disciplinary committee meeting.
Councillor Sullivan said the issue could not be raised at the council last night because the council was the body of his final appeal.
However, he added: ‘I'm quite shocked that this has happened.
It's a sad day when a trade union delegate and a member of the Labour Party can't pass an opinion.’
By Gary Duncan
FEARS of a sectarian bloodbath in Northern Ireland grew last night after Loyalist gunmen claimed their fifth Catholic victim inside 12 hours.
The latest killing, in which a teenager was shot in the head by gunmen in a shop on the Stewartstown Road in west Belfast, was part of an apparent escalation of the outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters' murder campaign.
The mounting violence came as the parents of Tim Parry, the 12-year-old victim of the IRA's Warrington bombing, made the agonising decision to switch off his life support machine.
Tim's father, Colin, watched over his son as the ventilator was removed.
He said Tim ‘went ever so quietly and it was very peaceful’.
In London, Dublin and Belfast yesterday politicians and churchmen pleaded for an end to the slaughter.
In their first ever joint statement, the heads of the Roman Catholic Church in England and Ireland condemned the IRA's actions as barbaric and inhuman, while in Dublin the Irish Senate heard an impassioned plea for the IRA to lay down its arms from the father of an Enniskillen bombing victim, Gordon Wilson.
Last night the teenager murdered by Loyalist gunmen was named by friends as Dee Walsh, 18, from Colinvale, Poleglass, west Belfast.
He had been working in a shop known as the coal bunker when the two assassins burst in, one carrying a shotgun.
They opened fire and Mr Walsh fell on top of another youth.
The gunmen kept firing and bullets went through the victim, injuring the youth trapped underneath him.
He was hit in the leg and was last night said to be in a serious condition.
Just hours before four Catholic workmen were shot and killed by the UFF in the seaside village of Castlerock, on Ulster's north Antrim coast.
Two building workers, James Kelly, 25, and James McKenna, 52, from Maghera, south Derry, died when their van was sprayed with gunfire as they and three other men arrived to carry out house renovations.
Gerry Dalrymple, 58, of Rasharkin, Co Antrim, died later in hospital and last night a life-support machine for Noel O'Kane, 20, of Upperlands, Co Derry, was switched off.
The fifth man, Gerry McEldowney, also from Rasharkin, had a bullet removed from one of his legs and was described as being seriously ill.
Earlier the homes of three nationalist councillors, one a Sinn Fein member, were hit by UFF bombers in Belfast and Banbridge, Co Down.
All were at home, but escaped uninjured.
The wave of cold-blooded attacks confirmed fears of a dramatic increase in Loyalist violence directed against constitutional nationalists and those suspected of being connected with the IRA, no matter how loosely.
Church leaders and politicians on all sides condemned the latest atrocity and appealed for calm.
Security chiefs expressed fears that retaliatory action by the IRA could create a sectarian war.
The IRA has agreed to meet Gordon Wilson, a retired Protestant businessman from Northern Ireland and a new member of the Irish senate.
His daughter Marie, a nurse, was killed in the Enniskillen Remembrance Day atrocity in 1987.
Mr Wilson said the news of the Loyalist killings ‘broke his heart’.
‘Northern Ireland and all of Ireland and its people are close to my heart, and we are bleeding to death,’ he told senators.
But his appeal to the IRA leadership to call a halt to its bloody campaign is likely to be dismissed as promptly as the Loyalists yesterday rejected calls to lay down their arms.
A Sinn Fein member, father of six Peter Gallagher, 44, of Toomebridge, Co Antrim, was gunned down at a builder's yard in Belfast, on Wednesday.
The loyalists, who are also using grenades, blast incendiary bombs and a new type of under-car booby trap device to target victims, said they plan to step up the campaign against what they describe as ‘the pan nationalist front’.
A statement warned: ‘So long as the SDLP continue to exercise a veto on political progress in Ulster, courtesy of IRA violence, and so long as Sinn Fein/IRA continue to act as the military wing of Irish nationalism, then so long will our war against them continue and intensify.’
In today's attack one of the shot workmen was hit as he tried to make a run for it at Gortree Park where a major housing renovation scheme has been under way since before Christmas.
All five men were inside the van when a second one pulled up alongside.
Two gunmen leapt out and fired at least 12 shots.
At first the gunmen fled in their getaway van towards the village but stopped and did a U-turn, before driving back again and past the spot of the killings.
The van was later found burned out.
Mr Dalrymple's son Joe said the gunmen had been prepared to shoot anybody so long as they were Catholics.
He said: ‘It's an awful tragedy.
My father and this family have no connections with trouble.
It wasn't my father they were after.
It was absolutely anybody, because everybody on that bus was presumed to be a Catholic worker.
They just didn't care.
‘It's unbelievable.
My father hadn't a bad word to say about anybody.
He was too honest and hardworking.
He just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.’
Tonight the deputy leader of the SDLP, Mr Seamus Mallon, MP for Newry and Armagh, said his party members would not yield to the terrorists.
Everybody in Northern Ireland was now a potential victim, particularly politicians and construction workers.
A so-called pan-nationalist front did not exist.
He added: ‘The loyalist paramilitaries are trying to terrorise an entire section of the community.
It is aimed at the political section within that community.
People in all parties, not just our own, are very courageous people, very brave and will not be deflected from serving the community and political process.
‘The terrorist fears democracy more than he fears anything else.’
Northern Ireland security minister Mr Michael Mates said the killings achieved nothing.
He asked: ‘What has been achieved by the death of a four-year-old boy in Warrington last Saturday and another 12-year-old who has died today?
What is achieved because three men going about their job earning money to support their families are dead, simply because they are Roman Catholics, and for no other known reason?
‘He was a good lad.
He lay there and quietly slipped away’ Audrey Gillan reports on how the family of a 12-year-old IRA victim made the agonising decision to switch off his life-support machine
LAST Saturday he was the ‘noisy, impudent chap’ in his family but, nevertheless, a ‘bloody good kid’.
But that was before doctors switched off the ventilator that had kept him alive ever since he ran in terror from one IRA bomb into the full force of another.
Yesterday 12-year-old Tim Parry lay on his hospital bed and ‘quietly slipped away’.
Watching over his son, Colin Parry felt extremely moved.
The boy he saw was ‘most unlike’ the son he knew.
‘It wouldn't have surprised me if he had sat up and shouted ‘Geronimo’ as he went,’he said.
‘But he didn't — he went ever so quietly and it was very peaceful.’
Mr Parry and his wife Wendy took the painful decision to switch off their son's life support system.
For the last six days they had clung to hope, but they finally felt it pulling away from them — the miracle they wanted just did not happen.
Each day Tim spent in hospital they thought he might survive, but tests showed the opposite.
Tim had gone to Warrington's busy town centre to buy a pair of Everton football shorts when an IRA bomb blew up in his face.
The same bomb killed three-year-old Johnathan Ball who will be buried at a family funeral later today.
Tim will be buried in the Everton shorts along with a signed Everton shirt given to him by the members of his favourite team.
‘It's a nice ending in a way,’ said Mr Parry.
The family, he said, were coping well — including Tim's brother and sister Dominic and Abby who said their goodbyes before the life-support machine was switched off at the Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery in Liverpool.
‘They held his hand and they were close to him and that was important to us,’ said Mr Parry.
‘We didn't want Tim to die without Dominic and Abby seeing him and touching him.
‘We know the future is going to be very difficult.
People don't rebuild their lives quickly after things like this.
I don't know how well we will do it, but it won't be for the want of trying.’
Holding his wife's hand, Colin Parry explained that he had stayed alone with his son.
They felt it right that Wendy did not see him die.
‘The doctor did warn me certain things can happen when the machine is switched off, but he was a good lad.
He just lay there and he quietly slipped away — most unlike himself because he was normally such a noisy, impudent chap.
I have to say I was extremely moved.’
The couple realised their son's death was inevitable but hope always lingered.
Saturday — when the bomb went off — had been ‘unbelievably painful’ and when they found out about Tim they ‘didn't think he would live the night’.
‘That was an awful time, but hope rose from then on and Tim seemed capable of beating this.
Because of his efforts, without really meaning to, we became very optimistic,’ said Mr Parry.
‘Yesterday morning we had almost reached the point, I think, of believing that the test would be plain sailing — we really did think he would make it.
So yesterday was absolute agony.
In some ways it was worse than Saturday because it was then we realised all hope had gone.’
As he told the press of his son's death, Mr Parry spoke with remarkable composure but he fought to hold back tears when asked if he felt anger for the IRA.
He replied: ‘I honestly don't, it's not because I'm being magnanimous.
I just feel loss for us, Wendy and myself.
We produced a bloody good kid…
He was a fine lad.
‘He had his moments, he could be a cheeky little pup.
But he was a great kid, a good character, and our thoughts are just with Tim and our family.
The IRA…
I've really got no words for them.’
Sighing, Tim's father said the family knew the country had been praying for the 12-year-old.
‘It is terrible that it never worked.
But we've got to cling to the view that some good may come of this.’
Freeze of postage rates is extended
THE postage stamp price freeze is being extended for five months, the Post Office said yesterday.
Prices of 24p for first-class and 18p second-class were frozen in October until the end of this month, and now will remain unchanged through August.
Postal rates have not risen since September 1991.
Chief executive Bill Cockburn said that despite the recession Royal Mail had increased ‘efficiency and productivity to such an extent that we are able to share this success with our customers’.
Ford unions claim strike success
A STRIKE by thousands of foremen, salesmen, and computer and personnel staff at the Ford yesterday was a total success, according to the unions.
The strikers, protesting against the threat of compulsory redundancies, gave leaflets to customers looking at the Mondeo on its promotion day, pointing out that many of the skills which went into it were in danger of being wiped out.
Talks fail to avert railway action
RAILWAY workers last night looked likely to go ahead with their strike over possible job losses next Friday after exploratory talks between officials of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union and British Rail management ended in stalemate.
The RMT general secretary, Jimmy Knapp, had given warning that there could be more 24-hour strikes unless BR guaranteed no compulsory job losses.
Tax bankruptcy of du Cann pre-empted
THE Inland Revenue's bankruptcy petition against Sir Edward du Cann was dismissed yesterday at the High Court in London.
According to sources, a bankruptcy order had been made against the former chairman of the Conservative 1922 Committee by the solicitors Denton Hall Burgin and Warrens, who had previously acted for him, and the Inland Revenue petition was automatically dismissed.
Allitt trial told of boy's dizzy spells
A BOY yesterday told how he had developed dizzy spells and a craving for chocolate soon after a nurse accused of murdering four children came to live at his home.
Jonathan Jobson, 16, from Peterborough, Cambridgeshire, said his condition had improved when he was away from home on work experience and when the nurse, Beverley Allitt, had left.
Allitt, 24, formerly of First Avenue, Grantham, Lincolnshire, denies murdering four children at the Grantham and Kesteven hospital between February and April, 1991.
She is also accused of the attempted murder of Jonathan, nine children, and Dorothy Lowe, 79, at a Leicestershire nursing home.
She denies the charges along with alternative charges of causing grievous bodily harm.
Nottingham Crown Court heard that Allitt had gone to live at the Jobson home in 1991.
Until then, Jonathan said, his health had been fine.
Jonathan told John Goldring, QC, prosecuting, that after her arrival he had begun to suffer dizzy spells and developed an addiction for chocolate.
‘Basically I could not get enough.
I was spending £2 or £3 a day on chocolate.
If I could not get it I became irritable.’
Jonathan described to the court how in August 1991 he had been given a blackcurrant drink made by Allitt.
‘Bev asked me if I would like a drink.
It didn't taste unusual but half way through I noticed a chalky powdery substance at the bottom of the glass.
‘I remarked about the glass being dirty.
I was quite annoyed she had used a dirty glass.
She just replied that she had got it from the cupboard.’
Jonathan, his mother and Allitt had gone to a market together: while there he began to feel nauseated.
‘My headache just grew and grew and suddenly the light faded and I could not see a thing.
The next thing I knew I was on the floor.’
He said someone had brought him a chair and he had begun to come round and had felt fine.
It had been decided he should go to hospital for a checkup and during the journey he had felt a little shaky.
‘I was aware of my heart being there…like a dull pain.
That lasted about 15 minutes and the pain had gone by the time I had got to hospital,’ he said.
The trial is continuing in the absence of Allitt, who has been suffering from the slimmer's disease, anorexia nervosa, and was in Bassetlaw Hospital, Worksop.
She has now been transferred from that hospital to Rampton Special Hospital.
The trial was adjourned until Monday.
Outrage after killer driver gets sentence of 21 months
A 21-MONTH jail sentence for a drunken driver who killed a father of four just before Christmas was greeted with outrage yesterday.
Martin Clarke, who will serve only half the term, was three times over the legal limit when he struck David Adams as he cycled home from the supermarket on 21 December.
Sentencing Clarke at Oxford Crown Court, Judge Francis Allen said he took into account he had not been driving his van fast or badly at the time.
Mr Adams's widow, Cathy, described the sentence of less than half the maximum five years for the offence as disgraceful.
‘How can life be so cheap?’ she demanded.
Chief Inspector Davina Logan described the sentence as wholly inappropriate.
The Campaign Against Drinking and Driving also condemned the sentence, as did the back-bench Tory MP Geoffrey Dickens, who called it derisory.
Clarke, 31, a groundsman of Witney, Oxfordshire, pled guilty to causing death by careless driving, having consumed excess alcohol.
He is thought to be the first to be charged with the offence created by the Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 1991.
Under rules which came into effect last autumn, as his sentence was less than four years, he will be freed from jail automatically after serving half the term, unless he reoffends.
Before he was sentenced, Tony McGeorge, defending, said Clarke's wife had divorced him and his family had been threatened since the tragedy.
Judge Allen told Clarke: ‘Nothing this court can do can remedy the harm caused by your decision to drive on that day.’
Outside, Clarke's solicitor, Alan Borland, said he was considering an appeal against sentence.
He also said Clarke was anxious to do all he could to make amends.
At a news conference at Witney police station, Mrs Adams, 39, said: ‘He can't bring him back, can he?
That's the only thing he could do.
I would not be responsible for my actions if I saw him.’
Mrs Adams bitterly attacked the sentence and the legal system.
‘I don't think any sentence would really be appropriate but I can't bear the thought that he is going to be out one day, and that day is going to be sooner than I thought.
I keep thinking of all my children.
Just one more birthday and he's going to be out.
‘I think the whole system is totally wrong, how they dealt with this case and how they deal with similar cases.
They've got to do something, life just can't be that cheap.’
She said Judge Allen should have made an example of Clarke and she criticised an earlier sentence he received for a 1983 drink driving offence — a £150 fine and 18-month ban.
If the law had been tougher then perhaps Clarke would not have reoffended, she said.
‘I would have my husband.
My children would have their father.’
Mrs Adams said her four sons — Richard, nine, Stuart, five, Mark, two, and Thomas, 11 months — were still coming to terms with the loss of their father, a former Royal Air Force engineer whom she described as a happy, family man.
Hopes fade for four missing fishermen
FOUR fishermen were feared drowned last night in two separate North Sea incidents.
In the first, the 32ft Whitby-registered Heritage was found on the sea bed 10 miles off the Yorkshire coast east of Scarborough.
The two missing crewmen were named as the skipper, Tony Mapplebreck, in his 30s and married with three children, from Bridlington, and crewman Shaun Rowley, 21, who was single and lived in Scarborough.
‘It is a disaster,’ said Humber coastguards district staff officer Tony Ellis.
‘We have 20 vessels still searching the area, but unfortunately things are not looking too good.’
The Heritage went down at about 6:30am while fishing with its sister boat, the Katie Jane.
Crew noticed the Heritage was missing and radioed for help.
An air and sea search was started immediately and after a patch of diesel oil was spotted, the Heritage was found on the seabed.
Peter Langley, from Bridlington, who owns both trawlers, was aboard the Katie Jane and spent the day helping the search.
There was no distress signal or mayday call from the Heritage, and coastguards have no idea what caused the tragedy.
‘The wind was fresh at the time but should not have given the trawler any problems,’ Mr Ellis said.
‘It was of steel construction, and was perfectly seaworthy.
One possibility is that its nets snagged on something on the seabed.
That would not be unknown, but most fishermen know the fishing grounds like the back of their hands.’
The second accident involved an 18ft boat which capsized just a few yards off the Lincolnshire coast.
An air and sea search involving a helicopter, tugs and lifeboats yielded no sign of the two men on board.
Last night Skegness lifeboat and a number of coastal rescue teams were scouring six miles of shoreline.
BBC joins ABC in news link-up
BBC News and the American ABC News network have joined forces to create the world's biggest radio and television news-gathering operation, it was announced yesterday.
Reporters and production crews will co-operate throughout the world with exchanges of material and daily discussions of news coverage plans.
No financial details of the agreement were being revealed but the BBC said it represented an expansion.
Talks fail to avert rail strike
NEXT Friday's planned 24-hour strike by railway workers looked likely to go ahead last night after exploratory talks between officials of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union and British Rail management ended in stalemate.
The union was invited to talks by BR after Monday's vote by members of RMT, the biggest rail union, to strike in protest at the threat of compulsory job losses.
Train drivers are being balloted on industrial action over the planned sell-off of BR, with officials of the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen confident of a Yes vote when voting ends on 7 April.
Guppy gets five years for gems robbery fraud
THE GEMS dealer turned fraudster, Darius Guppy, the best man to the Princess of Wales's brother, Earl Spencer, was jailed for five years yesterday over a bogus robbery and false insurance claim.
The 28-year-old Old Etonian was also fined £533,000 for conspiracy to steal £1.2 million from the gemstones firm of which he was an executive director.
With that came a warning that if it were not paid within six months, he would serve three years extra.
With him in the dock and receiving the same sentences was his business partner, Benedict Marsh, also 28.
Both men grimaced slightly as Judge Andrew Brooks announced the sentences at Snaresbrook Crown Court, east London, which followed five weeks after the end of a three-month trial.
As the judge left the court, the dock was surrounded by friends and relations of the two men.
Guppy's heavily pregnant wife Patricia, 27, rushed forward and embraced him over the dock rail before the two men were led away.
‘I love you,’ she was heard to say.
Each man was sentenced to five years for conspiracy to defraud Lloyd's of London of £1.8 million, five years concurrently for conspiracy to steal £1.2 million from their firm — for which the £533,000 fine was also imposed — and 12 months concurrently for conspiracy to commit false accounting.
They had pled not guilty at their trial to the three charges.
At a later hearing Guppy had pled guilty to three charges of falsely claiming he was entitled to repayment of VAT for bogus gold bullion exports, and Marsh pled guilty to one charge.
The judge imposed a fine of £2,000, with an alternative of 45 days imprisonment, on each charge.
In announcing the large fines for conspiracy to steal, Judge Brooks said he had listened to the account given to the court of the information given to the police by both defendants about how they had committed the fraud and had put some of the proceeds in foreign bank accounts.
The court had heard that Guppy would not give details of one account in Austria because publicity might ‘compromise’ someone else.
The judge told Guppy: ‘I am satisfied that you have at least as much as Marsh stacked away somewhere.
You have declined to give police details of your account for reasons that are best known to yourself and in my view the only inference I can draw from that is that you have the money at least to pay a fine.’
Timothy Langdale, QC, counsel for Guppy, said he had had high expenses in recent years and it should not be assumed ‘that there is some pot of gold stuck in some foreign country’.
Mr Langdale added: ‘He is quite clearly a ruined man — ruined in more senses than just one.
He is ruined in the sense of both money and reputation.’
Guppy could become bankrupt over the affair, and no profit would remain once he had provided the remaining cash to the court.
His wife had been particularly anxious that Guppy should surrender any remaining money from his crimes, said Mr Langdale.
‘They plan to make a completely fresh start upon his release from prison.’
John Kelsey-Fry, counsel for Marsh, said his client was the first of the two men to volunteer to be interviewed about what had happened to the missing money.
‘Without his help the police would not have known where to look and certainly would not have known where to recover this money,’ he said.
Marsh had spent some of the money on buying a Jaguar, followed by a Porsche which had now been repossessed.
Couples told that fertility service may end
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
CHILDLESS couples waiting for test-tube baby treatment in Tayside and Fife have been warned by their doctors that the service may be withdrawn.
Dr John Mills and Dr Geoff James, who are consultant gynaecologists at Ninewells hospital in Dundee, have written to the 450 patients on their waiting list to say that in-vitro fertilisation treatment may in future be available only to those who can pay around £1,500 per cycle of treatment.
They have called on couples to write in protest to their MPs and health board.
The doctors were rebuked yesterday by Fife Health Board, which issued a statement saying the unofficial letter had caused considerable distress to several couples.
Dr James was  unrepentant last night, saying that any distress comes from the threat to the service and not the decision by the doctors to inform patients about it.
Their letter follows the decision earlier this month by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to reject a recommendation from a medical advisory group that a free NHS-funded in-vitro service be established in Scotland.
Charges are levied for treatment in Edinburgh and Aberdeen, couples are asked to make a donation in Dundee and the service is free in Glasgow.
Instead of a centrally funded service, Mr Lang said, health boards will have to decide whether to provide IVF and other hi-tech treatments from within their existing budgets.
In the letter to patients the doctors write: ‘It is our belief that health boards and fund holding general practitioners will find that they are, like anyone else in the health service, short of money and that they may be reluctant to purchase [these services]on behalf of their patients.’
Dr James said he did not know if Tayside Health Board is to continue providing money for treatment.
A meeting has been organised for next week to discuss the situation.
‘The board may well change its attitude,’ he said.
The statement from Fife Health Board said that it will decide its policy on providing IVF treatment in the next few months.
The letter from the Dundee doctors recommends ‘very strongly’ that couples should write to their health board general manager or family doctor to ask that these services be bought on their behalf.
‘The idea of the letter was to get patients to protest at the lack of central funding and to explain to health board general managers that these are services patients think should be provided,’ Dr James said.
‘It seems unfair that IVF and other forms of assisted conception are being singled out among all the other forms of infertility treatment that can be used.’
Shooting raises fear of sectarian bloodbath Cardinals on either side of the Irish Sea yesterday joined forces for the first time to condemn the IRA, reports Gary Duncan.
THE MOUNTING death toll from sectarian violence in Ulster yesterday brought forth a chorus of condemnation in Britain and Ireland.
Churchmen and politicians joined in calls for an end to the killing as the deaths of four Catholics in a loyalist attack raised fears of a further escalation in the bloodshed.
In their first-ever joint statement, the heads of the Roman Catholic Church in England and Wales and in Ireland, Cardinals Basil Hume and Cahal Daly, said the Irish Republican Army's latest actions were utterly inhuman and barbaric.
In Dublin, the father of a victim of the Enniskillen bombing, Gordon Wilson, made an impassioned plea to the Irish Senate to support his attempt to begin a dialogue with the IRA, which yesterday agreed to meet him.
Mr Wilson said the news of the loyalist killings broke his heart.
‘Northern Ireland and all of Ireland and its people are close to my heart, and we are bleeding to death,’ he told senators.
The mounting protests on all sides came as the outlawed Ulster Freedom Freedom fighters, who claimed responsibility for the four shootings, threatened to step up their murder campaign.
In the attack, two building workers — James Kelly, 25, and James McKenna, 52, from Maghera, south Derry — were gunned down when two assassins sprayed their van with gunfire.
The attack took place as they and three other men arrived to carry out renovations at houses in the seaside village of Castlerock, on the north Antrim coast.
Gerry Dalrymple, 58, of Rasharkin, Co Antrim, and Noel O'Kane, 20, of Upperlands, Co Derry, both died later in hospital.
A fifth man, Gerry McEldowney, survived.
Also from Rasharkin, he had a bullet removed from one leg and was described as in a serious condition.
Earlier, three nationalist councillors — one a Sinn Fein member — escaped uninjured when their homes were hit by UFF bombers in Belfast and Co Down.
Last night, two Catholics were gunned down at a shop on the Stewartstown Road, west Belfast and one is believed to have been seriously wounded.
The attacks confirmed fears of a dramatic increase in loyalist violence and raised the threat of a sectarian shooting war should the IRA bow to pressure to strike back.
Last night, the UFF, now using grenades, blast incendiary bombs and a new type of under-car booby trap device to target victims, gave warning they plan to intensify their campaign against what they describe as ‘the pan-nationalist front’ of Sinn Fein, the IRA and the Social Democratic and Labour Party.
In their joint call for an end to violence in Ireland, Cardinals Daly and Hume said the IRA's actions were totally incompatible with the teachings of the Catholic Church.
‘We know our feeling of revulsion is shared by the overwhelming majority of the people in Ireland, as well as Britain, who bear no responsibility for such outrageous acts perpetrated by a very small faction,’ they said.
Gordon Wilson used the occasion to address the IRA in advance of his talks with them.
He called on them to abandon their armed struggle.
Mr Wilson, whose daughter Marie died in the IRA's 1987 Remembrance Day blast in Enniskillen, said even the republicans' most fervent supporters were questioning their campaign.
From the outside it seemed, he said, to have become a campaign for political stagnation.
‘In the eyes of all but a small percentage of Irish people, the so-called armed struggle has degenerated into a campaign of sickening sectarian killing of fellow Irish men and women.’
However, Mr Wilson said he looked forward to talking to the IRA.
‘Many people may accuse me of naivety, yet I believe they are wrong…
To have any hope of resolving these difficulties demands that we communicate.
‘There are many severed hearts in Northern Ireland today, there are many broken hearts.’
Police join forces in hunt for bomber
By Frank Urquhart
DETECTIVES from four forces held a cross-border summit meeting in Edinburgh yesterday as they stepped-up the hunt for the lone terrorist responsible for a spate of letter bomb attacks in Scotland and England.
The officers from Lothian and Borders, Grampian, Northern Constabulary and Cambridgeshire met to review the investigation.
It is being centred on the North- east, where the three explosive packages were posted.
The devices were sent to the Scottish Office in Edinburgh, the Dounreay nuclear plant in Caithness and the headquarters of Anglian Water in Huntingdon.
The letter bomb attacks have been linked to last Wednesday's elaborate bomb hoaxes at the offices of leading oil companies in Aberdeen and police believe that a rogue loner, rather than a small terrorist group, is responsible.
The force representatives agreed at the meeting at Leith Police Station that the hunt for the bomb maker should be co-ordinated by Det Supt Ron Coutts, the depute head of Grampian CID.
A spokesman for Lothian and Borders said after the meeting: ‘Very useful discussion took place, along with a good exchange of information.
This liaison will continue.
‘There appear to be similarities in the devices and indications that all emanated from the Aberdeen area.’
The spokesman also stressed that anyone receiving what he or she considered to be a suspect package should exercise extreme caution and contact the police immediately.
He added: ‘An appeal is made to all members of the public to pass any information, no matter how insignificant they feel it to be, to the police, either at Aberdeen or their local police station.’
Region may ask bullies for solution to problem
By James Rougvie
TAYSIDE Region, the first local authority in the United Kingdom to set up a special team to tackle classroom bullying, may turn to the tormentors for help in tackling the problem.
Prof Anatol Pikas, of Uppsala University, Sweden, pioneered the shared concern method of tackling bullying which has been used in Scandinavia and England.
Yesterday, Prof Pikas outlined his methods at a seminar in Dundee to teachers, psychologists and the bullying and truancy team which starts operating in the summer.
Prof Pikas said his methods were non-accusatory, and involved asking the bully for a solution to the problem, bringing together the bully and the victim, and discussing ways they can live together.
‘We put together a set of rules and also ask the bully what should be done if the rules are broken.
It is not a preaching philosophy, but we ask the bully to come up with the answers.’
The education convener, Mervyn Rolfe, said that although Tayside did not appear to have a greater bullying problem than elsewhere, anything which impeded a pupil should be tackled swiftly and methodically.
‘We are studying a number of ways of dealing with the problem.
Traditional methods seem to have failed, so we are interested in identifying good practice so we can spread it throughout Tayside,’ he said.
This week, Scottish Secretary Ian Lang accused ‘opt-out’ parents for contributing to increases in ill-  discipline and truancy.
Trapped whales of Scapa Flow heading for the open sea again David Hartley records the successful end of Operation Gentle Shepherd
THE effort to herd the Scapa Flow whales to safety ended in success last night.
When Operation Gentle Shepherd swung into action for the second time, five of the six sperm whales were coaxed by 14 rescue vessels between the islands of Swona and South  Ronaldsay and were heading for the Pentland Firth when they dived beneath the waves.
A straggler had also been rounded up and had rejoined the other whales.
Andy Dorin, Orkney officer for Scottish Natural Heritage, said last night from one of the rescue vessels: ‘We're lying off the southern tip of South Ronaldsay and the whales are in sight several hundred metres ahead of us.
‘We managed to shepherd five down at the second attempt but one straggler broke free.
We turned round and have managed to encourage him of his own volition to rejoin the others to make sure that all six enter the Pentland Firth and have a free passage out into the Atlantic.’
During an earlier effort the whales — which have been trapped within Scapa Flow for almost five weeks — had been shepherded to within a third of a mile of the entrance, but dived again and stayed at Scapa Flow until the later shepherding effort succeeded.
Members of the rescue team were elated when they landed at Scapa Pier near Kirkwall last night.
Dr Tony Martin, a whale biologist at the Sea Mammal Research Unit in Cambridge, said: ‘It is marvellous that it's worked and hopefully people both here and internationally will now have a better idea of how to solve a similar problem.
We tried a very softly-softly approach originally because we didn't want to push them too hard.
‘But it became obvious that we weren't posing enough of a threat to get them through the bottle neck and as a result they dived and went hell-for-leather back into Scapa Flow.
‘As a result we had to regroup and go after them again in a big pincer movement.
But this time we learned from our mistake, went after them with everything we had got and just pushed them through into the open sea.’
John Goold, a research student from the University of North Wales, said there had been a remarkable development when one of the whales broke away from the other five as they attempted to usher them out into the Pentland Firth for the second time.
‘When they realised that one was missing the others stopped as they were about to leave Hoxa Sound and waited for it to catch up,’ he said.
‘They weren't going to leave without their friend — in a way they were displaying remarkably human behaviour.’
Lynda Williams, a conservationist from North Wales, described her final view of the whales: ‘It was just so poetic.
We literally saw the whales heading into the sunset as they swam towards deeper water.
It was beautiful.’
Sir Hector Monro, Scottish Office environment minister, sent congratulations to everyone involved in the operation.
He said: ‘I am very pleased that this operation, which has involved a whole range of bodies and been well co-ordinated by Scottish Natural Heritage, has been so successful.’
Council worker suspended over ‘jobs for the boys’ claim
By Susan Dean
A STRATHCLYDE regional councillor has been suspended from his job as a caretaker with Monklands District Council for his claims that he has proof to back up ‘jobs for the boys’ allegations.
John Murphy, Labour regional member for Coatbridge North and Glenboig, was suspended on full pay yesterday after a meeting with officials of the housing department, including the depute director, James McCarrell.
The move, pending a full disciplinary hearing, follows Mr Murphy's claims to The Scotsman earlier this month that he has evidence to support claims that there have been cases of patronage to ensure that certain jobs in the local authority went to Labour Party members.
Mr Murphy, who works for the housing department as a caretaker for a group of flats in Coatbridge and is a shop steward for the National Union of Public Employees, said at the time that he could name names and that elected members had told him they had been put under pressure when short-leeting jobs.
The councillor, who also spoke out to the local newspaper to counter what he said were council leader Jim Brooks's unfounded assertions that jobbery claims were simply smears, also called on other party members in the area to step forward publicly with any information they had on malpractice.
Mr Murphy, who is being represented by a NUPE official and fellow Strathclyde Labour regional councillor, Douglas Hay, declined to comment last night.
However, one party source said: ‘The gloves are off.’
Monklands' housing convener, Elizabeth Leitch, said she was unable to confirm Mr Murphy had been suspended.
‘I haven't a clue about it and it would be a matter for management anyway,’ she said.
The latest development is sure to create storms within the troubled Labour party in the area, where divisions are still deep over the so-called Monklands Mafia affair which has brought out claims not only of jobs favouritism but accusations of sectarianism and abuse of power.
Labour's Scottish executive attempted to dampen down the controversy with a report which imposed new machinery, such as standing orders, to tackle what the executive chairwoman, Anne McGuire, described as old-fashioned practices.
Its decision to step back from examining the authority's employment methods has disappointed several party members in the area, even though a report is being prepared by independent management consultants into the authority's current and historic recruitment practices.
One of the so-called rebel councillors, Peter Sullivan, confirmed after last night's full meeting of Monklands District Council that Mr Murphy had been suspended on full pay pending a disciplinary committee meeting.
Councillor Sullivan said the issue could not be raised at the council last night because the council was the body of his final appeal.
However, he added: ‘I'm quite shocked that this has happened.
It's a sad day when a trade union delegate and a member of the Labour Party can't pass an opinion.’
John Murphy: claims he could name names
Community service for killers
TWO men who battered a man to death with hockey sticks after he shouted racist taunts at them walked free from the High Court in Glasgow yesterday.
Azeem Nazie, 25, and Liaquat Ali, 23, were each ordered to serve 200 hours community service.
Last March, they pled guilty to the culpable homicide of Hugh McCallum, 26, who was married to an Asian woman.
Sentence was deferred for a year.
Nazie, now of 155 Maxwell Drive, Pollokshields, and Ali, now of 2 Redhills, Lennoxtown, struck Mr McCallum, of 16 James Gray Street, Pollokshields, Glasgow, with hockey sticks and killed him in nearby Nithsdale Road on 6 August, 1991.
The move, pending a full disciplinary hearing, follows Mr Murphy's claims to The Scotsman earlier this month that he has evidence to support claims that there have been cases of patronage to ensure that certain jobs in the local authority went to Labour Party members.
Race row official's apology accepted
By Eric McKenzie
A SENIOR Strathclyde  education official whose remarks linking genetic factors to school under-performance of black and Asian children started a row over racism, apologised last night for his comments.
The apology by David McNeill, senior depute education director, was unanimously accepted at an emergency meeting of the executive committee of Strathclyde Community Relations Council.
Bashir Maan, chairman of the CRC, said: ‘Such a serious mistake should never have been made.
Such mistakes damage the confidence of ethnic minorities and lead to further misunderstandings.’
He called on the regional council to take a very serious view particularly of the appointment of senior executives and of anti-racist training programmes.
The aim was ‘to make sure that all their employees are well-versed with the terms of the Race Relations Act, 1976, and also that they are committed to multi-culturism, anti-racism and the provision of equal opportunities for all.’
The row broke out last week after Mr McNeill's reported comments that malnutrition or genetic factors could be  responsible for a high level of black and Asian children in special schools.
Since then Mr McNeill, who is about to retire, has apologised to the regional council for his remarks.
After last night's hour-long meeting at the CRC offices, Mr McNeill said there had been a full and frank exchange of views, but declined to add anything.
Later Mr Maan said that Mr McNeill, in a 20-minute statement to the meeting, had offered his very sincere regrets.
‘He has apologised unreservedly…he was very disturbed and very sincere in showing his regrets.’
Asked whether he thought Mr McNeill had intended to make a racist comment, Mr Maan said that after listening to him he felt it had been an error of judgment and that Mr McNeill had not meant to offend anybody.
Before Mr McNeill's remarks last week, it was announced that the Commission for Relation Equality has begun a formal investigation into the assessment procedures for bilingual children in Strathclyde.
Mr Maan said he hoped the region would fully co-operate with the CRE to get everything out in the open and sorted out.
‘The problem is not with Mr McNeill, the problem is with institutional racism.
Unless that is sorted out the problem will remain there,’ Mr Maan added.
‘The region has got to come out in the open and to do more than what they have been doing before to make a real commitment to get rid of racism, particularly institutional racism which has been built up over many, many years.’
ANNAN More radioactive particles found
A SIX-MONTH step-up in checks on the Solway Firth foreshore near Annan after five small radioactive particles were found has resulted in others being located.
British Nuclear Fuels Limited, operators of Chapelcross nuclear power station, says the particles were of no radiological significance.
It says strainers to trap the material from an outlet pipeline are on trial.
ARBROATH Firm to make 50 more redundant
ARBROATH has been dealt another jobs blow.
The engineering firm of Giddings and Lewis is to make 50 workers redundant.
In February the firm announced 90 redundancies.
Arbroath is now the unemployment blackspot of north-east Scotland.
A spokesman for the firm said yesterday that the new redundancies were to allow further restructuring in the Arbroath plant and maximise the company's manufacturing resources.
The Angus East MP, Andrew Welsh, said: ‘This is another sad day for Arbroath.’
He hoped the firm would continue its presence in the town.
I hope the firm in its restructuring will continue to fight back and retain this long-established engineering business in the town.’
EDDLESTON Victim of road crash named
A DRIVER who died following a two-car crash at Eddleston, near Peebles, was named yesterday as Margaret Keaney, 60, of Biggar Road, Edinburgh.
Shetland role in deep-sea fishing study
SHETLAND Islands Council is to support a study into the fishing potential of the deep waters of the North Atlantic.
The year-long study, commissioned by Highlands and Islands Enterprise, will gather knowledge on deep-sea fishing worldwide before field trials are undertaken.
An interest in deep-water fishing has been shown by owners of large Shetland boats, but most are unwilling to risk high costs for a relatively unknown fishery.
Small-scale deep-water trials three years ago by one fishing boat, the Vega, led to Shetland boats making profitable monkfish catches at 300 to 400 fathoms.
Local boats could not fish much deeper without major modifications.
Since then, French trawlers and Spanish longliners have pioneered a fishery in 500 fathoms, and other countries are investigating the potential of the North Atlantic.
The study will look at the distribution of stocks, their migration and the fishery potential of various species as well as ways to catch them.
The development committee is to ask the council to pay £2,500 towards the £50,000 study.
PAISLEY Ciba man wins chemical title
CHRISTOPHER Barclay, 22, a laboratory technician with Ciba Pigments in Paisley, was yesterday named the chemical industry's Young Person of the Year.
He was one of eight Scottish finalists chosen from employees under the age of 25 and will represent Scotland next month in the national final in London.
Christopher, of Wellington Way, Renfrew, is studying part-time for a BSc degree.
£30,000 lorry hijack earns four years' jail
A STORNOWAY man was jailed for four years at the High Court in Inverness after being convicted of hijacking a lorry with a £30,000 load of spirits, tobacco and groceries.
A not-proven verdict was returned on a charge against Murdo MacIver, 29, who gave his address as c/o 471 Maryhill Road, Glasgow, of assaulting and abducting a Ross-shire lorry driver, Donald Beaton.
Lord MacLean told MacIver, who drove the lorry after the robbery: ‘You may not have occupied a principal role, but you played an essential one.
No doubt the return would have been a high one and I have to take account of that.’
The trial had heard that Donald Beaton's ordeal began while he was asleep in his cab on 10 June last year.
Two men put a hood over his head, bound his hands and threatened to shoot him.
MacIver then drove the lorry, belonging to MacAskills of Stornoway, via Fort William to Glasgow.
Mr Beaton was bundled into a car by two men and driven down the A9.
Near Perth, they burst through a police road block, put in place for another enquiry.
There was a high-speed chase and the two men lost the police, dropped Mr Beaton, and abandoned their vehicle in Blackford in Perthshire.
They have never been caught.
Police picked up Mr Beaton and MacIver was arrested at a road block at Doune.
While MacIver was on bail, he found a job in the US.
His defence advocate, James Reilly said: ‘It is to his credit that he returned to face the music.’
During the trial, Lord Maclean heard a taped confession where MacIver admitted that he suggested which lorry to hijack and drove to Inverness a week before the robbery to check the vehicle's routine.
He denied knowing anything about a plan to abduct the driver or that guns might have been involved.
He named a Glasgow taxi driver, Joe Hughes, as an accomplice but later denied he knew the identities of the other men involved.
KIRKCUDBRIGHT Service order for insurance fraud
A PUBLICAN who set fire to his car and tried to claim insurance has been sentenced to 180 hours of community service.
Kirkcudbright Sheriff Court heard that Meindert Daniels, 50, Castle Douglas, had faced financial problems.
Sheriff James Smith told Daniels that his actions had been foolish and the offence was serious.
He heard that Daniels had set fire to his car after telling his wife that he was going to ‘lose’ it and tell police it had been stolen.
Daniels pled guilty to setting fire to his car on the Castle Douglas — Auchencairn B736 road on February 1st this year whereby the car was extensively damaged.
He also admitted attempting to defraud the Provincial Insurance Company and falsely representing to police officers that the car had been stolen from Cotton Street, Castle Douglas.
An agent said Daniels realised the position he was in and the seriousness of the his actions.
But he had been in such a degree of desperation because of his financial position.
GRAMPIAN Councillor barred from committees
A REGIONAL councillor, Terry Penny, was stripped of his membership of committees, sub-committees and working parties for three months by a meeting of the full council yesterday because of unruly behaviour and remarks about the Grampian convener, Bob Middleton, and the policy and resources chairman, Morag Morrell.
Two weeks ago he labelled them respectively ‘the J R Ewing of Aberdeen’ and a ‘Victorian madam’.
WICK Widow sues over family valuables
A PAKISTANI widow is claiming a relative has cheated her out of £36,000 in cash and £20,000 worth of jewellery after her husband's death.
In a civil action at Wick Sheriff Court, Surria Amin is suing her brother-in-law, Mohammed Hafeez, for the return of money and jewels she says she gave him for safe-keeping pending settlement of her husband's estate.
At a proof which started yesterday, Mrs Amin said the property is rightfully hers.
Mrs Amin, now living at Gilmore Place, Edinburgh, is seeking decree for the return of £36,593.33 withdrawn from building society accounts.
Official in race row makes new apology
By Eric McKenzie
A SENIOR Strathclyde  education official whose remarks linking genetic factors to school under-performance of black and Asian children started a row over racism, apologised last night for his comments.
The apology by David McNeill, senior depute education director, was unanimously accepted at an emergency meeting of the executive committee of Strathclyde Community Relations Council.
Bashir Maan, chairman of the CRC, said: ‘Such a serious mistake should never have been made.
Such mistakes damage the confidence of ethnic minorities and lead to further misunderstandings.’
He called on the regional council to take a very serious view particularly of the appointment of senior executives and of anti-racist training programmes.
The aim was ‘to make sure that all their employees are well-versed with the terms of the Race Relations Act, 1976, and also that they are committed to multi-culturism, anti-racism and the provision of equal opportunities for all.’
The row broke out last week after Mr McNeill's reported comments that malnutrition or genetic factors could be  responsible for a high level of black and Asian children in special schools.
Since then Mr McNeill, who is about to retire, has apologised to the regional council for his remarks.
After last night's hour-long meeting at the CRC offices, Mr McNeill said there had been a full and frank exchange of views, but declined to add anything.
Later Mr Maan said that Mr McNeill, in a 20-minute statement to the meeting, had offered his very sincere regrets.
‘He has apologised unreservedly…he was very disturbed and very sincere in showing his regrets.’
Asked whether he thought Mr McNeill had intended to make a racist comment, Mr Maan said that after listening to him he felt it had been an error of judgment and that Mr McNeill had not meant to offend anybody.
Before Mr McNeill's remarks last week, it was announced that the Commission for Relation Equality has begun a formal investigation into the assessment procedures for bilingual children in Strathclyde.
Mr Maan said he hoped the region would fully co-operate with the CRE to get everything out in the open and sorted out.
‘The problem is not with Mr McNeill, the problem is with institutional racism.
Unless that is sorted out the problem will remain there,’ Mr Maan added.
‘The region has got to come out in the open and to do more than what they have been doing before to make a real commitment to get rid of racism, particularly institutional racism which has been built up over many, many years.’
Gravediggers reject change in their hours
GRAVEDIGGERS at Vale of Leven Cemetery in Dunbartonshire have refused to accept new working hours which they claim will slash their wages by £30 a week.
Yesterday the men, employed by Dumbarton District Council, threatened to boycott funerals on Saturdays and public holidays unless the plan for the rota is scrapped.
The council's plan to replace their Saturday shift with a standby system has infuriated the men whose bosses have just been given a big pay rise.
One gravedigger said: ‘A £30 a week drop from our top line is a lot of money when we only get £240 before tax.’
The cemeteries chief, John Beveridge is to receive a £6,000 pay award, and his depute Ron McCreath £9,000 on top of an all-round 3 per cent rise for officials.
The council said the standby proposals were part of a package of budget cuts.
The council plans to meet trade unions to discuss the matter further.
Multi-disciplinary study to start the reclamation of Ravenscraig
By Graeme Stewart, Industry Correspondent
THE FIRST step of a plan to transform the former Ravenscraig steel complex in Lanarkshire was taken yesterday.
A study of redevelopment at the former steel plant was publicised by Archie Bethel, chief executive of the Lanarkshire Development Agency.
He said it was the crucial first step in the process of removing the scars from the Lanarkshire landscape.
Reclaiming the former steel site, reckoned to be one of the most polluted pieces of land in the country, would be one of the biggest urban redevelopment projects ever tackled in Europe.
Lanarkshire Development Agency intends to bring together experts from a range of professions to draw up a redevelopment plan for the 1,000-acre site.
Consultants will be invited to carry out a major study into the former steel plant, which closed last June with the loss of 1,200 jobs.
The study is being co-ordinated by a Ravenscraig steering group, which is chaired by the LDA and includes representatives of Scottish Enterprise, British Steel, Motherwell District Council and Strathclyde Regional Council.
Also included in the study will be the 140-acre Clydesdale Works and the 110-acre former Lanarkshire Steelworks site, now owned by Scottish Enterprise.
Mr Bethel said the reclamation of Ravenscraig was a massive task but one that had to be accomplished if the regeneration of Lanarkshire was to succeed.
‘Ravenscraig has been described as one of the biggest environmental challenges in Europe but we also see it as an opportunity to establish Lanarkshire as a world leader in the field of environmental technology.
‘We certainly hope Scottish and UK companies will become involved in the project but we are determined to get the very best expertise, even if it means going abroad,’ he said.
LDA and its partners envisage that the study team will comprise a range of professional disciplines.
It is expected that the members of the team of consultants will be announced in May and that they will be given six months to complete the report, which will be published towards the end of the year.
The findings of previous environmental studies into steel sites, and the continuing environmental investigations on behalf of British Steel, will be made available to them.
The study team will be asked to:
Formulate a redevelopment strategy for the steel sites within the wider context of Lanarkshire's regeneration;
Consider a range of development options and assess their viability and impact;
Link with the environmental consultants investigating the site on behalf of British Steel;
Estimate the financial costs of redevelopment and advise on likely sources of funding.
‘The scale of the initiative is huge but it offers the opportunity of becoming involved in one of Europe's major urban regeneration projects,’ said Mr Bethel.
‘Leaving the Ravenscraig site as it stands is not an option — we believe the scars must be removed from the landscape and the site returned to productive use.
This is the crucial first step in this process.’
Opt-out plan to cut school roll
By Alan Forbes
PARENTS at one of Scotland's largest state schools are collecting names for a petition to call for an opt-out ballot.
The move, at the 1,900-pupil Holyrood Roman Catholic Secondary in Glasgow, could pose a major threat to Strathclyde's schools closure programme and present a tempting plum to the Scottish Office, which has been encouraging schools to leave council control and go for self-governing status.
The plan was revealed to The Scotsman by campaigners against Strathclyde's attempts to close three other RC secondaries and a non-denominational secondary on the south side of Glasgow.
That campaign involves a series of ballots designed to last long enough to prevent the closures, while stopping short of a Yes vote on opting-out.
There is considerable concern in Strathclyde and inside the Educational Institute of Scotland that such delaying ballots may get out of control, and parents in popular schools may decide to vote Yes.
Parents at Holyrood, which accepts large numbers of youngsters through placing requests because of its good academic record, believe that Strathclyde condones overcrowding at the school and resent it.
Some believe the school should opt out and reduce pupil numbers.
Drew Morrice, convener of Strathclyde EIS, yesterday repeated his union's condemnation of parents' using opt-out ballots as a delaying tactic.’
We think this sends a very wrong message to the Government about the popularity of opting out.
While people are aggrieved about school closure policies, people like Ian Davidson are undermining the credibility of the democratic process.’
Mr Davidson, the Labour MP for Govan who was until recently Strathclyde's education chairman, has been supporting the ballot tactic employed by parents of St Gerard's, one of the three RC secondaries threatened with closure on the city's south side.
Parents there voted overwhelmingly against opting out in the final ballot.
Ayrshire buses dispute deal
A PAY dispute which has crippled bus services in Ayrshire could be over.
A revised pay offer for drivers at Western Scottish Buses was agreed between both sides at the Glasgow offices of the Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service yesterday.
The Transport and General Workers Union will recommend of the offer at a meeting of the drivers in Kilmarnock on Sunday.
March planned to support Albion
By Graeme Stewart, Industry Correspondent
THOUSANDS of people will take to the streets of Glasgow tomorrow in support of the Albion axle factory, which has been under threat since the financial collapse of its Dutch parent company last month.
The march will begin at the Albion works in Scotstoun and go to Partick Burgh Halls, where the demonstrators will be addressed by Campbell Christie, general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress.
He will tell them that the fight for Albion is the fight for Britain's manufacturing base and that the plant's plight clearly highlights the need for Government action and an active industrial policy.
Speaking in Glasgow yesterday, Mr Christie said without Government action now, the erosion of the country's productive base would continue.
‘In Scotland we have seen employment in manufacturing tumble from 605,000 people in 1979 to 348,000 today.
That is a staggering collapse of 42 per cent.’
Mr Christie claimed that though the Dutch and Belgian governments contributed to save sections of Leyland-DAF in their own countries, the British plants were left out in the cold after our government refused to participate in the rescue.
Tommy Gorman, acting convener at the Albion plant, said Government policies were destroying industry in the West of Scotland and destroying the social fibre of the Scottish people in the process.
‘Anybody who says there is not a direct connection between people's health and unemployment is not living in the real world.
‘We feel the case for the Albion is unanswerable…does the Government think that if Leyland-DAF goes down that Britain will suddenly stop needing buses, trucks and vans?
The answer is obvious.’
Huge protest over hospital cut plan
By James Rougvie
A SERIES of unprecedented all-ticket public meetings has been called to hear overwhelming opposition to plans to downgrade the infirmary in Arbroath — home of the health minister, Lord Fraser.
On Wednesday night, police were called to the town's Webster Theatre when 1500 residents tried to cram into the 600 capacity hall and the meeting was abandoned in the interests of public safety.
Tayside Health Board, as part of a country-wide acute services review, plans to close the acute medical services at the infirmary, relying on local GPs to provide accident and emergency cover.
Wednesday night's meeting was to have been the first in Arbroath as part of the consultative exercise the board must carry out before implementing changes.
The Rev Tom Tait, chairman of Tayside Health Council, said: ‘I think it is hardly necessary for the health board to meet with the people of Arbroath again.
The night's events must have given them a very clear idea of the depth of local opinion.’
The health council has not yet taken an official position on the board's proposals, but Mr Tait said that since Arbroath was a popular holiday town, it required better services than that of a cottage hospital.
The local MP, Andrew Welsh, has called on Lord Fraser to reverse the proposals, made, he said, by an unelected body behind closed doors.
‘The board seems to have learned nothing about how the people of Arbroath feel for their own hospital.
It is a disgraceful situation and the board should be ashamed of itself,’ he said.
A spokesman for the board said there was a feeling that there was an intention to close the hospital, which was not the case.
‘We have been told to find a reduction in beds and save £8 million in the next seven years across the region.
There is no option for no change.’
Salmon farmers reject rent cut
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
SALMON farmers yesterday rejected a rent review which will reduce site rentals by more than 12 per cent, saying they want the basis for assessments restructured.
The Scottish Salmon Growers Association Ltd said the rental system, based on productivity, was fundamentally flawed.
The SSGA is to take legal advice on its next step.
The review by the Valuation Office followed objections from salmon farmers on the West coast and islands, and on Shetland.
Before the review, farmers were required to pay £37.77 per tonne to the Crown Estate.
The new rent is £33 a tonne.
Lord Mansfield, the First Commissioner for the Crown Estate, welcomed the change, describing it as just and fair.
However, Jim Payne of the SSGA said: ‘The continued use of a formula based on the end price of a product, whether this price is profitable or loss-making is fundamentally flawed.
‘Substantial rents were paid over to the Crown Estate during the last five-year period when the industry was losing money.
That cannot be judged to be fair or equitable.’
The salmon farmers want a change to rents set per square metre of sea cages, similar to the principle of farm rents.
It is also argued that a production-based rent allowed the landlord to receive excess benefits due to the skill of the site operator.
Two fish factories have secured Shetland Islands Council backing for refurbishment to European standards.
Skerries Salmon, of West Voe, Skerries, has been offered a loan of £147,000 under the council's Fish Factory Hygiene Improvement Scheme, with a further bridging loan of £125,000, towards the £400,000 upgrading project.
The Northmavine factory of Ronas Fisheries is also to be refurbished, at a cost of £630,000.
The council is to offer loans worth more than £409,000.
The factory processes around 15 per cent of the whitefish landed in Shetland.
Lang drops registers of blighted land
A PLAN to draw up registers of land which may be polluted has been abandoned by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, writes Auslan Cramb.
The decision, forecast by The Scotsman last month, followed intense lobbying from property, development and lending groups which feared that huge areas of land would be blighted.
Mr Lang — who is coming into line with a decision already made by the Department of the Environment, for England and Wales — said that consultation on the proposed registers had shown they would not achieve their environmental objectives.
Instead the proposal had introduced ‘unfair and unacceptable’ blight and uncertainty into the subdued property market.
‘This additional loss of market confidence threatens in turn to undermine the investment needed for land reclamation and urban regeneration and, in so doing, to increase the pressure for development on greenfield land,’ Mr Lang said.
He announced a review of ‘underlying issues’, including the current powers of public authorities, and said that would be followed by consideration of how to treat and assess contaminated land.
The policy U-turn has been welcomed by local authorities, who claimed they did not have the resources needed to draw up the registers, and by building and property groups.
However, environment organisations condemned the Government for backing down in the face of an organised lobby from vested interests.
Friends of the Earth estimated that more than 100,000 sites in Britain were contaminated by former industrial use.
Scheme is just the ticket for disadvantaged
PEOPLE who find it difficult to get to sporting or arts events could receive free tickets if a successful Edinburgh scheme is adopted nationally.
Ticketlink, which arranges for the underprivileged, elderly, disabled and unemployed to enjoy events they cannot usually afford or get to, is calling for its scheme to be extended throughout Britain.
At present, it is available only in the Lothians and parts of Fife and the Borders.
Organisations and  promoters donate tickets which Ticketlink gives to groups and individuals registered with it.
The service is free to both parties.
The manager, John McIntosh, said that next month, details of its work are going to more than 250 bodies throughout the country, including social work departments and district councils.
Anyone wanting further information should contact John McIntosh on 031-557 4117.
Illegal play predicted as football fees rocket
By James Rougvie
DUNDEE'S young Sunday footballers could end up playing illegally on council pitches after Dundee District Council's Labour administration raised the cost of hiring pitches and dressing rooms last night.
A Sunday boys' league official forecast that the league, of about 2,000 boys aged between 9 and 15, faced collapse as the result of the price increase from £1.35 to £4.
A noisy demonstration of several hundred youngsters protesting against the proposed increases greeted councillors as they arrived for the meeting of the district council.
As expected, the Labour administration pushed through the rises in spite of opposition from the Tory and Scottish National Party groups.
The leisure and recreation convener, Charles Farquhar, said it gave the council no pleasure to raise the charges, as it had a high regard for the people who ran the teams.
But the council had to balance its books, he said.
He maintained that the increase was reasonable to provide sport for all, but insisted that since leisure and recreation expenditure took up 30 per cent of the council budget it had to safeguard jobs.
Afterwards, the president of the Dundee Sunday boys' league, Dave Pullar, said that he doubted if three-quarters of the teams in the leagues could carry on.
‘In no way will there be enough teams left to carry on in the age groups concerned.
‘We realised we had to have a price rise but not as great as the council have proposed,’ he said.
He said what he thought teams could end up playing on the pitches without paying for them, and it would be up to the council whether it called police to remove the players.
Mr Pullar said the league was not trying to buck the council but the council did not appear to feel it could offer the league the facilities at reasonable prices.
MIDLOTHIAN Poll tax protesters are admonished
THREE men who obstructed sheriff's officers during a poinding to recover poll tax debts were yesterday admonished.
John Moyers, 43, of Larch Crescent, Jonathan Suttie, 25, of Oak Crescent, and Hugh Creelie, 51, of Carlowrie Place, all Mayfield, were convicted a year ago of causing a breach of the peace during the anti-poll tax demonstration at a house in the Midlothian village in August 1991.
Sentence had been deferred for 12 months for good behaviour.
During the two-day trial, at Edinburgh Sheriff Court, it was claimed the poinding did not proceed because there was insufficient property in the house.
Trial hears of ‘not a vintage year’ alert
By Alison Daniels
A COURT yesterday heard the Edinburgh investment analyst Thorold Mackie deny on tape that he had encouraged his salesmen to tell clients to sell shares in a waste management and construction group.
The jury at the High Court in Edinburgh were played a recording of Mackie, a director of the stockbroker Bell Lawrie White, being interviewed by a stock exchange insider dealing inspector.
It was held after Peter Runciman, the former executive chairman of Shanks & McEwan, complained that Mackie's firm acted on privileged information.
During the interview, MacKie was asked to explain why nearly two million Shanks & McEwan shares had been sold with ‘indecent haste’, after a meeting with the company's chairman and if he had been told that Shanks & McEwan were going to issue a profits warning to the stock market.
Mackie denied he had been told that and said that if he had been told the meeting was confidential from the start there would have been little point in him, as an analyst, being there.
He said he had only repeated to the salesmen what Mr Runciman had said, that it was not a vintage year.
Mackie denies a charge under the Companies Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 that in September 1991 he counselled and procured two salesmen in his firm to deal in Shanks & McEwan.
Earlier Colin Telfer, 46, a Bell Lawrie salesman, said he had talked to Mackie but denied that Mackie told him Shanks & McEwan were going to issue a profits warning.
John Jeffrey, 47, of Edinburgh Fund Managers, said his company sold 40 per cent of their shares after a call from Telfer.
He added that a downgrading in profit forecasts was normal in a recession.
The case continues.
‘Thunderclap’ headaches man died after sex
A MAN suffered ‘thunderclap’ headaches after sexual intercourse with his girlfriend.
But doctors failed to diagnose that Anthony Newell, 35, a publican, of Websters Land, Edinburgh, had a serious but treatable arterial condition in the brain.
On 5 September last year his girlfriend, Ann Tierney, could not wake him after staying the night with him and he was dead on arrival at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
Ms Tierney, of Victor Paul Terrace, Edinburgh, told a fatal accident inquiry in Dunfermline yesterday: ‘On 15 August when he complained of blinding headaches I took him to my GP who referred him to Milesmark hospital in Dunfermline with suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage.
He was there all day undergoing tests and was released in the evening.
He still complained of headaches.’
The hospital's senior house officer, Dr Ewing Forrest, told the inquiry: ‘I was specifically looking for subarachnoid haemorrhage but there was no evidence of irritation.
I carried out tests and after eight hours he said he wanted to go home.
The headache appeared to have resolved itself with analgesic.
‘He had had a thunderclap headache which is a well recognised benign symptom after sexual intercourse requiring analgesic and observation.
Had I still been suspicious of a haemorrhage I would have sent him to Edinburgh for a brain scan.’
An Edinburgh University pathologist, Dr Basil Purdue, said Mr Newell suffered from a brain artery defect.
‘He had it since birth.
It had gradually enlarged and began to leak some six weeks before his death and was heralded by the onset of headaches.
Any increased blood pressure from excitement such as sexual intercourse might have caused it to burst.
‘I was supplied with information that his headaches were specifically related to sexual intercourse.
It is a rare but recognised phenomenon that headaches as a result of sexual intercourse might indicate his condition which could have been treated by an operation regularly performed by neurosurgeons.’
Sheriff Stuart Forbes returned a formal verdict of death from spontaneous subarachnoid haemorrhage and a ruptured aneurysm of the right posterior communicating artery.
Director of track take-over named
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
A FRESH move towards the privatisation of ScotRail has been made by creating a post to help establish Railtrack, the Government's track authority.
Paul Prescott, ScotRail's planning and marketing manager, has been appointed zonal director for Scotland of Railtrack, the state company which will take over railway infrastructure next year.
Cyril Bleasdale, who is preparing a bid for a franchise to operate Scotland's passenger trains after a proposed management buy-out, remains as director of ScotRail.
He believes that ScotRail's 9 per cent increase in revenue over the past year has strengthened his case for a buy-out.
Mr Prescott, 42, will set up the track organisation in Scotland and work out its structure and how it will relate to the train-operating firm and any British Rail remnants.
In an earlier privatisation step, Alex Lynch, Mr Bleasdale's senior finance manager, was appointed as franchise development director of ScotRail.
Mr Lynch will work with Mr Bleasdale to plan the structure, budgets and contracts required for the ScotRail operating franchise — one of the first to be set up under privatisation plans.
Mr Prescott said: ‘This complicated task is a great challenge and I am delighted that I will be working closely with both Cyril Bleasdale and Alex Lynch in creating successor bodies to ScotRail.’
Mr Prescott said that he hoped ScotRail's achievements would be preserved and strengthened in the new rail structure.
Railtrack will own the infrastructure but the successful bidder for the franchise will run the trains.
Bus companies are expected to be among those competing with ScotRail's managers to bid for the franchise.
Strathclyde Regional Council has won the right to be part of the franchising process for local trains in the Glasgow area.
NHS wage comparison unit to be set up
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
A PAY intelligence unit is being set up by the Scottish health service to guide managers on how to reward their staff.
The chief executive of the health service in Scotland, Don Cruickshank, said yesterday that one of the unit's aims is to ensure that the NHS attracts the best staff.
The move was attacked by one union leader as just another attempt to drive down wages.
Until the recent development of self-governing trust hospitals, health service pay and conditions were agreed nationally.
The decision to allow trusts to set their own pay rates has meant that pay bargaining is now becoming devolved.
In such circumstances, Mr Cruickshank said it is ‘crucial that up-to-the-minute information is readily available for NHS managers to enable them to make informed decisions on pay and staffing’.
Jim Devine, Scottish regional officer of the Confederation of Health Service Employees, said there was no need for a pay intelligence unit to find out what the Government's strategy is for its staff.
It had been made clear in the last few days, he said, with low-paid workers in North Ayrshire having their wages cut to join a trust while senior managers at the Royal Hospital for Sick Children in Edinburgh awarded themselves BMW cars.
The health service in Scotland employs 150,000 people — one in 15 of the Scottish workforce.
The pay unit is being set up in Edinburgh by Yorkshire Health, formerly the Yorkshire Regional Health Authority, which won the £210,000 contract.
EC fish imports ruling
CONTROLS on imported fish will be enforced more strictly, the European Commission confirmed yesterday in Brussels, as expected after recent protests by Scottish, Welsh, English and French fishermen against cheap imports, mainly from Russian ships.
The French government also announced that it would pay more than £5 million compensation to French fishermen for half the losses they reported last month as a result of falling prices.
The commission failed to support French demands for a 30 per cent higher minimum prices for imported fish.
From today, non-EC boats unloading in EC ports will be subject to thorough inspections on hygiene, weight and origin of the fish on board.
Minimum price levels equal to those applied to EC catches will be more rigidly enforced.
The commission announced that national governments must enforce the price and quality controls.
French demands for an increase in the minimum import price were said to contradict international trading rules.
Football fans may have clue to Moira mystery
By Graeme Stewart
FOOTBALL fans who went to an Airdrieonians versus Ayr United league match 36 years ago have been asked to come forward as they could have vital information on a schoolgirl who disappeared in 1957.
The unusual appeal was made yesterday by police who have reopened the case of Moira Anderson, 12, who vanished without trace in a snow storm while running an errand for her grandmother on 23 February, 1957.
She was last seen 300 yards from her home at 71 Eglinton Street, Coatbridge.
More than three decades after Moira disappeared, senior detectives from Coatbridge last week travelled to the North of England to interview a man in connection with the disappearance, which is still being treated as a missing person inquiry.
The latest developments have emerged a year after police in Coatbridge received surprising new information about the case, believed to relate to confirmed sightings of Moira on the night she disappeared.
Det Chief Insp Richard Gray, the man leading the inquiry, said that the match at Broomfield on the day of Moira's disappearance was abandoned because of the blizzard.
Mr Gray said those leaving the game might have passed the site where Moira was last seen.
‘I would like to speak to any spectators who were at that match — particularly if they remember seeing a young girl in the company of an older man.’
Until yesterday, after so many years, police had been unable to trace any members of the missing girl's family.
However, the two sisters telephoned Airdrie police station after friends in the Monklands area contacted them to tell them of the latest developments in the case.
The two women, Marjory, now 50, and Jeanette, 43, will be interviewed by the police.
Moira's body was never found and nobody has been prosecuted in connection with the case but police believe the schoolgirl was almost certainly murdered.
The man interviewed in Doncaster was being treated as a witness who may have information about Moira's disappearance.
Police have also tracked down a local man who gave a statement at the time.
Baby left in wood after secret pregnancy
DONNA MULLER gave birth to a boy in a staff lavatory at the stables where she worked after keeping her pregnancy secret for nine months.
She then wrapped the baby up, left him lying in a wood and returned to work, Aberdeen Sheriff Court heard yesterday.
Muller, 21, of Millbuie Farm, Skene, Aberdeenshire, who admitted contravening the 1809 Concealment of Birth (Scotland) Act, was placed on probation for a year.
The depute fiscal, Brian Crookshanks, told the court that staff at the stables had noticed early last year she had become more withdrawn and was putting on weight.
Her concerned employers had referred her to a doctor, who had put her on the contraceptive pill but, as was normal practice, she had not been examined or questioned.
She had not said she was pregnant.
On 11 April last year, Muller had not appeared to be her normal self and the following day it was apparent something had occurred in the staff lavatory.
Inquiries had revealed the child had been born there and Muller had placed his body in a nearby wooded area.
Describing the incident as ‘a very tragic situation’ Mr Crookshanks said a post-mortem examination failed to reveal the cause of the child's death.
Mike Monro, defending, said his client had had a strict upbringing, having to do what she was ordered to do by her parents.
She had been allowed to have only those boyfriends whom her parents deemed suitable.
When she met her current boyfriend and fell pregnant, she had not been able to confide in them.
She had been ‘petrified’ she would lose her boyfriend if she told him and feared if she told her employers, she would lose the job she loved.
Sheriff Alexander Jessop stated that Muller was in need of help, not punishment.
Crackdown on warlords in US show of force
THE United States military is sending thousands of troops to Kismayu after reports that a warlord, Omar Jess, may have launched a push to recapture the southern Somali port.
A US military spokesman, Colonel Fred Peck, said yesterday he expected about 4,200 troops to travel by sea from Mogadishu to Kismayu within the next 24 hours.
‘We plan a major show of force in the Kismayu region over the next few days,’ Col Peck said.
He had no specific details of an offensive by Mr Jess.
The US military's Radio Rajo reported that forces loyal to Mr Jess appeared to be moving nearer to Kismayu, dominated by supporters of Mohamed Said Hersi, known as Gen Morgan.
Col Peck said Belgian troops based in Kismayu had already launched extensive patrols north and south of the port.
The US assault ship Wasp would operate from Kismayu.
On Wednesday, US aircraft dropped 200,000 leaflets in the Kismayu region as a reminder that the area was a ‘weapons free zone.’
A military spokesman, Sergeant Jay Mathews, said he had heard ‘rumblings from Kismayu.
Apparently people, some of them women and children, are being moved towards Kismayu for some sort of demonstration.’
Reports of a possible attack on Kismayu by Mr Jess's supporters came as 15 Somali factions meeting in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa neared agreement on a new transitional authority in Somalia, without a government since January 1991.
The national reconciliation conference was suspended temporarily last week after forces loyal to Gen Morgan used women and children as shields and attacked Mr Jess's supporters.
About 50 people were wounded in the attack.
The US military sent a 500-strong force to Kismayu last week, accompanied by a military judge, to restore order and investigate the incident.
The troops returned to Mogadishu earlier this week.
Meanwhile, US military authorities have dropped charges  against a marine who shot dead a 13-year-old Somali boy last month, Mr Peck said yesterday.
Mr Peck said a military hearing had decided that no action would be taken against Sergeant Walter Johnson, who killed Omar Ahmed Mohamed on 4 February.
Togo president survives raid on army base
TOGO's president, Gnassingbe Eyadema, survived a pre-dawn attack on the country's main army base, sources said yesterday.
Intense shooting and the boom of heavy weapons erupted in the capital, Lome, before dawn.
State radio said unidentified ‘foreign forces’ had attacked the camp but an underground radio station said Togolese dissidents were responsible.
Presidential sources said Gen Eyadema, who seized power in a 1967 coup, had been at his quarters at the base during the attack.
A statement by the defence minister, Inoussa Bouraima, said the deputy chief of staff, Gen Mawulikplimi Amegee, had been killed and another senior officer wounded.
Mr Bouraima called the attack ‘external aggression’ aimed at blocking democratic reforms in the West African country.
He said the raid had been carried out by a ‘commando group armed with heavy weapons’ which had attacked ‘precise targets’.
The underground Radio Liberte, broadcasting from Ghana, said ‘democrats’ had staged the assault to try to topple Gen Eyadema.
One diplomat said the attack may have been ‘Eyadema himself staging an incident to get an excuse for a clampdown on opposition’.
Pakistan warned over bomb suspects
A STRONG warning was given to Pakistan yesterday as India demanded the return of six members of an alleged gangster family wanted in connection with bomb attacks in Bombay that left 250 people dead.
‘In a controlled state like Pakistan, when people land from Dubai by a plane whose number is given and the names of persons given, it would be very difficult to say Pakistan cannot find them,’ India's foreign minister, Dinesh Singh, said.
He said the United Arab Emirates had revealed six members of the Memon family took a direct Pakistan International Airlines flight from Dubai to Karachi on 17 March, five days after the bombings.
Bombay police said that some of the six fled to Dubai shortly before and others shortly after 13 bombs devastated the Bombay stock exchange, the Air India headquarters and other targets.
Mr Singh said Pakistan's promise of full co-operation in finding the Memons was a good start, but added that it was curious that the Memons had chosen to go to Pakistan.
Mr Singh repeated a statement he made in parliament on Wednesday that a Pakistani failure to hand over the Memons would have serious implications.
He would give no details, however.
Police in north India, meanwhile, said they had found a cache of 6lb of RDX plastic explosive, similar to that used in the Bombay bombs.
The explosive was seized from two homes in the town of Meerut, in Uttar Pradesh, on Wednesday.
In another incident, three men on motorcycles hurled a grenade into a mosque in the central Pakistani city of Bahawalpur and opened fire on the congregation yesterday, killing five people and injuring 40.
Girl, 12, killed in axe attack
A 12-YEAR-OLD girl was killed with an axe and a woman speared to death in an attack on a Cambodian village in which eight Vietnamese were killed, United Nations investigators said yesterday.
Survivors blamed the Khmer Rouge for Wednesday's attack in central Kompong Chnang province, claiming 10 guerrillas arrived in three boats at the village early in the morning.
‘Five bodies were found yesterday (Wednesday), today another two and just a few hours ago the last body,’ said a human rights officer.
‘We have examined the bodies with a doctor.
Most of them were shot at close range.
Two were hit — one with an axe — and the other probably died from a spear injury.’
Human rights investigators were interviewing two witnesses to the killings, he said.
Wednesday's bloodshed follows a massacre of ethnic Vietnamese in the northwestern province of Siem Reap on 10 March in which at least 38 people died.
Hundreds of ethnic Vietnamese have fled the country since.
The site of the latest killings is at the southeastern end of the Tonle Sap (Great Lake), the headwater of the Tonle Sap river which flows into the Mekong at Phnom Penh.
UN officials confirmed reports of a mass exodus of Vietnamese down the river, fleeing the prospect of further bloodshed.
Seagull partly to blame for jockey's death
A LOW-FLYING seagull was partly responsible for the death of a jockey and his horse, an Australian coroner's court ruled yesterday.
The seagull, sighted on videotape of the horse race in Sydney last year, flew in from outside the racetrack and skirted the ground ahead of Father Time, ridden by Noel Barker.
The horse reared and its front legs buckled when it returned to the ground, pitching the jockey on his head in the 21 August race.
Barker, with serious head injuries, died in hospital some weeks later.
‘I'm inclined to think, on the balance of probabilities, the seagull contributed to the accident,’ said the New South Wales coroner, Greg Glass.
He said he believed the bird excited or frightened the horse, which itself died moments after the fall.
UN official held in Italian scandal
ITALY's ambassador-designate to two Rome-based United Nations aid agencies was arrested yesterday and charged with extortion.
Giuseppe Santoro, who used to run third world aid at Rome's foreign ministry, was arrested yesterday as part of an ongoing nationwide corruption investigation.
The former foreign minister, Gianni De Michelis, and his deputy, Claudio Lenoci, are also under investigation.
Both are Socialist MPs.
Police have issued an arrest warrant for Mr de Michelis's former secretary, Barbara Ceolin.
She is alleged to have accepted a bribe used to finance an election campaign for the minister.
Magistrates suspect third world aid contracts awarded to some Italian companies were inflated to disguise kickbacks.
In the United States, a new scandal over non-payment of tax forced President Bill Clinton to scrap another appointment.
He has dropped plans to nominate a Washington lawyer, Charles Ruff, for the No2 post in the justice department because of concern over his failure to pay tax for his housekeeper.
S Africa calls up 20,000 troops
SOUTH AFRICA is calling up more than 20,000 mainly white army reservists to stamp out violence threatening its transition to democracy and to protect civilians from marauding gunmen.
Armed police and soldiers will patrol city streets and isolated communities, the police commissioner, Johan van der Merwe, announced yesterday.
Up to 21,000 reservists would be called up in a countrywide security crackdown, he said.
Internal stability units were being established in northern Natal, the flashpoint of much of the violence between rival black groups which has claimed nearly 8,000 lives in the past three years, and in East Rand's troubled townships.
The African National Congress accused the government of trying to find a military solution to a political problem.
‘We fear that the major call-up…could, instead of helping to prevent violence, lead to serious intimidation of local communities and even more violence,’ the ANC said.
It said the solution to increasing violence was the speedy introduction of a transitional executive council in South Africa and multi-party control over the security forces.
The government has warned that unless the violence is halted, the transition from white rule to democracy might be delayed.
South Africa's first multi-racial elections are due by the middle of next year.
The Zulu leader, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, who considers elections are impossible in the current climate of violence, said yesterday that a peace agreement between his Inkatha Freedom Party and the ANC was the only way to halt the the bloodletting.
The reformist president, FW de Klerk, told parliament on Wednesday the mobilisation of reservists would help police crack down on ‘barbaric’ political violence including child murders.
Mr de Klerk said a solution to the rampant political violence should top the agenda at multi-party democracy talks set to resume next week after a 10-month hiatus.
Recalling the slaughter of six black schoolchildren near the Natal provincial capital Pietermaritzburg this month and Friday's killing of a white mother and two children near Johannesburg, Mr de Klerk said: ‘This is barbaric and totally unacceptable in a civilised society.’
Meanwhile, the education minister, Piet Marais, launched a programme yesterday to desegregate South African schools and said the government would equalise spending on black and white children in next year's budget.
Farrow tells of improper relationship
MIA FARROW said in court yesterday that her estranged lover, Woody Allen, had an improper relationship with their adopted daughter and said she was concerned about their son.
The court is to rule who will get custody of their two adopted children, Dylan, 7, and Moses, 14, and biological son Satchel, 5.
Last week medical experts cleared Allen of allegations by Farrow that he sexually abused Dylan.
Asked if she believed Allen had a sexual relationship with Dylan, the actress said: ‘I think sexual is not the word I used.
 Inappropriate was the word I used.
First of all it was the quality of it the intensity of it.
It was relentless and overpowering.’
She added: ‘If she visited his apartment, they would end up playing in his bed.
The quality of it would arouse her and she would grab at him.’
Farrow also said Allen put his thumb in Dylan's mouth.
She added said that she had believed Allen had homosexual tendencies and she had concerns that he would sexually abuse Satchel.
Bosnia peace talks marred by threat to Muslim enclaves
BOSNIAN Serbs were reported to be poised to overrun the besieged Muslim enclaves of Srebrenica and Zepa yesterday, the same day as the first full peace talks took place.
All three parties to the Bosnia talks attended the first meeting since the current round began two weeks ago and the Bosnian president, Alija Izetbegovic, said he would sign key documents in a peace package.
‘Now it is up to the international community.
We sign,’ he told reporters as he arrived nearly four hours after the scheduled start of the talks.
Waiting for him were the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Croat leader, Mate Boban, and mediators Lord Owen and Cyrus Vance.
All three Bosnian leaders have already signed documents dealing with constitutional principles and arrangements for a ceasefire and disengagement of forces.
None of the three leaders has yet signed a new, fourth document detailing interim arrangements for the period between a peace settlement and the holding of elections in one or two years' time.
The threat to Srebrenica and Zepa triggered a refugee exodus and dealt a blow to a peace plan granting the area to Muslims.
Cedric Thornberry, deputy head of the United Nations Protection Force in the former Yugoslavia, told a news conference in Belgrade that Srebrenica was under serious threat and could fall within days.
Bosnia's Muslim-controlled radio reported that Bosnian Serb forces had entered two villages near Srebrenica and pushed its defenders back several kilometers.
Bosnian Serbs were at certain points only 1 mile from Srebrenica's outskirts.
Later it said Bosnian Muslim forces counter-attacked and pushed the Serbs back two miles.
None of the reports could be independently confirmed.
The Serbian president, Slobodan Milosevic, reportedly promised to intervene with Bosnian Serb leaders for safe passage for evacuation and aid convoys to Srebrenica, one of the last towns held by the Bosnian government in eastern Bosnia.
But Jose-Maria Mendiluce, a senior UN High Commissioner for Refugees official who met Mr Milosevic, was sceptical those assurances would prove more effective than previous promises often broken by Serb forces, a UNHCR spokeswoman, Alemka Lisinski, said.
UNHCR officials said meanwhile that hundreds of Slavic Muslims continued to arrive each day in Srebrenica, where the mood was increasingly one of panic.
The UN was forced to call off an attempt to evacuate Muslims from Srebrenica by helicopter on Wednesday after Serb artillery shelled the landing zone.
The Bosnian Serb high command denied it had attacked the town.
 Meanwhile , two French soldiers were slightly wounded yesterday when their building came under machine-gun fire in fighting around Sarajevo airport, a UN spokesman said.
Also yesterday, a UN spokesman said UN peace-keepers had protested to Yugoslavia over an amphibious exercise by its troops on a Serb-held part of Croatia.
A spokesman said UN authorities had lodged a strong protest with the Belgrade authorities over the Yugoslav military war games in mid-March when troops crossed the Danube to land on Croatian territory.
Climbdown on call to impeach Yeltsin
THE conservative arch-rival of Russia's leader, Boris Yeltsin, yesterday backtracked on demands for the president's impeachment and said there was still a chance they could reach agreement to end the power struggle that is paralysing the country.
‘Impeachment is the most extreme measure.
I don't think that among all possible measures we should immediately talk about the most extreme,’ the chairman of parliament, Ruslan Khasbulatov, said on the eve of a debate on Mr  Yeltsin's removal.
Mr Yeltsin, meanwhile, asked the 1,033 members of the Congress of People's Deputies not to go ahead with a planned impeachment vote.
In a television address, he called on deputies to pull back from the brink.
‘Remember, if the congress takes historically incorrect decisions, it will plunge the people into an abyss of confrontation.’
The president said Russia's 150 million people must be allowed to have their say in a 25 April vote of confidence in the presidency and referendum on a new constitution.
A Yeltsin aide also warned yesterday that even if the congress voted to oust him, the president would refuse to quit on the grounds that the decision was illegal.
The president on Wednesday softened his demands for a ‘special order’ of rule after the constitutional court and 247-member supreme soviet standing parliament started the impeachment process.
After Mr Yeltsin softened his stance, Mr Khasbulatov, who also made a nationwide television address, yesterday withdrew his demands for impeachment, but not until the supreme soviet had voted to convene the congress today.
To remove Mr Yeltsin the congress has to have a two-thirds majority.
A presidential spokesman said Mr Khasbulatov's comments indicated that hard-liners did not have enough votes.
Mr Khasbulatov acknowledged that he and other politicians had overreacted to Mr Yeltsin's speech on Saturday declaring a ‘special order’ of rule pending a referendum.
He said the text of Mr Yeltsin's call for a referendum had ‘violated the constitution, but maybe not in such a dramatic form as his appeal suggested’.
The parliamentary chairman said ‘people are afraid that there will be a new stage of dictatorship’.
Mr Khasbulatov said compromise could be reached ‘if the president addresses the congress and says: ‘I was wrong…let's form a government together and leave it alone.
I will not interfere in its affairs’.’
Mr Khasbulatov said he preferred the idea of early, simultaneous elections for president and parliament instead of Mr Yeltsin's referendum.
Parliamentary elections currently are set for March 1995 and presidential voting for June 1996.
‘The most correct thing to do is to hold elections for both president and deputies as soon as possible, so that people can trust somebody,’ Mr Khasbulatov said.
He said the congress would prefer this idea to impeachment.
Mr Yeltsin insists simultaneous balloting could create a dangerous power vacuum.
He instead wants parliamentary elections first.
— Reuter and AP
A miners' union yesterday said it would call an all-out, open-ended strike if Mr Yeltsin were impeached.
The NPG union in Siberia's Kuzbass region also had the support of the district administrator, Mikhail Kislyuk.
‘A strike could lead to the collapse of not just the economy but of Russia…
But losses from impeachment of the president or elimination of his post would be greater,’ he said.
Tea and sympathy: Russian president Boris Yeltsin stirs a cup of tea as he studies a copy of his speech before last night's television address to the nation
Offer by Milosevic after breakthrough in peace talks
AT THE first-ever face-to-face peace talks between Bosnia's warring parties, Muslim and Croat leaders yesterday signed a package to end the war in the country.
The breakthrough came as the United Nations commander in Bosnia, Gen Philippe  Morillon , of France, said he had secured a pledge of help from Serbia's president, Slobodan Milosevic.
However, hopes were dealt a blow as Bosnian Serbs looked poised to overrun two besieged Muslim strongholds in eastern Bosnia.
UN sources said the towns of Srebrenica and Zepa could fall within days, causing a ‘catastrophic’ refugee crisis.
The towns are designated as Muslim areas in the peace package put forward by the international mediators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen.
The Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, was the only factional leader yesterday not to sign the peace accord.
The UN-appointed mediator, Cyrus Vance, nevertheless saw the signing by Bosnia's Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic, as ‘a major step’ in the peace process.
However, his co-chairman Lord Owen, appointed by the European Community, warned that peace talks could not go on forever, saying there would come a time when action had to be taken by the international community.
‘Talking doesn't stop and will continue,’ he said.
‘But if there is no readiness to come around…the international community will have to take some action and it will be tough action.’
Mr Izetbegovic, after months of negotiating, accepted a controversial map that divided Bosnia into ten semi-autonomous provinces.
He and the Bosnian Croat leader, Mate Boban, also signed a new paper giving interim arrangements for governing the country during a period up to two years.
Mr Boban had previously accepted the map, but changes had been made and he had to sign it again, Mr Vance said.
All three leaders have previously signed two other documents dealing with constitutional principles, and arrangements for a ceasefire and disengagement of forces.
Mr Izetbegovic arrived nearly four hours after the scheduled start of the talks and told reporters it was ‘now up to the international community’— a reference to UN Security Council or United States pressure on Serbs to sign.
Mr Karadzic warned that any new sanctions against Yugoslavia meant his group would leave the peace conference altogether.
The United States yesterday said that lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia to allow Muslims to defend themselves was an option.
Pressure will also be put on Serbia, widely seen as backing the Bosnian Serbs in the conflict.
After a meeting with the US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, in Washington, Britain's Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, warned that all non-humanitarian goods would be blocked from going into Serbia and Montenegro if the talks did not bring an end to the conflict.
The Serbian leader appeared keen to help even before this warning was given.
Gen Morillon, after talks in Belgrade, said: ‘President Milosevic promised to help me in the implementation of every request I have made, that is the immediate ceasefire.’
Mr Milosevic said: ‘We want to support all efforts for peace.
Now, concretely.
‘We will offer…hospitality to all sides…here in Belgrade aiming to intensify negotiations towards a peaceful solution.’
Council tax savings put at fraction of forecast
By David Scott, Local Government Editor
THE council tax will bring administrative savings of 16 per cent, compared with the 60 per cent predicted by the Scottish Office, according to the controller of audit, John Broadfoot.
In a report published yesterday, he points out that the Government anticipated that the introduction of the council tax, which comes into operation on 1 April, would substantially reduce the costs of administering and collecting local taxation, possibly by as much as 60 per cent.
However, a survey by the controller of Scottish local authorities suggests that the council tax will cost as much as 84 per cent of the poll tax, a saving of 16 per cent.
The findings, contained in a report which Mr Broadfoot has submitted to the Accounts Commission, were announced at a press conference held during the conference of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities at Dunblane.
The commission's chairman, Professor Ian Percy, said he believed the expenditure involved in changing to the council tax was still money well spent even if the savings were not as great as the Government had hoped.
The collection rate would be much higher than that for the poll tax and there were signs that the system was going to be much more acceptable to the public.
The commission has found that councils expect a tax collection level of 94 per cent.
The number of council tax payers in Scotland will be just over 2 million, compared with 3.7 million for the poll tax.
The drop in numbers is one of the reasons why the Government believed it would cost far less to administer.
The report shows that the number of finance staff (excluding benefits administration) is expected to rise by between 30 and 60 per cent in 1993-94 as the transition from poll tax to council tax takes place.
Mr Broadfoot said that local authorities were clearly prepared to put the resources into the new system so that it operated successfully.
He believed that the Scottish Secretary's estimates were probably based on the operation of the system once it had bedded down rather than looking at initial assumptions.
The aim of the survey was to assess the preparations for the new tax being made by the 12 levying authorities — nine regional and three islands councils.
It has found that all of the councils should have the necessary administrative arrangements in place to issue bills no later than the end of April and to begin enforcement action by May or early June.
Pointing to a general perception among officials and councillors that the council tax must be made to succeed, Mr Broadfoot states: ‘This new tax presents an opportunity to overcome the shortcomings of the community charge.’
He gives warning, however, that the biggest single threat to the new tax in Scotland is whether the non-payment culture that had developed under the poll tax can be reversed.
He believes the nature of the new tax, including 100 per cent benefits and almost a halving in the number of bills to be issued, will help collection.
The report points out that the timetable for enforcement is so precise that it may not be possible for authorities to process payments received as a result of reminders, in time to comply strictly with the regulations.
‘This will require delicate judgments to be made.
The possibility of a review of the regulations might be of assistance in this respect,’ Mr Broadfoot states.
John Broadfoot: savings of 16%, not 60% as predicted
Alternative plans for shake-up aired
By Our Local Government Editor
RENEWED calls for an independent inquiry into the future of local government were made yesterday.
Speakers at the annual conference of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities at Dunblane voiced concern about the planned reorganisation of local government being handled by the Scottish Office instead of by an independent commission as in England.
Anthony Bradley, emeritus professor of constitutional law at Edinburgh University, said there was a case for a double-stage inquiry which first examined the principle or case for change and the second to study how changes could be made with the minimum dislocation or waste of expenditure.
He did not believe that council reform should be at the top of the list of problems to be dealt with in Scotland.
Martin Easteal, the chief executive of the commission which is reviewing English local government, thought setting up such a body was a sensible way of dealing with the matter.
He gave warning, however, that councils in England had to stop treating the review as some kind of beauty contest and begin to treat it seriously for what it was: an appraisal of the viable options for a new local government structure.
Jean McFadden, the leader of the Glasgow and COSLA Labour groups, put forward a seven-point plan for the future of local government.
She called for a system which allowed councils to raise more revenue from local taxation, maximum decentralisation and decision-making and a constructive partnership among local authorities, central government and the European Commission.
Donald Mackay, a former junior minister at the Scottish Office, who was secretary of the Wheatley Commission which planned the 1975 council reforms, said it was far too early to undertake another reorganisation.
Local authorities were warned by the leader of the Conservative group on Stirling District, Keith Harding, that they would be wasting their time in resisting change.
Local government reform, he said, was going to happen with a new system fully in operation by 1996.
Farm suicides blamed on extra pressure
A JUNIOR health minister was pressed in the Lords yesterday on why more farmers commit suicide than any other industrial group.
Baroness Cumberlege, who is married to a farmer, said: ‘Farmers have a strong sense that they are custodians of the land for the next generation; this brings added pressures.’
She told the Opposition's Lord Carter that farmers often worked in isolation and were traditionally independent, ‘possibly leading to a reluctance to seek help at time of depression.
Farmers also have easy access to the means to commit suicide.’
Baron Stanley of Alderley (C), a farmer, said problems included persecution by bureaucrats and planners and ‘by greens who fail totally to understand the problems the farming community face’.
Lady Cumberlege spoke of ‘an EC form which asked farmers to fill in the number of cows they had —‘figures to be given in whole numbers’ '.
— PA
SNP tells Lang to put up or shut up
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
IAN LANG, the Scottish Secretary, was challenged yesterday to accuse the Scottish National Party of breaking the deal on the Maastricht Treaty bill or stop a campaign of misinformation by his staff.
The calls from the SNP leader, Alex Salmond, followed continued speculation that the party's three MPs had agreed to vote with the Government on more than one occasion, not just the division on 8 March.
Government sources claimed that the SNP had broken the deal by not voting with Conservative MPs on Wednesday and implied that Mr Lang might reconsider his position on appointments to the European Community committee of the regions.
Mr Salmond emphasised that the only correspondence surrounding the deal had already been published and rejected claims that his party had broken its side of the deal.
He said: ‘If the Scottish Secretary wishes to make a statement then he should do so openly and publicly and not allow his young office staff to brief members of the press off the record.
‘If the Scottish Secretary breaches the written undertaking he gave us then the next letter he should write is his resignation letter.’
Mr Salmond also dismissed a call by Labour's Scottish affairs spokesman, Henry McLeish, to come clean on the extent of the SNP's deal with the Government.
Mr McLeish said: ‘Alex Salmond must now reveal the extent to which he has made the SNP hostage to this Tory Government.
‘It is now clear that the SNP signed on the dotted line for a long-term deal between themselves and the Tories over the Maastricht bill and the Tories are now exacting their pound of flesh.
‘There must be an end to this double-dealing and deceit which is selling Scotland and its people short.’
MPs were debating Maastricht again in the Commons last night after yesterday's 22-hour sitting on the treaty ratification bill.
A second all-night session was not expected as the line-by-line examination of the measure resumed for the 18th day of its committee stage.
Ministers were pleased at progress made on the European  Communities (Amendment) Bill through the previous night after the Liberal Democrats had supported the Government's wish to sit into the small hours.
The Commons did not rise until 12:42pm yesterday.
The Government would like the bill to complete its Commons passage as soon as possible after Denmark votes in its second referendum on the treaty, set for mid May.
But Conservative Euro-rebels remain pledged to fight on against the treaty.
They intend to press their demand for a British referendum, towards the end of the committee stage.
MPs last night returned to discussion on a group of amendments relating to European economic and monetary union, the 19th of 26 sets of amendments to be dealt with.
— PA 
Judges' role
You must surely be right when you say in your editorial today (‘Judging public mood’) that judges should dispose of cases on their merits rather than, as Lord Chief Justice Taylor suggests, pass sentence with an eye to the public's expectations.
After all, this is the mistake that Pontius Pilate made!
 Reprieve for pits — and Heseltine
THE immediate impression emerging from the measures announced yesterday for Britain's coal industry is that 12 pits and one Michael Heseltine have been reprieved.
His statement and robust delivery from the dispatch box in front of an initially sceptical House of Commons appear to have been sufficient to rally Conservative backbenchers.
Their main response was relief that a political blunder had been taken care of.
Even among the rebels the passion has waned.
The flag of rebellion has been lowered.
Mr Heseltine may well count this a political triumph.
He can argue that he has responded in a statesmanlike manner to the democratic will, and done what was asked of him.
In reality, however, it is more a triumph of public relations, especially when his announcement is judged against the reality of what his review offers the long-term future for the coal industry.
To a large extent we are back where we started.
Some pits have been reprieved for the time being, but the closure programme may simply be delayed, the price of buying off political defeat being a £500 million subsidy over the next two years.
British Coal has warned that a radical shift in the market framework would be required to safeguard the future of the industry without the cuts proposed last September.
That is not on offer.
In the five months of the review Mr Heseltine has been unable to come up with, as Labour pointed out, a single extra tonne of coal in terms of orders.
Moreover, there is nothing in the 152-page report to satisfy the Opposition, industry or the few remaining Tory rebels that the Government has come out of the review with a national energy policy.
The free market will remain the key determinant.
As Richard Caborn, chairman of the Commons energy select committee, pointed out, Mr Heseltine has rejected or ignored the committee's main point, to wit, the need for a larger market for coal.
In two years time, gas, not coal, will still be king.
Mr Heseltine can reasonably say that he has done what the political reality required of him.
But he knows that the basic market conditions governing the industry have not changed.
The white paper is a prescription for a massively scaled-down industry in which a small number of pits will fill the market while others go by the wayside.
The pits that have been ‘saved’ will be shored up with public subsidy to enable them to compete internationally until some of them are ready for privatisation.
Meanwhile, those miners who see the writing on the wall will be leaving soon in droves.
It comes to this: some pits have been given a fighting chance — albeit in a contracting market — that they did not have last year.
They may be able to make something of that, and they deserve the best luck going for them.
But one is left with the feeling that throughout the exercise the importance of recovering the Government's position has been at least as important as the evaluation of a national energy policy.
Justice bruised
THE European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg is well known for its liberal rulings.
That is to be expected, given that its decisions are based on the European Convention of Human Rights.
It is surprising, therefore, that it should have rejected the claim that a boy's ‘slippering’ at boarding school broke the convention — particularly as the court's past rulings led to the outlawing of corporal punishment in state schools.
Clearly the case was not a straightforward one; the judgement had a slim majority of five votes to four.
But in the end the argument apparently prevailed that the punishment had not breached the minimum threshold of severity to constitute a violation of human rights.
For campaigners for the abolition of corporal punishment this will have been a setback.
But in fact the human rights court has generally exercised a positive influence on British legislation.
Following rulings from the court, changes in the law have been prompted in such areas as prisoners' rights, immigration, telephone tapping and terrorist laws.
Indeed, since Britain is a signatory of the human rights convention, the Strasbourg judges perform the function of a final court of appeal for British citizens in the area of human rights.
That puts British justice in a rather curious position.
UK judges are obliged to apply Scottish and English law which can then, however, be challenged in the European court.
Britain is bound, morally at least, to incorporate its decisions into UK law.
This is gradually strengthening the case of those who argue that Britain should have a Bill of Rights which incorporates the European convention.
As the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Taylor, commented in the 1992 Dimbleby lecture, British ratification of the convention obliges the Government in the end to accept it, but the refusal to incorporate it means acceptance occurs only after a decision in Strasbourg, much delay and eventual humiliation.
‘It is as if we said in 1950 the well-known prayer, God make us good, but not yet.’
Indeed, he went so far as to say that Britain's justice system had been badly bruised by the Government's failure in this respect.
Apart from codifying the rights of the individual, a Bill of Rights would iron out the curious anomaly to which Lord Taylor referred and might in addition save time and money because far fewer decisions by British judges would need to go to the European Court of Human Rights.
There are increasingly strong reasons for considering its advantages.
The bombs which tell us we failed
LOOKING back on Northern Ireland as it was when the troubles started is uncannily like looking back on a silent movie.
The stars and the supporting cast, even the crew, have moved into the Technicolor age and prospered; but some of the audience are dead, others mutilated.
And some who did not even know of the movie's existence, who were not even born when it was made, are dead too, or mutilated, or orphaned…
Dr Paisley is still going strong, Johnathan Ball is dead.
Gerry, now Lord, Fitt is sound in wind and limb.
Tim Parry is dead.
Bernadette Devlin had a close call, but she survived the assassination attempt against her.
L-Cpl Dickson did not.
John Hume continues to present his case in Westminster.
How many young men from his Derry constituency have been silenced?
The voice of Gerry Adams, who arrived a little later on the scene, has been banished from television, but he is alive.
Unlike so many victims of the armed struggle for the reunification of Ireland.
The rank and file of the civil rights movement are also safe and well.
Most of us seem to have left Ireland.
Many I have lost sight of, but those who are visible have prospered.
Nick Ross was a fellow protester.
I see him now on Crimewatch.
Anne Devlin another.
She is a playwright based in England.
Most famous perhaps is Seamus Heaney.
He has the English chair at Oxford.
The civil rights movement in the early Seventies was an honourable non-sectarian movement peopled by pacifist idealists in pursuit of justice.
It did not start the cauldron brewing but its members reacted to the simmering unrest that was their inheritance with an honest attempt to apply minds to what had always been the province of bigotry and emotion.
The movement achieved its immediate political ends.
But on the bigger issues it failed.
I feel its failure every time I recall the two sisters who went into a Belfast cafe in the early 1970s and came out with no legs.
I wonder about the family of my sister's friend.
She had six children.
She went to catch a bus on Bloody Friday when 13 bombs went off in Belfast city centre.
All they found was her handbag.
I feel its failure every time I read that the polarisation of the two main religious communities in Northern Ireland is more extreme than ever.
Politicians no longer need to draw doodle shaped boundary lines to guarantee ward majorities.
Gerrymandering has been eliminated all right, but not by democracy, by the Laager.
I have a sense of failure every time a bomb goes off, in Northern Ireland or here; but more so here.
I mean Warrington, why Warrington?
What is Warrington to Ireland or Ireland to Warrington that two children should have died and more lie injured?
What does it benefit the British people of Northern Ireland (for the Ulster-born members of the IRA are British whether they like it or not) randomly to murder British children in Warrington?
The IRA, will no doubt, argue that it is taking its fight to mainland Britain to let the English feel the war at first hand; to sicken the English and to cause them to pressurise their government to withdraw from Ireland.
But if it troubled to open a history book or to read some political analysis it would see that the thing most needed by a government under pressure at home is an enemy without.
Nothing is better designed to galvanise a people, unify it, strengthen it.
Nor is it only in England that the IRA has fouled up.
I have a sister in Northern Ireland and one in Eire.
They tell me their communities are sickened by this latest outrage.
They too have children.
No tactical advantage then in Ulster, Eire, or in Westminster.
What are we left with as an explanation for this carnage?
Killing for its own sake?
I think that is out of character for the IRA.
Its members view themselves as occupants of the moral high ground because they see their cause as legitimate, their crimes political.
Its leaders are ruthless.
Yes, but not stupid.
So what is left?
The IRA claims it gave 38 minutes warning of the Warrington bombs and details of their exact location.
The police say no password was given, no exact location specified.
I am inclined to believe the police.
Whichever version you believe, the IRA is foiled.
Either its organisation is in so parlous a condition that it has to rely on active service units of such incompetence that they cannot place bombs and give effective warnings.
Or they are up against an anti-terrorist policy so cynical that its devisers are prepared to sacrifice a certain amount of civilian life in order to strip the terrorists of any legitimacy.
Or, perhaps the IRA's leadership is now both ruthless AND stupid.
Colette Douglas-Home
Dress rehearsal for an independent parliament
A DEMAND for the recall of the Scottish parliament was made yesterday, 286 years after its adjournment.
To mark the anniversary, 18th Century Scots MPs, Kevin Pringle and George Christie, presented a copy of the Act of Adjournment to the SNP vice-president, Andrew Welsh.
Speaking outside Parliament Hall, Mr Welsh said there was historical and constitutional justification for its recall.
‘If Scotland's opposition MPs were all prepared to work double time on a Friday, they could form the basis of a representative recalled parliament without even having to boycott Westminster.’
IAN RUTHERFORD
Boycott to target fish from Faroes
By Frank Urquhart
THREE conservation groups called yesterday for a boycott of Faroese fish in an attempt to halt the annual slaughter of pilot whales by the islanders.
A series of press and cinema advertisements highlighting the annual hunt will target high street supermarket chains which use Faroese fish in their products.
About £35 million of Faroese frozen and fresh fish is imported to Britain every year and accounts for 13 per cent of the islands' fish exports.
The boycott campaign was officially promoted at the Fishing 93 exhibition in Aberdeen, the industry's annual showcase, by the Environmental Investigation Agency, the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society and the World Society for the Protection of Animals.
Gillian Stacey, organiser of the campaign, claimed that the Faroese needlessly slaughtered 1,500 pilot whales every year.
She claimed the whales were killed in a barbaric and inhumane way after being driven ashore.
The whales were being killed for sport because the islanders did not require whale meat for survival, she added.
Ms Stacey said: ‘It is a national pastime and the islanders have to take responsibility for the slaughter.
We have been negotiating for eight years with the Faroese authorities in an effort to get them to stop, without success.
‘This killing is totally unnecessary and unacceptably cruel and the time has come to end the killing.’
The campaign, she explained, would press supermarkets to find non-Faroese suppliers and would seek the support of the public and the British fishing industry.
A Faroese government spokesman said that only 1,550 whales had been killed in the past ten years in a non-commercial hunt which gave islanders an important local source of nutrition.
‘The hunt is fully regulated by Faroese law.
It is not a sport,’ he said.
Mike Curley, a director of the Faroe Seafood Company in Grimsby, a main importer of Faroese fish, said: ‘I am here to protect the jobs of 320 people involved in processing fish here in Grimsby.’
We take 30 per cent of our raw material from the Faroe Islands, leaving 70 per cent to be purchased here in the UK and elsewhere.
He added: ‘Their fight is with the Faroe Islands, not with Faroe Seafood here in Grimsby.’
Newall wins ruling on costs
RODERICK Newall, the former army lieutenant accused of murdering his wealthy Scottish parents in Jersey five years ago, was yesterday faced with the problem of whether he can afford to appeal to the Privy Council in the fight against extradition to stand trial.
Gibraltar's Court of Appeal rejected his claim that an alleged tape-recorded confession to the murders could not be used as evidence against him.
The court refused the Crown's application for the costs of the hearing, estimated at £80,000, to be met by Newall.
The court also granted a stay of proceedings for three weeks after it delivers its written judgment, in a few days, for the defence to decide whether to take its appeal to the Privy Council, the highest court to which the case can go.
Gibraltar's attorney- general, John Blackburn Gittings, said that it would cost many thousands of pounds in legal fees alone for an estimated three-day contested hearing before the Privy Council.
Lawyers pointed out that if Newall again lost his appeal over the tape recording, the Crown might be granted full costs.
Newall's lawyer, Christopher Finch, said that the court's costs ruling had saved his client tens of thousands of pounds.
One member of the defence team estimated that Newall's brother, Mark, a broker based in Paris who was arrested on the same charges a few days ago and now faces extradition from France, has paid more than £100,000 so far in legal costs in Gibraltar.
Roderick Newall, 27, wearing the tie of his old regiment, the Royal Green Jackets, showed no emotion at the verdict but he smiled at his lawyer when the court ruled against costs.
Alpine reaches supercar heights Jim Dunn falls in a a big way for the Renault A610
EARLY-morning commuters on the A8 were simply minding their own business one day last week when they were set upon and assaulted by a driver who used all the remaining power of his ageing Vauxhall Senator to bludgeon his way in and out of traffic.
Time after time he overtook in the face of oncoming traffic then braked heavily as he forced the car into a small gap causing everyone behind him to brake amidst the clouds of exhaust smoke from his obviously tired old engine.
Yet, as I watched all this from the very end of the slow queue, I had thought it would be me who would have been regarded the potential menace as I was at the wheel of the most outrageously styled and priced supercar ever.
With a whopping 250 bhp from its turbocharged, three-litre V6 engine and no less than 350 foot-pounds of torque available from just 2,500 rpm, the Alpine 610 is an outrageously fast car by any standard.
This level of power, allied to fine aerodynamic tuning and an ultra-light build of composites and plastics, means performance in the order of 165 mph top speed and standstill to 60 mph in well under six seconds.
On the autobahn or the test track, this translates into an uncanny ability to accelerate strongly to 140 mph with sufficient in reserve to cruise at that speed for as long as conditions allow.
Priced at just under £30,000, however, the Alpine offers so much for so little as to question the morality of widening the scope of supercar ownership far beyond those dedicated few prepared to invest in the high level of training to drive one safely.
And while the performance of the Alpine is in the supercar league, the cost of using it, in terms of comfort, running costs and fuel economy, is definitely not — which holds out the enticing prospect of accomplishing long, fast continental journeys in great comfort and 25 mpg economy.
Accommodation is particularly generous for this type of car with the possibility of carrying two teenagers for short to medium distance providing the front seat occupants are not too tall.
Considering Renault's pioneering work in turbocharging for both road and track, it comes as little surprise that the power delivery is so smooth and strong though even Renault engineers have been unable to iron out the last fraction of a second of lag between the throttle being floored and the turbo-pressure rising.
It is, nevertheless a gem of an engine which, despite its muscle, works quietly at all speeds and, until the electronic cut-off kills the ignition system abruptly at 6,250 rpm, feels as though it will rev to astronomical figures.
At high speed, the Alpine feels rock steady which suggests careful attention to aerodynamic tuning and it is only at lower speeds, over give-and-take roads, that the price of the rear engine layout has to be paid with momentary vagueness in the steering when the car crests a brow.
All the toys, gadgets and home comforts come as standard save for leather upholstery.
The stereo system is standard, but it is particularly complex to operate, even after practice, and the sound quality is but a shadow of that fitted in the version of the car six years ago which was, quite simply, the best I have ever experienced.
Of course with this level of looks and performance for such a low asking price there's bound to be a catch.
It is the Alpine's bizarre, clap-hands windscreen wipers which would do Heath Robinson proud with the unnecessary complexity of their design and engineering and, in the matter of clearing rain, are about as effective as a Government promise to bring more civil service jobs to Scotland.
Garages cash in on chipped windscreens
NEW regulations governing the condition of windscreens have provided a licence to print money for MoT, testers according to one of the UK's leading insurance brokers, the Insurance Service.
It has done a survey of MoT testing stations and windscreen replacement centres which shows that the majority recommended the replacement of windscreens even if only slightly chipped.
All quoted the MoT regulations introduced on 1 January yet the crack in the test windscreen was less than ten millimetres long, so that it should not have failed the test.
This practice, according to the Insurance Service, has led to a 20 per cent jump in windscreen replacement claims to insurance companies since 1 January — a rise which could eventually push up premiums.
Time to test ageing skills
OLDER cars have to undergo an annual MoT test — so why not drivers too?
That is the question being posed this week by the College of Driver Education, writes Jim Dunn.
The college is a new charitable organisation which proposes to use a nationwide network of approved driving instructors to give experienced drivers an annual assessment.
For £25, £1 more than the new charge for MoT test for cars, a qualified driving instructor will give the driver an hour-long skills appraisal which will include at least 45 minutes of driving.
After the assessment, the driver will receive a written report on his driving plus advice on what to do to correct any faults.
Those participating will receive up to 20 per cent discount on car insurance rates from the charity's insurance brokers.
The introduction of the test for drivers, which could be available in April, has been prompted by the realisation that driver error is responsible for 95 per cent of road accidents which kill 14 people a day on UK roads.
The need for the new test is underlined by a report today from the Royal Automobile Club and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents which suggests that drivers never read the Highway Code after passing their driving test.
The report quotes recent research by the Transport and Road Research Laboratory which suggests that experienced drivers are more likely than newly qualified ones to make mistakes such as racing away from traffic lights, signalling with the car headlamps and speeding at night.
The RAC's campaign manager, Edmund King, said: ‘Research shows that just under 50 per cent of experienced drivers would fail their driving test if they took it today.
‘A higher proportion of experienced rather than newly-qualified drivers failed because of driving too fast for the conditions, approaching junctions too fast and not anticipating the actions of other drivers.
‘Drink/drive campaigns have been successful in changing social attitudes, now is the time for raising awareness of road manners and the Highway Code.’
Driver test application forms are available from the College of Driver Education (which also wants applications from qualified driving instructors) on 081-888 8058.
The RoSPA and the RAC have set up a 24-hour hotline on 0891 445922 to allow drivers to test their knowledge of the Highway Code.
Road death toll reaches record low
THE number of deaths last year on Britain's roads fell to the lowest level since records began in 1926.
Provisional figures yesterday from the Department of Transport showed that 4,274 people were killed in 1992 — 6 per cent fewer than in 1991.
In 1926, the number of deaths was 4,886 — and then there were only 1.7 million vehicles on the roads compared with around 24.5 million now.
There was a particularly big fall in child pedestrian deaths last year, down 22 per cent to 179.
Deaths of those over 60 were 8 per cent down.
Car user casualties rose 4 per cent but pedestrian casualties were 5 per cent down overall.
Motorcyclist casualties in 1992 were down 13 per cent with deaths falling 16 per cent and serious injuries down 14 per cent.