

An inexpensive and simple method for DNA purifications on silica particles
We have developed a simple, rapid and cheap method for the isolation of DNA from various sources by a further development of the silica binding method of Boom et al.
(1).
In combination with the alkaline lysis method for preparation of bacterial lysates, this constitutes a rapid and effective method for the isolation of plasmid DNA for sequencing and other purooses.
In this method the DNA-binding matrix is provided by diatomaceous earth as a cheap and convenient source of silica particles.
Pretreatment with nitric acid is not required, but the diatoms should be size fractionated.
Very small particles are difficult to remove without filtration and may inhibit some enzymic reactions.
This is performed by resuspending 50 g of diatoms (Sigma D 5-384) in 500 ml of water, and allowing them to settle in a 500 ml measuring cylinder for 3 hours.
The settled particles are recovered in 10-20 ml and resuspended at 10 mg/ml in 4 M guanidine thiocyanate (Sigma G-6639), 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 20 mM EDTA (assuming no significant loss of material during the size fractionation step).
This solution (termed DNA-bind) should be stored in the dark and is stable for at least three months.
DNA may be recovered from solution (eg enzyme reaction mixtures or gel eluates) by the following method which is designed for a volume of DNA solution of 0.5 ml.
If the sample volume is smaller than this it should be adjusted to 0.5 ml with water and transferred to a 1.5 ml microfuge tube.
The DNA-bind solution is shaken and 1 ml added to the sample.
The tube is mixed for 2 min at room temperature to allow binding of the DNA before the diatoms are sedimented for 5-10s in a microfuge.
The supernatant is removed with a drawn-out Pasteur pipette and the pellet resuspended in 50% ethanol containing 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4.
Diatoms are pelleted again, and the washing step repeated.
The final pellet is washed in 1.0 ml of acetone as above and briefly dried at 65°C.
DNA is eluted by resuspending the pellet in 50-200 µl of water and incubating at 65°C for 2 minutes.
Diatoms are then removed by sedimentation and the aqueous solution of DNA transferred to a fresh tube.
We have successfully recovered ds DNA fragments as small as 120 bp.
This procedure is compatible with a modification of the alkaline lysis method for plasmid minipreparation and considerably speeds this process (2).
We routinely resuspend 1.5 ml of an overnight bacterial culture in 200 µl of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM EDTA.
If required RNAse A can be included in this solution at 50 µg/ml.
Cells are lysed by the addition of 200 µl of 0.2 M NaOH, 1% SDS and gentle inversion.
When the suspension has cleared 0.2 ml of 2.55 M potassium acetate pH 4.8 is added and mixed.
The flocculent precipitate is removed by centrifugation and the supernatant transferred to a clean tube.
1 ml of DNA-bind solution is added and processed as above.
This method yields in excess of 5 µg of DNA from a typical minipreparation of plasmid pTZ18R and requires 10-15 minutes to perform.
Total costs involved (plasticware and chemicals) are low (approximately 12p per minipreparation).
Single-stranded DNA is also recoverable from PEG-precipitates of bacteriophage after resuspension of the pellet in 0.5 ml of water.
We have found DNA prepared this way to be immediately suitable for most laboratory procedures: both single and double-stranded sequencing reactions, restriction enzyme digestion, ligation, and for transfection of eukaryotic cells using lipofectin (data submitted but not shown).
The method is suitable for the recovery of DNA between enzyme reactions and we estimate the efficiency as 60-80%.
However losses become appreciable after 4 successive re-isolations.
DNA made this way is lost during phenol extraction unless acidified beforehand by addition of sodium acetate pH 5.0 to 0.1 M. No further salt addition is then required for ethanol precipitation.
Retroviral vectors displaying functional antibody fragments
ABSTRACT
We have made retrovirus particles displaying a functional antibody fragment.
We fused the gene encoding an antibody fragment directed against a hapten with that encoding the viral envelope protein (Pr80 env ) of the ecotropic Moloney murine leukemia virus.
The fusion gene was co-expressed in ecotropic retroviral packaging cells with a retroviral plasmid carrying the neomycin phosphotransferase gene (neo ), and retroviral particles with specific hapten binding activities were recovered.
Furthermore the hapten-binding particles were able to transfer the neo gene and the antibody-envelope fusion gene to mouse fibroblasts.
In principle, the display of antibody fragments on the surface of recombinant retroviral particles could be used to target virus to cells for gene delivery, or to retain the virus in target tissues.
INTRODUCTION
The isolation of genes encoding proteins with known binding properties has recently been facilitated by selection technologies.
The genes encoding the protein are packaged such that the encoded protein is displayed on the outside of the package.
The package is then selected by its binding affinity (for example an encoded antigen by binding to solid phase antibody), and replicated.
The tight linkage between genes and encoded protein allow packages to be selected in rounds of binding and growth, leading to selection factors of more than one in a million.
Replicable packages have included mammalian cells —used to isolate the genes encoding lymphocyte surface markers from cDNA libraries 1 —and filamentous bacteriophage —used to isolate the genes encoding antibody fragments 2 and other proteins 3 .
The use of filamentous bacteriophage has even led to strategies for building antibodies in bacteria and improving their binding affinities, and so by-passing immunisation 4,5 .
Here we have explored the use of retroviral vectors for display of proteins expressed in mammalian cells.
Such retroviruses offer an alternative to the use of filamentous bacteriophage as replicable display packages.
For example, glycosylated proteins which are unsuitable for display on filamentous bacteriophage may be amenable to selection in a retroviral display system.
Retroviral vectors displaying nonviral proteins or peptides may also offer a vehicle for somatic gene therapy 6 .
Retroviruses can transfer genes efficiently to cells but they deliver their therapeutic genes to both target and nontarget cells, necessitating local delivery of the recombinant retroviruses to specific target tissues 7,8 , or retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to target cells ex vivo , followed by reimplantation of these cells 9 .
An alternative strategy would be to alter the host range of the virus 10 which is determined in part by the binding properties of the proteins displayed at its surface 11 .
In principle, to target the virus to cell surface molecules which are not recognised by natural viral coat proteins, we could incorporate functional nonviral polypeptides into the virion.
Nonviral proteins have been incorporated into viral particles, for example, CD4 and chimaeric CD4-envelope proteins into avian retroviruses 12 , but the displayed proteins were not shown to be folded.
Here we show that a functional antibody fragment can be displayed as a fusion with the retroviral coat protein on the surface of the viral particles and binds specifically to the hapten recognised by the antibody fragment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plasmid construction
The BamHI/ClaI env fragment (nt 6537-7674, nt numbering from Shinnick et al, 1981 (ref 13) from pCRIP (gift from O. Danos 14 ) was cloned into the BamHI/ClaI backbone fragment of pZipNeoSV(X) (gift from R. Mulligan 15 ) to generate an intermediate plasmid penvBam/Cla.
A SfiI/NotI cloning site was introduced beyond the leader peptide sequence between codons corresponding to the 6th and 7th aminoacids (from the N-terminus) in the mature MoMLV env polypeptide.
The oligonucleotides envNotrev (5'-CTG CAG GAG CTC GAG ATC AAA CGG GCG GCC GCA CCT CAT CAA GTC TAT AAT ATC-3', complementary to MoMLV env nts 5894-5914 with a 33nt 5' sequence encoding a NotI site and 21nt complementary to the 5' tail of envSfifor) and envseq7 (5'-GCC AGA ACG GGG TTT GGC C-3', complementary to MoMLV env nts 6600-6581) were used to amplify a 739bp fragment from plasmid pCRIP (and encoding downstream of codon 6).
A second set of oligonucleotides, envSfifor (5'-TTT GAT CTC GAG CTC CTG CAG GGC CGG CTG GGC CGC ACT GGA GCC GGG CGA AGC AGT-3', complementary to MoMLV env nts 5893-5873 with a 36nt 5' overhang encoding a SfiI site and 21nt complementary to the 5' tail of envNotrev) and revMLVpol (5'-AAT TAC ATT GTG CAT ACA GAC CC-3', complementary to MoMLV pol nts 5277-5249) was used to prime amplification of a 702bp fragment from pCRIP (and encoding upstream of env codon 7).
Amplifications were carried out using Vent polymerase and reactions were subjected to 15 PCR cycles at 94°C for 1min, 60°C for 1min and 72°C for 1min.
The 702 and 739bp gel-purified PCR products were linked through their complementary 21nt tails to generate an env gene fragment incorporating a SfiI/NotI cloning site: the two fragments were mixed and subjected to three cycles (94°C-1min, 40°C-1min, 72°C-2min) followed by 17 further PCR cycles (94°C-1min, 60°C-1min, 72°C-2min) after addition of ologonucleotides envseq7 and Bglenvrev (5'-TAA TCA CTA CAG ATC TAG ACT GAC ATG GCG CGT-3', complementary to MoMLV pol nucleotides 5766 to 5785 and with the 5' tail incorporating a BglII restriction site).
The product, a 905bp fragment, was digested with BglII and BamHI and cloned into the BamHI site of penvBam/Cla (see above) giving the plasmid pSfi/Notenv.
Correct assembly of this plasmid was confirmed by restriction analysis and dideoxy sequencing.
A SfiI/NotI fragment from pB1.8scFv 16 , encoding a functional B1.8 scFv antibody was then cloned into the SfiI/NotI cloning site of pSfi/Notenv to generate the plasmid pNIPenv (Fig 1).
Plasmid pDCNeo (Fig 1, a gift from Dr P Allen, Institute of Cancer Research, Fulham Road, London) is a retroviral plasmid which carries the bacterial neomycin phosphotransferase gene.
It generates packagable RNA transcripts which are encapsidated into recombinant MoMLV particles and transfer G418 resistance to infected target cells.
Cells and recombinant retroviruses
NIH3T3 fibroblasts, the ecotropic retroviral packaging cell line psi2 17 and the amphotropic retrovirus producer cell line GP+envAm12-BabePuro (a gift from RG Vile, ICRF, Lincolns Inns Fields, London —derived by transfection of GP+envAm12 18 cells with the plasmid pBabePuro 19 ) were maintained in DMEM/10%FBS supplemented with 60µg/ml benzylpenicillin and 100µg/ml streptomycin at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5%CO 2 .
The cells were replated twice weekly using EDTA without trypsin to disrupt the monolayer.
Plasmids pNIPenv and pDCNeo were transfected (or co-transfected) into psi2 cells by calcium phosphate precipitation 20 .
Briefly, 2 10 5 cells were plated in 90mm tissue culture plates (Nunc), cultured overnight, washed and fed with 10mls new medium.
10µl plasmid DNA and 50µl 2M CaCl 2 (0.2µm-filtered) were diluted in sterile water to a volume of 400µl.
The CaCl 2 /DNA mis was added dropwise to an equal volume of 0.2µm-filtered 2 HEPES-buffered saline (280mM NaCl, 10mM KCl, 1.5mM Na 2 HPO 4 .2H2O, 12mM dextrose, 50mM HEPES, pH adjusted to 7.05 with 0.5N NaOH) and left to stand for 20 minutes at RT.
The transfection solution (800µl) was added to the cells which were cultured for 16hrs, washed and re-fed.
G418 selection (1mg/ml) was commenced 24 hrs later and continued for approximately 2 weeks.
Transfected colonies expressing surface B1.8 single chain antibody were identified by panning with NIP.BSA-coated beads.
Briefly, tosyl activated paramagnetic beads (Dynal, Oslo, Norway.
Prod.
no. 14004) were coated with NIP.BSA (about 10 NIP-caproate-O-succinimide molecules coupled to each bovine serum albumin molecule 16 ), washed extensively in PBS and blocked with DMEM/10%FBS. 90mm tissue culture plates containing up to 50 G418-resistant psi2 colonies were rocked gently for 1 hr at 4°C followed by 1 hr at room temperature with 2 10 7 (50µl) beads in 5mls DMEM/10%FBS.
After 5 washes in PBS, positive colonies (heavily coated with paramagnetic beads) were easily identified and were transferred individually for further growth and harvest of cell supernatants.
Recombinant retrovirus titres were determined by transfer of G418 or puromycin resistance.
NIH3T3 cells were infected by overnight exposure to 0.45µM-filtered viral supernatants in the presence of 5µg/ml polybrene and colonies resistant to 1mg/ml G418 or 1.25 µg/ml puromycin were counted after 10-14 days.
The amphotropic producer cell line GP+envAm12-BabePuro was infected with ecotropic virus by exposing 10 5 cells overnight (twice) to 10 mls of the appropriate producer cell supernatant in the presence of 5µg/ml polybrene.
ELISA for B1.8scFv-MoMLVenv fusion protein
To detect the B1.8-env fusion protein in supernatant of pNIPenv transfected clones, 96-well microtitre plates (Falcon) were coated overnight at RT with 20µg/ml NIP.BSA or BSA alone, blocked for 2 hrs at 37°C in DMEM/10%FCS and washed 6 in PBS.
Culture supernatants, cleared of cell debris by centrifugation at 5000RPM for 15min, were added in triplicate to coated wells and incubated for 2hrs at RT.
Wells were washed (PBS 6).
The second layer was a goat polyclonal anti-Rauscher MLV env antiserum (Microbiological Associates, Inc.
Bethesda), diluted 1/500 in DMEM/10%FCS, and incubated at RT for 1 hr.
After 6 washes in PBS, the third layer HRP-conjugated rabbit anti-goat antibody (Sigma) was added, the plates incubated for a further hour at RT, washed 6 in PBS and the reaction developed with ABTS (2'2'-azinobis(3-ethylbenzthiazolone)sulphonic acid).
Absorbance readings were measured at 405nm after 20 minutes.
Infectious retrovirus immunosorbent assay (IRISA)
Individual wells in 6-well tissue culture plates (Corning, New York) were coated overnight at 4°C with 100µg/ml NIP.BSA or Ox.BSA (about 14 molecules 2-phenyl-5-oxazolone coupled to each bovine serum albumin molecule, and was a gift from C.Rada), washed 3 PBS, blocked for 2 hrs at 37°C with DMEM/10%FBS and washed 3 PBS.
Virus-containing supernatant (0.45µM-filtered) was added (2 hrs at 37°C), wells were washed 6 PBS and 10 5 NIH3T3 cells were added to each well in 5 mls DMEM/10%FBS containing 5µg/ml polybrene.
After 24 hrs incubatiion, G418 or puromycin was added, either before or after replating. 10-14 days later, viable colonies were stained with 50% methanol/5% Giemsa and counted.
For inhibition IRISA, virus-containing supernatants were pre-incubated (30 mins at room temperature) with varying concentrations of NIP·BSA.
EM analysis of virus agglutination
0.45µM-filtered virus-containing supernatants were incubated overnight at 4°C with varying concentrations of NIP·BSA.
Virions were pelleted by centrifugation at 40,000 rpm for 1 hr, resuspended in 100µl 2% phosphotungstic acid and dropped onto Formvar-coated grids which had previously been coated with a thin layer of carbon.
Transmission electron micrographs were taken with a Joel JEM100CX microscope at magnifications ranging from 10,000 to 50,000.
RESULTS
Design of pNIPenv vector
Plasmid pNIPenv (Fig. 1) encodes a chimaeric fusion protein consisting of the ecotropic MoMLV envelope polypeptide Pr80 env with a single chain Fv (scFv)21,22 fragment directed against the hapten 4-hydroxy-5-iodo-3-nitrophenacetyl caproate (NIP)16 inserted 6 aminoacids from the N-terminus of Pr80 env .
The scFv fragment is flanked by SfiI and NotI sites as in the vector pHEN1 23 , to facilitate the cloning of scFv fragments selected from phage display libraries 4 .
The 33 aminoacid MoMLV env leader sequence is retained, without disruption of the leader cleavage site.
The N- and C-termini of the B1.8scFv are connected to adjacent env sequences through short linker sequences (Fig. 1).
Expression is driven from promoter/enhancer sequences in the 5' MoMLV long terminal repeat (LTR) and a polyadenylation sequence is provided by the 3' MoMLV LTR.
Display of antibody fragments on surface of mammalian cells
Plasmid pNIPenv was co-transfected with the retroviral plasmid pDCNeo (which generates a packagable RNA transcript encoding neomycin phosphotransferase and confers G418-resistance, Fig. 1) into the ecotropic retroviral packaging cell line psi2.
Control cells were transfected with pDCNeo alone.
G418-resistant psi2 transfectants displaying the B1.8 scFv-MoMLVenv fusion protein at their surface were identified by panning with NIP.BSA-coated paramagnetic beads.
The cells isolated by panning were heavily coated with the beads, indicating that a functional antibody fragment was displayed on the surface of the transfected cells.
Display of antibody fragments on surface of retrovirus
The retroviruses expressed from the selected clones were titred by transfer of G418 resistance to NIH3T3, and a range of titres noted, for example clones psi2-NIPenv1 (titre 0 G418 t.u. /ml) and psi2-NIPenv5 (titre 10 3 G418 t.u. /ml).
Cell supernatants were then tested by ELISA for presence of the B1.8scFv-env fusion protein (Fig. 2).
Using anti-env antiserum as the second layer, specific NIP.BSA-binding activity was detected in supernatants from pooled pNIPenv psi2 clones (titre 10 3 G418 t.u. /ml) and from clone psi2-NIPenv5, but not from clone psi2-NIPenv1 or pooled psi2-DCNeo clones (titre 10 3 G418 t.u. /ml).
This suggested that the functional antibody fragment could be incorporated into virion particles and displayed at their surface.
As a further demonstration, 0.45µM-filtered culture supernatant psi2-NIPenv5-virus was incubated with varying concentrations (0, 0.1, 1.0 and 10.0µg/ml) of NIP.BSA and the resuspended viral pellet examined by electron microscopy for virus agglutination.
At 10µg/ml NIP.BSA, numerous large aggregates of MoMLV particles with typical morphology 24 were observed (Fig. 3).
Individual virions were closely apposed with a relatively uniform interparticle distance (6-20 nm), indicating crosslinking by NIP.BSA.
Similar aggregation was not observed in the absence of NIP.BSA, nor with control psi2-DCNeo supernatant.
Retrovirus particles displaying antibody fragments can package marker genes
As proof that the functional antibody fragment was displayed on infectious retroviral particles, the novel IRISA assay was developed (Materials and Methods).
Filtered recombinant psi2-NIPenv5 virus was bound to NIP.BSA-coated pates, washed and NIH3T3 cells added to each well.
The bound virus gave rise to G418 resistant colonies (Fig. 4 and Table 1), and the binding of the virus could be competively inhibited by soluble NIP.BSA (Fig. 5).
The virus did not bind to phOx-BSA-coated or uncoated tissue culture wells, nor did psi2-DCNeo virus bind to NIP.BSA.
This indicates that the virus particles bind specifically to hapten, are infectious and can package a marker gene for transfer into mouse fibroblasts.
Retroviral particles displaying antibody fragments can package the antibody V-genes
The amphotropic producer cell line GP+envAm12-BabePuro was infected with recombinant psi2-NIPenv5 virus and transfer of the hybrid B1.8scFv-MoMLV env fusion gene was confirmed by PCR analysis of high molecular weight DNA extracted from these cells (data not shown).
As a demonstration of functional expression of the transferred env fusion gene, the virus particles expressed by these cells bound more efficiently to NIP.BSA-coated plates than to phOx.BSA-coated plates as indicated by subsequent transfer of puromycin resistance to NIH3T3 cells (Fig. 6).
In contrast, GP+envAm12-BabePuro cells infected with Psi2-DCNeo virus gave no signal when analysed by PCR for the env fusion gene and expressed virus which did not bind specifically to NIP.BSA.
This indicates that psi2-NIPenv5-derived virus particles encapsidate and transfer a functional gene encoding the functional B1.8scFv antibody fragment displayed on their surface.
DISCUSSION
We have shown that a functional antibody fragment can be displayed on the surface of a retroviral particle fused to its envelope protein, and that this confers novel binding specificity on the particle.
Pr85 env , the initial translation product of the env gene forms oligomers, undergoes glycosylation and is proteolytically cleaved during its transport through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus to the cell surface where it appears as a small transmembrane C-terminal domain p15(E) TM , linked noncovalently or by a disulphide bridge to a larger extracellular domain gp70 SU (ref 25).
Here we fused the scFv fragment close to the N-terminus of gp70 SU and we envisage that it is folded and displayed as a separate domain.
This choice of fusion site may be important, as an attempt to replace the N-terminal domain of gp70 SU with a functional IL2 polypeptide did not succeed 26 .
Presumably it will prove possible to incorporate antibody fragments with different binding specificities, and indeed the restriction sites of pNIPenv were designed to facilitate the cloning of other scFv cassettes from filamentous phage vectors 4 .
It may also be possible to display other functional nonviral polypeptides (growth factors, cytokines or T cell receptors for example) or short peptide sequences with a variety of receptor binding activities.
We showed that the virus particles that display antibody fragments could also encapsidate the genes of a marker (neo ), and were infectious as shown by the transfer of G418 antibiotic resistance to murine cells from viral particles immobilised on NIP-BSA coated plates.
The infectivity of these particles was expected since they incorporate both the antibody-envelope fusion protein and unmodified envelope protein which is also expressed abundantly in the retroviral packaging cell line.
In principle such particles could be used for targeted delivery of a genetic marker to cells (see below).
It is not known whether retrovirus can be assembled in which all the subunits of the viral envelope protein are fused to antibody, and if so whether the virus would infect cells.
We also demonstrated that virus particles displaying antibody fragments can encapsidate the genes (pNIPenv) encoding the antibody fragments on their surface and hence have potential as replicable display packages, as with phage antibodies 2 .
(These virions could also have been selected directly by including a selectable marker gene on the pNIPenv plasmid).
We suggest that it might be possible to evolve new viral tropisms (see below) using repertoires of antibody fragments or peptide sequences displayed on the virus, with cycles of infection and selection.
Retroviral particles displaying antibodies against cell surface antigens should bind preferentially to target cells expressing those antigens, and this may facilitate their infection.
For some antigens, the binding of retrovirus-associated antibody fragments to cell surfaces is followed by membrane fusion between virus and target cell: streptavidin-linked biotinylated monoclonal antibodies have been used to link ecotropic retroviruses to the surface of nonpermissive human cells with subsequent transfer of the viral genome into the target cells 27 .
This ‘molecular bridging’ approach was successful (but inefficient) when viral particles were coupled to human MHC class I and class II antigens 27 , but not to the human transferrin receptor 28 , and suggests that only a limited number of cell surface antigens can function as surrogate receptors for MoMLV particles.
In an attempt to identify suitable surrogate receptors, we are currently generating ecotropic retroviral particles displaying antibody fragments against a number of target antigens present on human cells.
NIP-derivatised human cells were tested as a model for targeted gene delivery, but became permissive for both modified (displaying an anti-NIP antibody) and unmodified ecotropic viral particles.
Retroviruses displaying antibody fragments might also be used to retain the retrovirus in the vicinity of a tumour, and thereby reduce the systemic spread of recombinant retroviruses.
For example, it has been proposed to deliver genes encoding prodrug-activating enzymes to tumours by injection of retroviral vector-producer cells 29,30 , and then to administer the appropriate prodrug to kill gene-transduced tumour cells and their untransduced neighbours.
As a safety measure, the retroviral particles could be engineered to display antibody fragments directed against an antigen on the tumour cells to enhance their retention within the tumour deposit.
Figure 1.
Plasmids pNIPenv and pDCNeo, including sequence and translation of pNIPenv expression vector showing details of fusion between MoMLV env and B1.8 scFv.
See Materials and Methods for details of construction.
LTR = long terminal repeat; L = 33 aminoacid env leader peptide; SV40E = SV40 early promoter, enh -= enhancer deletion.
Figure 2.
Supernatant ELISA for B1.8scFv-MoMLV env fusion protein binding to NIP.BSA.
Figure 3.
Electron micrograph (20,000 magnification) of NIP.BSA-agglutinated virus from psi2-NIPenv5 supernatant.
Figure 4.
IRISA plate (5% Giemsa).
Wells were coated as indicated and bound virus was detected by transfer of G418 resistance to NIH3T3 cells (see Materials and Methods for details).
Psi2-NIPenv5-derived virus binds specifically to NIP.BSA-coated wells.
Figure 5.
Inhibition IRISA plate (5% Giemsa).
All wells were coated with NIP.BSA.
Psi2-NIPenv5-derived virus (1ml) was preincubated with varying concentrations of soluble NIP.BSA, as indicated on the photograph, prior to assay.
Virus binding is progressively inhibited with increasing concentrations of soluble NIP.BSA.
Figure 6.
IRISA plate (5% Giemsa).
Wells were coated as indicated and bound virus was detected by transfer of puromycin resistance to NIH3T3 cells.
Virus expressed by an amphotropic producer cell line infected with psi2-NIPenv5-derived virus binds specifically to NIP.BSA-coated wells.
Identification of proteins that interact with CREB during differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells
ABSTRACT
The mammalian transcription factor CREB is thought to activate cAMP-inducible genes in a variety of differentiated cell types and is probably involved in other signalling pathways.
Undifferentiated F9 embryonal carcinoma (UF9) cells are refractory to cAMP and become cAMP-responsive following differentiation to endoderm like cells.
It has been proposed that UF9 cells contain a negative regulator(s) of the cAMP-response that might act through direct interaction with CREB.
We have used a protein blotting assay and 32 P-labelled CREB to probe for CREB-binding proteins in nuclear extracts from F9 cells and to examine their abundance during differentiation.
We find that ATF1 (a protein that is highly homologous to CREB) and a novel polypeptide(s) of ∼100 kDa (CBP100) are the major CREB-binding proteins in extracts from UF9 cells.
As expected ATF1 is detected due to leucine zipper-dependent heterodimerisation with CREB.
In contrast CBP100 interacts with CREB independently of the leucine zipper.
The total amount of ATF1 and the amount of ATF1 that is complexed with CREB are substantially reduced following differentiation.
In addition, ATF1 mRNA levels are lower in differentiated F9 cells indicating that a pretranslational mechanism contributes to the decreased ATF1 protein levels observed.
CBP100 levels are also reduced or CBP100 is modified upon differentiation.
We discuss the potential roles of ATF1 and CBP100 in regulating CREB activity during differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.
INTRODUCTION
The cAMP-response-element-binding-protein (CREB) is the best characterised mediator of cAMP-inducible transcription in mammalian cells (1, 2, 3).
cAMP acts through the cAMP-dependent-protein-kinase (PKA) which in turn activates CREB by direct phosphorylation (4, 5).
CREB can activate the somatostatin promoter in vivo(6, 7) but in addition CREB may play a highly complex role in several other cellular pathways.
CREB is able to bind to promoters that are induced by a variety of agents other than cAMP (including Ca 2+ (8, 9) and the adenovirus E1A protein (10, 11, 12)) and is thought to activate a functionally diverse array of genes in response to elevated cAMP.
These include genes encoding neuropeptides (13), early response proteins (14, 15, 16), gluconeogenic enzymes (17, 18) and cell specific transcriptional activators (19).
Consistent with these pleiotropic effects of CREB, the CREB gene is widely expressed but the activity of CREB is controlled in a cell type specific manner (19, 20, 21, 22, 37).
Direct interaction of CREB with other cellular proteins is certain to play an important role in allowing CREB to have such a variety of effects on cellular transcription.
Although CREB can bind to DNA as a homodimer CREB is a member of the ‘bZIP’ class of transcription factors (23, 24, 25) and can heterodimerise with other bZIP proteins (26, 27).
Two bZIP proteins (ATF-1 and CREM) which are highly related to CREB are known to form heterodimers with CREB (28, 29, 30).
Moreover a further level of complexity arises from the fact that both ATF1 (29, 30) and CREM (28, 31) exist in multiple forms.
The functional roles of CREM and ATF1 are not well characterised.
CREM can repress CREB when overexpressed in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells (28) and CREM is expressed in a manner that suggests an important negative role during spermatogenesis (31).
In contrast to CREM the available evidence indicates that ATF1 is a transcriptional activator and shares many structural properties with CREB.
ATF-1 acts as a transcriptional activator when overexpressed in F9 cells (32) or when assayed in vitro(33).
Despite these similarities however ATF1 and CREB exhibit several functional differences.
First, when fused to the DNA binding domain of the yeast activator gal4, transcriptional activation by gal4/CREB is not dependent on the CREB leucine zipper while activation by gal4/ATF1 is dependent (30).
Second, CREB and ATF-1 form complexes of different stability with DNA (29, 30) and ATF-1 has a destabalising effect on CREB DNA-binding (30).
Third CREB has a limited ability to mediate response to E1A whereas ATF1 is unable to do so (11, 12).
These differences between ATF1 and CREB strongly suggest that CREB/ATF1 heterodimers and CREB homodimers will have different properties and therefore point to a significant role for ATF1 in regulating CREB.
Undifferentiated F9 embryonal carcinoma (UF9) cells are refractory to cAMP and become cAMP-responsive following retinoic acid-induced differentiation (34, 35, 36).
However, UF9 cells contain normal levels of endogenous CREB (37) and it has been proposed that UF9 cells contain a CREB inhibitor that prevents relay of the cAMP-signal to the transcription machinery (37).
UF9 cells and their differentiated derivatives may therefore be useful for identifying proteins that functionally interact with CREB.
To identify proteins that directly interact with CREB we have used a protein blotting or Far Western technique to probe crude nuclear extracts from F9 cells.
We find that ATF1 and a novel polypeptide(s) of ∼100 kDa (CBP100) are the major CREB-binding proteins in extracts from UF9 cells.
As detected in the Far Western assay both ATF1 and CBP100 are substantially reduced following retinoic acid induced differentiation.
ATF1 and CBP100 may therefore regulate CREB in F9 cells and we discuss their potential role during differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Undifferentiated (UF9) and differentiated (DF9) mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma cells were maintained as monolayers in 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) on standard tissue culture dishes coated with 0.1% gelatin ∼300 bloom from porcine skin (Sigma G-2500).
UF9 cells were induced to differentiate with retinoic acid as follows.
80% confluent monolayers were split 40 fold in the presence of 1µM all-trans retinoic acid (Sigma).
Retinoic acid was freshly prepared as a 10mM stock solution in ethanol.
After 3 days in the presence of retinoic acid, cells were split 5-fold using fresh media and retinoic acid.
Extracts were made from differentiated cells following 6 days of treatment with retinoic acid.
Plasmids and peptides
pCREMα is described elsewhere (28).
pGEX-ATF1 was obtained by cloning a full length ATF1 cDNA (30) into pGEX-KG. pGEX-KG was derived from pGEX-2T (38) by insertion of a polylinker in to the EcoR1 site of pGEX-2T. pGEX-CRIα was obtained by cloning a full length CREB cDNA including the α-peptide region (6) into pGEX-KG.
Synthetic peptides corresponding to the leucine zipper regions of CREB, c-jun and c-fos were as follows.
ZIP1 contains the c-terminal 36 residues of CREB (EYVKCLENRVAVLENQNKTLIEELKALKDLYCHKSD).
ZIPJUN contains 34 amino acids from c-jun (ARLEE- KVKTLKAQNSELASTANMLREQVAQLKQK).
ZIPFOS contains 33 amino acids from c-fos (TDTLQ- AETDQLEDEKSALQTEIANLLKEKEKLE).
Preparation of nuclear extracts
Nuclear extracts were prepared as previously described (29).
Briefly cells were resuspended in ice cold lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH8.0; 20 mM NaCl; 0.5% NP40; 1mM DTT; protease inhibitors including 0.5 mM PMSF, 2µg/ml leupeptin and 2µg/ml trasylol), left on ice for 5 minutes and centrifuged for 1 minute at top speed in an Eppendorf microfuge.
The crude nuclear pellet was resuspended in buffer C (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9; 25% [v/v]glycerol; 420 mM NaCl; 1.5 mM MgCl 2 ; 0.2 mM EDTA; 1mM DTT; protease inhibitors [0.5 mM PMSF, 2µg/ml leupeptin and 2µg/ml trasylol]), and left on ice for 30 minutes.
Nuclear debris was removed by centrifugation for 1 minute in an Eppendorf microfuge and the supernatant diluted to low salt by the addition of 2 volumes of 20 mM Hepes pH7.4.
Western blotting, Northern blotting and immunoprecipitations
Antibodies to CREB and ATF1 have been previously described (29).
CREB antibody was raised against a synthetic peptide corresponding to the carboxy terminal 10 amino acids of CREB and polyclonal antibody was raised against ATF1 purified fom HeLa cells (29).
Detection of CREB by Western blotting and immunoprecipitation of 32 P-labelled CREB and ATF1 was performed as previously described (29).
For Northern blotting total RNA was prepared from cytoplasmic extracts and analysed according to standard procedures.
32 P-labelled probes were prepared from their corresponding cDNA inserts and the blot was hybridised sequentially with each of the probes used.
Probes for ATF1 and CREB were derived from the non-homologous amino terminal sequences of ATF1 and CREB and were therefore non-cross reacting.
In vitro transcription and translation
35 S-labelled CREB, CREM or ATF1 proteins were synthesised in vitro by transcription of their corresponding cDNAs (29, 30) as previously described (23) using T7 RNA polymerase (Boehringer) and subsequent translation in rabbit reticulocyte lysate (Amersham).
Preparation of 32 P-labelled probes for Far Western blotting
Plasmids pGEX-CR1α and pGEX-ATF1 were used to express GST-CREB and GST-ATF1.
Bacterial lysate was prepared by sonication in PBS, 0.5% T 100, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT and protease inhibitors including 0.5 mM PMSF, 2µg/ml leupeptin and 2µg/ml trasylol.
The lysate was mixed with glutathione agarose beads at room temperature for 40 minutes, unbound proteins removed and washed three times in 10 mls lysis buffer.
Bound protein was eluted by mixing for 20 minutes end over end with 25 mM glutathione (dissolved in 50 mM tris pH 8.0), the eluate adjusted to 10% glycerol and quick frozen.
32 P-labelled CREB or ATF1 were produced as follows.
Purified GST-fusion proteins (6 mg) were adjusted to 150 mM NaCl and 2.5 mM CaCl 2 in a volume of 500 ml and incubated with 680 ng thrombin (sigma T3010) at 25°C for 90 minutes to yield full length CREB or ATF1.
Proteins were 32 P-labelled using the catalytic subunit of PKA (Sigma P2645) by incubation at 37°C for 1 hour under the following conditions.
30 µl (∼ 0.3 mg) of protein in thrombin buffer, 20ml 10 kinase buffer (200 mM tris-Cl (7.5), 1M NaCl and 120 mM MgCl 2 ), 20ml PKA catalytic subunit (17U/ml in 0.3M DTT), 45 ml 32 P-γ-ATP (10 mCi/ml, 5000 Ci/mmol, Amersham) and 85 ml of H 2 O in a total volume of 200 ml.
BSA (enzyme grade) was added to 1 mg/ml and the sample passed through a G50 spin column (Pharmacia) equilibrated in 1 kinase buffer plus 1mg/ml BSA.
Specific activity of 32 P-labelled probes was typically between 10 7 and 10 8 cpm per mg.
Far Western blotting
Proteins were resolved on 10% SDS gels and transferred to nitrocellulose paper as for Western blotting.
Filters were washed in 1 HBB (25 mM Hepes-KOH(7.7), 25 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl 2 ) plus 1mM DTT.
Proteins were then denatured and renatured by sequential incubation (10 minutes per change) with decreasing concentrations of Guanidine-HCL in 1 HBB plus 1mM DTT as follows: 6M (2 changes), 3M, 1.5M, 0.75M, 0.375M, 0.19M and finally back into 1 HBB plus 1mM DTT (2 changes).
Filters were blocked in HYB100 (20 mM Hepes-KOH (7.7), 100 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, 0.05% NP40) + 5% marvel dried milk for 30 minutes, HYB100 + 1% marvel for 15 minutes and incubated overnight with 32 P-CREB (∼1ng/ml or ∼5 10 4 cpm/ml) in HYB100 + 1% marvel.
Following removal of probe, filters were washed 3 times (300 mls/filter 5 minutes each change) with HYB100 + 1% marvel, well dried and exposed to X-ray film.
Phosphatase treatment
Rabbit reticulocyte lysate (2ml) containing 35 S-labelled in vitro translated proteins was treated with 5U of calf intestinal phosphatase for 2 hours at 37°C in 12ml reactions containing 20 mM HEPES pH8.0, 20 mM MgCl 2 , 40 mM KCl and 0.6 mM PMSF.
Phosphatase inhibitors were used at the following concentrations.
60 mM NaF, 20 mM EDTA, 2 mM L-cys and 2 mM okadaic acid.
Phosphatase treatment of nuclear extracts from F9 cells was performed as follows.
15ml reactions contained 5 ml of undiluted nuclear extract (obtained from ∼10 6 cells), 5U of calf intestinal phosphatase and were incubated for 2 hours at 37°C in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH8.0, 20 mM MgCl 2 , 40 mM KCl and 0.6 mM PMSF.
RESULTS
Detection of CREB and ATF1 using antibodies
CREB and ATF1 are highly homologous proteins (figure 1) that are known to form heterodimers (29, 30).
Previous studies using antibodies have shown that CREB and ATF1 are expressed in UF9 cells (29) and at least some of the CREB is dimerised with ATF1 (29).
In addition CREB protein levels are not detectably altered during differentiation of F9 cells ((37) and see figure 2A).
Initially to examine the effects of differentiation on the relative levels of ATF1 and CREB we used a previously described assay in which CREB and ATF1 present in heat denatured nuclear extracts are 32 P-labelled using protein kinase A and immunoprecipitated (figure 2B).
The anti-CREB antibody used, recognises CREB/ATF1 heterodimers but does not directly recognise free ATF1 (29).
The ATF1 antibody does not recognise CREB/ATF1 heterodimers or CREB (30).
As shown previously (29) both free ATF1 (lane 1) and CREB/ATF1 heterodimers (lane 2) can be immunoprecipitated from extracts of UF9 cells.
CREB and ATF1 appear to be present at similar levels in immunoprecipitates obtained with the CREB antibody (lane 2) suggesting that most of the CREB is in the form of a heterodimer with ATF1.
This together with the presence of free ATF1 (lane 1) suggests that ATF1 is present in excess of CREB in UF9 cells.
Following differentiation the amount of ATF1 detected is reduced compared with CREB (compare lanes 3 and 4) and the amount of ATF1 that co-immunoprecipitates with CREB is also reduced (lane 4).
Because ATF1 is detected by 32 P-labeling in this assay the reduction in ATF1 observed is not necessarily quantitative.
Nonetheless these initial experiments suggest that ATF1 protein levels are substantially reduced during differentiation of F9 cells and that the amount of ATF1 complexed with CREB is also reduced.
A general assay for proteins that interact with CREB
The immunoprecipitation assay described above has a limited potential for detection of CREB binding proteins in general.
Because the assay requires 32 P-labelling of proteins by PKA and has to be performed on heat denatured nuclear extracts, it is not necessarily quantitative (because it will be affected by the degree to which the protein is already phosphorylated) and will fail to detect heat labile proteins or proteins that are not substrates for PKA.
Moreover the assay requires immunoprecipitation that might be detrimental for detection of proteins (other than bZIP proteins) that only weakly associate with CREB or that might prevent recognition of CREB by the CREB antobody.
To probe crude nuclear extracts directly for CREB binding proteins, we employed a prtein blotting or ‘Far Western’ technique.
This approach has recently been described by a variety of investigators for studying protein/protein interactions in general and leucine zipper interactions in particular(39-43).
To establish the viability of this approach for probing crude nuclear extracts we first tested the ability of 32 P-labelled CREB to detect itself or ATF1 that had been overexpressed in bacteria (figure 3).
Bacterially made CREB (lanes 1-3) or ATF1 (lanes 4-6) present in crude cell extracts were ran on SDS gels, transferred to nitrocellulose paper, probed with 32 P-labelled CREB under different conditions and detected by autoradiography. 32 P-labelled CREB binds to both CREB (lane1) and ATF1 (lane 4).
No proteins of similar size are detected in bacterial extracts not containing CREB or ATF1 (data not shown).
Detection of ∼ 1 ng of CREB and ATF1 is easily achieved using only a short autoradiographic exposure and is therefore highly sensitive.
To test that detection of CREB and ATF1 is due to leucine zipper (LZ) dependent dimerisation we performed a competition assay in which synthetically made LZ peptides of known dimerisation specificity were tested for their ability to compete for binding.
In the experiment shown blots were incubated in the presence of a large molar excess of CREB LZ peptide (lanes 2 and 5) or JUN LZ peptide (lanes 3 and 6).
JUN was used as a negative control since the JUN LZ does not dimerise with CREB (28, 45).
CREB LZ competes both CREB/CREB binding (lane 2) and CREB/ATF1 binding (lane 5) whereas the same amount of JUN LZ is not able to compete (lanes 3 and 6).
Thus the Far Western technique provides a sensitive and specific assay for detection of proteins that can complex with CREB.
Detection of CREB-binding-proteins in extracts from F9 cells
We used the Far Western assay to identify CREB binding proteins present in nuclear extracts from UF9 cells (figure 4A).
This resulted in detection of two major polypeptides of ∼ 47 and 43 kDa and some other more minor polypeptides (lanes 1 and 4).
We have previously shown that CREB and ATF1 are present in UF9 cells (29) and that CREB/ATF1 heterodimers are immunoprecipitated by an antibody that recognises the carboxy terminal 10 amino acids of CREB (29).
To assess the profile of CREB binding proteins obtained by probing crude nuclear extracts we immunoprecipiated material from UF9 extracts with CREB antibody (lane 6) or preimmune serum (lane 5) and probed this on the same blot.
CREB and ATF1 are the only proteins detected in the immunoprecipitate (lane 6) and comigrate with the two major polypeptides detected in crude extracts.
To further test the specificity of the polypeptides detected in the crude extract we utilised the LZ competition assay.
Incubation of blots with a large molar excess of CREB LZ peptide prevented detection of the 47 and 43 kDa polypeptides (lane 2) while incubation with the same amount of JUN LZ peptide had no effect (lane 3).
Binding of 32 P-labelled CREB to other minor polypeptides of ∼ 30, 20 and 15 kDa was also specifically competed by the CREB LZ while binding to a faintly detectable ∼100 kDa doublet (seen more clearly in figure 6) appeared not to be competed.
The above results indicated that the 47 kDa polypeptide in crude extracts corresponds to CREB and that the 43 kDa polypeptide is similar or identical to ATF1.
However, ATF1 shares many properties with another bZIP protein termed the cAMP-response-element-modulator binding protein or CREM (45).
These properties include a high degree of homology, ability to dimerise with CREB, similar or identical DNA-binding specificity and similar size.
To distinguish between CREM and ATF1 we examined whether one further property of ATF1 is shared by CREM.
It has been shown previously that the mobility of ATF1 on SDS gels is increased by treatment with phosphatase (29, 30).
This effect is observed using purified ATF1 from HeLa cells (29) or ATF1 made by in vitro translation in rabbit reticulocyte lysate (30).
We tested the effect of phosphatase treatment of ATF1 and CREM in reticulocyte lysate (figure 4B).
As previously described the mobility of ATF1 on SDS gels is significantly increased by phosphatase treatment and this effect is inhibited by phosphatase inhibitors (lanes 1-3).
In contrast however the mobility of CREB (lanes 6 and 7) and CREM (lanes 4 and 5) are not significantly affected by phosphatase treatment.
We exploited the differential effect of phosphatase treatment on ATF1 and CREM to identify the 43 kDa polypeptide detected in crude nuclear extracts (figure 4C).
Nuclear extracts were either treated (lane 3) or mock-treated (lane 2) with phosphatase and then analysed using the blotting assay.
An anti-CREB immunoprecipitate is included for comparison (lane 1).
Treatment of nuclear extracts with phosphatase results in a comparable increase in the mobility of the 43 kDa polypeptide and ATF1.
From the sum of these results we conclude that ATF1 and CREB are the two major bZIP proteins that can dimerise with CREB and are present in nuclear extracts from UF9 cells.
We also conclude that CREM is only present at very low levels (it might correspond to the weak band observed in figure 4C lane 2) or is not expressed at all in UF9 cells.
Effect of differentiation on ATF1 protein and RNA levels
To examine the effects of differentiation on ATF1 protein levels we prepared nuclear extracts from UF9 and differentiated F9 (DF9) cells and compared them using the blotting assay.
A representative result is shown (figure 5A).
Comparison of total nuclear extracts (NE) demonstrates that CREB and ATF1 are the predominant CREB-binding proteins detected in extracts from differentiated cells and that no major additional proteins appear following differentiation.
A minor band of approximately 30 kDa appears to increase in abundance during differentiation and is also present in CREB immunoprecipitates (figure 5A).
Significantly however, the total amount of ATF1 is reduced (∼10 fold) in extracts from DF9 cells compared with UF9 cells.
The same result is obtained by analysis of CREB and ATF1 present in immunoprecipitates using anti-CREB antibody (Anti-CREB, see figure 2B) or selected from crude nuclear extracts by sequence-specific DNA-affinity chromatography (DNA-affinity).
In summary these results demonstrate that both the total amount of ATF1 and the amount of ATF1 that is directly associated with CREB are reduced following differentiation of F9 cells.
The ratio of ATF1/CREB immunoprecipitated by the CREB antibody gives an underestimate of ATF1.
This is due to release of ATF1 during the washing steps of the immunoprecipitation (37).
It is therefore likely that the ratio of CREB/ATF1 is close to 1:1, indicating that most of the CREB present in UF9 cells is associated with ATF1.
To gain insight into the level at which expression of ATF1 is controlled during differentiation we performed RNA analysis by Northern blotting (figure 5B).
The same RNA samples from several cell lines were probed for ATF1 RNA, β2-microglobulin RNA (as a monitor of differentiation (46)) and CREB RNA which has previously been shown to be present at similar levels in UF9 and DF9 cells (47).
Levels of β2-microglobulin RNA were highly elevated in the RNA sample from DF9 cells indicating that the cells were efficiently differentiated.
In comparison with CREB RNA that is present at similar levels in all cell types analysed (the reason for the decreased size of CREB transcripts in F9 cells relative to other cell types is not known) ATF1 RNA is present at higher levels (∼3 fold) in UF9 cells compared with DF9 cells or other cell types.
The decrease in ATF1 mRNA during differentiation of F9 cells (∼3 fold) appears less than the decrease in ATF1 protein levels (∼10 fold).
These results indicate that a pretranslational mechanism contributes to the reduction in ATF1 protein levels observed during differentiation but may not account for all of the reduction.
Identification of a novel CREB binding protein
Although CREB and ATF1 are the predominant polypeptides detected in the blotting assay there are some weaker bands of unknown identity.
The zipper competition assay reveals that some minor polypeptides of ∼ 30, 20 and 15 kDa specifically interact with the CREB leucine zipper (see figure 4A).
These might represent distinct proteins but may also be degradation products of CREB or ATF1.
Initial LZ competition experiments suggested that a weakly detected higher molecular weight doublet of ∼100 kDa (P100) is not competed by the CREB leucine zipper (figure 4A).
This was confirmed in subsequent experiments (figure 6A).
Under conditions in which binding of CREB to itself or to ATF1 is efficiently competed by the CREB LZ, binding of CREB to P100 is not affected.
Thus P100 binds to CREB independently of the CREB leucine zipper.
Detection of P100 is somewhat variable between experiments (for example compare figures 5A and 6A) but is consistent within any one experiment (for example figure 6).
This presumably reflects a relatively weak interaction of P100 with CREB that is easily perturbed under blotting conditions.
To examine the specificity of the P100/CREB interaction further we simultaneously probed equivalent blots with 32 P-labelled ATF1 or 32 P-labelled CREB (figure 6B).
ATF1 and CREB probes were prepared simultaneously and were the same specific activity (data not shown).
ATF1 interacts with P100 but only very weakly compared with CREB (figure 6B, compare lanes 1 and 2 (which contain two different extracts) with lanes 3 and 4).
Given the degree of homology between CREB and ATF1 this result indicates that P100 interacts quite specifically with CREB.
Analysis of P100 levels during differentiation of F9 cells demonstrates lower detectable levels of P100 in extracts from DF9 cells (figure 6C).
Thus either P100 levels are reduced or P100 becomes modified during differentiation.
We also detect a polypeptide with the properties of P100 in other cell types for example JEG3 (data not shown).
In summary the specificity of the P100/CREB interaction together with the reduction in detectable P100 following differentiation suggests that P100 may functionally interact with CREB during differentiation of F9 cells.
DISCUSSION
We have shown that ATF1 and a novel polypeptide (that we refer to as CREB-binding-protein 100 or CBP100) are two proteins that can directly interact with CREB in undifferentiated F9 cells.
In addition, ATF1 is by far the most abundant bZIP protein in UF9 cells that can dimerise with CREB.
We detect small amounts of other polypeptides (∼ 30, 20 and 15 kDa) that specifically interact with the LZ (see figures 3A and 4A) although the identity of these polypeptides is unclear.
They may be proteolytic degradation products of ATF1 or CREB or may represent novel bZIP proteins.
In the latter case it remains to be determined whether any of the minor polypeptides detected in our assay are related to other CRE-binding activities (ECRE-1, ECRE-3 and ECRE-4) that have previously been shown to be down regulated during differentiation of F9 cells (48).
Co-immunoprecipitation of ATF1 and CREB using a non-cross reacting antibody demonstrates that ATF1 is present as a heterodimer with CREB in UF9 cells.
The CREB/ATF1 ratio in the immunoprecipitate is close to 1:1 indicating that most or all of the CREB is complexed with ATF1.
Decrease in ATF1 levels during differentiation results in significant changes to the dimer population.
In UF9 cells CREB is predominantly or exclusively heterodimerised with ATF1 and large amounts of ATF1 exist as a homodimer while in DF9 cells CREB homodimers are most abundant and ATF1 homodimers least abundant or absent.
We can only speculate on the functional consequences of these changes at present because differences in the transcriptional properties of CREB homodimers, ATF1 homodimers and CREB/ATF1 heterodimers are far from clear.
However, because the transcriptional properties of ATF1 and CREB are fundamentally different when fused to a heterologous DNA-binding-domain (30) it is apparent that changes in the relative proportions of ATF1 and CREB will have important consequences.
The activation potential of CREB could be directly affected by ATF1 or be a consequence of the ability of CREB homodimers and CREB/ATF1 heterodimers to functionally interact with distinct target promoters.
In this regard it is significant that CREB/ATF1 heterodimers bind less stably to DNA than CREB homodimers (30) raising the possibility that CREB/ATF1 heterodimers may be relatively poor activators.
Such an effect is likely to be promoter specific since the stability of ATF1 binding is highly variable depending on the DNA-binding site in question (29).
Our data indicate that a pretranslational mechanism accounts for at least part of the decrease of ATF1 during differentiation.
It will be of interest to examine whether the ATF1 promoter is transcriptionally repressed during differentiation and if so whether this is a direct response to retinoic acid or to subsequent events that occur during differentiation.
However the decrease in ATF1 RNA is not as great as the reduction in protein levels, suggesting that other mechanisms are involved in regulating ATF1 protein levels during differentiation.
We have previously proposed that a negative factor (termed ICR) contributes to the inability of UF9 cells to support cAMP-inducibility of the somatostatin promoter (37).
One of the main aims of our experiments was to try and detect candidate repressor proteins that might function through direct interaction with CREB.
By analogy with examples of repressors from other dimeric transcription factor families (26, 49) one likely possibility is that ICR can heterodimerise with CREB through the leucine zipper.
Our findings appear to rule out a role for CREM but do suggest that ATF1 is a candidate for ICR.
However as described above it is difficult to address the activity of CREB/ATF1 heterodimers and several different approaches have provided evidence that ATF1 itself can be an activator.
A gal4/ATF1 fusion protein can mediate cAMP-dependent transcription in JEG3 cells (30) and ATF1 can activate the adenovirus E4 promoter in vitro(33).
Most significantly from the point of view of this study ATF1 can activate the somatostatin promoter in UF9 cells (32).
Since both CREB and ATFI are able to function as transcriptional activators it seems more likely that CREB/ATF1 heterodimers would be activators and not repressors.
However resolution of this issue will require a reconstitution of repression in vitro so that the potential role of ATF1 can be directly tested.
Using the Far Western assay coupled with the LZ competition assay we have been able distinguish between bZIP proteins that dimerise with CREB through the leucine zipper and other proteins that bind to CREB independently of the leucine zipper.
This has enabled us to identify a novel protein (CBP100) that directly interacts with CREB.
Interaction between CBP100 and CREB maybe of lower avidity than ATF1/CREB interaction because detection of CBP100 is variable in crude nuclear extracts and CBP100 is not usually co-immunoprecipitated with CREB.
CBP100 is sometimes present in immunoprecipitates from UF9 cells but is not detected following differentiation (data not shown).
We therefore think that CBP100 is weakly associated with CREB in extracts from UF9 cells and that this association is disrupted (or the amount of CBP100 is reduced) following differentiation.
Two observations suggest that CBP100 may functionally interact with CREB.
First the amount of CBP100 or its ability to interact with CREB (or both) is decreased during differentiation.
Second CBP100 appears to bind quite specifically with CREB since it interacts only very weakly with the highly homologous ATF1.
The properties that we have described for CBP100 suggest several possible functions.
CBP100 may correspond to ICR and thereby function as a repressor of the cAMP response in UF9 cells.
Alternatively CBP100 may be an adaptor protein that mediates interactions between CREB and the basal transcriptional machinery.
As is emerging for other mammalian transcription factors the ability of CREB to activate transcription will depend on highly complex interactions with other transcription factors and the general transcriptional machinery (50-54).
If CBP100 does play a role in assembly of active transcription complexes this could contribute to the different transcriptional properties of CREB and ATF1 (11, 12, 30).
The major difference between the CREB and ATF1 probes that we have used to detect CBP100 is the inclusion of two transcriptional activation regions in CREB (see figure 1) consisting of an ∼ 30 aa glutamine rich region (4) and the 14-amino acid α-peptide sequence (6).
It is tempting to speculate that either of these regions in CREB might include the CBP100 binding site.
The Far Western assay should allow a delineation of the region of CREB that interacts with CBP100 and provide insight into the above issues.
Figure 1.
Homology between CREB and ATF1.
The known functional regions of CREB and homologous regions of ATF1 are shown.
bZIP represents the basic and leucine zipper domains that are responsible for DNA-binding and dimerisation.
PKA represents a single protein kinase A phosphoacceptor site that is required for transcriptional activation (7).
PDE1 and PDE2 represent other conserved regions that are required for transcriptional activation by CREB in various assays (4, 5).
Together PDE1, PDE2 and the PKA site are referred to as the P box (5) or the kinase inducible domain (KID)(4).
Overall homology between CREB and ATF1 is ∼70% while homology within the bZIP region is ∼ 95% (23).
CREB contains two other regions towards the amino terminus (the α-peptide (α) and a glutamine rich activation domain (Q)) both of which contribute to transcriptional activity (4, 6) and are not present in ATF1.
Figure 2 .
Analysis of CREB and ATF1 in F9 cells.
(A)Detection of DNA-affinity purified CREB by Western blotting.
CREB was purified from equal amounts of nuclear protein from UF9 and DF9 cells by sequence-specific DNA-affinity chromatography.
Western blot analysis was performed using an antibody to CREB as described in materials and methods.
Two amounts of sample are loaded (lanes 1 and 3 contained four times as much sample as lanes 2 and 4) to indicate that visualisation of CREB is in the linear range for the detection method used.
(B)Detection of CREB and ATF1 by immunoprecipitation.
Nuclear extracts were prepared from UF9 and DF9 cells and nuclear proteins 32 P-labelled with protein kinase A, immunoprecipitated as described in materials and methods and analysed by SDS-PAGE.
Cell type is indicated below and the antibody (Ab) used indicated above.
Figure 3.
Detection of bacterially expressed CREB and ATF1 by Far Western blotting.
Approximately 5 ng of bacterially expressed CREB (lanes 1-3) or ATF1 (lanes 4-6) were resolved by SDS/PAGE transferred to nitrocellulose paper and probed with 32 P-labelled CREB as described in materials and methods.
Blotting was carried out in the absence of leucine zipper peptide as competitor (lanes 1 and 4), in the presence of 6 mg/ml CREB leucine zipper peptide (lanes 2 and 5) or 6 mg/ml JUN leucine zipper peptide (lanes 3 and 6).
The autoradiogram was exposed for 60 minutes at minus 80°C.
Figure 4 .
Detection of CREB binding proteins in nuclear extracts from undifferentiated F9 cells.
(A)Proteins present in crude nuclear extracts were resolved by SDS/PAGE transferred to nitrocellulose paper and probed with 32 P-labelled CREB as described in materials and methods.
Blotting was carried out in the absence of leucine zipper peptide as competitor (lanes 1 and 4), in the presence of 6 mg/ml CREB leucine zipper peptide (lane 2) or 6 mg/ml JUN leucine zipper peptide (lane 3).
Nuclear extracts were also immunoprecipitated with anti-CREB antibody (lane 6) or pre-immune serum (lane 5) and probed as above.
Molecular weight standards (Biorad prestained low size range) are shown to the left.
(B)Effect of phosphatase treatment on in vitro translated CREB, ATF1 and CREM. 35 S-labelled ATF1 (lane 1-3), CREM (lanes 4 and 5) and CREB (lanes 6 and 7) were produced by translation in rabbit reticulocyte lysate and treated with calf intestinal phosphatase in the presence or absence of phosphatase inhibitors as indicated below the figure.
(C)Effect of phosphatase treatment on proteins detected by Far Western blotting in nuclear extracts from UF9 cells.
Crude nuclear extracts (lanes 2 and 3) were treated with CIP as described in materials and methods, resolved by SDS/PAGE and probed using the Far Western assay.
Nuclear extracts were also immunoprecipitated with anti-CREB antibody (lane 1) and probed by Far Western.
Figure 5 .
Effect of differentiation on ATF1 protein and RNA levels.
(A)Proteins present in nuclear extracts (NE) from undifferentiated F9 cells (U) or differentiated F9 cells (D) were resolved by SDS/PAGE transferred to nitrocellulose paper and probed with 32 P-labelled CREB as described in materials and methods.
Nuclear extracts were also immunoprecipitated with CREB antibody (Anti-CREB) or proteins purified by sequence-specific DNA-affinity chromatography (DNA-affinity) and probed as above.
(B)RNA from several different cell lines (indicated above the figure) was probed by Northern blot for the RNAs indicated to the left of the figure.
β2-M is β2-microglobulin.
Figure 6 .
Characterisation of CBP100.
(A)Proteins present in crude nuclear extracts were resolved by SDS/PAGE transferred to nitrocellulose paper and probed with 32 P-labelled CREB as described in materials and methods.
Blotting was carried out in the absence of leucine zipper peptide as competitor (lane 1) or in the presence of 6 mg/ml CREB leucine zipper peptide (lane 2).
Molecular weight standards are shown to the left (B)Duplicate crude nuclear extracts from UF9 cells were subjected to Far Western blotting using 32 P-labelled ATF1 (lanes 1 and 2) or 32 P-labelled CREB (lanes 3 and 4) as a probe.
Molecular weight standards are shown to the left.
(C)Comparison of crude nuclear extracts from undifferentiated F9 cells (U) and differentiated F9 cells (D) using the Far Western assay.
Three pairs of extracts were probed.
Molecular weight standards are shown to the left and CBP100, CREB and ATF1 are indicated to the right of the figure.
Development of baculovirus triple and quadruple expression vectors: co-expression of three or four bluetongue virus proteins and the synthesis of bluetongue virus-like particles in insect cells
ABSTRACT
Baculovirus multiple gene transfer vectors pAcAB3 and pAcAB4 have been developed to facilitate the insertion of three or four foreign genes respectively into the Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcNPV) genome by a single co-transfection experiment.
The pAcAB3 vector contains a polyhedrin promoter and two p10 promoters on either side of the polyhedrin promoter but in opposite orientations.
The pAcAB4 vector has an additional polyhedrin promoter in opposite orientation to the first copy that is in juxtaposition to the first p10 promoter.
Each of these derived vectors (pAcAB3, pAcAB4) have been used for the simultaneous expression of three or four bluetongue virus (BTV) genes respectively.
When Spodoptera frugiperda cells were infected with the recombinant virus (AcBT-3/2/7/5) expressing the four major structural genes of BTV, double-capsid, virus-like particles consisting of VP2, VP3, VP5 and VP7 of BTV were assembled.
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in gene manipulation have made it possible to express foreign genes in heterologous systems.
In general, recombinant gene expression has two particular goals:(i) the efficient production of large amounts of authentic protein products (e.g., for diagnostic or therapeutic use, and (ii) the study of the biological functions of the expressed products.
The productivity and flexibility of baculovirus expression vectors (1, 2) and the ability of the baculovirus genome to incorporate (and express) large amounts of foreign DNA have permitted this system to be used for both single and dual gene expression (3, 4, 5).
To accomplish this, several expression vectors have been developed based on the resident promoters of Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus.
One which has found particular favour is the strong promoter of a so-called ‘very late’ polyhedrin gene (ph ).
The promoter of the ph gene has been exploited to express one or two foreign gene products either by replacing the ph gene or by duplicating the promoter together with appropriate transcription termination signals (see review, Bishop, 1992)(2).
A second very late gene, p10, which is responsible for the synthesis of a non-structural protein, has been successfully utilized to express foreign proteins either by replacing the resident p10 gene (5, 6) or by duplicating the p10 promoter and inserting it elsewhere in the AcNPV genome, eg, in proximity to the ph gene site (4).
The synthesis of complex structures such as viruses often requires the synthesis and interaction of several gene products.
For example, for bluetongue virus (Orbivirus, Reoviridae) seven viral proteins are incorporated into virions.
Of these, three are minor components (VP1, VP4, VP6) that together with the ten double stranded RNA segments of the virus genome are enclosed within the core which is composed of two major proteins (VP3, VP7), that in turn is enclosed by the two outer virion proteins (VP2, VP5) to form the complete virus particle (7, 8).
Recently, we have reported the construction of a dual recombinant baculovirus containing the gene sequences coding for VP3 and VP7 (9).
Insect cells infected with this recombinant were shown to assemble core-like particles (CLPs) composed of VP3 and VP7 alone, which were identical in size and shape to authentic BTV cores.
In further studies, a second dual recombinant baculovirus was constructed to express VP2 and VP5 (10).
When insect cells were co-infected with these two dual recombinants, all four proteins were synthesized, and morphological structures resembling BTV particles, double-shelled virus-like particles (VLPs) were recovered (10).
In this report, we describe the construction of triple (pAcAB3) and quadruple (pAcAB4) expression vectors utilizing p10 and polyhedrin promoters.
Each pair of identical promoters were placed in opposite orientation to the other copy and in segregated fashion to minimize the possible gene elimination by recombination between repeated sequences.
The vectors were utilized to express bluetongue virus proteins.
Using the quadruple vector, double shelled VLPs consisting of four proteins were synthesized.
METHODS
Viruses and cells
Spodoptera frugiperda cells (IPLB-SF21), AcNPV and recombinant viruses were propagated as described previously (11, 12).
Construction of plasmid transfer vectors
Standard procedures were used for plasmid DNA manipulations (13).
For the construction of multiple transfer vectors, the Ppu MI- Bgl II fragment of AcNPV, containing 114 bp of the p10 promoter and the Eco RV- Bam HI fragment containing 95 bp of the ph promoter of AcNPV were purified from pAcUW3 and pAcYM1 vectors respectively (4, 14).
Subsequently, a fragment containing both p10 and ph promoters in juxtaposition was generated by ligating the two fragments using a Ppu MI-blunt end adapter.
This fragment was then religated into the Xba I site of pAcUW3 dual vector using Xba l- Spe I- Sma I- Bam HI and Xba I- Stu I- Xba I- Bam HI adapters (Figure 1).
These manipulations produced a vector designated pAcAB4 containing duplicated copies of p10 and ph promoters in both orientations.
For construction of a triple transfer vector, pAcAB3, one of the two ph promoters of pACAB4 was excised using Smal and BamHl enzymes, and followed by religation using a Sma I- Bam HI-linker.
Construction and purification of recombinant viruses
For construction of recombinant transfer vectors, various BTV genes were selected.
Each BTV DNA fragment was excised by digesting with Bam HI enzyme from the single transfer vectors described previously (15-19).
Each fragment was directly cloned into the Bam HI or Bgl II sites of the triple or quadruple vectors.
For insertion into other sites (eg,Xba I/ Stu I or Spe I/ Sma I) each fragment was first subcloned into the Bam HI site of the multiple cloning vector pUC19 and subsequently isolated as a Xba I- Sma I fragment.
The transfer vectors containing BTV genes cloned in pAcAB3 and pAcAB4 vectors were co-transfected with Bsu36 I cut BacPAK6 DNA, white plaques were selected and purified by two sequential plaque assays (20).
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
S.frugiperda cells were infected at a multiplicity of 10 PFU per cell either with a recombinant baculovirus or with wild-type AcNPV.
Cells were harvested at 48 h post-infection, washed with phosphate-buffered saline, and lysed at 4°C in 50 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0) -150 mM NaCl-0.5% Nonidet P-40.
Protein dissociation buffer (10% β-mercaptoethanol, 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS], 25% glycerol, 10 mM Tris hydrochloride [pH 6.8], 0.02% bromophenol blue) was added to each sample, and the mixture was incubated at 100°C for 5 min.
Proteins were resolved by SDS-10% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue.
Purification of assembled BTV particles from insect cells
The expressed virus-like particles (VLPs) were purified by lysing infected cells as described above followed by centrifugation on a discontinuous sucrose gradient 30%:50% [wt/vol]in 0.2 M Tris hydrochloride [pH 8.0]at 85,000 g for 3 h.
The particles were analyzed by SDS-PAGE (as above) or were examined by electron microscopy.
Western immunoblot analysis
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and electroblotted onto Immobilon-P (Millipore Corp., Bedford, MA) using a Sartorius semi-dry electroblotter.
The BTV derived protein bands were identified by probing with BTV-10 antisera as described previously (10).
Immunoprecipitation
Purified VLPs and core-like particles (CLPs) were diluted to the concentration of 0.1 mg/ml with 50 mM Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0)— 150 mM NaCl — 5 mM MgCl 2 — 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 6 µl of anti-VP2 monoclonal antibody was added to each 200 µl of VLPs or CLPs and incubated for 5 h at 5°C.
To these samples, 20 µl of pre-swollen protein A-Sepharose beads were added and the mixture incubated for 1 h at room temperature.
After centrifugation and three washes of the beads, proteins were solubilized by heating for 5 min in protein dissociation buffer, separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and detected by Western immunoblot analysis with rabbit anti-BTV-10 serum.
Electron microscopy
Expressed CLPs and VLPs were absorbed onto copper 400-mesh Formvar carbon-coated grids by floating on droplets of the samples for 2 min.
After washing twice in 0.2 M Tris hydrochloride (pH 8.0), the particles were stained for 20 s on droplets of 2% uranyl acetate.
All grids were examined in a JEOL electron microscope.
RESULTS
Construction of the triple and quadruple expression vectors and preparation of recombinant viruses
To insert three or four foreign genes simultaneously into the AcNPV genome the recombinant vectors pAcAB3 and pAcAB4 were constructed as described in Methods.
Figure 1A shows the schematic organization of pAcAB3.
Figure 1B shows the nucleotide sequence of its promoter cassette.
This vector was designed to insert three foreign gene sequences into unique Bam HI- Sma I (p10 promoter),Xba I- Stu I (ph promoter),Bgl II (p10 promoter) sites.
Figure 1 C and D show the general organization of pAcAB4 and the nucleotide sequence of its promoter cassette.
In this vector foreign gene sequences can be inserted into unique Bam HI (ph ),Spe I- Sma I (p10),Xba I- Stu I (ph ), and Bgl II (p10) sites.
These restriction enzyme sites were chosen to facilitate recloning DNA fragments from the pUC-based plasmids.
When BTV VP6, or VP7 or the non-structural NS1 protein was expressed by single gene recombinant baculoviruses, all three proteins were synthesized in abundance, reaching up to 50 to 70% of the total protein mass of the infected S.frugiperda cells (16, 17, 19).
Therefore, the genes encoding these proteins were chosen for insertion into the triple gene transfer vector.
Each DNA fragment was recovered from the corresponding single gene recombinant transfer vector and was either directly cloned into the pAcAB3 vector, or via subcloning into the multiple cloning vector pUC19 (as described in Methods).
By this procedure the transfer vector pAcAB3.
VP6/NS1/VP7 was constructed.
To express four proteins in the quadruple vector we selected the genes that were either expressed at a high level in insect cells (eg, VP2, VP6, VP7, NS1) by single expression vector systems or can be assembled into a morphological structure in a native configuration (10, 16, 17, 19).
For high level expression VP2, VP6, VP7 and NS1 were isolated from the corresponding single gene recombinant expression vector and cloned into pAcAB4 and the transfer vector pAcAB4.VP2/VP6/NS1/VP7 was constructed.
By a similar procedure a vector encoding the four major structural proteins of BTV, namely VP2, VP3, VP5 and VP7, pAcAB4.VP3/VP2/VP7/VP5 was constructed since these proteins can self-assemble into VLPs in insect cells (10).
The order of genes in these transfer vectors was the same as the order of cloning sites from left to right in pAcAB3 and pAcAB4 (Figure 1).
Spodoptera frugiperda cells were transfected with mixtures of each transfer vector and linearized BacPAK6, as described elsewhere (20, 21).
Recombinant plaques with a white phenotype were isolated.
Three recombinant viruses, designated AcBT-6/NS1/7, AcBT-2/6/NS1/7 and AcBT-3/2/7/5 were obtained from their respective vectors.
Expression of BTV genes by triple and quadruple recombinant viruses
To assess whether these multiple recombinant baculoviruses synthesized BTV proteins in S.frugiperda cells, RNAs and mRNAs made in infected cells were identified by Northern Blot hybridization analysis (data not shown), and the proteins made in infected cells were analysed by SDS-PAGE as described in Methods.
As shown in Figure 2A, cells infected with AcBT-6/NS1/7, synthesized three additional proteins with M r of 64 kDa, 38.5 kDa and 36 kDa respectively in lieu of the 29 kDa polyhedrin protein synthesized in wild-type AcNPV-infected cells.
All three proteins were expressed in significantly higher levels than the level of expression of any other cellular or AcNPV derived protein.
AcBT-2/6/NS1/7 expressed BTV proteins although the level of VP2 expression was lower than the other three proteins as shown in Figure 2.
Nevertheless, the presence of VP2 protein in the infected cells was identifed by Western analyses (see Figure 2B).
We have demonstrated previously that S. frugiperda cells, co-infected with two dual recombinant baculoviruses expressing VP2/VP5 and VP3/VP7 produce BTV-like particles consisting of the core which is formed by VP3 and VP7, and the outer shell which consists of VP2 and VP5 (10).
To assess the ability of the quadruple gene expression vector to make virus-like particles, subconfluent monolayers of S.frugiperda insect cells were infected with the recombinant AcBT-2/3/7/5 virus, harvested 48 h post-infection, lysed with the nonionic detergent Nonident P-40, and released particles were purified on discontinuous sucrose gradients as described in Methods.
When examined under the electron microscope, typical empty double-shelled particles consisting of a core surrounded by a thick outer capsid were observed (Figure 3).
Contrary to experiments in which BTV-like particles are produced by co-infection of insect cells with two dual expressing viruses, all the produced particles appeared to be double-shelled VLPs and no CLPs were observed.
When analysed by SDS-PAGE, the VLPs consisted of four major BTV structural proteins (Figure 4).
Since VP3 and VP2 co-migrated in this gel system, the presence of VP2 was confirmed by immuno-precipitating the VLPs with monoclonal VP2 antibody (data not shown).
The stability of triple and quadruple recombinant viruses
To determine whether recombinant viruses expressing multiple BTV proteins are genetically stable, each was passaged at high m.o.i.
nine times successively.
Fifty clones of each recombinant virus were isolated and individually propagated in S.frugiperda cells.
Each isolate was analysed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot using BTV serum.
In each case, the level of expression of all three or four proteins were equivalent to that of the original isolates (data not shown).
To confirm the stability at the genetic level, both restriction endonuclease digestion and Southern blot analysesusing 32 P-labelled probes to the individual BTV genes were performed for all three recombinant viruses after four passages.
As in the case of protein profiles, the DNAs of these recombinant viruses revealed no signs of instability, indicating that the triple and quadruple recombinant viruses are stable at least for several passages.
DISCUSSION
This report describes the construction of triple, pAcAB3 and quadruple pAcAB4 transfer vectors, to accommodate the insertion of three or four foreign genes into the baculovirus genome in a single cotransfection experiment.
To address the possibility that recombinant baculoviruses containing duplicated promoters might be unstable, we avoided the juxtaposition of identical promoters by arranging and segregating them as illustrated in Figure 1.
The triple and quadruple recombinant baculoviruses proved to be stable for up to nine passages.
We have utilized both SV40 and polyhedrin terminators to terminate the transcription on both sides of the expression cassette.
It has been demonstrated previously that p10 promoter is able to terminate upstream transcription (22, 23), and therefore, we have used p10 promoter to terminate transcription from the polyhedrin promoter in pAcAB3 vector.
Thus, each promoter has a separate terminator.
Using this transfer vector, three BTV proteins, VP6, VP7 and NS1, were expressed at high level.
In pAcAB4 vector, three different terminators were employed for four promoters.
In this vector, the left-hand polyhedrin (Bam HI site) and p10 (Spe I/ Sma I sites) promoters shared the same polyhedrin terminator.
We have compared the expression levels of VP6 and NS1 proteins in alternative sites by cloning one into the Bam HI site and the other in the Spe I/ Sma I sites or vice versa.
In each case the expression of the gene placed at the Spe I/ Sma I site was significantly higher than that of the gene placed in the Bam HI site.
In this context it is noteworthy that other investigators have previously indicated that over-running transcripts from an upstream promoter might down-regulate transcription from the downstream promoter (24, 25).
Our data suggest that in the quadruple vector the p10 promoter probably makes transcripts that over-run and down-regulate the downstream ph promoter products.
However, it will be necessary to confirm such a possiblily by inserting a transcription terminator between these two promoters, which we are currently investigating.
Right-hand oriented p10 promoter (Bgl II site) in both triple and quadruple vectors provides strong expression despite the presence of the upstream ph promoter, probably because the former has sequences for termination of upstream transcription (22, 23, 26).
In the quadruple expression vector that made the 4 structural proteins of BTV, the weaker site was used for expression of VP3, since the molar proportion of VP3 in VLPs is much less than the other three major proteins of BTV (27, 28).
BTV particles are calculated to be composed of 60 copies of VP3, 780 copies of VP7, 120 copies of VP5 and 180 copies of VP2.
The recombinant baculovirus AcBT-3/2/7/5 made virtually homogenous VLPs.
This is in contrast to the results from coinfection with two dual viruses AcBT-2/5 and AcBT-3/7 which produces mixtures of VLPs and CLPs (10).
More efficient production of BTV VLPs will not only facilitate our ongoing research on defining the three-dimensional structure of the particles but also the use of VLPs as candidate vaccines against bluetongue disease of sheep (29).
Figure 1.
General organization and the DNA sequence of vectors pAcAB3 (A, B) and pAcAB4 (C, D).
Black arrows represent promoters and indicate the direction of transcription.
Hatched areas show potential transcription termination signals.
The DNA sequences of the pAcAB3 (B) and pAcAB4 (D) promoter cassettes are shown below.
The synthetic linker and adapter sequences are shown in small letters, sequences derived from parental pAcUW3 and pAcYM1 vectors are represented in capital letters.
Arrows indicate the direction of transcription.
Incomplete restriction sites produced on the junctions with linkers and adapters are indicated by enzymes with asterisks.
Figure 2.
Expression of BTV proteins in insect cells by recombinant baculoviruses.
S.frugiperda cells were infected at a multiplicity 10 PFU per cell with recombinant baculoviruses or wild-type AcNPV.
Cells were harvested at 48 h post infection.
Proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (A) or electroblotted onto Immobilon-P membrane and reacted with rabbit antiserum raised to purified BTV-10 particles.
Bound antibodies were detected with an alkaline phosphatase conjugate by standard methods.
The serum contained antibodies to the virus proteins VP2, VP6 and VP7, but not to the non-structural protein NS1.
Figure 3.
Electron micrographs of baculovirus-expressed particles.
(A) Single-shelled CLPs composed of VP3 and VP7 were produced in insect cells infected with dual recombinant baculovirus expressing VP3 and VP7 (9).
(B) Double-shelled VLPs consisting of VP2, VP3, VP5 and VP7 were produced in insect cells infected with quadruple recombinant baculovirus AcBT-3/2/5/7.
Figure 4.
SDS-PAGE analysis of CLPs and VLPs.
CLPs were obtained using dual recombinant baculovirus expressing BTV VP3 and VP7 proteins as described previously (9).
VLPs were obtained using the quadruple recombinant baculovirus AcBT-3/2/5/7 as described in Methods.
Lane 1, CLPs; Lane 2, VLPs.
The positions of BTV VP2, VP3, VP5 and VP7 proteins are indicated.