

Cloning, chromosomal localization and expression pattern of the POU domain gene
ABSTRACT
POU domain genes encode a family of highly conserved transacting factors that influence the transcriptional activity of several cell type-specific and ubiquitous genes.
We have cloned and sequenced cDNAs encoding a novel mouse POU domain protein, Oct-11, that is closely related within the POU domain to the POU class II proteins, Oct-1 and Oct-2.
Recombinant Oct-11 protein binds specifically to an octamer sequence in vitro .
The Oct-11 gene is expressed during mouse embryogenesis and in the adult thymus and testis.
In addition, it is abundant in the myeloma cell line P3/NS-1/1-Ag4.1.
We describe the structure of Oct-11 and its chromosomal localization, and discuss the evidence that the POU class II gene family has evolved by duplication and divergence of a common ancestral gene.
INTRODUCTION
The POU domain proteins are a family of structurally related transacting factors which have been isolated from a variety of organisms (1, 2).
The POU domain has a characteristic bipartite structure; a 75-80 amino acid POU-specific domain separated by a short linker from a 60 amino acid carboxy-terminal region related to homeodomain proteins.
POU-homeodomains are more closely related to one another than to other homeodomain proteins (1) and can interact weakly with DNA.
The POU-specific domain appears to be required for stabilization and high affinity protein/DNA binding (3-7).
The linker that separates the POU-specific domain from the POU-homeodomain is poorly conserved, of variable length, and may not be critical for functions such as DNA binding (8).
POU domain genes have been isolated from a variety of organisms and show diverse patterns of expression (9-15).
Some of these have been shown to bind to a specific octamer DNA motif (2, 16-18).
Several octamer binding proteins called Oct-1 to Oct-10, identified by distinct band shifts, have been reported to be present in various mouse tissues at different stages of development (17).
To date four genes that encode these octamer binding proteins, Oct-1 (19), Oct-2 (3, 5, 20-22), Oct-3/4 (15, 23, 24) and Oct-6 (25-28), have been analysed in detail and shown to encode sequence-specific DNA binding proteins.
Assigning the remaining band shift activities (17) to specific genes is complicated by the existence of splicing variants of the genes; for example, at least six distinct coding variants of Oct-2 exist (29).
Here we describe a novel murine POU domain gene, Oct-11, that is expressed during embryogenesis as well as in specific adult tissues.
We compare the predicted amino acid sequence of Oct-11 with other POU domain proteins and describe the structure of the Oct-11 gene and its chromosomal localization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Isolation and sequencing of Oct-11 cDNA and genomic clones
In order to isolate full length cDNA clones, a lZAP thymus cDNA library (Stratagene) was screened with an Oct-11 POU domain probe (30)(nucleotides 646-1055 in Figure 1) generated by PCR.
Hybridization was overnight at 42°C in 50% formamide, 6 SSC, 10 Denhardt's solution [100 Denhardt's solution is 2% bovine serum albumin; 2% polyvinylpyrollidone; 2% Ficoll], 50 mg/ml denatured salmon sperm DNA and 0.1% w/v SDS.
Filters were washed twice for 15 minutes at 65°C in 2 SSC/0.1% SDS and once for 30 minutes in 0.1 SSC/0.1% SDS.
From approximately 1 10 6 plaques, 5 hybridizing clones were isolated, representing two-independent cloning events.
Genomic clones of both the Oct-11a and Oct-11b loci were isolated from a BALB/c library in the vector l Charon 4A.
Five hybridizing clones were isolated, one of which represented the intronless Oct-11b locus and the other four the structural gene Oct-11a .
Double stranded plasmid sequencing reactions were carried out according to the Sequenase Version 2.0 kit (USB).
PCR products were directly sequenced as follows.
PCR products (0.2-1 mg) were excised from an agarose gel, purified by the Geneclean (BIO101) procedure and eluted into 7 ml of water.
Following the addition of sequencing primer (100 ng), the DNA was denatured by boiling for 3 minutes and then snap frozen on dry ice.
Immediately after thawing, the labelling reaction mix containing enzyme was added and sequencing reactions performed as for plasmid DNA templates.
Reverse transcriptase PCR conditions
A Fast-Track kit (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA) was used to prepare poly(A) + RNA.
Reverse transcription of RNA was performed as follows.
Poly(A) + RNA (1 m g) was mixed with oligo (dT) 12- 18 (0.5 µg) and water added to a total volume of 11 µl.
The mixture was heated at 70°C for 10 minutes, quick chilled on ice and 4 µl of 5 reaction buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 375 mM KCl and 15 mM MgCl 2 ), 2 ml DTT (100 mM), 1 ml 10 mM dNTP stock and 1 µ l M-MLV RNAse H- reverse transcriptase (BRL, 200 units) were added.
After incubation at 37°C for 60 minutes the reactions were diluted to 100 ml with water.
PCRs contained 2.5 µl of 10 PCR buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8; 600 mM KCl; 25 mM MgCl 2 ), 0.625 ml 10 mM dNTPs, 1 ml of each primer (30 ng/ml), 0.2 ml Taq DNA polymerase (Cetus, 5 units/ml), 1 ml template cDNA and water to a total of 25 µl.
PCR conditions were 94°C for 30 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 1 minute for 30 cycles using an automatic heating block apparatus (Techne, Programmable Dri-Block PHC-1).
The following primer pairs were used to analyse the expression of Oct-1 5' TTCAAGCAGAGACGCATTAAGCTAGGC 3' and 5' CTCTGCATCATTTAGCCACTTCTCTAA 3';Oct-2 5' TTCACACAGGGTGATGTGGG 3' and 5' CCAGCTGAGCAGCCCAG 3', and Oct-11 5' AGTCCTCCCCGTCAGACC 3' and 5' ATCGATGGAGAAGGAGGT 3'.
RACE PCR
To isolate the 3' end of Oct-11 mRNA, RACE PCR was used (31).
1 mg of cell line P3/NS-1/1-Ag.4 poly (A)+ RNA was reverse transcribed with a primer oligo T 57 (AAGGATCCGTCGACATCGATAATACGACTCACTATAAGGGATTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT) as described under cDNA synthesis.
Aliquots of the cDNA reaction were used as templates for PCR with primers OL1918 (5' CTCAAGCCACTGCTGGAG 3') and Ro (5' AAGGATCCGTCGACATC 3' — complementary to T 57 ).
Another round of amplification was performed with the third internal nested primer, OB10 (5' AGAAGAGAATCAACTGCC 3') with Ri (5' GACATCGATAATACGAC 3' — complementary to T 57 ).
PCR products were electrophoresed on agarose gels and purified by the Geneclean procedure followed by direct sequencing.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
Oct-11 and Oct-2 proteins were expressed in E.coli as protein A-fusions.
Oct-11 (clone Thoc 3 in Figure 1) and Oct-2 (full-length cDNA clone, a gift of D.Meijer) coding sequences were introduced into a vector (S.Swift and A.A., unpublished) that contains the protein A gene (32) under the control of a T7 RNA polymerase promoter (33).
These constructs were introduced into E.coli BL21/DE3(pLysS) (33) and fusion protein synthesis induced with IPTG.
Protein A-fusion proteins were purified by IgG-Sepharose (Pharmacia) chromatography according to the manufacturers instructions.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed essentially as previously described (34).
Briefly, approximately 10 ng of purified protein A-fusion protein was preincubated in 20 µl of binding buffer (10 mM Hepes (pH 7.9), 60 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 0.25 mg/ml bovine serum albumin and 12% glycerol) with appropriate competitor DNA for 5 min at room temperature, then 10 fmol (approx. 20,000 cpm) of 32 P-labelled, annealed octamer oligonucleotides were added and incubated for a further 20 min at room temperature.
The reactions were electrophoresed on a non-denaturing 4% polyacrylamide gel in 0.5 TBE buffer at room temperature at 10 V/cm for 90 min.
Gels were dried prior to autoradiography.
The double stranded octamer oligonucleotide (a gift of G.May) was (top strand) 5' GGGCTGATTGATTTGCATGTCCAG 3'.
The double-stranded non-specific competitor oligonucleotide containing a Sox-5 binding site (34) was (top strand) 5'TCGAGCACTAAAACAATTCAAGCCCGGGG 3'.
Northern blot analysis
RNA electrophoresed in formaldehyde denaturing gels was transferred to Hybond N + membranes (Amersham, UK) and alkali treated by submerging the membrane in 0.05 M NaOH for 5 minutes.
Filters were hybridized at 65°C overnight in 50% formamide, 6 SSC; 10 Denhardt's solution, 50 µg/ml denatured salmon sperm DNA, 0.1% w/v SDS to probes radiolabelled with 32 P by hexamer priming.
The Oct-11 probe was a 430 bp fragment (nucleotides 646-1055 in Figure 1), the Oct-2 probe was derived from a POU domain cDNA (30).
Following hybridisation, the membrane was washed twice in 2 SSC/0.1% w/v SDS at 65°C for 15 minutes, once in 2 SSC/0.1% w/v SDS at 65°C for 20 minutes and then twice in 0.1 SSC/0.1% w/v SDS at 65°C for 30 minutes.
Interspecific backcross mapping
Interspecific backcross progeny were generated by mating (C57BL/6J M.spretus ) F 1 females and C57BL/6J males as described (35).
A total of 205 N 2 progeny were obtained; a random subset of these N 2 mice were used to map the Oct-11 loci.
DNA isolation, restriction enzyme digestion, agarose gel electrophoresis, Southern blot transfer, and hybridization were performed essentially as described (36).
The Oct-11 probe was the 430 bp fragment described above.
Washing was done to a final stringency of 0.5 SSC, 0.1% SDS, 65°C.
Fragments of 5.8, 5.2, 5.0 and 3.9 kb were detected in PstI digested C57BL/6J DNA; fragments of 10.0, 8.7, 5.2, 4.8 and 4.0 kb were detected in PstI digested M.spretus DNA.
The 10.0 and 4.8 kb M.spretus -specific fragments cosegregated in this analysis and defined the Oct-11a locus.
The 8.7 kb M.spretus -specific PstI fragment segregated independently and defined the Oct-11b locus.
A description of the probes and RFLPs for the loci linked to Oct-11a including the Ets-1 and Thy-1 genes has been reported (37).
The probe for the D2 dopamine receptor (Drd2 ) locus was a 2.4 kb rat cDNA (38) that was kindly provided by O.Civelli (Beaverton, OR).
The probe detected fragments of 9.0 and 3.9 kb in SphI digested C57BL/6J DNA and fragments of 9.0 and 5.1 kb in M.spretus DNA.
The probes and RFLPs for loci linked to Oct-11b including the Acrg, Bcl-2 and En-1 genes have been described (39).
Recombination distances were calculated as described (40) using the computer program SPRETUS MADNESS developed by D.Dave (Data Management Services Inc., Frederick, MD) and A.M.Buchberg (NCI-FCRDC, ABL-BRP, Frederick, MD).
Gene order was determined by minimizing the number of recombination events required to explain the allele distribution patterns.
RESULTS
Isolation of Oct-11 cDNA clones
The POU domain of Oct-11 was originally isolated in a screen for novel POU domain genes expressed during spermatogenesis (30).
In order to isolate cDNA clones representing the entirety of the Oct-11 mRNA, various mouse cDNA libraries were screened with a probe derived from the Oct-11 POU domain.
Although the original Oct-11 clone had been isolated from testis cDNA using PCR (30), screening of three different testis cDNA libraries, including one that was unamplified, failed to reveal any clones corresponding to Oct-11 .
Clones were found in a mouse thymus cDNA library, however.
Sequence analysis of two independent cloning events (called Thoc1 and Thoc3) showed that both have 3' ends that start close to the carboxy-terminus of the POU domain (Figure 1).
Neither had a polyA stretch despite the fact that the library was oligo-dT primed.
In order to extend the open reading frame 3' to the POU domain, first strand cDNA was prepared from P3/NS-1/1-Ag-4.1 cells and Oct-11 cDNA sequences amplified according to the RACE procedure (31).
The 3' RACE resulted in two distinct PCR products that extended approximately 380 bp and 1.5 kb beyond the 3' end of Thoc3.
Characterization of these cDNAs demonstrated that both encoded the same protein sequence but the shorter RACE product was the result of oligo-dT primer annealing to a short A rich sequence within the 3' untranslated region that does not have an identifiable polyadenylation signal associated with it (data not shown).
The coding regions of clones Thoc1, Thoc3 and the 3' RACE were sequenced on both strands.
The combined sequence from Thoc1, Tboc3 and the 3' RACE is shown in Figure 1.
Both Thoc1 and Thoc3 have a single open reading frame and it is possible that one of the two methionine residues at nucleotides 76 and 94 (Figure 1) is used for translational initiation in vivo .
Both have reasonable matches to a consensus start codon (41).
Translation of the longest open reading frame of the combined cDNA sequence indicates that there is a potential open reading frame of 428 amino acids, encoding a protein with a molecular weight of 44 kD that has some homology to the amino terminal region of Oct-2 but not Oct-1 (Figure 2).
This region of Oct-11 is rich in the amino acids serine, glutamine and proline which are frequently associated with the activation domains of transcription factors.
The Oct-11 amino terminus has 43% amino acid identity with the corresponding region of Oct-2 compared to 24% with this region of Oct-1.
However, the much higher phylogenetic conservation of this region within the Oct-1 proteins (88% sequence identity between Xenopus (42) chicken (43) and human (19) Oct-1) suggests this region plays a specific rather than a general function.
The carboxy terminal region of Oct-11 is significantly shorter than either Oct-1 or Oct-2.
The carboxy-terminus has previously been demonstrated to be essential for Oct-2 to activate transcription (20, 44, 45).
It is worth noting that Oct-1 and Oct-2 have extensive sequence homology within this region, and both are multiply spliced within their coding regions (18, 20, 21, 29, 46).
Oct-11 binds sequence specifically to an octamer motif in vitro The high sequence homology of Oct-11 to Oct-1 and Oct-2 in the POU domain strongly suggested that Oct-11 would be able to bind to an octamer motif.
In order to address this, we expressed part of the Oct-11 cDNA containing the POU domain in E.coli as a protein A (PA) fusion protein.
This protein, and a PA-Oct-2 fusion protein, were purified from bacterial extracts by affinity chromatography and tested for sequence-specific DNA binding in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (Figure 3).
This demonstrated that both PA-Oct-11 and PA-Oct-2 were able to bind to an octamer motif in vitro and that this binding was competed by an excess of unlabelled probe DNA.
A similar excess of an irrelevant competitor DNA had no effect on DNA binding.
Thus Oct-11 is a bona fide octamer binding protein and may be able to interact in vivo with similar target genes as Oct-1 and Oct-2.
Expression of the POU domain genes Oct-1, Oct-2 and Oct-11
The expression of the POU class II genes was analysed using specific sets of PCR primers and first strand cDNA prepared from a variety of mouse tissues (Figure 4).
The expression of Oct-1 is generally regarded as ubiquitous and our results agree with this, although the relative amount of product appears to vary slightly between RNA samples (Figure 4a).
These variations may be a result of slight variations in the amount of template cDNA.
The distribution of Oct-2 transcripts is more restricted than Oct-1 ; expression is detected only in the 14.5 day post-coitum embryo, and adult testis and spleen (Figure 4b).
Expression in the spleen is in good agreement with previous data indicating that Oct-2 expression is found within B cell lineages in the adult (22).
Oct-2 -like protein complexes have been detected in sperm and embryos (17) and transcripts in the testis and embryo (46).
Our results are in agreement with this data.
Oct-11 transcripts are also restricted in their tissue distribution, expression is detectable only in testis, thymus (data not shown) and 14.5 day p.c. embryos (Figure 4c).
The zinc finger gene Zfx , was used as a control for cDNA integrity.
By Northern blot and PCR analysis Zfx appears to be non-abundant and expressed in all tissues (47).
Oct-11 expression in haemopoietic cell lines
The isolation of Oct-11 cDNAs from a thymus library suggested that Oct-11 might be expressed in a lymphoid cell type.
PCR analysis of a variety of murine haemopoietic cell lines with Oct-11 -specific primers detected abundant expression of Oct-11 in the myeloma cell line P3/NS-1/1-Ag4.1 (48-50).
These results are summarised in Table 1.
Northern blot analysis of RNA extracted from a variety of cell, organ and other tissue types confirmed that expression of Oct-11 was restricted to the myeloma cell line P3/NS-1/1-Ag4.1 (Figure 5).
This cell line expresses two Oct-11 transcripts, estimated to be 2.8 kb and 5 kb in size (Figure 5a, lane 4).
Expression of Oct-2 was also studied by Northern analysis in the myeloma cell lines using an Oct-2 POU domain probe (Figure 5b).
The P3U1 myeloma cell line expresses two distinct Oct-2 transcripts of 5 kb and 2 kb (Figure 5b, lane 7), whilst the other 3 myeloma cell lines all express the 5 kb but not the 2 kb transcript (Figure 5b, lanes 4, 5 and 6).
Integrity and equality of loading of RNAs was confirmed by reprobing the blot with an actin probe (Figure 5c).
This confirms that Oct-11 can be expressed within the same cell type as Oct-2 and that Oct-11 is abundantly expressed in the P3/NS1/1-Ag4.1 cell line and its two hybridoma derivatives MR26/8cC11/E6/C12 and 2MR/47/A/D4/H1.
Chromosomal localization of Oct-11 genes in the mouse
Southern analysis of genomic DNA indicated that there are two Oct-11 genes in the mouse genome but only one in the rat (data not shown).
The mouse chromosomal locations of the two murine Oct-11 genes were determined by interspecific backcross analysis using progeny derived from matings of [(C57BL/6J Mus spretus ) F 1 C57BL/6J]mice.
This interspecific backcross mapping panel has been typed for over 700 loci that are well distributed among all the autosomes as well as the X chromosome (35).
C57BL/6J and Mus spretus DNAs were digested with several enzymes and analysed by Southern blot hybridization for informative restriction fragment length variants (RFLVs) using the Oct-11 probe.
Several Mus spretus -specific PstI RFLVs were identified and used to follow the segregation of the Oct-11 loci in backcross mice.
The mapping results indicated that the two Oct-11 genes, which we have called Oct-11a and Oct-11b , are unlinked in the mouse genome.
Oct-11a is located in the proximal region of mouse chromosome 9 linked to Ets-1, Thy-1 and Drd2 .
Although 95 mice were analysed for every marker and are shown in the segregation analysis (see Figure 6a), up to 162 mice were typed for some markers.
Each locus was analysed in pairwise combinations for recombination frequencies using the additional data.
The ratios of the total number exhibiting recombinant chromosomes to the total number of mice analysed for each pair of loci and most likely order of gene order are: centromere —Ets-1 — 6/95 —Oct-11a — 3/99 —Thy-1 — 2/162 —Drd2 .
The recombination frequencies [expressed as genetic distancs in centimorgans (cM) +/- the standard error]are Ets-1 — 6.3 +/- 2.5 —Oct-11a — 3.0 +/- 1.7 —Thy-1 — 1.2 +/- 0.9 Drd2 .
The placement of these loci relative to other chromosome 9 markers and a comparison of the interspecific backcross map with the composite intraspecific backcross map has been reported previously (37).
Oct-11a is located in a region of mouse chromosome 9 homologous with the long arm of human chromosome 11.
This suggests that the human homologue of the Oct-11a locus will reside on chromosome 11 in the region of q23.
A 8.7 kb M.spretus -specific PstI RFLV was used to follow the segregation of the Oct-11b locus in backcross mice.
The mapping results indicated that Oct-11b is located in the middle of mouse chromosome 1 tightly linked to Acrg, Bcl-2 and En-1 .
Although 59 mice were analysed for every marker and are shown in the segregation analysis (Figure 6b), up to 127 mice were typed for markers.
Each locus was analysed in pairwise combinations for recombination frequencies using the additional data.
The ratios of the total number of mice exhibiting recombinant to the total number of mice analysed for each pair of loci and the most likely order are: centromere —Acrg — 1/77 —Oct-11b — 0/59 —Bcl-2 — 4/127 —En-1 .
The recombination frequencies [expressed as genetic distances in centiMorgans (cM) +/- the standard error]are Acrg — 1.3 +/- 1.3 [Oct-11b ,Bcl-2 ]— 3.2 +/- 1.6 —En-1 .
The fact that no recombination between Oct-11b and Bcl-2 was observed in 59 mice suggests the two loci reside within 5 cM (upper 95% confidence limit).
The genetic distance between [Oct-11b and Bcl-2 ]and En-1 was calculated using the data for Bcl-2 and En1 ].
The placement of these loci relative to other chromosome 1 markers and a comparison of the interspecific backcross map has been reported previously (39).
Structure of the murine Oct-11 genes
We screened a BALB/c murine genomic library and identified hybridising clones representing both the Oct-11a and Oct-11b genes.
Analysis of the structure of the POU domain region of the Oct-11a gene (Figure 7) revealed the presence of three introns.
The splice site sequences of Oct-11a are shown in Figure 7a.
These conform well to consensus sequences (51).
All three introns are conserved in the POU class II gene Oct-2 (46).
This strengthens the argument for a common ancestor for this class of POU domain gene.
Two of these introns (A and C, Figure 7) are also present at similar positions in the mammalian POU domain gene,Pit-1 (52) and the nematode gene Unc-86 (53).
Oct-11b , in contrast, does not have any of the introns we identified in Oct-11a and is therefore probably derived by retroposition.
Oct-11b has diverged at 10 nucleotides in a total of 90 within the POU specific domain compared with the structural gene and is therefore a clearly distinct but related sequence (Figure 8).
This high level of divergence, together with the absence of Oct-11b from rats (data not shown) suggests that this gene may be under the reduced selective pressure typical of pseudogenes.
DISCUSSION
We have cloned and characterized cDNA for Oct-11 , a novel member of the POU domain gene family.
Analysis of the sequence of this gene reveals that it is most closely related to Oct-1 and Oct-2 and thus is the third member of the POU class II family isolated.
The amino-terminal region of the Oct-11 protein is more closely related to Oct-2 than Oct-1 perhaps indicating a conserved function or more recent divergence of these two genes.
This domain has previously been shown to be important for transcriptional activation (44, 45).
In contrast to the amino-terminal region, the POU domain is highly conserved.
All members of the family are related by sequence homology within this domain that is composed of the POU specific domain, the linker and the POU homeodomain.
All three of these domains may contribute to DNA binding (54, 55), however the interaction of the POU specific domain with the major groove suggests that this region confers DNA binding specificity by making sequence-specific contacts with DNA (54).
As predicted from the high sequence homology of Oct-11 with Oct-1 and Oct-2, Oct-11 can bind sequence specifically to an octamer site in vitro (Figure 3).
The POU domain has also been shown to be important for protein-protein interactions (55).
These can homo- (16, 56) or hetero-dimeric (57, 58) in nature.
For example, Oct-1 can homodimerize or heterodimerize with Oct-2a or Pit-1, and both the POU-specific and POU-homeodomains are required for these interactions (55).
It seems likely that Oct-11 will be involved in similar interactions.
The ability of the Oct-1 POU domain to interact with the Herpes virus protein VP16 is well established (8, 59).
Regions of the POU domain that interact with other components of the transcriptional apparatus have been inferred from mutational analyses of Oct-1 and Oct-2.
The second predicted alpha-helix within the Oct-1 POU homeodomain appears to be critical for VP16 interaction (8).
It may be significant that the mouse Oct-1 homeodomain sequence is diverged at four positions compared with Xenopus , chicken and human Oct-1.
Two of the four changes are within the second helix (30).
Considering that Oct-2 does not interact with VP-16 efficiently (8, 59) it will be of great interest to establish whether the murine Oct-1 and Oct-11 proteins are capable of complexing with VP16.
We used PCR to examine a range of tissues and cell lines for Oct-11 expression.
Oct-11 mRNA was detected in the adult thymus and testes and in 14.5 day p.c. embryos.
However, no detectable signal was obtained by nonhem blot analysis of RNA isolated from these tissues.
This suggests that the expression was at a low level.
Alternatively, significant levels of expression may be limited to a subset of cells or developmental stages.
It is possible that the PCR signal in testis was due to blood contamination, however we did not detect Oct-11 expression in well-vascularised tissues such as kidney and liver.
Expression was also absent from the spleen which is composed of up to 50% B cells, although Oct-11 is expressed in the plasma cell line P3/NS1/1-Ag4.1 (see below).
This suggests it is not normally expressed during B cell differentiation although we have not examined early B cells.
Furthermore Oct-11 expression could not be detected in any B cell line analysed (see Table 1).
Although expression could be detected in the thymus we have not yet identified the specific cell type involved.
We found Oct-11 to be abundantly expressed in P3/NS-1/1-Ag4.1 (P3/NS), a non-antibody secreting myeloma cell line which is a derivative of the mineral oil-induced myeloma MOPC 21 (60).
Two antibody-secreting hybridomas derived from fusion of P3/NS with mouse spleen cells also express Oct-11 abundantly (data not shown).
However P3U1 (61), P3X63 Ag8 (49, 50, 61, 62) and P3/X63.653 (63) which are also derived from MOPC 21 do not express Oct-11 detectably.
This suggests that some change occurred specifically in the P3/NS cell line to activate transcription of the Oct-11 gene.
A possible mechanism for the activation is suggested by the observation that two genes,c-mos and the interleukin 6 receptor, are known to be activated in the P3/NS cell line due to the insertion of an intracisternal A particle into regulatory regions (64-67).
It is possible that Oct- 11 is activated in a similar manner in this cell line.
Two unlinked genes were found homologous to Oct-11 in the mouse genome in contrast to rats and humans which have only one (data not shown).
These genes were mapped, using an interspecific backcross, to mouse chromosome 9 (Oct-11a ) and mouse chromosome 1 (Oct-11b ).
One of these genes,Oct-11b , is likely to be a pseudogene having diverged significantly from Oct-11a (Figure 8).
The active gene,Oct-11a , is localized to part of mouse chromosome 9 syntenic with human chromosome 11q.
In particular,Oct-11 is predicted to map close to a region (11q23) frequently translocated in acute lymphoblastic leukaemias (68).
Further work is underway to map the human gene in detail but preliminary results support the localisation to human chromosome 11.
All three members of the POU class-II gene family have now been mapped in the mouse.
The three genes are unlinked;Oct-1 is on chromosome 1 (69),Oct-2 is on chromosome 7 (70) and Oct-11 on chromosome 9.
Interestingly these regions of the mouse genome are thought to be paralogous or ancestrally related (71).
This further emphasises the evolutionary relatedness of the class II genes.
The isolation of Oct-11 -like genes from Xenopus laevis (72) indicates that the separation of the class II genes occurred before the divergence of mammals and amphibians.
Elucidation of the genomic organization of the Oct-11a POU domain revealed a striking concordance of intron/exon junctions with Oct-2 .
Two of the junctions are also in common with the POU domain genes Pit-1 (54) and Unc-86 (55).
This provides further evidence that the POU domain gene family arose from a series of gene duplications.
Oct-11 can bind to an octamer site,in vitro , suggesting that in vivo it may be able to interact with similar target genes as Oct-1 and Oct-2.
It will be interesting to establish how the specificity of the interaction of these proteins with DNA is determined in cells, such as P3/NS, which express all three of the POU-domain class II genes.
Figure 1.
Nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequence of the Oct-11 cDNA.
Amino acids are shown in single letter code.
The POU-specific domain is underlined and the POU-homeodomain is double underlined.
Numbers to the right of each row refer to the nucleotide position, numbers to the left refer to amino acids.
The positions of the 5' ends of the Oct-11 cDNA clones Thoc1 and Thoc3 and the 3' RACE are indicated by the arrows.
The end of the coding region is indicated by a U. Translation is shown initiating at the first methionine at nucleotide 76.
The positions of introns within the POU domain (shown in Figure 7) are also indicated.
Figure 2.
Comparison of the amino acid sequences of the POU class-II proteins.
Proteins sequences were compared with the Oct-11 protein from Figure 1.
The POU domain is underlined.
Spaces indicate identity with Oct-11.
Dashes indicate deletions to optimize the alignment.
Abbreviations as follows: X-Oct-1,Xenopus laevis Oct-1 (42); C-Oct-11, chicken Oct-1 (43); H-Oct-1, human Oct-1 (19); M-Oct-2, mouse Oct-2a (29, 30, 46); H-Oct-2, human Oct-2a (3, 20, 21); M-Oct-11, mouse Oct-11.
Figure 3.
Oct-11 can bind to an octamer motif sequence specifically.
Recombinant protein A-Oct-11 or protein A-Oct-2 was incubated with a 32 P-labelled oligonucleotide containing an octamer sequence in the absence or presence of the indicated molar excess of specific (Oct) or non-specific (Sox-5) double stranded ofigonucleotides.
Protein-DNA complexes were resolved on a polyacrylamide gel and the gel dried and autoradiographed.
Figure 4.
PCR analysis of (a)Oct-1 ,(b)Oct-2 ,(c)Oct-11 ,(d)Zfx expression in various murine tissues.
Specific PCR primers (see Materials and Methods) were used to amplify cDNA sequences from reverse transcribed mRNA.
The PCR products were electrophoresed on agarose gels.
Figure 5.
Northern blot analysis of Oct-11 and Oct-2 expression in various mouse tissues and cell lines.
Two mg polyA + RNA prepared from 1.
Hind leg muscle, 2.
Kidney, 3. 14.5 day p.c. embryo, 4.
P3/NS1/1-Ag4.1 myeloma cell line, 5.
P3.X63 Ag8 myeloma eell line, 6.
Ps.X63.653 myeloma cell line, 7.
P3U1 myeloma cell line, were electrophoresed in a formaldehyde/agarose gel and blotted to Hybond N + .
The same Northern blot was hybridized and then stripped and rehybridized with the probes indicated (a ) Oct-11,(b ) Oct-2 and (c ) actin.
Size of RNA molecular weight markers (in kb)(BRL-Gibco) are shown to the right of each panel.
Figure 6.
Chromosomal mapping of the mouse Oct-11 genes.
a .
The Oct-11a locus maps to mouse chromosome 9. b .
The Oct-11b locus maps to mouse chromosome 1.
The Oct-11a and Oct-11b loci were mapped by interspecific backcross analysis.
The segregation patterns of Oct-11a, Oct-11b and flanking genes in the backcross animals that were typed in common is shown at the top of parts a and b.
Each column represents the chromosome identified in the backcross progeny that was inherited from the (C57BL/6J M.spretus ) F 1 parent.
The shaded boxes represent the presence of the M.spretus allele.
The number of offspring inheriting each type of chromosome is listed at the bottom of each column.
Partial chromosome 9 and chromosome 1 linkage maps showing the location of Oct-11a and Oct-11b in relation to linked genes are shown.
Recombination distances between loci in centiMorgans are shown to the left of the chromosome and the positions of loci on human chromosomes are shown to the right.
Figure 7.
Intron/Exon structure of the Oct-11a POU domain.
(a ) Schematic representation of the Oct-11 cDNA shown in Figure 1.
Domains are as follows: a.
The glutamine rich amino-terminus, b.
POU-spp domain, c. the linker, d. the POU-hd and e. carboxy terminus region.
Thin dotted lines represent the exon/intron junctions relative to the cDNA.
The lower half of the figure is a schematic view of the 5.6 kb EcoRI fragment derived from the genomic DNA clone GE5.1.
Restriction sites and exons are shown.
(b ) Sequences of splice acceptor and donor sites of the Oct-11 POU domain.
Consensus donor and acceptor sites are underlined.
Figure 8.
Sequence divergence of Oct-11a and Oct- 11b .
The sequence of part of the POU domain of Oct-11a is compared to that of Oct-11b .
Asterisks indicate sequence differences.
The amino acids in Oct-11b different from those encoded by Oct-11a are indicated.
Numbers in brackets indicate positions in the Oct-11a cDNA sequence in Figure 1.
Large-scale production of DNA sequencing templates by microtitre format PCR
Large scale DNA sequencing projects require gel readers with high throughput and good base-calling accuracy with as little manual intervention as possible.
The automatic sequencing machines now available meet these requirements quite well, indeed, a single ABI 373A machine can read at least around 500 samples/200 000 nt per week.
Thus, a full-time sequencing laboratory will need to produce thousands of sequencing templates per week, in order to make full use of several ABI machines.
Efforts to address the problems of template production have focussed on automating the processing of miniprep cultures (1-5).
PCR methods (6-9) obviating the processing of miniprep cultures would offer a great time saving but as yet, reliable large scale methods are not available.
One problem is to remove excess primers and nucleotides as well as larger amounts of truncated amplification products from the PCR reaction prior to sequencing.
So far compliated clean-up procedures have been suggested which are expensive and not compatible with large numbers of templates.
Another problem is the set-up of PCR reactions in a convenient format with as little manual interference as possible.
We present a fast and reliable method for sequencing plasmid and M13 phage libraries based on PCR production of seqencing templates in microtitre dishes, from cultures stored and grown in the same format.
This method consists of four steps:(1) Pick colonies or plaques into microtitre dishes and grow overnight;(2) Aliquot PCR mix with multi-channel pipette into PCR microtitre dish, load DNA using a 96-pin hedgehog device, and run PCR;(3) Remove excess primer, nucleotides and low molecular weight truncated PCR fragments by one step precipitation of templates with polyethylene glycol (PEG);(4) Cycle sequence PCR products using e.g. dye-terminator or dye primer chemistry on the ABI 373A sequencer.
Lambda and M13 phage libraries may also be handled by a modification of steps 1 and 2.
We have used the method for sequencing around two thousand PCR templates obtained from both plasmid and phage libraries.
The success rate of the method (number of PCR templates with inserts greater than 250 bp/number of high quality sequence reads) was greater than 90%.
The method has the following advantages.
PCR amplification is only limited by the number of available PCR machines and a single worker can easily produce between 300 to 900 templates per day.
No conventional miniprep of M13, plasmid or lambda DNA is required.
PEG precipitated templates can be sequenced from both ends, each read yielding up to 400 nt of highly accurate sequence (Figure 1).
Bacterial stocks and PCR templates for sequencing are conveniently stored in microtitre dishes.
The PCR templates can also be used for directed sequencing using custom primers.
Thus, our method is suitable for large scale sequencing projects.
Most of the protocol (steps 1, 2, and 4) can be further automated by robotic handling of colony/plaque picking and reagent dispensing.
Step 3, involving high speed centrifugation in microtitre dishes will be more difficult to automate.
PROTOCOL
Step 1 .
Recombinant colonies or plaques are toothpicked into separate wells of a microtitre dish (Corning 25850) containing 100 µl of TB or 2 TY broth with the appropriate antibiotic (colonies) or 100 µl of 1/100 dilution overnight culture of host cells in 2 TY (M13 plaques) and then incubated 12 to 24 hrs with lids on, at 37°C without shaking.
Culture microtitre dishes are stored at 4°C for several weeks until sequencing is finished.
Replica dishes containing glycerol are stored at -70°C.
Step 2.
Sequencing templates are generated by symmetric PCR using universal primers flanking the insertion region of the plasmid/phage e.g.: M13 -21 forward/M13 reverse, T3/T7, KS/SK.
A PCR mix for one hundred reactions (or multiples of this) containing 1 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 50 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 ), nucleotides (250 µM each), universal primers (approx. 0.3 µM each) and Cetus native Taq polymerase (0.5 U per well) is dispensed into a heat-stable microtitre dish (Techne FMW1) using a multichannel pipette.
A 96-pin hedgehog device is used to transfer a small amount of culture from the culture dish to the wells of the PCR dish.
The PCR dish wells are then overlaid with 20 µl of light mineral oil (Sigma) and PCR is performed on a Techne thermal cycler (MW-1, PHC-3).
After an initial denaturation period at 95°C for 150 sec., in order to free some template DNA, 30-35 cycles are carried out including denaturation at 95°C for 1 min., annealing at 50 to 55°C for 1 min. (depending on the Tm of the primers), and extension at 72°C for 1-3 min. (depending on the insert size).
An aliquot of the PCR product is examined by agarose gel electrophoresis to estimate insert size and check the specificity of the PCR.
Step 3 .
A large portion of the aqueous phase of the PCR products is transferred to 0.5 ml snap-cap tubes containing an equal volume of PEG mix (26.2% PEG 8000, 6.6 mM MgCl 2 , 0.6 M NaOAc pH 5.2)(10), and then mixed thoroughly.
The PEG mix is dispensed in advance using a multiple pipettor (eg. Eppendorf 4780).
The PEG mixture selectively precipitates DNA of more than 100 bp to 150 bp, leaving residual primers, nucleotides and truncated PCR products in the supernatant.
After 5 min at room temperature, samples are spun at 13000 rpm for 5 min. and the supernatant is carefully removed with a yellow tip, avoiding the usually invisible DNA pellet.
Pellets are washed once with ethanol and air dried, then dissolved in water.
The final volume of the template depends on the volume of the PCR reaction e.g. PCR products from a 30 µl reaction are dissolved in 10 µl H 2 O and PCR products from a 50 µl reaction are dissolved in 30-50 µl H 2 O.
Step 4 .
Cycle sequencing is performed in microtitre dishes using dye terminators (Taq DyeDeoxy TM Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit from Applied Biosystems) or dye primers (11)(Applied Biosystems or home-made).
With dye terminators, 96 templates can be sequenced in a single microtitre dish and excess dye terminators are removed 24 samples at a time by gravity chromatography using a perspex block of microcolumns scaled down to microtitre format (12).
With dye primers, 24 templates can be sequenced in a single microtitre dish.
Radioactive methods for cycle sequencing may also be used.
Modification for lambda/M13 libraries .
Because of the difficulty of obtaining reliably good phage titres in liquid culture, we recommend picking lambda plaques directly into the PCR microtitre dish.
1-2 µl of top agar containing phage is transferred by yellow tip to the PCR dish and mixed with the PCR mix.
A small amount of the resultant PCR product may be saved for long term storage.
M13 plaques can also be toothpicked first into the wells of the PCR dish, followed by dipping the toothpicks into the appropriate wells of a culture microtitre dish.
The culture dish is incubated at 37°C overnight and then stored at 4°C or -70°C.
Figure 1.
Typical fluorescent plot of a PCR template sequenced with dye terminators.
The template V-H12 is one of a collection of 576 recombinant clones obtained by cloning of Alu I-digested genomic DNA from the Japanese pufferfish Fugu rupripes rupripes into the Eco RV site of Bluescript II KS vector.
Template DNA was generated by PCR with M13 (-21) forward and reverse primers as described in the protocol.
It has a 396 bp insert (nt 15 to nt 410) and was sequenced with SK primer.
The ble resistance gene as a new selectable marker for Trypanosoma brucei : fly transmission of stable procyclic transformants to produce antibiotic resistant bloodstream forms
ABSTRACT
We describe here the stable transformation of Trypanosoma brucei using a new selectable marker for kinetoplastid protozoa, the Sh ble , or phleomycin, resistance gene.
A plasmid containing this gene targeted to the tubulin gene locus by homologous sequences was introduced into procyclic trypanosomes by electroporation and cells selected for antibiotic resistance.
Southern analysis of stable transformants showed that the plasmid had been integrated into the tubulin locus by homologous recombination.
Analysis of bloodstream stage transformants, produced by transmission through the vector Glossina , showed that the resistance gene was conserved and expressed in these forms in the absence of selective drug pressure.
In both procyclic and bloodstream forms, transcription of the ble gene appears to originate from the upstream tubulin promoter, despite the presence of a VSG promoter in the integrated construct.
The generation of stable bloodstream transformants for the first time will facilitate the study of gene function and expression during the trypanosome life cycle, and aid in the investigation of genetic exchange in these organisms.
INTRODUCTION
Trypanosomes are kinetoplastid protozoa which frequently cause disease in Man and domestic animals.
They exhibit a number of interesting and often novel mechanisms of gene expression and control, such as RNA editing, transsplicing and polycistronic transcription (for reviews see 1,2,3).
Trypanosoma brucei is one of the most intensively studied of this group.
It has a digenetic life cycle, alternating between a bloodstream stage in the mammalian host and a procyclic stage in the tsetse fly vector (4).
Recently the techniques of stable transformation have been successfully applied to the kinetoplastid protozoa, predominantly members of the genera Leishmania (5-10) and Trypanosoma (11-16).
When linearized DNA constructs are used, transformation occurs almost exclusively by homologous recombination, which allows highly specific targeting of a chosen gene locus (8-15).
In the African trypanosome T.brucei two selectable marker genes have been used to achieve stable transformation of the procyclic life cycle stage; the neomycin (11-13, 15) and hygromycin B (14) antibiotic resistance genes.
We descibe here the stable transformation of T.brucei using a further selectable marker, the Sh ble , or phleomycin, resistance gene (17), and the transmission of these transformants through the insect vector,Glossina , to produce antibiotic resistant bloodstream form trypanosomes for the first time.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Trypanosomes
Maintenance of procyclic trypanosomes:T.brucei strain EATRO 1125 were grown at 25-27°C in SDM-79 (18), or Cunningham's, medium (19), supplemented with 15% inactivated foetal calf serum and 10 µg ml -1 gentamycin.
Fly transmission of stable transformants: Tsetse flies (Glossina morsitans morsitans ) were infected by allowing them to feed on blood mixed with procyclic trypanosomes through artificial membranes (20).
Twenty one days post-infection, flies were dissected and infected salivary glands were injected into mice.
Blood from mice which developed infections was passaged repeatedly through mice and then rats at 3 day intervals to increase virulence, before cloning in mice.
Plasmids
Plasmids were prepared by alkaline lysis and caesium chloride density gradient centrifugation (21).
The construct pPT was derived from the plasmid pD5 (22) as follows: a 0.45 kb KpnI-NotI(blunt) fragment containing the Sh ble resistance (ble ) gene from the plasmid pUT58 (17) was ligated into KpnI-HpaI digested pD5.
A 5.3 kb BamHI fragment from the 3' end of the T.brucei tubulin gene locus (23) was then inserted into a unique BglII site, just downstream of the ble gene.
The resulting construct, pPT, contains the VSG gene promoter, the ESAG 7 3' splice acceptor site (22) and the ble gene, followed by the tubulin sequences (see Figure 1B).
DNA and RNA analysis
The techniques of DNA and RNA isolation, Southern and Northern blotting, and cDNA cloning were as previously described (24).
Sequencing of DNA fragments subcloned into M13 vectors was carried out by the method of Sanger et al (25), using a modified T7 DNA polymerase (Sequenase, United States Biochemical Corporation).
Run-on transcription assays were performed using freshly isolated nuclei as described (26).
Transfection of trypanosomes
Procyclic trypanosomes were harvested in mid log phase, pelleted, washed once with Zimmerman's Post Fusion Medium (27), and resuspended in the same buffer at a concentration of 2.10 7 ml -1 .
Plasmid DNA (5-10 µg in 10-20 µl of sterile TE buffer or distilled water), linearised at a unique PstI site at the 5' end of the interrupted beta-tubulin gene (Fig. 1B), was added to 0.5 ml of this suspension in an electroporation cuvette (0.4 cm electrode gap) and mixed thoroughly.
After several minutes incubation one or two pulses of 1.5 kv at 25 µF were delivered to the cuvette, using a BioRad gene pulser, resulting in 50-70% cell mortality.
Following a further five minute incubation, the contents of the cuvette were transferred directly to a culture flask containing 4 mls of SDM-79 or Cunningham's medium.
All electroporation steps were carried out at 4°C.
Cells were left for 18-36 hours post-transfection to allow growth to resume, then diluted and the antibiotic phleomycin (Cayla, France) added, usually at a concentration of 1.0 µg ml -1 (the ble gene confers resistance to the bleomycin family of antibiotics, with phleomycin the most effective against eukaryotic cells (17)).
Transformed cells could be positively identified after 7-10 days.
RESULTS
In order to avoid disrupting essential genes, and to maximise the chances of successful integration (12), the construct containing the ble gene was targeted to the tubulin locus, which consists of a multiple array of alternating alpha- and beta-tubulin gene repeats (23, 28-30).
Procyclic trypanosomes were electroporated with linearised plasmid DNA and selected for resistance to phleomycin (17).
In a preliminary analysis, hybridisation of a ble gene spcific probe to genomic DNA isolated from several transfected cell lines, showed that these trypanosomes contained the ble gene.
One of these lines, ST3, was analysed in more detail (see Fig. 2).
Digestion with PstI alone gave a single band of 10.4 kb with the ble probe, which also hybridised with the tubulin specific probe (probe 1, Fig. 1B).
A BamHI + PstI digest gave a single band of 4.8 kb with the ble specific probe, consistent with the restriction map of the construct (Fig. 1B), and generated 2 novel tubulin specific bands; the 4.8 kb band and a second of 5.6 kb, which represents the remaining integrated sequences.
The intensity of hybridisation to these bands suggested that there were several copies of pPT in the genome.
This was confirmed by the BamHI digest, which revealed 3 ble specific bands of 10.4, 7.4 and 5.8 kb, and a fourth tubulin specific band of 8.4 kb.
The hybridisation intensity of the ble specific bands (2:1:1) reveals that there are 4 copies of the integrated construct.
In addition, the size of the bands indicates that at least one copy of the construct has been integrated into the interrupted beta-tubulin gene at the 3' end of the tubulin locus (7.4kb fragment), and that a second integration event has occurred at a PstI site within an intact beta-tubulin gene (5.8 kb band).
This suggests that either two separate integration events have occurred in the same trypanosome, or that the ST3 line is polyclonal.
Two of the 3 possible arrangements of the integrated constructs are shown in Fig. 1C.
The first (C1) shows two tandem copies of pPT in both alleles of the tubulin locus, two at the 3' end and two internal (2:2 arrangement).
The second (C2) has a single copy at the 3' end and 3 internal copies (1:3 arrangement).
The third (not shown), is a reversal of C2 (3 at the 3' end and one internal; 3:1 arrangement).
To confirm that integration had occurred by homologous recombination, the unique BamHI genomic fragments of 5.8, 7.4 and 8.4kb, which span the junctions of inserted plasmid and genomic sequences, were cloned in lambda EMBL12, and the regions around the PstI and terminal BamHI sites sequenced over a distance of 2-300 bps.
This confirmed that these junctions were unaltered at the nucleotide level (data not shown), indicating that integration had indeed occurred by homologous recombination.
This transformed trypanosome line, ST3, was then transmitted through tsetse flies and the resulting bloodstream forms cloned in mice.
Southern analysis of both the original population emerging from the tsetse fly and the cloned line showed an identical pattern of restriction fragments, consistent with the integration of 3 copies of the PT plasmid into a beta-tubulin gene at an internal position in the tubulin locus (Fig 3A); the diagnostic evidence being the 2:1 ratio of the 10.4 and 5.8 kb BamHI ble specific bands, and the absence of the 7.8 kb band indicative of a 3' end insertion.
The alpha-tubulin specific probe (probe 2; Fig. 1B) also hybridises to these two bands, in addition to a third 8.4 kb band generated from the 5' end of the integration (Fig. 3B).
The fourth hybridising band, closest to the strongly hybridising 3.8 kb tubulin repeat unit, is generated from the 3' end of the wild type tubulin locus, and is also present in the controls.
This confirms that the original procyclic line ST3 was not clonal, and that the line originating from the fly transmission, as well as the clone derived from this line, contained 3 copies of the plasmid integrated into an intact beta-tubulin gene, as represented by the lower half of diagram C2 in Fig. 1.
Northern blots of poly[A] + RNA isolated from transformants before and after fly transmission revealed the presence of a 1.3 kb transcript, which hybridised with a ble specific probe (Fig. 4A, lanes 2 and 4), which was absent from control cells (Fig. 4A, lanes 1 and 3).
Transcript abundance appeared to be similar in both life cycle stages (RNA loading checked using the actin gene (31) as a control probe (Fig. 4B)).
Hybridisation with a tubulin probe showed that transcript levels were largely unaffected by the presence of the endogenous sequences (Fig. 4C).
The size of the transcript suggested that the polyadenylation site of the ble gene mRNA was located within the tubulin intergenic region.
This was checked by cDNA cloning and sequencing of the 3' end of the transcript, which showed that polyadenylation had occurred at the wild type beta-tubulin polyadenylation site (position 1710 of the sequence in Kimmel et al(30); data not shown).
Run-on transcription assays in isolated nuclei showed that both the plasmid and the ble gene were transcribed in an alpha-amanitin sensitive manner, in both procyclic and bloodstream stage transformants (Fig. 5; compare lanes c and a in P-P and B-P).
As the VSG gene promoter directs alpha-amanitin resistant polymerase activity (32), this suggested that transcription of the integrated plasmid was not originating from the internal VSG promoter, but from the upstream tubulin promoter.
In order to verify this, we measured the effect of UV irradiation on transcription of the ble gene (see 26, for a detailed explanation of this effect).
Briefly, if this gene was transcribed from a promoter located just upstream, there would be an accumulation of ble gene transcripts due to a transient blocking of RNA decay under these conditions (26, 33, 34).
However, as shown in Fig. 5, there is an apparent inhibition of transcription following UV irradiation (Fig. 5; P-P (u) and B-P (u)), as would be expected for a trypanosome gene transcribed by a distant promoter.
Thus, the VSG promoter present in the construct was either inactive, or its activity was too low to be detected.
The same result was obtained with a transformed procyclic line in which integration was achieved using a unique MluI restriction site in the tubulin intergenic region (Fig. 5; P-M).
Attempts to establish bloodstream stage transformants in culture, in order to determine phleomycin resistance levels, were not successful as the transformed cells would not multiply in vitro , even in the absence of selective pressure.
Therefore, trypanosomes were selected in vivo in mice.
Preliminary experiments with control (AnTat1.3A) bloodstream forms, revealed that phleomycin would suppress parasitaemia, provided the initial inoculum was low (2.10 6 trypanosomes), and mice were treated daily with antibiotic.
Table 1 shows the result of a typical selection experiment.
The transformed cells showed a similar parasitaemic profile in both phleomycin treated and untreated mice.
In contrast, untransformed bloodstream trypanosomes were unable to grow in mice treated with this concentration of antibiotic.
DISCUSSION
We have shown here that the ble gene can be used as a selectable marker for procyclic T.brucei , and that these trypanosomes continue to express the gene after transmission through the tsetse fly vector.
This is of particular importance for the study of differential gene expession during the trypanosome life cycle using transgenic techniques.
The difficulty of transfecting bloodstream form trypanosomes (22; DJ unpublished data) may also be circumvented using this approach, in order to study the function and regulation of genes which are expressed only at this stage of the life cycle.
In addition, these results open the way to the development of a system for the study of genetic exchange in trypanosomes.
At present the non-obligatory nature of sexual exchange in T. brucei means that the production of genetic hybrids is time consuming and laborious (35).
The ability to generate large numbers of hybrids using selectable markers will allow a more detailed analysis of genetic exchange in these organisms.
As reported by other workers (11-15), integration of exogenous sequences was by homologous recombination.
In the procyclic line ST3, two separate integration events had occurred.
One at the PstI site at the 5' end of an intact beta-tubulin gene, within the tubulin gene cluster; and the second into the PstI site at the 5' end of the interrupted beta-tubulin gene, present at the 3' end of the tubulin locus (23).
Thus, the 700 base pairs of homology downstream of the PstI site (23, 30) was sufficient for integration into an intact beta-tubulin gene to occur.
Indeed, Eid & Sollner-Web (15) found that 87 base pairs of homology was all that was necessary for the second crossover event of insertion into the T.brucei calmodulin gene locus, as long as there was an extensive region of homology (6-7 kb) for the first crossover.
As expected, there was no apparent disruption of tubulin transcription due to the inserted sequences.
Indeed, run-on analysis indicated that transcription of the tubulin locus continued through the plasmid, and that the VSG promoter within the plasmid was silent, even after fly transmission.
This is in contrast to the results obtained by Lee & van der Ploeg (12) with a plasmid containing the procyclin/PARP gene promoter, inserted into the tubulin locus of T.brucei procyclic forms.
Transcription of the exogenous sequences was shown to be alpha-amanitin resistant, which indicates that the procyclin/PARP promoter was active.
The reason for this discrepancy is not clear, as the VSG promoter has been shown to be active in procyclic, as well as in bloodstream form trypanosomes (22, 33).
Insertion of the plasmid PT into the tubulin locus at the MluI intergenic restriction site used by Lee & van der Ploeg (12), gave the same result as the PstI integration (Fig. 5).
However, in the transformed procyclic line studied by these authors, there were at least 16 copies of the plasmid inserted into the tubulin locus.
Thus, it may be that, in our case, the level of transcription from the VSG promoter was too low to be detected.
Alternatively, the procyclin/PARP promoter used in (12) may contain an upstream transcription termination region, not present in the VSG promoter fragment.
This hypothesis is consistent with two observations: firstly, the VSG promoter region is smaller than that of the procyclin/PARP promoter (22, 36-38); secondly, the procyclin/PARP promoter appears to be positioned just downstream of a region transcribed by a different RNA polymerase, which terminates in close proximity to the procyclin/PARP promoter (33, 39, 40).
In contrast, the VSG promoter does not appear to be associated with any upstream transcription units (41-44).
Figure 1.
Restriction maps of integration construct pPT and tubulin locus.
Abbreviations: a = alpha-tubulin gene, b = beta-tubulin gene, t = retrotransposon-like element, B = BamHI, E = EcoRI, H = HpaI, N = NcoI, P = PstI.
Scale of A and B is twice that of C. A)Wild type tubulin gene array showing alpha- and beta-tubulin gene repeats, with the interrupted beta-tubulin gene at the 3' extremity of the tubulin locus.
B)Plasmid construct pPT used to target the tubulin array.
The small horizontal arrow indicates the position of the VSG promoter.
The solid black box represents the ble resistance gene.
The black bars underneath the construct indicate the probes used in the Southern analyses (1 —tubulin probe used in Fig. 2. 2 —alpha-tubulin specific probe used in Fig.3.
The same ble probe was used in both Figs.).
The restriction sites EcoRI and NcoI were used to generate the ble gene specific fragment for the run-on transciption assays.
C)Two possible interpretations of the Southern data.
Both involve two separate integration events.
The line under each of the two patterns indicates the extent of the integrated plasmids.
C1) Pattern 1 shows two tandem copies of the construct integrated into each allele of the tubulin locus (2:2 arrangement).
C2) Pattern 2 shows a single copy integrated at the 3' end of the first allelic locus and 3 adjacent copies at an internal position on the second allele (3:1 arrangement).
Figure 2.
Southern analysis of transformed procyclic trypanosome line ST3.
Genomic DNA from wild type (left hand lane) and transformed (right hand lane) procyclics, was digested with various restriction enzymes (indicated by the letters above the panel) and hybridised to tubulin (Tu) and ble gene (Ph) specific probes (probe fragments are shown in Fig. 1).
Figure 3.
Southern analysis of the fly transmitted trypanosome line ST3.
Genomic DNA from transformed mixed (1), transformed cloned (2) and wild type (3) populations, was digested with various restriction enzymes (above panel) and hybridised to ble gene (panel A ) and alpha-tubulin gene (panel B ) specific probes.
Figure 4.
Transcripts from the ble gene.
Northern blots of poly [A]+ RNA from transformed (lanes 2 & 4) and untransformed (lanes 1 & 3) procyclic (lanes 1 & 2) and bloodstream (lanes 3 & 4) form trypanosomes were hybridised with probes specific for the ble gene (panel A), the actin gene (panel B) and the alpha-tubulin gene (panel C).
Figure 5.
Run-on transcription assays of the ble gene.
Run-on transcription assays were performed with nuclei from control procyclic forms (P-C), procyclic transformants (P-P: integration at PstI site; P-M: integration at MluI site), or bloodstream transformants (B-P), obtained after fly transmission of P-P (see text).
Lane c: nuclei incubated in the absence of alpha-amanitin.
Lane a: nuclei incubated in the presence of 1mg ml -1 alpha-amanitin.
Lane u: cells irradiated with 60 Joules of UV light prior to isolation of the nuclei (incubated as for control cells).
Run-on transcripts were hybridised to Southern blots of BamHI+EcoRI+NcoI digested pPT (see Fig. 1).
The interpretation of the bands is as follows: TRS = 4.6kb NcoI-BamHI fragment containing the TRS and plasmid sequences.
TUB = 3.6kb EcoRI-NcoI fragment containing the tubulin sequences.
VSG = 1.6kb BamHI-NcoI fragment containing the VSG promoter and ESAG 7 splice site.
PHL = 0.6kb NcoI-EcoRI fragment containing the ble resistance gene.