

Introduction: Changing Industrial Relations in the Public Enterprise
Politics, Public Enterprises and Industrial Relations
This book is a study of how change comes about in the industrial relations of public enterprises.
In recent years, the outbreak of major industrial relations conflicts in public enterprises has attracted attention not only in Britain but in France, Spain and elsewhere.
During the 1980s, there have been serious confrontations in the British railways and steel and an epic struggle in the coal industry.
The winter of 1986–7 witnessed an intensity of public sector conflict in France not seen since 1968, while a massive, prolonged wave of strikes and demonstrations affected Spanish railways and other public industries in the spring of 1987.
These conflicts have, of course, had diverse and individual causes, but common to them has been a change in the political environment in which public enterprises operate.
Public policy in a number of countries has been increasingly exercised since the mid-1970s by the problems of controlling state expenditure and increasing the efficiency of the state's activities.
The background to these concerns has been a deepening crisis in the capitalist economic system — to which some argue the growth and behaviour of the state sector has itself contributed.
The crisis has brought, to varying degrees, recession, mass unemployment, high rates of inflation, and widespread industrial restructuring (see, e.g., Armstrong et al.1984: part III).
There has also been a political debate over whether the state should play a role in production or whether its presence should be reduced in order to clear the way for greater private initiative.
Governments have tried to introduce the disciplines of the market into the management of public enterprises, and in many cases, have returned companies to the private sector.
One of the main arguments used by politicians in the debate has been that the typical industrial relations practices of public enterprises have impeded efficiency.
In Britain, for example, John  Moore, Financial Secretary to the Treasury (and later Secretary of State for Transport) in the 1983 Conservative government, argued that
The [nationalized]industries' performance on both productivity and manpower costs has also been disappointing.
Public sector trade unions have been extraordinarily successful in gaining advantages for themselves in the pay hierarchy by exploiting their monopoly collective bargaining position.
…We have consciously tried to place responsibility on the management of nationalized industries and to make it clear that pay negotiations are matters for them and their employees.
But public sector trade union experience of previous administrations has given their leaders a taste of political power without responsibility (1986: 82, 89).
Government's belief that ‘the character of management-union relationships have provided a substantial blockage to the adoption of entrepreneurial behaviour by [nationalized]industry managers’(Pendleton 1987a: 2) has focused political interest directly on the industrial relations of public enterprises.
But the political pressure for greater efficiency and ‘commercialism’ has also had more indirect but far-reaching consequences for industrial relations through its impact on management strategy.
The book explores these consequences by asking how industrial relations in state enterprises respond to economic crisis and to attempts of governments to formulate political programmes to combat that crisis.
The heart of the study is an examination of state railways in two countries, Britain and Spain, but it is not intended to be a book primarily ‘about railways’.
It aims to use detailed empirical observations both to draw out general trends and processes that occur in state enterprise industrial relations, and to illuminate the factors that create different responses in similar industries.
It will, I hope, show that political processes and structures are important variables mediating between underlying economic trends and pressures, and industrial relations outcomes within the state enterprise.
In doing so, it should contribute to the debate about the nature of the capitalist state and its degree of ‘relative autonomy’ from the processes of capitalist accumulation.
Too often that debate has been conducted in a vacuum, uninformed by detailed empirical information on how states and their component parts actually operate.
But the principal aim of the study is to help develop at least a framework of analysis, in a seriously neglected area of research: the nature and logic of industrial relations in state enterprises.
In particular, the study concentrates on the strategies of the chief industrial relations actors — managers, politicians and unions — and the way they respond to changing political pressures on them.
It is frequently assumed that large corporations act in roughly the same manner, whether they are part of the public or the private sector, and that their industrial relations follow the same pattern, too.
A notorious illustration of this assumption was the failure of the influential Donovan Report on trade unions and employers' associations to address public sector industrial relations at all(Donovan 1968).
But, in the words of Grant (1987: 56–7), ‘the distinctive relationship that the nationalised industries have with government, and the politically charged environment in which they operate, means that they cannot simply be treated as  a special case of the close relationship that many large privately owned enterprises have with government.’
The comment was made in the British context, but as will be seen in later chapters, it is of general applicability.
Students of the British public sector have attempted to set down the ‘typical’ features of industrial relations in nationalized industries.
For example, Thomson and Beaumont argue that the ‘public market sector’ is characterized by high unionization for both manual and white-collar staff, with relatively clear union jurisdictions.
Bargaining is centralized, highly formalized, and wide-ranging with highly codified agreements, and there is extensive joint consultation.
Job security is relatively high and attention is paid to relocation and the easing of redundancy when job loss occurs.
Finally, conflict resolution procedures are formal and centralized, there is frequent resort to third party intervention, and the pattern of conflict is one of occasional large strikes having a very high impact on the ‘public at large and related production’(1978: 14–5).
Other writers (e.g. Bell 1975; Beaumont and Leopold 1982; Clegg 1979: passim; Winchester 1983) have also attempted to identity ‘key features’ of nationalized industries, although few (with the exception of Bell) have dealt with the state enterprise sector specifically rather than the public sector as a whole.
Leaving aside the question of whether these descriptions may be generalized beyond the British context, a problem with the approach is that writers have tended to concentrate on the ‘outward and visible signs’, the more manifest differences in collective bargaining structure, unionization, pay determination, conflict and so on, without providing a more general framework within which these phenomena may be seen.
The picture drawn is a static one, and it has been unable to provide a convincing account of how and why changes have occurred in the pattern of industrial relations.
As a result, writers have often resorted to ad hoc explanations of changes in the typical characteristics, or confined their explanations to changes in institutional industrial relations variables, as, for example, in accounting for the outbreak of conflict in hitherto peaceful industries.
This study will take a different approach to identifying the peculiarities of public enterprise industrial relations.
It will be more concerned with how industrial relations practices are related to the distinctive logic of operation of public enterprises, and how they have changed as the enterprises themselves have come under the political pressures referred to above.
It will be argued that the enterprises' distinctiveness is to be found in their relationship to the state.
They are under some degree of political control but they also need to have enough autonomy to carry out complex productive activity in an efficient way.
The continuing conflict between control and autonomy has profound consequences for industrial relations and it will therefore be examined in detail in subsequent chapters.
The Aims of Comparative Research
Writers have frequently attributed to cross-national research the important advantage of throwing light on one's own country and helping one to understand it better, undermining the ‘in-bred prejudices or preconceived ideas’ that attend  a parochial approach (e.g. Schregle 1981: 28).
It has also been suggested that the comparative approach may help to develop explanatory theory of greater power and generality (e.g. Bean 1985: 7; Shalev 1980).
These arguments apply with particular force to the study of state enterprises.
For, to anticipate the argument of later chapters, the nature of the political process and the relationship between state enterprises and other state agencies are crucial for an understanding of the evolution of industrial relations.
It will also be argued that the history of the labour movement, its degree of internal coherence, and its relationship with the state and political parties are significant explanatory factors.
It i.s therefore important to have a sufficient range of variation in these independent variables', and this can only be achieved by means of cross-national study.
The value of the approach is illustrated by Weaver's illuminating study (1985) of public enterprise in the United States and Canada; coincidentally it is also about railways.
Weaver convincingly explains differences in the use of nationalization as a ‘policy instrument’, and in the subsequent pattern of industrial restructuring, by reference to differences in the political system.
The checks and balances of the US system lead to a fragmentation of power both within the executive and between it and the legislative branch, while executive dominance within the Canadian parliamentary system assures a more unitary approach.
By contrast, the Canadian polity is riven by conflict between federal and regional interests, a conflict more muted in the US case.
These distinctions have major consequences for the way in which public railway enterprises are controlled, and the way in which their objectives are negotiated.
For example, the existence of ‘multiple veto points’ in the American system leads to pressure to distribute widely the benefits of a proposed enterprise strategy, in order to build a winning coalition from potential allies in Congress.
the labour unions, rail users' organizations and so on.
This has sometimes led to rail company policies of resisting cutbacks, restoring services (e.g. in the home states of influential congressmen) and avoiding staff reductions.
The comparative approach allows two major tasks to be carried out.
First, the factors that explain differences in the response of enterprises to similar environmental pressures (in Weaver's study, the crisis of private railways in North America) can be identified.
Second, it also enables general features of public enterprise behaviour to be explored.
Weaver shows, for example, that a certain peculiar kind of process is occurring when public enterprise objectives are being determined.
In his analysis, this relates to patterns of negotiation and conflict adjudication within political systems.
Thus a cross-national study can tell us something at a more general level about how public enterprises ‘work’.
The logic of cross-national comparative study suggests the value of carrying out research within a single industry, a strategy long recognized by students of industrial relations.
By holding technological and market factors more or less constant, comparison allows one to ‘highlight the relative influence of the national power contexts’(Dunlop 1958: 129); or as Bean puts it.
‘to test for any separate impact of environmental forces appertaining to the national level, in terms of broader social and political influences’(1985: 14).
Holding the industry constant in this way is of course only possible in broad terms.
The organization and development of an industry from country to country  may vary significantly enough for factors such as final size, management strategy, introduction of new technology and market structure to be important variables explaining differences in the nature of industrial relations in a single industry.
For example Elbaum and Wilkinson (1979) explain differences in industrial relations in the United States and British steel industries from the late nineteenth century in terms of the increasing differences in the size of the market, the rate of technological innovation and the degree of industrial concentration in the two countries.
Thus a comparative analysis must be sensitive to an ‘industry effect’ even within what is broadly the same industry.
This is made easier by confining the study to a small range of detailed case studies.
The case study approach also mitigates the classic problem of cross-national comparisons, of comparing like with like (see.
e.g., Schregle 1981: 18–19).
which is acute in the case of public enterprises.
As an OECD study notes the borderline between public and private enterprises is difficult to draw…some enterprises are more public than others, some are only nominally public and have all the essential characteristics of private organizations' (1985: 75).
National practices in the definition and classification of enterprises vary widely (Pathirane and Blades 1982: 28–91) and rarely are the criteria made fully explicit in national accounts (263).
For example, some countries — Spain, Portugal and Austria for example — appear to classify enterprises as public if they are owned 50 per cent or more by government.
Other countries — France, Italy and the United Kingdom for example— appear to use a stricter definition based on ownership plus some other criteria, such as the degree of control exercised by government, the enterprise's monopolistic position, or the way in which the enterprise came under public ownership (OECD 1985: 76).
A detailed case study approach is also called for by the nature of the explanatory variables that will be proposed.
Since these have to do with complex processes of political control and relationships between industrial relations actors and the state, an adequate understanding of them and their historical context requires more than a superficial acquaintance with the countries concerned.
As Kassalow argues, ‘without a fair understanding of the social, economic and political setting of the industrial relations system in a given country one can make errors of analysis or judgment, or, even more likely, learn only half truths about the significance of particular industrial relations policies or practices in a foreign country’(1968: 99; cf. Shalev 1980: 40).
A detailed comparison should make it possible to filter out the effects of intervening variables' from more ‘fundamental’ determinants of variations in the ‘dependent variables’.
This relates to a more basic question concerning the sorts of explanations that are to be given of the cross-national variations that are discovered.
One tradition in industrial relations research concentrates on differences in the character of industrial relations institutions in different countries.
Clegg's attempt (1976) to relate variations in trade union behaviour to the nature of collective bargaining is perhaps the best-known example of the general approach.
Among single industry analyses, Derber's study (1976) of five metalworking industries concentrates on the differences in union organization, collective bargaining structures and industrial relations ‘rule-making’ processes.
Such studies generally refer to wider determinants or concomitants of the national industrial relations variables with which they explain their findings.
Clegg refers (1976: ch. 8) to the role of the state and the strategy of employers; Derber to such all-embracing national characteristics as size, GNP, politics, economic history and cultural values.
But on the whole these broader factors do not form an integral part of the explanation of observed differences.
The strategy of explaining certain industrial relations phenomena in terms of other features of an industrial relations ‘system’ may be both legitimate and appropriate; it is partly a question of where one chooses to stop the analysis.
But equally, in explaining observed differences in features of industrial relations, it may be more productive or apposite to go beyond industrial relations variables to consider explanatory ‘factors in the social, political and economic environment’(Shalev 1980: 29).
This is the strategy pursued in a second tradition in cross-national industrial relations research.
A notable example is found in the attempt (e.g. Korpi and Shalev 1979) to explain the incidence of industrial conflict by reference to the political action of the working class and its representatives  rather than to institutional industrial relations features as in Clegg and others; while Dore's (1973) study of Japanese and British factories suggests that variations in the way that capitalist societies order the ‘world of work’ are a function of the nature, pace and time scale of industrialization — differences in industrial relations reflect aspects of early or late development.
However, the present study also sees industrial relations variables as having a certain ‘functional autonomy’(Shalev 1980: 29).
The institutions and processes of industrial relations are, to use Wright's distinction, ‘mediating’ rather than merely ‘intervening’variables.
An intervening variable is ‘simply a variable which is causally situated between two other variables.
X causes Y which in turn causes Z’; while a mediating variable ‘is one which shapes the very relationship between the two other variables: Y causes the way in which X affects Z’(1979: 23).
Thus the industrial relations outcomes of external pressures on state enterprises will be filtered through existing industrial relations structures (which may themselves have been partly determined by the same external pressures).
A common theme emerging from much of the second tradition of cross-national research is that it becomes possible to examine the complex ways in which national industrial relations variations are bound up with wider processes of political and economic development, particularly the phasing of industrial development (as in Dore's work), the nature of the state and underlying class relations.
For example, the way in which the labour movement relates to political parties and the state has been seen as a function of when industrialization occurs (e.g. Maier 1984: 55; Badie and Birnbaum 1983: 77–8).
A related advantage of the case study method is that it more readily allows the exploration of interaction between variables.
In other words it enables one to modify the artificially simplistic notion of clear-cut dependent and independent variables having one-way causal links.
It will be argued in later chapters, for example, that processes within state enterprises act back upon the wider political context and modify its impact.
The idea of looking at variations in political response to a common economic  crisis has provided the starting point for recent comparative studies, examining, for example, differences in the political strategies of the labour movement, its relation to the state and to other social classes (notably Goldthorpe 1984a).
One of the major themes of the present study is that variations in the political response to economic crisis profoundly affect readjustments in the public enterprise sector.
Political responses are dependent on the nature of the state, the political process and class relations.
The theme goes to the heart of recent debate about the capitalist state and its degree of ‘relative autonomy’ from the interests of any one class in society.
This concern influences the choice of comparator.
Within the overall group of advanced industrialized, capitalist market economies, it is necessary to choose a pair of countries that gives sufficient interesting variation in the ‘independent variable’; that is, in the nature of the political system (including the place of state enterprise within it), and in the relationship between social classes and the state.
Of major industrial countries, certainly within Europe, Britain and Spain provide perhaps the widest variation on these factors.
The comparison does not set up the neat, formal differences such as those exploited by Weaver (1985) between the executive dominance of the Canadian parliamentary system and the checks and balances of the United States constitution.
But it does allow the exploration of the effect of political factors at several different levels of analysis.
First, there are differences in the historical nature and development of the British and Spanish states.
Spain is, together with Portugal, marked out from other European countries by its ambiguous historical engagement with the New World and with Africa (for example, the Moorish conquest in the eighth century led to a domination that lasted for up to eight centuries in some regions).
Broad historical developments leave a distinctive legacy of political assumptions and behaviour.
Second, there is the very different trajectory of recent political history in the two countries.
In Britain, most of the post-war period was marked by ‘Butskellite’ consensus within the continuity of a long-established parliamentary tradition.
Spain by contrast has had a 40-year dictatorship which unlike those of Japan, Germany or Italy, is part of very recent history.
The period of authoritarian rule has given way during the last decade or so to a democratic system that is still consolidating itself.
Spain has the added advantage as a comparator, therefore, that it contains its own recent ‘internal comparison’ between markedly different political systems.
Moreover, the ‘transition to democracy’ has occurred at exactly the time when the international economic crisis was making its presence felt with greatest intensity.
It thus provides an unusually good opportunity to try to disentangle the general cross-national effects of the crisis from the influence of national political factors.
Third, the choice of Spain provides an important short-term political variable.
The major political responses to the economic crisis have taken place under governments of a very different stripe in the two countries: the ‘Thatcherite’ Conservatives in Britain, and the Socialists of the PSOE (Partido Socialist a Obrero Español) under Felipe González in Spain.
This allows exploration of the impact of differing political ideologies and political alliances on the readjustments taking place in the state enterprise sector.
There are also more pragmatic reasons behind the choice of Spain.
The vast  majority of cross-national case studies confine themselves to a narrow range of countries: United States, Japan, Scandinavia, France, West Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom; and to a lesser extent, Canada and the smaller northern and central European countries (notably Holland and Austria).
Comparative industrial relations studies which involve Spain are virtually non-existent, the only exception springing to mind being Dunlop's analysis in the 1950s (when Spain could hardly be considered an ‘advanced’ capitalist country) of the ‘web of rules’in the construction industry (1958: ch. 6).
Yet Spain, with a population approaching 40 million, is now one of the major industrialized nations, eighth in the OECD group of countries in terms of GDP and fifth within Europe.
Increasingly it is turning away from its relative isolation and facing towards the rest of Europe, a move symbolized by its accession to the European Economic Community on 1 January 1986 (and in quite another sense by its debates concerning its membership of the NATO alliance).
If this by itself were not sufficient grounds for paying Spain more attention than it has hitherto received, the development of the country's industrial relations over the last decade provides ample material for fertile investigation.
In particular, the transition to democracy has seen a condensed and accelerated process of institutionalization of industrial relations, and of accompanying political exchange between the labour movement, employers and the state that would normally only be observable over a far longer period.
These processes have a relevance to academic and practical debates that go far beyond the confines of the Spanish case.
Plan of the Book
Public enterprises are part of the state, and its typical forms of organization and behaviour will be mirrored in them.
Chapter 2 therefore explores the nature of the capitalist state, examining its ‘relative autonomy’ from the so-called needs of the economic system, and its complex internal organization.
It is argued that political programmes have to be worked out by actors within the state, rather than emerging automatically from the ‘needs’ of the economic system.
The nature of the state affects the way enterprises are controlled and their objectives are set.
As well as examining the general pattern, the sources of variability within the state are analysed, and pertinent differences in the nature of the Spanish and British states are briefly described.
Chapter 3 examines in detail the characteristic logic of state enterprises and argues that the relationship of these enterprises to the state is marked by conflicting and changeable political objectives and an oscillation between pressures tor political control and enterprise autonomy.
The chapter focuses on the effect on this pattern of recent efforts to make the enterprises more ‘commercially oriented’.
A central theme is that the ‘transmission’ of state objectives to the enterprises is problematic, and that this gives rise to typical patterns of negotiation over changes in business strategy and in industrial relations.
The form of these transmission processes is affected by variables such as the effectiveness of political control structures, as well as by differences in the organization of management and unions within the corporations.
Again, broad differences between  the British and Spanish public enterprise sectors, and in the respective government policies towards them, are outlined.
The first part of the book therefore establishes a framework of analysis for the detailed case studies of British and Spanish railways in chapters 4–9.
Chapter 4 examines the changing political pressures on the railways, stressing the differences in the political process in Britain and Spain.
It explores how the rise of public sector ‘commercialism’ has encouraged new management strategies in both countries.
The consequences of these developments for industrial relations are the subject of the following chapters.
Chapter 5 describes the similarities and differences in the ‘institutional’ background of industrial relations in British Rail (BR) and the Red Nacional de Ferrocarriles Españoles (Spanish Railways Network — RENFE), relating these to broader political and social developments.
It emphasizes the direct and indirect effects of political control and intervention on the pattern of industrial relations.
But it also suggests that industrial relations have a relative autonomy of their own, and hence are an independent influence on the railways' response to the pressures of commercialism.
Management's efforts to devise new industrial relations strategies and styles appropriate for the changing circumstances are the subject of chapter 6.
It is suggested that the timing and the content of new strategies differed markedly between BR and RENFE.
The underlying reasons for these differences are explored in depth in chapters 7 and 8.
Chapter 7 shows how the nature of management strategy has been influenced by the success of the government in changing the ‘rules of the game’— the set of political signals that forms the environment for managerial decision-making and determines the broad costs and benefits of different courses of action.
It is argued that differences in the political agendas and ideologies of the British and Spanish governments lie behind the variable pressures — and opportunities — for industrial relations change experienced by railway management.
Chapter 8 takes up another theme from chapter 6: why managerial strategies concentrate on particular issues rather than others.
It argues that this reflects the inherent character of the relationship between the public enterprise and the political controllers.
In order to retain political support, management has to address the preoccupations and objectives of the government as well as pursuing an internal managerial rationale.
This leads to a concentration on politically symbolic items.
Differences in the content of industrial relations strategies between BR and RENFE is thus again related to the different agendas of the British and Spanish governments.
The analysis stresses that managerial strategy in public enterprises develops by a process of negotiation between the enterprises and the state.
Chapter 9 explores this theme by looking at the role of the trade unions in political bargaining over new industrial relations strategies.
The limits and possibilities of such bargaining are shown to depend on complex interactions between the actors' strategies.
The differences between the Spanish and British cases are used to highlight these processes.
The final chapter summarizes the themes of the book and attempts to synthesize the arguments about the nature of state enterprise industrial relations at a time of change.
It assesses both the general processes affecting the public  enterprise sector, and the variations between countries resulting from differences in the political environment and in institutional industrial relations factors.
A Note on Data Sources
The book is based on research that was carried out in British Rail and RENFE between 1983 and 1986.
The period of intensive fieldwork lasted from the summer of 1983 to the summer of 1984, but there was continuing contact with both companies over the following two years.
The detailed cases described in chapters 7–9 concentrate heavily on the events that took place during that period.
Since the aim of the research was to illuminate the industrial relations of state enterprises by examining two corporations in considerable detail, there was a need to collect material rich enough to illustrate the nature of the processes at work.
This dictated the extensive use of in-depth interviews.
Over 100 interviews were carried out, lasting some 170 hours in all, as well as several shorter, informal conversations.
The great majority of them were with the management and unions of the railways, the remainder with politicians, civil servants and others closely involved with the railways and their industrial relations.
Management interviews were conducted primarily with senior personnel and industrial relations managers, though individuals involved in finance, planning and operations were also interviewed, as were managers at regional and local area level.
The purpose of the interviewing programme was to collect background information on the nature of the railways and their industrial relations, and to examine a number of key issues and events with the actors who had participated in them.
Where possible, information on an issue was collected from several different respondents to minimize the risk of bias.
The interviews were supplemented by as much documentary information as could be collected.
This consisted of management data on pay, productivity, hours, staff numbers and so on, minutes of negotiating and consultative meetings, and internal plans and reports.
Annual reports and accounts were a fruitful source of information.
The unions also provided copious material.
Finally, extensive use was made of published sources which for BR in particular are quite voluminous.
As well as a wide range of books on all aspects of the railway question there are numerous official sources, from special commissions of inquiry, to House of Commons select committee reports and minutes of evidence, and debates in parliament.
The relative lack of equivalent material on RENFE (reflecting, among other things, the newness of the tradition of democratic scrutiny in Spain) was partly compensated for by carrying out additional interviews.
The State and Relative Autonomy
Introduction
The task of the next two chapters is to provide a framework and some analytical tools for exploring public enterprise industrial relations.
Public enterprise is part of the state; its logic of action, and hence the functioning of its industrial relations, must be understood in terms of the place that it occupies within the state.
Yet most accounts of public sector industrial relations ignore the nature of the state.
It is treated, if at all, only in the most descriptive terms.
This chapter considers, therefore, the nature of the state, its internal composition, and its relationship to the groups, classes and interests of ‘civil society’.
Chapter 3 examines the place of public enterprises within the state, the nature of their objectives, the logic of their functioning, including their patterns of industrial relations, and the dynamic of their development over time.
Within this broad picture, the factors that lead to different patterns in different states are considered, and some broad comparisons are made between the state and public enterprise in Britain and in Spain.
Relative Autonomy of the State
The nature of the capitalist state has been the subject of exhaustive argument in recent years, particularly among Marxist scholars (see, e.g., Jessop 1982).
A central question in the debate concerns the relationship between the nature of the state and the development of the capitalist economic system as a whole.
Early approaches which saw the state as the' instrument' or tool of the dominant class, faithfully tending to its needs, were soon seen to be inadequate.
Another approach, exemplified by the work of a number of German theorists (see Holloway and Picciotto 1978), derived the functions of the capitalist state from the ‘needs’ of capitalist accumulation.
Thus the role of the state was to provide the  economic, legal and administrative infrastructure; ensure adequate supplies of labour resources through education, health and welfare; and maintain the working of the market system.
In short, it was to supply the framework for economic activity, especially in areas where private capital, operating according to the logic of profitability, would be unable to provide it.
Other writers were quick to point out the inherent functionalism of this approach.
There were no grounds for assuming that the capitalist state would work in such a way as to meet the needs of the system.
First, these needs were themselves ambiguous and often contradictory.
They had to be ‘processed’ or interpreted in the political sphere through the cut and thrust of political debate and conflict.
Moreover, writers such as Poulantzas (e.g. 1978) pointed out that the state was not just called upon to meet the needs of capitalist accumulation; in a class-divided society the long term stability of the system depended on the state's being able to act as a force of cohesion and stand as a ‘symbol of legitimacy’ for all sections of society.
It was the argument of writers such as Offe (e.g. 1975b) that such demands on the state could lead to state policies that conflicted with the other needs of capitalist development.
Second, the contradictions inherent in the demands made on the state were likely to intensify as capitalist development proceeded.
The growth of industrial concentration and the size of firms, the acceleration of technological innovation, and the increased costs of restructuring sectors of private capital (that is concentrating resources in more efficient units and transferring resources from declining to more profitable sectors of production) all tended to undermine the effectiveness of the market as an ‘automatic’ regulator of the processes of capitalist accumulation.
As a result, the state was increasingly expected to intervene in order to provide the basic requirements of the system and to ‘socialize’ the costs of economic development.
In the words of Mandel (1978: 484), ‘there is thus an inherent trend under late capitalism for the state to incorporate an ever greater number of productive and reproductive sectors into the ‘general conditions of production’ which it finances'.
Increasingly, the state was financing the research and development costs of private industry, and subsidizing the activities of the private sector through grants, tax regimes, the provision of cheap inputs and so on(552 — 5).
At the same time, the development of the division of labour, the growth of the labour movement, the increased education of the working class, and so on, were leading classes and social interests other than those of capital to make more insistent demands on the state (e.g. Lehner and Widmaier 1981; Gough 1979).
The ability of pressure groups and class interests to make use of the parliamentary political system has been interpreted by conservative critics of the expansion of the state's role as giving rise to an ‘overload’ of demands on the state (e.g. Brittan 1976).
In other words, the demands on the state in its capacity as the focus of the system's legitimacy were increasing over time.
The two sets of pressures on the state — to meet demands for social welfare and other expenditure tied up with the legitimacy of the political system, and to provide the conditions for capitalist accumulation — were seen as leading to a growing ‘fiscal crisis of the state’(O'Connor 1973).
The quantitative growth of  advanced capitalist states in recent years may be illustrated by the proportion of GDP represented by general government expenditure in OECD countries, shown in table 2.1.
TABLE 2.1
Public Expenditure/GDP Ratio for Selected OECD Countries
The state's expanding role threatened capitalist development by drawing funds from the sector of production for profit into the state sector.
Non-Marxist critics of the growing state intervention described this phenomenon as one of ‘crowding out’, whereby the state's activity starved the private sector of financial, physical and labour resources (e.g. Bacon and Eltis 1976).
Even where the state's activities were productive, in the sense of producing a surplus, the capitalist logic of accumulation was undermined by the fact that the production of that surplus did not respond to the signals of profitability characterizing private capitalist activity (Frankel 1979; Offe 1975a).
The Sources of Relative Autonomy
The critique of functionalism led writers to stress the ‘relative autonomy’ of the capitalist state, manifested in its existence as a set of institutions separate from the classes of civil society.
Originally, in the hands of Poulantzas (e.g. 1969; 1978) and others, the concept had a distinctly functionalist tinge.
It was seen to derive directly from the dual functions of the state, the securing of accumulation and legitimation.
The latter was only possible if the state was seen to be separate from direct control by capital.
But the concept need not be functionalist, as writers such as Jessop and Offe have indicated.
First, the fact that the ‘needs’ of accumulation and those of legitimation may be contradictory or confused, both internally and with respect to each other, gives an independent role to the political sphere in the formation of policy.
Second, the form of the state allows the interests of groups and classes other than the dominant class to find expression within it.
This is especially the case with the liberal democratic form of the state whose claim to legitimacy rests on the access to the political system which it grants to non-dominant interests.
As a result, the interests of the subordinate social groups may at times prevail over those of capital; at the very least, such interests affect the form and outputs of the policy process.
Thus, the very nature  of the demands made upon the state by the capitalist system leads to a form of the state that cannot necessarily ensure that capitalist interests are furthered.
The notion of relative autonomy raises the question of the limits within which the state's autonomy may vary.
Writers such as Zeitlin (1985: 22–5) argue that, if the autonomy is real, there is nothing to stop the state from not pursuing capitalist interests.
However, several writers have postulated plausible mechanisms limiting the degree of autonomy of the state.
Block (1980) and Offe (e.g. 1974), for example, have argued that there are structural ‘selection mechanisms ‘, notably the dependence of the state's activity on resources generated by the private sector, and the nature of capitalism as an international competitive system, that prevent the state from mounting a threat to the continuation of the capitalist mode of production (cf. also Poulantzas 1978: 190–3).
It is appropriate therefore to see the state and its actors as facing strategic choices within constraints.
Nonetheless, the limits of the state's autonomy would seem to be very wide, and Block goes so far as to postulate a ‘tipping mechanism’ which could allow the state to take a social formation away from the capitalist mode of production.
Taking their lead from Marx's classic account (1926) of the regime of Louis Bonaparte, writers (e.g. Miliband 1984; Ferner 1983) have argued that stalemate between classes or fractions of classes gives the state abnormal freedom of action, loosening the impact of the usual structural constraints and enabling it to prevent the interests of civil society from being expressed.
The dominant class's grip on the formation of state policy may be weakened, for example in times of economic recession, giving the state heightened autonomy, as in the experience of the New Deal in the United States (Edwards 1986: ch. 4).
If the state is autonomous, within wide and variable limits, what determines how the state actually behaves, in other words the logic of state action?
For many if not most writers in the Marxist or neo-Marxist tradition, the state is an ‘arena of class struggle’.
Class interests are represented within and through the state, and from their clash emerge state policies (e.g. Edwards 1986: ch. 4); the state represents the ‘crystallization’ of a relationship of class forces (Therborn 1978; Poulantzas 1978: part II), although it is not reducible to class relations.
Thus state policies and actions reflect the balance of class forces and the way that balance is represented within the state.
This implies that when the balance is temporarily favourable to the working class, the demands that it espouses, whether or not they are in the interests of the dominant class, may be translated into state policy — for example, on social welfare (see Gough 1979; Esping-Andersen and Korpi 1984), workers' rights and so on .
However, the nature of the state's action cannot be understood solely by reference to what happens outside the state.
The notion of relative autonomy and the idea that the state faces choices suggests two further lines of inquiry, both of which have been relatively neglected in the mainstream of Marxist debates on the state, although they have been explored in the traditions of political science and public administration.
First, the state has its own institutional interests distinct from those of the classes and groups of civil society (Skocpol 1979; Zeitlin 1985: 16–26; Miliband 1983: 62–4).
Skocpol (1979: 24–32) has strongly criticized the idea  of the state as ‘nothing but an arena in which conflicts over basic social and economic interests are fought out’(25).
Against the arguments of writers such as Poulantzas, that the state is not an intrinsic entity, a subject capable of exercising power in its own right (e.g. 1978: 128), she maintains that it is ‘an organization-for-itself’(Skocpol 1979: 27), which extracts resources from society and uses them to support coercive and administrative organizations.
The state has two specific tasks: to maintain social order and to compete with other states.
Its interest in maintaining ‘sheer physical order and political peace’(30) may lead it to act against existing economic interests and class structure; moreover, its involvement with other states is a basis for potential autonomy of action over and against groups and economic arrangements within its jurisdiction.
Thus Skocpol sees the state's autonomy as deriving from the specific political functions that it performs.
Although it might be objected that Skocpol's analysis courts the danger of falling into another version of functionalism, since it postulates some inherent functions of the state, it has the benefit of drawing attention to processes within the state and the specific logic which guides them.
Second, the state is composed of separate agencies concerned with the formulation and implementation of policy, that is, it has an internal structure (Therborn 1978).
In liberal democracies, there is, to varying degrees, a functional differentiation between legislative and executive tasks, although this has been seen as increasingly eroded by the growth of executive policy-making powers, whether de facto or statutory, and the emergence of policy-making ‘communities’ within the state administration.
The main formal channel of representation of interests is through the elective process and the organization of political parties around programmes and ideologies.
The state administration is itself highly differentiated into agencies responsible for different aspects of policy.
For example, policy is divided into different issue areas such as state finance, production and distribution (industry and trade), social welfare, foreign relations, labour management and so on .
These policy areas are located in different parts of the state, each with its own ‘institutional relative autonomy’(Palmer 1985: 528) and distinct organizational interests and policy agendas.
In more purely administrative and policy terms, the interests of different state agencies may be in conflict with each other, for example the interest of the treasury (finance ministry) and central bank in controlling government expenditure may, and frequently in real states does, conflict with the interests of production ministries such as industry and energy in promoting the development of their sector.
This functional differentiation of the state apparatus leads potentially to the fragmentation of political authority, because of the problems of coordination and direction by the central executive authority, the government.
Fragmentation depends on factors such as the nature of political representation.
States such as Italy with a preponderance of coalition government or with marked factional organization within political parties have seen the phenomenon of the parcelling up of different parts of the state administration among different parties or factions (e.g. Donolo 1980).
In such cases, the functional differentiation between parties and the permanent state administration becomes blurred; a dominant political party may ‘occupy’ the state, but at the same time, becomes  itself ‘institutionalised’(167–8).
This interpenetration of party and state machinery further complicates internal state relations, and also the relations between the political party and the interests of civil society that it represents.
Further, fragmentation is encouraged in many states by the relative transience of the political authority compared with the permanent state administration.
Thus government ministers and other political appointments within the bureaucracy are frequently replaced.
and governments themselves have a relatively short lifespan compared with the time scale for the generation and implementation of policy.
Fragmentation also results from the need for different ‘regions’ of the state to act according to different logics.
As Offe (1975a: 136–40) argues, the classic Weberian model of bureaucratic rationality is suitable for applying predetermined rules in a universal, undifferentiated manner through a hierarchical structure composed of ‘neutral’ officials.
This rationality is well described by a former head of the British civil service, Sir Douglas Allen: ‘The desire for uniformity of treatment, coupled with accountability for decisions, require elaborate codes and rules so that a multiplicity of decision-makers can produce acceptably similar results in similar cases’(cited in Thomson 1983: 141).
But it is not adequate for many of the tasks of the modern capitalist state which has to intervene increasingly according to a ‘substantive’ rather than‘formal’rationality (Therborn 1978: 54, 89) based on highly specialized forms of expertise (e.g. Dunleavy 1982: 196–205)— for example , in production itself.
As a result the hierarchical structure of the state has been increasingly broken up by horizontal structures of working parties, ad hoc reviews, and above all, semi-autonomous government agencies (see, e.g. Barker 1982).
Palmer (1985: 527) has argued that these quasi-government organisations', ‘being relatively independent of normal public service rules,…have a greater flexibility in operations and decision-making’.
They increasingly operate in ‘complex and dense networks of cross-cutting territorial, functional, and hierarchical organisational relationships’(Hood 1982: 66).
The outcome of these developments is, therefore, a ‘highly differentiated and fragmented form of government’(Dunleavy 1982: 185), in which co-ordination is achieved as much by negotiation and bargaining between agencies as by imperative, bureaucratic control mechanisms.
The fragmentation of the state, and the relative autonomy of its constituent agencies, also depends on the degree of permeability of the state to the interests of civil society.
In the model of liberal democracy, interests are aggregated through political parties and expressed within the parliamentary system.
But there are also forms of direct access of interests to the state, notably through relationships with individual state agencies.
In some parts of the state, notably the quasi-autonomous organizations, the distinction between public and private is blurred (e.g. Dunleavy 1982: esp.
188–92).
State agencies may enter into alliances and negotiate with private interest groups.
and such alliances may provide the agencies with the leverage to resist, or act independently of, centrally co-ordinated state policy.
However, the permeability of state agencies to external influence may lead them to serve the interests of private groups, and in extreme cases to become ‘colonised’ by them.
Thus increased autonomy within the state may imply reduced freedom of manoeuvre with respect to outside interests; though conversely, private interest organizations may become ‘semi-private extensions of government’(Dunleavy 1982: 189).
But the point is that the degree of autonomy is not static, determined a priori, but rather is negotiated within and outside the state.
As with the state as a whole, the permeability of state agencies to civil society depends upon the balance of power between classes and interest groups, a point that will be returned to in the following chapter in connection with state enterprises.
The Variability of the Capitalist State
The discussion of relative autonomy suggests that to say that a state is capitalist is to make a statement at a very high level of abstraction.
The constraints of the capitalist mode of production still permit a great degree of variability in actual historical states.
The variability, which reflects both the relationship of the state to civil society and the internal organization of the state, operates at distinct, although interacting, levels of analysis.
First, writers such as Badie and Birnbaum (1983) or Moore (1967) operating from a broad historical perspective suggest that states have a distinct character resulting from long-term processes of political development.
In particular, the nature of class relationships and the degree of political centralization under feudalism affect the subsequent character of the state under capitalism, particularly forms of representation and the balance of power between state and civil society.
Strong interventionist states with powerful centralized bureaucracies and institutions of state coercion, for example, may be contrasted with those of countries where the interests of civil society are stronger and state institutions are moulded to its purpose.
Below, the main points of contrast between the British and Spanish states are briefly sketched.
Variations in the ‘Historical Character’ and Development of the State in Britain and Spain
The British state, compared, for example, with the powerful French state, developed in line with the interests of the dominant groups of civil society.
Political centralization under the Tudor monarchs enabled the early creation of a unified national state.
The tendency to royal absolutism was halted by the English revolution of the seventeenth century which reflected the dynamism of civil society and firmly established its pre-eminence.
The centralized bureaucratic apparatus of the state became subordinated to the interests of the dominant economic groups that were already creating a commercial agriculture and would subsequently promote industrial development: ‘for the first time a state had been created whose policies and activities were shaped in response to the needs and movement of civil society’(Gamble 1981: 67).
Subsequently the British state evolved with a remarkable degree of' stability and continuity when compared with the state in Spain.
Emerging groups, including the subordinate classes.
were more or less successfully incorporated into political life, first by successive extensions of the suffrage and political ‘citizenship’, later by the evolution of well-organized institutions of interest mediation.
During the present century these have gained broad access to the policy process within the state.
Badie and Birnbaum (1983: 77–8) have argued that in countries where the working class has to organize in the context of a strong state, the labour movement has often been preoccupied with state power, giving rise to a powerful strand of revolutionary syndicalism as in France or Spain.
By contrast, the British labour movement was more interested in shop floor and trade union organizational issues than with politics or revolution: the trade union model’ is seen to be a perfectly logical development in a civil society with considerable capacities for self-organisation'.
Another consequence is seen to be the lower degree of legal regulation of industrial relations in Britain compared with countries where the labour movement developed in the context of a strong state (see Bean 1985: ch. 5 for a summary of the literature).
The general subordination of the British state to the interests of civil society has limited the relative autonomy of state groups, although they have had a certain freedom to ‘navigate’ between the competing demands of different groups and classes, for example in the realm of industrial relations (Edwards 1986: 168–72).
The internal organization of state policy-making has tended to reflect the lines of cleavage within dominant economic groups of civil society.
For example, the dominant role of the Treasury and the Bank of England in economic policy-making and the absence of administrative counterweights in the ministries concerned with industrial policy is often said to reflect the dominance of British financial capital (e.g. Longstreth 1979).
The British pattern of development has limited the extent of corporate interests within the state, certainly when compared with Spain (see below).
Notably, the Northcote-Trevelyan reforms helped to root out political patronage and corruption in the state bureaucracy in the second half of the nineteenth century, and to establish a public administration that operated according to principles of professionalism and the ethos of ‘public service’.
While, as suggested earlier, the different time horizons of elected politicians and civil servants allow scope for the fragmentation of policy-making and group interests, limits are placed on this by the openness of the British state to organized interests.
This gives rise to the typical ‘policy style’ of consultation and negotiation between different state agencies; each is at the centre of a ‘policy community’composed of government officials, professional advisors and representatives of outside pressure groups (Jordan and Richardson 1981; 1987).
The historical character of the Spanish state, by comparison, falls into the pattern, exemplified by France, of a centralized, interventionist institution that developed before strong independent economic forces in civil society had time to emerge.
The feudal institutions of the ancien régime began to be dismantled under the bureaucratic reforms of the eighteenth century Carlist monarchy, and the process was hastened by the Napoleonic invasion, rather than by the pressure of new economic interests and the emergence of commercial agriculture.
A polity grew up in the nineteenth century that, through changes of regime, was characterized by its narrow social base and the ‘exclusion of subordinate classes from any form of participation in the political sphere’(Giner 1985: 311).
The military played an important role as arbiter of conflicts between the restricted  political groups, leading to the era of ‘pronunciamientos’ in mid-century.
The army was, of course, to play a recurring part in Spanish political life in the twentieth century with the Nationalist insurrection against the second republic, and before that, the dictatorship of General Primo de Rivera from 1923 until 1931.
Spanish industrialization was relatively weak, late, and often under foreign control, and indeed the country remained a largely agrarian and underdeveloped society during the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth.
In 1930, 50 per cent of the population still depended on agriculture, compared with 10 per cent in Britain.
This development path led to a pattern of state interests markedly different from that in Britain:
The political class controlling the state under the different regimes…was relatively independent of civil society.
The control of the state apparatus, the manipulation of elections, the granting of privileges, and the control of violence often rendered the political class relatively autonomous and independent of interests or at least able to discriminate among them
(Linz 1981: 368).
The unusual degree of relative autonomy of the Spanish state has continued into recent times.
The Franco regime was able to control interest groups by means of the hierarchically ordered syndicate system which organized the different branches of the economy under the direction of the state.
Autonomous interest representation, even of dominant economic groups, was successfully prevented.
Instead, the state was organised by the political ‘families’ that provided the base of support for Francoism: the Falangists, the military, the monarchists, and later the lay Catholic ‘Opus Dei’technocrats (Carr and Fusi 1981: ch. 2).
These groups tended to divide up the different parts of the state machinery, with the Falangists, for example, controlling the ministry of labour, while the technocrats were in charge of economic policy from the 1960s.
The relationship between state groups and civil society was thus fundamentally different from that in Britain, a point brought into focus by Linz's comment that the ‘access of the political elites, the military, bureaucrats, Catholics and Opus Dei to positions of economic power in the public sector, and increasingly in the private sector, poses the interesting and difficult question of the extent to which political power can be transformed into economic power rather than the reverse’(1981: 392–30).
This is of relevance to the distinctive origin and role of the public enterprise sector in Spain, a question that is considered in chapter 3.
Nonetheless, rapid economic development, which led to real income per head tripling during the 1960s and quintupling again during the 1970s, strengthened private economic interests.
Although these groups were often closely associated with the Francoist regime, their interests could not be expressed through the limited channels of the Francoist state.
Economic development was also creating massive changes in the subordinate classes.
The proportion of the population living and employed in rural areas declined sharply.
Industrialization inevitably led to the expansion of the urban working class.
These forces introduced unresolvable contradictions into the political model of hierarchical, authoritarian control of civil society.
In the words of Giner (1985: 338), Spain, like the other authoritarian regimes of southern Europe, ‘sheltered a ‘liberal’ economy within an illiberal polity'.
Well before the death of Franco, the model was breaking down.
For example, autonomous grass roots organization at the workplace was officially tolerated at certain times, despite continuing repression, and the introduction of collective bargaining from the 1960s, particularly in the modern, foreign-controlled sectors of manufacturing, loosened the state's tight control over the regulation of labour.
The contradictions of the model help explain why the transition from Francoism to democracy did not take place by a process of radical ‘rupture’, but through a more consensual evolution in which elements of the regime's own institutions and key political figures played a central role.
The historical growth of the state in Spain in combination with the weakness of economic development gave rise to a middle class connected with state employment and ‘overloading of the public administration by parasitical personnel’(Giner 1985: 318).
Giner adds that this phenomenon, common to the Southern European states, continues to be felt to the present day.
‘Empleomani/1a’ or the ‘rage for office’as Dyson translates it (1980: 61), together with clientelistic politics based on ‘enchufe’or personal contacts, came to characterize the public administration.
Successive reforms failed to end patronage and to establish the sort of professional, rationally organized state bureaucracy loyal to the notion of public service that the Northcote-Trevelyan reforms made possible in Britain.
The weakness of countervailing forces enabled state employees to pursue their corporate interests through the hundreds of specialist ‘cuerpos’.
These corps arose from the middle of the nineteenth century in response to the chronic insecurity caused by a Spanish version of the ‘spoils system’: each change of government would lead to the replacement of all those appointed under the previous government by individuals loyal to the new party in power.
The corps have become, according to Medhurst (1973: 113), ‘a means of transforming administrative structures to serve private ends’.
They established considerable control over recruitment and promotion, and even collected special levies to supplement their basic pay.
While the bureaucracy was highly centralized, with control being exerted from Madrid (at least until the devolution of functions to the new autonomous regions in recent years), fragmentation and lack of co-ordination resulted from the fiercely protected interests of the corps and their hermetic structure which allowed virtually no mobility between them.
To this day, the Spanish civil service is more politicized than its British counterpart.
A modified version of the spoils system continues, since the senior civil service posts of under-secretary, director general and deputy director general within ministries remain political appointments.
Under Franco, they used to be distributed among representatives of the different political groups that made up the regime's base of support; under democracy, incumbents in such posts have tended to be replaced with each change of government.
There is also a much closer interconnection than in Britain between political elites and administrative elites within the state.
The political class under Franco — ministers, political appointees in the civil service and members of the Cortes (Spanish Parliament)— was drawn to a marked extent from the ranks of civil servants (Beltran 1977: ch. 2).
During the early years of the transition back to  democracy, politicians of the governing party moved repeatedly between ministerial posts, civil service appointments and management positions in public enterprises.
Variability of Political Responses to Economic Crisis in Britain and Spain
A second level of analysis of state variability is the response to much more short-term balances of political forces and economic conjunctures.
As was suggested in chapter 1, a major theme of the present study is to examine differential reactions within two different states to a common economic crisis.
Goldthorpe and others (Goldthorpe 1984a) have argued that these reactions express forms of political accommodations and alliances between social classes, allowing states to construct widely differing political strategies for confronting the crisis.
Cameron (1984) argues, for example, that in countries where the labour movement is capable of reaching a political accommodation based on collective restraint in its economic demands, the rate of inflation is lower and employment higher than in countries where the working class is more militant.
In turn, the ability of the working class to pursue a strategy of class co-operation depends upon its internal organization, strength and unity (Cameron 1984: 163–70; Regini 1984).
State conjunctural policies respond, similarly, to variations in the strategies and internal organization of the dominant class.
Thus Esping-Andersen and Korpi (1984) argue that cross-national variations in social welfare policy reflect factors such as the strength and homogeneity of the bourgeoisie and its political representatives.
The effects of the general economic crisis were being acutely felt in Britain and Spain by the mid-1970s or earlier.
In both countries the crisis superimposed itself on more chronic economic problems.
The decline of British manufacturing and the problems of relatively low growth, productivity and competitiveness had concerned policy makers for decades, while the Spanish ‘economic miracle’ of rapid growth during the 1960s concealed major structural weaknesses of the economy.
The world recession and the oil shocks of the 1970s exposed these weaknesses and precipitated effects that were often considerably worse than those in other advanced capitalist countries.
The growth of GNP stagnated.
During the second half of the 1960s, GNP had been rising at about 3 per cent a year in Britain.
Between 1971 and 1976, the annual growth rate fell to 1.8 per cent and in the following five-year period it was only 0.5 per cent.
From 1961 to 1973, Spain's growth had been 7 per cent a year, faster than in any capitalist economy except Japan; by 1976–81, growth was down to 1.4 per cent a year.
Following the first oil shock, inflation rose from a figure of about 5 per cent in both countries in the early 1970s to an annual average of 16 per cent in Britain and 19 per cent in Spain in the period 1973–8.
Spain was especially affected by its dependence on imported oil.
Unemployment rose sharply.
The number out of work in Britain which had stood at little more than half a million in 1969, had more than doubled by the end of the 1970s (then almost doubled again in the following two years).
In Spain, unemployment rose from 2.1 per cent in 1972 to over 17 per cent in 1982.
As has been suggested in this chapter, the relative autonomy of the state from the mode of production means that the jump from tendencies in the economy to a political response to those tendencies is problematic.
The timing and content of political strategies for confronting the economic crisis within individual countries will depend on the kinds of interrelated factors that have been examined: the balance of social forces, class strategies and alliances and their expression within the state through the medium of political parties and their ideologies.
Thus a political response does not arise automatically and fully formed out of the needs generated by crisis.
Thus it was that Britain and Spain produced two distinct political responses to the crisis.
The Conservative government of 1979 represented a break with the post-war Keynesian consensus in economic management.
Although the move away from Keynesianism had begun during the mid-1970s under a Labour government, the Thatcherite programme explicitly rejected the previous consensus and embraced a liberal political economy based on the restoration of market forces and market values.
Much of Conservative policy was therefore devoted to getting rid of ‘imperfections’ in the market.
This lay behind the government's attacks on the power of trade unions.
The union movement's informal channels of political influence became blocked, and the role of ‘tripartism’ in economic policy-making was diminished.
The Conservatives' legislation to impose legal constraints on picketing, industrial action, the closed shop, the use of political funds, and so on, was justified as a means of removing impediments, both to the flexible operation of the labour market, and to the ‘rights’ and liberties of individual workers.
The freeing of markets also meant ‘getting the state off people's backs’.
State expenditure supposedly ‘crowded out’ private enterprise by making use of scarce physical and financial resources, and by sapping the spirit of enterprise; while the rise of the ‘public sector borrowing requirement’(PSBR)— the gap between government revenue and expenditure — was considered to be a major factor in inflation.
The government's strategy led to policies to control public expenditure and to reduce the provision of goods and services by the state.
This was to have major consequences for public enterprise.
Spain's response to economic crisis was dominated by the transition from an authoritarian regime to a liberal parliamentary democracy.
After Franco's death at the end of 1975, the overwhelming political preoccupation was the creation of new democratic institutions.
This process was initiated just as the economic crisis began to make itself felt in Spain.
But economic problems were put into abeyance; in the words of Carr and Fusi (1981: 219), ‘politics had an almost obsessional priority’.
Attempts by Franco's supporters to limit change had to be defeated, and a coalition of democratic forces had to be assembled.
The political agenda was dominated by issues of basic liberties, the legalization of parties, the introduction of democratic elections and a new constitution, and a decentralization of power to the regions.
At the same time, serious threats to the stability of the infant democracy also had to be confronted.
Campaigns of terrorist violence from the anti-democratic right and from Basque separatists had a destabilizing effect, while elements in the military remained strongly attached  to Franco's authoritarian vision.
The vulnerability of democracy was sharply illustrated by the failed coup d'état of February 1981, in which detachments of the civil guard, acting as the stalking horse for plotters in the armed forces, took control of Congress and held members of parliament hostage.
Within the political mainstream, the spirit of these times was consensual.
The need to establish the legitimacy of the political system after the years of repression and apathy meant that previously excluded groups such as the organized working class had to be brought into the political process.
Trade union liberties were re-established.
Strikes were made legal, and a new framework of industrial relations was established.
The individual and collective rights of the labour force were codified in the 1980 Workers' Statute.
The consensual politics of the transition was manifested in a number of national compacts involving at different times government, opposition parties (including the Spanish communist party), national unions and employers.
The first of these were the Moncloa Pacts of 1977.
These agreements aimed to secure widespread support for pay moderation and other austerity measures, but real wages nevertheless increased significantly faster in Spain than in EEC countries (Fina and Hawkesworth 1984).
The national agreements also granted important concessions to the labour movement.
For example, annual working hours were successively reduced from the equivalent of a 48-hour week to a 40-hour week by 1984.
Such compromises and concessions, necessary for maintaining consensual politics, exacerbated the economic pressures; for example, the growth of social provision and the socialization of the losses of large sectors of private capital through nationalization (see chapter 3) was reflected in a rapid rise in public expenditure from 25.0 per cent of GDP in 1975 to 35.4 per cent in 1982 (Donges 1984: 111); the public sector deficit rose from zero to 5.9 per cent of GDP over the same period.
There was, therefore, a significant lag before the newly emerging political system in Spain could turn its attention to the questions raised by the economic crisis.
It was only once the basic political problems of the transition had been resolved that a coherent strategy could emerge for confronting the immediate economic crisis, and for dealing with serious underlying questions such as the restructuring of basic sectors of industry and the modernization of state finances and administration.
Such a political strategy was crystallized in the programme of the Spanish Socialist party (PSOE) which came to power in 1982.
Progress, change and modernization were the key ideas of its programme (PSOE 1982; Maravall 1984: 235–6).
In practice, the economic policies of the Spanish socialists had much in common with those of the Conservatives in Britain.
The emphasis was on reducing inflation, increasing the competitiveness of the private sector, controlling the public deficit, and increasing the efficiency of the state sector.
Monetarist ideas had considerable influence among economics ministers.
A harsh restructuring of basic industries, particularly steel and shipbuilding, took place under the Socialists' rule, although it relied less than in Britain on the power of the ‘market’ and more on the intervention of the state.
Despite this, there were significant differences, reflecting the PSOE's social base of support as a party of the left, and the particular dynamic of the transition to democracy.
Where Thatcherism sought to limit the power of organized  labour, the PSOE was closely allied to the socialist segment of the union movement and promised to extend the rights of unions and workers.
It committed itself to reduce inequality and increase social provision.
The party's most important electoral commitment was the creation of 800,000 jobs over four years, and although it was to fall lamentably short of the aim, the reduction of unemployment remained an important point of reference for the party in power and for its political allies (see, e.g., PSOE 1983: 43–4).
Thus the economic crisis evoked political responses in Britain and Spain that, despite their similarities, differed both in their timing and in their substance.
They emerged from different ideological traditions, and had different social bases of support.
Above all, one was premised on the rejection of a consensual pattern of post-war politics and of the role of organized labour in policy-making, while the other grew out of consensual politics in a vulnerable phase of political development.
Conclusions
This chapter has identified some features of the advanced capitalist state that are relevant for an understanding of the logic of state enterprises.
The state is called on to perform a number of functions necessary for the smooth development of the capitalist system.
But far from being logically and mechanically derived from the ‘needs’ of capitalist accumulation, state policies are the outcome of very complex and contradictory processes.
First, even the theoretical basic requirements of the system, for policies to further accumulation and to guarantee political legitimacy, are mutually and internally contradictory.
Second, the form of the political system means that non-dominant classes have access to the state and hence may influence state policy in directions antipathetic to the interests of capital.
Third, the state has its own historically developed ‘interests’ which it can express to a greater or lesser degree depending on the balance of external class forces and their forms of representation within the state.
Finally, the state is fragmented, both in terms of political authority and the organizational form and logic of its component parts.
Two important implications follow from the analysis.
In the first place, the internal structure of the state leads to processes of bargaining within the state and between its agencies and interests of civil society, and this in turn raises further questions on the nature and coherence of state policy.
In particular, when the nature of the tasks that state agencies are intended to perform leads them to act with relative autonomy within the state, how is political control to be maintained without undermining the agencies' freedom of action?
This is, of course, a problem of central importance to the case of state enterprises, and forms a major thread of the following chapter.
In the second place, the relative autonomy of the state from the mode of production means that the jump from tendencies in the economy to a political response to those tendencies is problematic.
The formation of a strategy for confronting the current crisis of accumulation in the world capitalist system will depend on the factors that have been examined in this chapter: the balance of social forces, class strategies and forms of political representation; the broad historical  character of the state; and its internal composition, organizational interests, and dynamic.
As a result, a political response to economic crisis does not arise automatically, but may only emerge with a considerable lag, and its content will be highly variable from polity to polity.
‘Commercialism’ and the Logic of State Enterprise
Introduction: the Rise of Commercialism in the State Enterprise in Britain and Spain
This chapter first describes how the British and Spanish political strategies discussed in the previous chapter have created pressures for change in the public enterprises, pressures encapsulated in the idea of ‘commercialism’.
It then explores at a more fundamental level the relationship between public enterprise and the state, in an attempt to understand the ambivalence, tensions and even contradictions that are embodied in the pursuit of commercialism.
It also examines some of the general implications for industrial relations that flow from the characteristic ‘logic’ of the state enterprise.
The new political programmes of the Conservative government in Britain and the PSOE government in Spain have had major consequences for public enterprises.
The state productive sector is at the centre of a web of current policy concerns, for a mixture of economic and political or ideological reasons.
The state enterprises in both countries have had a considerable economic weight in terms of contribution to GNP, employment and investment.
Their activities have made major calls on state expenditure, both because they are operating in politically desirable but unprofitable areas, but also because of their presence in economic sectors like coal and steel that are undergoing a process of profound restructuring.
The enterprises have also come to play a symbolic role in broader governmental strategies, epitomizing, for example, certain styles of managerial behaviour and of labour relations which both the Conservative and the PSOE have aimed to reform.
As a result of these concerns, there has been a major drive in both countries to reduce the burden placed on state finances by public enterprises.
This has taken the form of the encouragement of ‘commercialism’, that is a rationality akin to that of the private corporation.
In practice it has involved efforts to cut  the size of the public enterprise sector and to make the remainder more efficient and more attentive to financial rather than public service criteria of viability.
The development of the public enterprise sector has been a major cause of the crisis of state expenditure in Spain.
In the period 1972–83, government transfers to companies (of which state enterprises absorbed about three-quarters) rose from 8.8 per cent to 12.5 per cent of government expenditure.
For most of this period, transfers to the state enterprises amounted to more than the total public deficit (Gimeno 1984: 88–92).
The losses of the state sector had grown as a result of the explosion of labour costs with the return to democracy, and because the state holding company INI (Instituto Nacional de Industrias) became a ‘hospital’ for near-bankrupt private companies; these accounted for more than 40 per cent of its losses in 1983.
This reflected the pressures of the transition.
Politicians were not prepared to risk the fragile social consensus by allowing troubled firms to go to the wall.
Thus the rationalization of the state enterprise sector became a major priority of the post-1982 PSOE government.
According to a study by the finance ministry, the government's aim was to ‘liberate the considerable financial resources which [these enterprises]absorb and employ them in financing activities and companies with a future and capable of generating stable employment’(cited in El País, 6 July 1983).
The PSOE's restructuring programme in the steel, shipbuilding, mining, vehicles and capital goods industries led to a reduction in public enterprise employment and the sale of a number of major companies (notably the INI-owned car firm SEAT) to the private sector.
The government also tried to reduce the deficits and increase the efficiency of other public enterprises, including the railways, by tightening mechanisms of control and introducing French-style ‘programme contracts’ between government and enterprise (see below).
The victory of the Conservatives in the British general elections of 1979 led to a radical questioning of the role of the public enterprise sector.
As suggested in chapter 2, one of the main aims of the Conservative government's political programme was to reduce the weight of the state in economic activity, because of its belief in the superiority of market mechanisms.
It was also concerned with the effect of nationalized industry deficits on public borrowing and hence on inflation and interest rates.
By 1987, the government had ‘privatized’ half a dozen major public corporations including the telecommunications and gas utilities and the state airlines, and many smaller enterprises (including the hotel and shipping interests of the British Railways Board).
The privatized companies had together employed well over half a million people when the Conservatives came to power.
The government's programme for its third term of office contained provisions for further major privatizations, notably of the water and sewerage authorities and the electricity industry.
As a result of the government's programme, the weight of the public enterprise sector was significantly curtailed.
In 1978, the ‘public corporations’ accounted for 20 per cent of GDP, employed 2.1 million people, or 8 per cent of the total working population, and were responsible for 16 per cent of gross domestic fixed capital formation (GDFCF)(Central Statistical Office 1987).
By 1986, the proportion of GDP had fallen to under 15 per cent, employment to 1.2 million (less than 5 per cent of the total), and GDFCF to 9 per cent .
The government also pursued policies designed to encourage a commercial ethos in the remaining public enterprises.
It brought in new financial controls to limit spending and borrowing, and introduced competition by weakening the statutory monopolies of some of the major public services.
To a greater extent than its predecessors, it attempted to intervene directly to undermine what it saw as union resistance to greater efficiency.
This led to serious confrontations in steel, coal and the railways, on which the government had a major influence.
The nationalized industries became a battleground in the government's fight to promote a change in the balance of power between management and workforce in British industry as a whole.
There was, then, a clear political strategy in both countries for dealing with the public enterprises.
The pursuit of the new ‘commercialism’ was the response, albeit ‘lagged and variable’, to the forces engendered by the general economic crisis and its attendant crisis of state expenditure.
Commercialism clearly created major tensions in industrial relations in the public enterprises, since it involved cost cutting, the search for greater efficiency and productivity and in some instances an attack on the very idea of public enterprise.
One of the main questions that the following chapters try to address is how these pressures fed through into changes in industrial relations strategies and practices in the enterprises.The rest of this chapter lays the groundwork for this examination by considering how the general relationship between public enterprise and the state has evolved under the pressures of ‘commercialism’.
It will be argued that despite the obvious impact of government policy, the way in which policies are converted into practice within the enterprise and the precise form they take are problematic.
Government intention does not transform itself into public enterprise action in a mechanical and straightforward way.
The Logic of State Enterprise: the Problems of Political Control
State enterprises are hybrid organizations, as their name implies, being in some ways akin to private enterprises while still being part of the state.
Like private enterprises, they are concerned with the production of goods and services to be traded on the market.
This distinguishes them from the state agencies that provide health, education or other services on the basis of bureaucratic criteria such as need and entitlement, rather than as commodities to be bought and sold in the market.
But they differ from private enterprise in that their defining characteristic, indeed the rationale for their existence, is that they are subject to some form of political control.
Their areas of activity are defined by politicians, they are given objectives, constraints are imposed on them, their performance is monitored.
In this way, they are led to pursue goals that would not be achieved by leaving the activity to the private enterprise sector.
In the private sector, the imperative need to be profitable acts as an external discipline on the activities of enterprises.
The operation of the market may be modified, of course, by government intervention, but in general the ‘market’ functions as a sort of semi-automatic, impersonal control device.
Public enterprises, because they are subject to political control, are at most only partially affected by the discipline of the market; as manifested, for example, in the often  quoted platitude that public enterprises do not go bankrupt (e.g. NEDO 1976: 42).
The way in which their objectives are defined through the political process and then ‘transmitted’ into the enterprise raises fundamental problems.
First, the political demands on public enterprises lead to objectives that are confusing, changeable and often mutually at odds.
Second, partly for this reason, but for others as well, the relationship between the state and public enterprises is dogged by difficult questions of enforcement: how can the political authorities ensure that the objectives set for state enterprises are effectively pursued?
These issues are discussed in the following paragraphs.
The Political Definition of Public Enterprise Objectives
The objectives of public enterprises mirror the complexity of the role of the state as a whole.
As the discussion of the previous chapter would suggest, their objectives do not arise ready made in response to some supposed ‘needs’ of the accumulation process; they emerge out of the complex interplay within the state of organized political interests.
Although the public enterprises have a primary economic task, such as the provision of railways, energy, postal services and so on, they also lend themselves to a wide range of other economic goals, precisely because they are under political control.
First, their ‘basic’ economic function is supplemented by a major role in economic restructuring.
They are themselves prominent actors in the rationalization of a number of industries in crisis, notably steel and shipbuilding.
Second, they support private industry not only through the provision of often subsidized inputs but also by providing guaranteed markets and assisting export endeavours.
Third, state enterprises provide governments with an important tool for implementing macroeconomic policies, for reducing inflation through price and wage controls and for controlling public expenditure by tariff policy and financial restraints.
Thus, while the principal economic function of state enterprises is usually quite well-defined and stable over time, they also perform many other economic functions which may place complex and often contradictory demands on them.
For example, supporting a sector of national industry may increase the costs of the goods or services provided to industry as a whole; or the use of state enterprises to control inflation may increase the state's fiscal problems because of the need for higher subsidies.
Most fundamentally, there is a constant tension between the need to provide the basic economic conditions under which capitalist accumulation can proceed, and the danger of upsetting the accumulation process through an increasing transfer of resources from the private to the state enterprise sector, thus undermining the logic of profitability that powers the accumulation process.
In addition, public enterprises also lend themselves to tasks that have more to do with political legitimation than with the needs of the economic system, and which increase the contradictory pressures on them.
For example, they may frequently be given a role in maintaining employment and thus helping to preserve the political accommodations between classes upon which a successful response to the crisis depends; this may conflict with their central role in the restructuring of industries in crisis.
In Spain, for example, the political and economic pressures of the transition to democracy saw the workforce employed in the companies controlled by INI rise from 219,000 to 244,000 between 1975 and  1980, at a time when the real value of sales was falling sharply (Crossier 1985: 24–6).
Similar conflicts arise in the case of regional development policy, which again is important in countries such as Italy, Spain, France and Britain for maintaining bases of political support and consensus.
Another example is the conflict engendered by providing universal ‘non-discriminatory’ services in transport, communications or energy supply which may increase the cost of essential inputs to the capitalist sector (since costly services such as rural train lines will be subsidized by profitable services or by direct state subsidy).
This multiplicity of objectives, and the way in which they are defined through the political process and change in response to changing political priorities, distinguishes state enterprises from private firms.
The position is neatly summarized by a former chairman of the British Railways Board, Lord Beeching:
In the case of private industry there is a single, clear and unchanging primary objective, and management is free to optimise its behaviour in pursuit of that objective within a general framework of conditions imposed by law, practice, and opinion, which it hopes and expects will also be reasonably stable.
Therefore, its actions can and should be compatible and coherent.
In the case of a nationalized industry, on the other hand, objectives are more numerous, more ambiguous and less distinguishable from qualifying conditions.
Moreover, they fluctuate in their supposed order of priority, not merely from Government to Government, nor even from year to year, but almost from day to day at the whim of public and parliamentary opinion.
Imposed policy decisions which are bound to increase losses or limit capacity may be followed within days by a howl of anguish about the financial state of the organization, or about shortage of supply.
Management does not have the freedom to optimise its own performance in pursuit of a single objective, or even in pursuit of a number of stable and compatible ones…
(cited in Edwards 1967: 10).
As this passage suggests, the contradictory pressures on the state enterprise are increased by the way objectives are defined through the political process.
Multiple, changing objectives arise out of the very logic and internal organizational structure of the state.
The functional division of policy-making responsibilities among different central government departments and agencies means that public enterprises may experience political pressures from several distinct authority sources within the state.
For example, an enterprise may be subject to some form of political control from ministries or agencies responsible for finance, employment, defence and regional policy in addition to its principal ‘sponsor’ or ‘tutelary’ministry (see, e.g., Feigenbaum 1985: 87–92).
As Vernon (1984: 8) writes of the French case, ‘in actual practice, managers have found themselves dealing with half-a-dozen ministers or more, each with some capacity to reward or punish’.
In Spain in the 1960s, INI found itself with representatives of the ministries of finance, commerce, industry, public works, agriculture, as well as the ministries of the army, navy and airforce, on its board of directors (Fernandez 1970: 951–2).
Thus state enterprises are faced, in Aharoni's phrase (1981a: 1342), with  ‘multiple principals’.
This fragmentation of the state, with the ‘coexistence of a great number of autonomous centres of power, all weakly linked to each other’(Burgi 1985: 137) makes more difficult the definition and co-ordination of public enterprise objectives.
Conflicts among these state power centres are common, leading to confusion of objectives, or even mutually conflicting political messages for state enterprises.
For example, ministries responsible for control of government expenditure may oppose the sponsor ministry's sectoral strategy on the grounds of cost.
A notable example, provided by Eisenhammer (1985: 48–51), is of the refusal of the Italian finance minister to authorize release of the massive funds approved by the industry ministry for the restructuring of the steel firm Finsider.
The effects of functional differentiation of policy-making are exacerbated by the relationship between the government and the permanent machinery of the state.
Co-ordination of enterprise objectives is impeded by the time cycle of political authority.
In other words, governments, which formally at least set the political agenda, have relatively limited lifespans.
The turnover of individual government ministers responsible for setting objectives of state enterprises in their domain is even more rapid (e.g. Grassini 1981: 75).
Furthermore, the nature of political authority in representative democracies means that governments are bound by doctrines of accountability.
As a result, ministers are subject to a range of ad hoc and constantly changing pressures from parliamentary representatives and interest groups that create a substratum of secondary political considerations to be taken into account.
The Dilemma of Control and Autonomy
The nature of public enterprise objectives makes it difficult for political authorities to evaluate and control the activities of the enterprises.
When there are few clear, constant priorities, it is difficult to hold management to account for its actions.
For example, as will be argued in more detail below, performance targets, such as rates of return on capital, are undermined as a means of control when other politically imposed demands, such as the requirement to keep prices down, provide management with a plausible alibi for failing to meet them.
Even where targets are met, it may be for the ‘wrong’ reasons; for example, where an enterprise has considerable monopoly power, it can achieve its targets by manipulation of prices or a reduction in the quality of service.
But even if political authorities were clear about what they expected from public enterprises, political control would remain problematic.
One reason for this is that the enterprises must have a ‘relative autonomy’ within the state if they are to operate efficiently.
Their functions — the production of goods and services — require, in Therborn's terms, substantive rather than formal rationality, that is rationality based on managerial technical skill rather than bureaucratic competence and predetermined general rules.
Thus the model of bureaucratic central state organizations such as ministries is unsuitable.
Public enterprises are usually separate from the central administrative bodies and have a legal identity and accounts independent of the central government department to which they are formally accountable (see, e.g., Shirley 1983: 2).
Some public trading activities, notably posts and telecommunications, have operated as parts of central government departments.
But this is more a reflection of historical functions and  origins, as with the role of postal services as a source of revenue for the state and as an instrument of state security.
With the growing pressures to develop more efficient, flexible and ‘commercial’ state organizations, the tendency has been to transfer trading activities from departments of state to public corporations, as with the British Post Office at the end of the 1960s and the Italian railways in the mid-1980s.
This need for ‘distance’ from political control has given rise to the doctrine of the ‘arm's-length’relationship in countries such as Britain where the classic form of the state enterprise has been the ‘public corporation’under the control of a ‘sponsor’department.
The original conception of the public corporation was that it had only to be given its ‘marching orders’ by the political authority and could then be left to pursue the ‘national interest’as management saw fit (SCNI 1968: 34).
In countries where state-owned enterprises have typically been scattered among different economic sectors alongside private capital, the conventional form of public enterprise directly responsible to a ministry has been supplemented by the state holding company; for example, IRI in Italy, and INI and INH (the oil and gas sector holding company) in Spain.
The holding company form has been used to provide a buffer between the state enterprises themselves and political direction by the state.
Management autonomy has led to serious problems of control.
Merely giving management its ‘marching orders’ proved insufficient to ensure that the principal economic function of producing goods and services was carried out efficiently and without becoming an additional strain on state finances.
Indeed, a major concern of many state enterprises in early post-war Europe was the physical reconstitution of the depleted or war-damaged infrastructure of railways, power stations and so on.
Financial constraints on investment were relatively unimportant and only developed subsequently as political concern with state enterprise deficits prompted efforts for greater commercialism.
The greater is managerial freedom on questions of pricing, internal organization and investment, the more likely are public enterprises to act in ways inimical to the political objectives of government, or as Feigenbaum (1982: 109) puts it, ‘to pursue strategies dysfunctional to the public weal’.
Feigenbaum cites examples of the role of French oil enterprises and banks speculating against the national currency, refusing to divert deliveries from foreign customers during the 1973–4 oil embargo, and making excess profits at the expense of the consumer (1982; 1985).
In Spain, the policies of the enterprises controlled by the holding company INI have been said to follow those of their private sector counterparts, to the detriment of the national interest in areas such as pricing policy and import controls (e.g. Tamames 1986: 177–80).
Feigenbaum.
in common with many others, also notes the problems when public enterprises are given unbridled autonomy to ‘ride the waves of the market’ in conditions of market imperfection and monopoly power.
The response of governments to such problems has been to redefine the relationship between control and autonomy by providing a more formal framework for enterprises to operate in.
One major thrust of such efforts has been to introduce proxies for market signals, in the form of financial targets and constraints.
Enterprises have been required to achieve financial targets concerning rates of return on capital or revenue, and to attain minimum rates of return on  investment programmes.
Other market proxies have laid down rules for pricing according to marginal cost.
More recently, governments have imposed financial constraints limiting the call of state enterprises on public funds.
These targets have been the subject of successive initiatives in Britain, for example, since the 1960s.
Attempts have also been made to clarify political control by means of‘contractual’ arrangements between government and state enterprise.
These date back to the recommendations of the 1967 Nora Report in France.
The essence of a ‘contrat de programme’ or ‘contrat d'entreprise’is that a state enterprise agrees to achieve targets for economic performance, physical output, productivity, quality of service, and so on in return for a commitment from the government to provide necessary finance, and to provide compensation for obliging the enterprise to undertake non-commercial activities in the public interest (Durupty 1986b: 357–96).
Such moves, however, have tended to restate rather than resolve the tension between control and autonomy.
One problem is that the pressures for commercialism have brought about two divergent policy responses from governments.
On the one hand, there has been a redefinition and tightening of formal controls, but on the other, there has been a simultaneous and sometimes incompatible thrust towards more management autonomy.
Public enterprises have been forced into a greater orientation to the market by increasing exposure to competition and a relaxation of their statutory monopolies: a strategy used most notably by the post-1979 Conservative government in Britain.
But the more genuine the competition, the more ineffective do government-imposed controls become as a way of affecting enterprise behaviour, since it must increasingly be governed by the ‘logic’ of the market rather than of political control.
Problems of Enforcing Political Control
The increasing use of market proxies and targets of various kinds to control the activities of public enterprises brings problems of its own.
The central issue is how to turn political objectives into actual behaviour by enterprises.
In other words, how is political control to be made effective?
A major problem has been the complexity and variability of political objectives discussed earlier.
First, as long as other politically defined goals may override them, the power of market proxies to control management behaviour is limited.
For example, attempts to introduce marginal cost pricing (Treasury 1967) or ‘verité des prix’(Dubois 1975: 31–2) are undermined by simultaneous government concern with inflation and hence with holding down public enterprise prices (and there are problems in principle with the application of marginal cost pricing ).
Second, the formal objectives themselves are liable to abrupt change.
In the words of a former chairman of a British nationalized industry, when the economy fluctuates, ‘ministers find it difficult to resist varying the targets or borrowing limits of the industries, frequently at very short notice, and these imposed fluctuations in general management direction produce severe strains on the efficient operation of the industry’(Tombs 1980: 5).
Programme contracts have also been extremely vulnerable to alterations in political priorities and objectives.
As the French experience following the oil shocks of 1973 and 1979  indicates, the commitments in programme contracts may be rendered meaningless by major changes in the economic forecasting parameters upon which they are based (Shirley 1983: 77–80).
Third, many political objectives may remain unquantified and even unacknowledged, and this makes it even harder to tell exogenous from endogenous reasons for failure to meet targets (e.g. NEDO 1976: 40).
Many authorities have advocated the practice of setting clear political objectives and compensating the enterprise for the resulting financial detriment.
But as Tivey (1973: 1960–200) argues, political and economic considerations do not impinge occasionally on nationalized industries but are continuous and pervasive features.
The changeability of political concerns and priorities means that governments are unwilling to make long-term commitments to compensate enterprises for carrying out public service objectives (NEDO 1976: 28, 43).
Moreover, political authorities are often unwilling to define or take public responsibility for objectives that are not seen to be politically ‘legitimate’.
For example, considerations of short-term electoral advantage may dictate an interest in the nature of price and pay policy in public enterprises (e.g. Foster 1971: 114).
Thus state enterprises are not faced with clear guidelines as to the balance between commercial objectives relating to the economic performance of the enterprise, and the political objectives concerning, for example, regional policy or employment.
Such problems have led to the characteristic phenomenon in which de facto priorities have been established by ad hoc political intervention over such matters as pay and prices, purchasing policy, import substitution, investment location and closure decisions.
This breaching of the formally ‘arm's-length’ or contractual relationship has tended to undermine the supposed managerial independence of the enterprise; in the graphic words of Johnson (1978: 128), there were ‘grounds for suspecting that the public corporations were becoming something like tenants in the great ramshackle mansion of central government administration’.
This type of informal intervention in turn increased confusion over the weight to be attached to the enterprise's different objectives, and made it harder to co-ordinate political goals and express them in a coherent manner.
Even were objectives to stay relatively stable, a fundamental problem of control would remain: the acquisition by the controllers of the knowledge upon which to base targets and evaluate performance.
Enterprises have considerable incentives to manipulate data.
Corporate planning, for example, becomes a vehicle for obtaining political support, rather than internal managerial commitment (see below).
The specialist managerial expertise involved in running complex public utilities ensures that public enterprises are able to control the data upon which assessments are made.
Opportunities are therefore ‘legion for bluffing, evasion and selective reporting in the course of the actual performance’(Chambers 1984: 128).
The necessary expertise is scarce in the controlling agencies such as the sponsoring ministry and state auditing bodies, and studies suggest that enterprises attempt to control access to their own expertise.
For example, the post-war British Electricity Authority tried to insist on the protocol of official contact through the board secretary rather than allowing civil servants to make contact directly with specialist personnel (Hannah 1982: 44).
Dunleavy (1982: 190–7), using the example of the British civil nuclear industry, argues that the ‘professional’ ethos of public enterprise specialists may strengthen their links with their professional colleagues outside the state and hence make them less susceptible to control by state agencies.
If this is true, it would further increase the problems of control in countries such as Britain where the form of the public corporation relied on the notion of the ‘professional ideal’ of self-regulation, trust and responsibility to ensure that the ‘national interest’was furthered (Burrage 1973).
Nor are these problems of control resolved by the activities of specialist state auditing agencies, such as the French Cour des Comptes and similar bodies such as the Tribunal de Cuentas in Spain or the proposed function of the comptroller and auditor general in Britain.
Such forms of control suffer from many of the problems already detailed, particularly lack of specialist expertise.
The Spanish Tribunal de Cuentas was virtually inoperative during the 1960s (Fernandez 1970) and control in general suffered from one of the characteristic features of the Spanish administration, an excessive concern for legal form and precedent rather than with the substance of performance (see Beltran 1977: ch. 5; Medhurst 1973: 163).
A more fundamental reason for the failure of these control bodies is suggested by the Spanish case: they can only operate effectively in a propitious political environment.
Thus the clientelistic interplay of political interests within the Spanish state under Franco converted state enterprises into part of the political patronage system.
There was also a nexus of interests between state managers and private capital in the firms controlled by INI which made supervision difficult (Medhurst 1973: 164).
In short, there was an apparent absence of political will to ensure that formal control mechanisms functioned in practice.
The problems of measurement exacerbate a further fundamental problem of control, the difficulty in imposing sanctions for poor performance.
Public enterprises run little risk of bankruptcy, and if targets are not met, governments usually step in to cover deficits.
Even the supposedly rigid ‘external financing limits’ imposed by the post-1979 Conservative government in Britain have proved to be flexible in practice (Heald and Steel 1981), with targets being adjusted when it became apparent that they would not be met.
The major formal sanction in the hands of the government is the power of appointment and dismissal over boards and (normally) chief executives of public enterprises.
A proposal for the reform of the Italian railway network advocated the dismissal of the board if it failed for two years running to achieve performance targets (Santoro 1985), and the Spanish Socialist government has similarly toyed with the idea of sacking unsuccessful chairmen (Tamames 1983: 371).
But a number of writers have suggested that the sanction is often not effective in practice (Tivey 1982; Foster 1971: 70; Dudley and Richardson 1984).
Partly this is because, where political objectives such as employment are given high priority, enterprise management will be judged on the basis of its ability to maintain or expand the workforce rather than on its financial performance (e.g. Grassini 1981: 84).
In addition, as argued above, there are great difficulties in assessing the performance of public enterprises.
A major reason for the ineffectiveness of the sanction of appointment and  dismissal is that politicians are as likely to wish to get rid of appointees for political reasons as on the grounds of poor performance.
The Spanish public sector, for example, has long been characterized by the politicization of public appointments (see ch. 2).
Senior management posts in nationalized industries were used under Franco to reward politicians and military men for services rendered to the regime (Medhurst 1973: 164).
The use of state posts as a source of patronage and control was reflected in the hypertrophy of the state enterprise bureaucracy.
It is claimed that about half of the almost 4,000 senior management posts in companies controlled directly or indirectly by INI were ‘superfluous sinecures’(Graham 1985: 97), available for distribution as political favours.
The practice continued when democracy was restored.
In 1982, for example, among the chairmen of INI firms were 16 ex-ministers, 10 members of parliament and about 20 senior civil servants linked with the governing party UCD and with the Francoist regime (El Socialista, 15–21 September 1982).
Nor did the Socialists abandon political appointments; indeed, the growing number of party activists occupying senior management posts in public enterprises (see Diario 16, 30 January 1985) illustrated the government's belief that the introduction of its policies of commercialism was an operation demanding political rather than purely managerial skill.
Relative Power and Bargaining Between Public Enterprises and Political Authorities
The issue of measurement and control presupposes a clear differentiation and distancing between the controller and the object of control.
But in practice, there is often a process of ‘co-option’ of, or at least accommodation with, agencies whose nominal function is to control the public enterprise.
Cassese (1981: 149) and Feigenbaum (1985: 75–6, 95–6) argue that the officials of the French Cour des Comptes acted more as advocates and defenders of the enterprises than their controllers, while Hannah (1982: 44) describes how civil servants in the sponsor ministry became ‘valuable allies’ of the electricity authority, translating ‘known needs into appropriate Whitehall language, according to the changing fashions dictated by public opinion or cabinet preoccupations’.
The root of these accommodations is the bargaining power possessed by state enterprises.
We have already discussed the leverage deriving from control over expertise.
In addition, enterprises may take advantage of the characteristic fragmentation of political authority and inter-agency conflicts of the type described earlier.
Thus Hannah (1982: 45) suggests that management in the electricity industry made common cause with civil servants against the demands of the Treasury.
A state enterprise may be able to manoeuvre among the diverse pressures on it, playing one off against the other (Levy 1987); what Feigenbaum (1982: 113) refers to as ‘corporate manipulation of the state’.
The bargaining power of enterprises is enhanced by their strategic role within their own sectors and governments' dependence on them for implementation of policy.
Increasingly, state enterprises have been able to function as an organized political lobby, despite their differences of interest (e.g. Dudley and Richardson 1984; Tivey 1982; Vernon 1984: 10).
As well as becoming proficient in the techniques of lobbying such as public campaigning and the use of the media, enterprises have frequently formed alliances with private interest groups, and (as we shall see below), with their own workforces, in pursuit of their political goals.
The fragmentation of the state political authority thus ‘allows an unpredictable mechanism of alliances and counter-alliances’ to develop (Burgi 1985: 140), or as Smith Ring and Perry (1985: 281) call it, ‘a process of coalition building involving diverse and ofttimes competing interests’.
The ‘counter-power’ of the state enterprise in relation to the controlling authorities has major consequences for the way in which control is exerted.
As the foregoing arguments have suggested, control is not imposed so much as negotiated or bargained between parties who both have considerable power resources (cf. Aharoni 1981a: 1342).
Enterprises have the capacity to thwart external assessment of their performance and to steer between the conflicting, multifarious pressures on them; while the political authorities can grant or withhold economic resources and more fundamentally, general political support.
As a result, relations are characterized by political exchanges between the parties.
For example, enterprises may agree to refrain from raising prices prior to an election or from publicly criticizing a policy with which they disagree in return for approval for expenditure.
Thus Hannah (1982: 46–7) cites the case of government relaxations in the investment controls on the British electricity authority in 1951 in return for its silence on the policy of cutting rural electrification.
In exchange for support from civil servants in resisting the cuts of the Treasury or in presenting its investment programme sympathetically to the government, an enterprise might refrain from padding out its capital applications; again the electricity industry provides an example (Hannah 1982: 44).
The Implications of the Logic of Control and Autonomy for State Enterprise Management Behaviour
A number of writers have argued that the peculiarities of the environment in which the public enterprise operates create distinctive managerial processes.
With goals that are complex, conflicting, vague and set at least partially by external agencies, the planning process is much more of a political act than in private corporations (e.g. Grieve Smith 1981; Smith Ring and Perry 1985).
Because plans set performance standards and create expectations in the political controllers, they are used to manipulate the external environment as much as to generate internal management commitment.
As Grieve Smith says, enterprises are led to ‘present a plan which shows a sufficiently favourable financial forecast to justify further investment or financial support’(1984b: 58).
Although in some cases enterprises have tried to develop realistic ‘performative’ plans (Wernham 1985: 633), their incentives to do so are limited by the fact that plans are still subject to external political appraisal which may alter their content and assumptions and thus undermine managerial commitment.
As argued above, the nature of state enterprise planning encourages the manipulation and concealment of data so that the enterprise may control the terms upon which its performance will be judged.
The limitations of performance evaluation lead to a concern with visible and politically acceptable results.
State enterprises have to reconcile the needs of  long-term planning horizons of a quarter of a century or more, especially in highly capital intensive sectors such as railways, telecommunications or energy, with short-term political pressures (Harris and Davies 1979: 50; 1981).
The short life cycle of political control, conditioned by the frequency of elections and ministerial changes, means, in the words of Mazzolini (1981: 22–3) that politicians tend ‘to impose a high discount rate on expected outcomes’.
This leads enterprise management to place stress on the achievement of short ‘pay back periods’, particularly when the formal control devices themselves measure performance over short periods.
A style of management is evolved that emphasizes visible outcomes; that is, oriented to ‘managing public support in the political markets’, as Zif (1981: 1326) puts it.
One constituent of this is the pursuit of ‘symbolic’ goals with a high political ‘payback’, even to the detriment of more ‘commercial’business objectives.
Roig (1981: 14), for example, has noted that strategic changes in the public enterprise are often more ‘rhetorical’ than ‘effective’.
This reflects the fact that politics often involves the exchange of symbolic resources rather than substantive ones, since these are important in the mobilization of political action (see ch. 8).
For example, it may be more important for a government that a public sector pay settlement appear to be within the limits of pay policy, than for it actually to be so.
This orientation to the political sphere conditions internal management organization and culture.
The nature of the political environment confuses the normal distinction between strategic and minor issues, since what may be minor in operational or commercial terms may have important symbolic political impact.
For example, a state enterprise may be subject to close parliamentary scrutiny by elected representatives, and this may have a major impact on the public image and hence the political vulnerability or strength of the enterprise.
This need to deal with a tricky political environment has often led to managerial centralization of decisions that may have political overtones, and a consensual style of leadership based around committee structures (e.g. Batstone et al.1984: ch. 2; Hannah 1982: 15, 47).
An alternative strategy, developed into a model by Aharoni (1981b), is for enterprises to aim to maximize business objectives such as profits and cash flow in order to minimize their dependence on government.
However, studies suggest that a major source of enterprise autonomy is the ability of management to manipulate the conflicting political pressures on it and to negotiate successfully with the fragmented political authorities in the central state administration (see, e.g., Hannah 1982: ch. 5; Feigenbaum 1985).
Moreover, the ability of state enterprises to maximize business objectives depends on the nature of the political pressures on them, and indeed, a greater ‘business’ rather than‘political’orientation (Zif 1981) may flow from clear directives of the political authorities; in other words the dominant political objective may be for the enterprise to behave in a ‘commercial’manner, so that the maximization of business objectives may be a reflection of greater dependence on political authorities.
The introduction of ‘commercial’ objectives has been a response to growing fiscal crisis, and generates its own tensions.
For example, pressures to commercialism may lead management to replace blurred and ambiguous strategic objectives with clear and concise ones.
But this clarity may make it more difficult to  play off political demands against each other, and to handle the conflicting and diffuse political pressures that inevitably persist.
Again, commercialism may lead to the pursuit of indicators, such as current balance sheet results, chosen more to convince the government that commercial goals are being successfully achieved than for their relevance to the economic objectives of the enterprise.
A further consequence of commercialism is the pressure for management to legitimate politically determined goals by clothing them in the language of managerial decision-making.
The use of ‘objective’ business techniques of accounting to justify closures and rationalization reflecting political decisions has been extensively documented in the case of the British mining industry (O'Donnell 1985) and the nationalized steel corporation (Bryer et al.1982; Manwaring 1981).
A corrective is needed, however, to the impression that state enterprise management is entirely conditioned by the political forces that impinge upon it.
On the contrary, since the enterprise is an organization with a complex internal structure and of necessity relatively autonomous from political control, it is capable of developing its own internal interests and agenda (cf. Levy 1987).
When political conditions permit, for example when the commercial orientation is more prominent, the internal agenda may come to the fore and inform the objectives of the corporation.
Indeed, the logic of commercialism may lead the enterprise to pursue activities at odds with other government objectives.
In that case, corporate interests may find themselves in conflict with their political controllers.
The Logic of State Enterprise and Industrial Relations
It was suggested in chapter 1 that the conventional accounts of industrial relations in the public enterprise sector have been too static and ad hoc.
In this section it will be argued that, since industrial relations form part of the overall texture of state enterprise activity, the logic of public enterprises provides a starting point for understanding their industrial relations.
The section will therefore draw out some general implications for industrial relations of the dynamic of political control and managerial autonomy within the context of growing fiscal crisis.
‘Crystallized’ Interests and Industrial Relations Institutions in State Enterprises
It was argued earlier that the role of state enterprises partly reflects the interests of social classes and groups and the way they are represented within the polity.
The same is true of the use of nationalization as a form of state intervention.
It is commonly argued that nationalization takes place in order to socialize the losses of sectors of capital where capitalist relations have broken down (e.g. Fine and O'Donnell 1981) or to resolve an immediate crisis in a sector of the economy, as with the creation of the Italian state holding company IRI by Mussolini in response to the impending collapse of the banking system (Maraffi 1980).
But this is a partial explanation; as Urry (1981: 93) points out, not all industries taken over by the state are necessarily unprofitable in private hands; a striking recent example would be the nationalization of some of the leading French banks and industrial conglomerates by the Mitterand government in 1982 (Durupty 1986a: 77–119).
Furthermore, nationalization is only one form of achieving state policies of intervention.
Whether it is adopted or not will depend on ‘the strength, organisation and cohesiveness of the various social classes struggling in that particular society’(Urry 1981: 94).
Although Urry (134) reasonably cautions against a ‘politicist’ account that sees nationalization as largely reflecting the ambitions of the labour movement and its political representatives, these ambitions have had a major impact on nationalization.
For example, the aspirations of the labour movement have influenced the timing and form of nationalization, and the content of industrial relations in state enterprises, particularly forms of worker representation and managerial control.
In Britain, by the 1890s the TUC was calling for the nationalization of the ‘whole of the means of production, distribution and exchange’(Weiner 1960: 4).
The labour movement's demands stressed the democratic control of industry by employees' representatives.
Similar currents flowed strongly through the ideology and programmes of the French union movement after the First World War (Dubois 1975: ch. 3).
In Italy, too, the interests of sections of the labour movement, in alliance with factions in the Christian Democrats, were a force behind post-war nationalizations (Maraffi 1980: 514–21; Martinelli 1981: 94).
In both Britain and France, aspirations were greatly watered down by events.
During the 1930s and 1940s the British labour movement accepted Morrisonian ideas of non-political administration of public enterprises (Weiner 1960: ch. 3), while the shape of early nationalizations in France was conditioned by the needs of approaching war rather than the political demands of the working class.
Moreover, many actual nationalizations were indeed objectively functional for the restructuring of parts of the economy ‘no longer organised as capital’ as Fine and O'Donnell (1981) put it; and the British Conservatives only attempted to reverse the post-war Labour government's efforts ‘where we believed that a measure of nationalisation was a real hindrance to our island life (Winston Churchill, cited in Weiner 1960: 80).
Nonetheless, nationalization still bore the mark of long struggles by the labour movement to further working class interests.
This was most evident in the statutory requirements concerning industrial relations that were universal in the British nationalization acts, and the creation of complex machinery for consultation and negotiation with staff (see Chester 1975: ch. 8; Clegg 1951: ch. 3).
In France, the post-war nationalizations set up a tripartite scheme of management with representation of users, public authorities and employees (Dubois 1975: 161–3; Holter 1982).
Although in France changes in the balance of class relations permitted a whittling away of forms of labour representation in the state enterprises, in Britain they have been much more resistant to change, until recent years at least.
In both countries, the class relations that gave rise to nationalization have been reflected in the continuing ethos of ‘progressive’ public sector industrial relations and the notion of the ‘good employer’, manifested in relatively good sick pay and pensions, ‘humane’handling of redundancy, and so on.
In a number of countries, state enterprises were in the forefront of ‘progressive’ developments in industrial relations.
Renault, for example, pioneered extension of annual holiday rights in France (Anastassopoulos 1981: 109–11), while state industries were among the first to introduce ‘contrattazione articolata aziendale’(i.e. formal plant level bargaining) in Italy in the early 1960s (Martinelli 1981: 94).
Thus the pattern of current relationships in a nationalized industry may partly reflect events that happened in the past, even the distant past.
As Therborn (1979: 35) says, ‘in the historical course of the class struggle, the state apparatuses come to crystallize determinate social relations and thus assume a material existence, efficacy and inertia which are to a certain extent independent of current state policies and class relations’.
In short, the inertial properties of ideologies and institutional arrangements allow them to colour industrial relations long after the constellation of political forces has changed.
In Spain, in contrast to Britain, the emergence and form of public enterprise owed little to the aspirations of the labour movement, and much to the state's own organizational interests.
Public ownership was perceived as a means whereby the state elites could direct the Francoist strategy of economic autarchy launched in the 1940s, which in turn owed much to concerns with national security.
The nationalization of the railways, the creation of the state holding company INI, the acquisition of a major state shareholding in the telephone company, were carried out by a repressive authoritarian regime which had crushed organized labour.
The institutions of industrial relations in state enterprises were those of the Francoist state — vertical ‘syndicates’ and strictly controlled, docile company councils (‘jurados’).
It was only when democracy was restored in Spain that this legacy truly began to break down and the form of state enterprises changed to accommodate the interests of organized labour.
Fragmented Authority, Multiple Goals and Intervention in Industrial Relations
The fragmentation of political authority, and the existence of multiple, changing and politically defined goals, have led to continuous ad hoc intervention by the political controllers of public enterprises in their decision-making.
This intervention has the effect both of undermining managerial autonomy and of weakening the coherence of political control by blurring objectives.
It has been a particularly marked feature of industrial relations in state enterprises, since the conduct of industrial relations influences the achievement of a variety of state objectives.
The pay of employees has been a traditional and frequent object of intervention, as have a wide range of other industrial relations issues such as closure and redundancy, working practices and dispute settlement.
Short-term political considerations have led governments (or parts of the central state organization) to put pressure on supposedly autonomous managements to grant concessions to the unions.
Sometimes the government has wished to avoid the politically damaging disruption of vital public services; for example, Hannah, describes how, in the 1960 wage negotiations at the Central Electricity Generating Board, the settlement was made ‘after management consultation with the Ministry had indicated that they should settle, as the Cabinet were not willing to force matters to a strike’(1982: 223).
The phenomenon is vividly described by a former chairman of the British Prices and Incomes Board:
On the first appearance of a wage claim,[the government]whispers to the nationalised undertaking to stand firm — even though the undertaking may think that some concession may be reasonable.
The fact that the undertaking is not speaking with its own voice but is merely the echo of another's soon becomes known.
The indignation of the trade union mounts; there is the threat of a strike; Government, which fears a strike more than the nationalised undertaking, sounds the call for retreat; and amid paeans of praise for everybody's wisdom in choosing the path of peace the claim is settled — more generously than it could have been in the first place (Aubrey Jones, cited in Bell 1975: 10).
On other occasions a high settlement has been desired as part of a strategy of political alliances.
Grassini (1981: 82–3), for example, cites the case of the Italian state enterprise bargaining body Intersind which in 1960 was pressed into making a settlement favourable to the unions because the Christian Democrats were contemplating a coalition with the Socialist Party.
Such intervention has often had to be exerted through covert pressure, since it conflicts not only with the formality of managerial autonomy, but also with the achievement of other formally defined goals such as financial performance targets and even policies on controlling public sector wages.
Even when intervention is compatible with official pay restraint policy, it may still be covert since politicians may not wish to take public responsibility for influencing the outcome of a specific case and prefer to see the opprobrium attached to management.
An example, again from Hannah's study of the British electricity industry, is provided by the 1961 pay negotiations.
Although the Macmillan cabinet pressed management to delay a settlement, ministers were not prepared to take responsibility for a breakdown in negotiations; when the industry settled, the Prime Minister publicly rebuked management for capitulating to the unions and breaching the pay pause (1982: 225–6).
Finally, intervention in industrial relations often expresses the tensions between long-term government strategy, for example to promote industrial restructuring, and short-term political considerations, such as electoral advantage.
In a Spanish case in 1984, the PSOE government intervened in the restructuring programme of the state-owned steel firm Aceriales, forcing it to modify its plans for severe cuts in the workforce.
The intervention was the result of the governing party's worries about the effects of job losses on its chances in elections to the Basque regional parliament (Ariño 1985: 59–60).
Such interventions have tended to undermine the autonomy of the state enterprises' internal industrial relations institutions, especially where governments have funded concessions to the workforce beyond what management was prepared to consider (cf. Kelf-Cohen 1973: 176), and have encouraged complex bargaining relations extending beyond the boundary of the enterprise to encompass the political authorities themselves (see below).
Fiscal Crisis and State Enterprise Industrial Relations
The growing political preoccupation with controlling public expenditure and limiting the role of the state has had far-reaching, if ambiguous, consequences for state enterprise industrial relations.
First, political attention has been focused  on public sector pay as a major element in the growth of state expenditure and of the deteriorating financial performance of state enterprises (see, e.g., Dubois 1975: ch. 2).
This has heightened the importance of anti-inflationary policies of wage restraint, in which the highly ‘visible’ state enterprises have often been expected to play an exemplary role, because of concern for the impact of their actions on other employers.
It has also encouraged the use of new financial control mechanisms such as external financing limits, which in Britain since 1979 have been used as a covert pay policy (Heald and Steel 1981: 15).
Second, commercialism in the form of tighter financial constraints and increasing competition has created pressures on state enterprise management to cut labour costs and increase flexibility.
A major issue for research is how these pressures become incorporated in the policies of strategic management and how they are then propagated down through the management organization, changing the environment in which middle and lower levels of management operate, and altering the constraints on their handling of industrial relations questions.
The Role of the Unions and Political Exchange
Unions in state enterprises operate in an environment in which corporate objectives are subject to continuous renegotiation and intervention by fragmented political authorities outside the corporation.
As we have seen, this applies to industrial relations issues such as pay determination, and to matters having a major bearing on industrial relations, such as restructuring and rationalization plans.
The government does not merely confine itself to setting the ‘rules of the game’, but is in a sense a participant in industrial relations to the extent that it chooses to intervene.
Intervention varies according to factors such as the degree of commercial autonomy of the state enterprise, although as we have seen, commercialism is no deterrent to intervention and may indeed promote it.
The consequence of this logic of action is that the management of the state enterprise ceases to be the unions' sole potential bargaining partner.
Formal or informal bargaining may take place across the boundaries of the corporation between unions and political authorities — ministries, governments and local or regional authorities.
The possibility of government intervention on pay, by putting pressure on management to settle or even by funding additional increases, encourages the unions to try to deal with ‘the organ grinder, not the monkey’ as the chairman of a British public corporation told the House of Commons Select Committee on Nationalised Industry (SCNI 1968: 190).
But such union-government bargaining has taken place on a wide range of issues; for example, over new investment in poorer regions (e.g. Eisenhammer 1985: 42–4), rescue bids for ailing private sector companies (e.g. Grassini 1981: 82), extension of union participation in management (e.g. Batstone et al.1983: ch. 2; Holter 1982), and plant closures or service rationalizations (Ariño 1985: 59–60).
Much bargaining is tacit and informal, but at times it may become formalized into tripartite arrangements involving government, unions and enterprise management; a rare example in the British context was the drawing up of the 1974 ‘Plan for Coal’(Burgi 1985).
As the words of Aubrey Jones cited above suggest, bargaining is based on the unions' threat to disrupt the state enterprise's activities.
Because of the strategic  nature of the services and products provided by the major state enterprises, and because of their monopoly position, industrial conflict may cause widespread disruption and lead to severe political embarrassment for the government.
This may take the form of pressure from third parties affected by disruption, aimed at influencing the outcome of management-union negotiations (Thomson and Beaumont 1978: 132–5).
The political damage that may be done to governments by industrial conflict may be illustrated by the fall of the Heath government in the course of the 1973–4 British miners' strike.
The capacity of the unions to disrupt can be expected to vary according to factors such as the internal unity and organization of the unions.
But it also varies, as we shall see in the case studies in later chapters, according to the resources that the government has at hand to defuse the political consequences of disruption.
The bargaining relations between state enterprise unions and the political authorities may be seen in terms of Pizzorno's well-known concept of ‘political exchange’.
He drew attention to the difference between exchanges in the market and in the political sphere.
In the labour market, the commodity being bought and sold is labour power; in the political market, the union is trading on the power to prevent disruption.
In Pizzorno's words, an ‘actor (generally the government) which has goods to give is ready to trade them in exchange for social consensus with an actor who can threaten to withdraw that consensus’(1978: 279).
Exchange could also take place on the basis of ideological support, commitment or obligation, as has often been the case between public enterprise unions and social democratic governments.
An important consequence of the orientation of state enterprise unions to the political sphere is that industrial disputes and strikes may be aimed at putting political pressure on government as much as economic pressure on the enterprise's management (cf. Thomson and Beaumont 1978: 146–51).
This may affect the form of conflict, favouring, for example, the short, widely publicized demonstration strike.
It may mean also that strikes are openly directed against state policy as much as against management's negotiating position, as with the French public sector strike in the mid-1960s against government fixing of the total wage bill (Dubois 1975: 114–15), or the wave of public sector conflicts over the Spanish government's wage control and restructuring policies in early 1987.
The scope for political exchange complicates the nature of bargaining in state enterprise industrial relations.
In addition to the conventional bilateral union-management negotiations of the private sector, both parties may be engaged in simultaneous bilateral negotiations with the political authorities.
This might be called ‘triangular’ bargaining, i.e. negotiations in which each of three parties deals bilaterally with the other two.
At times, triangular bargaining may be replaced or supplemented by ‘tripartite’ bargaining, that is where the three parties negotiate jointly.
There are two further complications that the logic of state enterprise suggests are likely to occur.
First, the fragmentation of the political authorities means that the unions may be negotiating separately with a number of different state agencies: for example, with the sponsoring ministry and the ministry for labour or employment.
Second, the political bargaining that accompanies the definition of  state enterprise objectives provides opportunities for alliances between groups within the state and outside it.
In such cases, management may seek alliances with its own unions in order to pursue courses of mutual interest within the state machinery.
Dudley and Richardson (1984), for example, describe joint campaigns involving several British nationalized industries to ease financial constraints, and to defeat attempts to introduce parliamentary auditing.
In the British coal industry, management and unions have fought for changes in energy policy (Robens 1972: chs. 9, 10) and more recently, a successful alliance of interests prevented the separate privatization of the gas corporation's retail showrooms (Tivey 1982: 46).
Conclusions: Some Elements of a Framework of Comparative Analysis for Industrial Relations in State Enterprises
This chapter has laid out some general elements for an understanding of the ‘logic’ of state enterprises in an era of increased commercialism.
The implications of that logic for industrial relations issues have been discussed.
These arguments together with those of chapter 2 on the role of the state provide a framework for understanding the consequences for industrial relations of the current economic crisis in the advanced capitalist countries, and suggest some dimensions of variation that may account for differences between different national systems.
In chapter 2 it was suggested that political responses to economic crisis were lagged and variable.
The same is true of political projects responding to the specific problems of the public sector and state enterprises, such as those that have emerged in Britain and Spain in recent years.
There have been general pressures towards greater ‘commercialism’ as a way of restructuring the public enterprise sector and of easing the problems of fiscal crisis.
Yet the extensive range of state objectives, their mutual contradictions and the way in which they are determined within a fractured state organization, leave ample scope for variation in both the content and timing of projects to ‘reform’ the role of state enterprises and to change the balance between political control and enterprise autonomy.
It has been argued that forms of control over state enterprises are inherently problematic.
This raises the issue of how political objectives are transmitted into the enterprise.
The British and Spanish cases will be examined in terms of the nature of transmission mechanisms.
These, on the arguments that have been put forward above, would be likely to vary according to the nature of the relationship of the state enterprise to other state agencies.
The effectiveness of formal control devices such as financial targets coupled with monitoring of performance is likely to be affected by institutional variables such as the quality of information produced and the arrangements made by controlling agencies to gain access to it.
But given the limitations on control devices discussed above, given the fragmentation of the state and the diversity of objectives, political bargaining or ‘exchange’ between enterprise actors and the state is likely to be a major method of transmitting state objectives to the public enterprise.
Variables such as the  degree of ‘distance’ between state enterprises and central state agencies, the internal coherence of management and unions, the ability to inflict costs on government, and conversely of government to bear the political costs of disruption, will affect the way objectives are transmitted; as will wider relationships between social classes and the state.
Transmission mechanisms are concerned with changing the way in which actors within the enterprise perceive the costs and benefits and calculate the balance of relative advantage associated with different courses of action.
But the issue is not simply one of ‘cross-boundary’ transmission from the state to the enterprise, but also of ‘intra-organizational’transmission.
For example, once strategic management has assimilated new objectives on the basis of a changed perception of costs and benefits, these objectives have to be promulgated within the organization.
This process will be influenced by variations in internal forms of planning and control.
On the other hand, transmission mechanisms may work by changing the perceptions of costs and benefits made at the ‘working level’ of management, and this in turn may create upward pressures in the organization for strategic management to bring its policies into line.
In certain circumstances, both downwards and upwards pressures may be at work at the same time.
Similar pressures apply to the relationship within the workforce between top level representatives, local activists and the ‘rank and file’(cf. Batstone et al.1984: part III; Terry and Ferner 1986).
Variations in intra-organizational transmission will reflect the internal composition of enterprise actors, their relationships with each other, and also the external relations of each with other parts of the state.
The industrial relations consequences associated with the reform of state enterprises are therefore doubly ambiguous.
First, there is scope for variation in the precise composition of the government's political strategy, granted the general pressure for cutbacks in labour costs and increased flexibility.
Second, once a strategy has been formulated, its impact on industrial relations in the enterprise depends on how it is transmitted into and down through the organization.
Indeed, its transmission is likely to be profoundly dependent on existing industrial relations practices and processes, since negotiation between management and workforce is central to the transmission and internalization of political objectives.
In the following chapters, these will form the principal themes in the examination of industrial relations in British and Spanish railways.
The Railways in Britain and Spain: An Overview
Introduction
This chapter applies the framework of chapter 3 to the specific case of the railways.
It provides an overview of British Rail and RENFE and the issues confronting them.
The first section outlines the main features of the British and Spanish networks.
The rest of the chapter explores broader issues of the historical development of the railway system in the two countries.
It briefly examines the legacy of private development during the nineteenth and earlier twentieth century and the nature of the pressures for taking the railways into state ownership, which are likely to influence the subsequent development of industrial relations.
It then considers the patterns of state-railway relationships since nationalization, particularly the conflicts between state control and enterprise autonomy, and the consequences of growing pressures for ‘commercial’ management of the railways.
The Railway Systems Compared
The Networks
The distinctive features of railway activities affect organization and management-workforce relations independently of the fact that in most countries of the world the major railway networks are owned and run by the state, and everywhere without exception they are subject to close state regulation.
The nature of railway transport, with heavy trains travelling at speed along fixed tracks between stations and terminals, dictates within broad limits the organization of railway work and creates requirements for specialized control systems.
In the words of Dunlop (1958: 20), the technological context of ‘railroads has many distinctive features affecting the relations of managers and workers: the  train operating divisions use small crews working together and in movement far from close and immediate supervision; complex and expensive equipment is utilized with a high ratio of capital to worker;…the costs of accidents can be consequential; the hours of operations for equipment may be around the clock, and they do not conform to normal factory schedules…’.
Similarly, Fontgalland (1984: 131) maintains that the ‘parameters influencing the internal organisation of a railway are continuity of operations; co-ordination of this with the management of an infrastructure used concurrently to supply two totally independent markets, passengers and goods; the large number and geographical dispersion of installations; and individual staff discipline in the matter of safety.’
Thus certain features of railway organization are universal.
For example, every railway has complex safety regulations containing an injunction to the effect that ‘every member of staff, whatever his rank, owes complete obedience to the signals’(Fontgalland 1984: 52).
The nature of railway operation gives rise to standard tasks and categories of work that are to be found in any railway administration: the staffing of trains; the control of their movement between points of the network; the running of stations, yards and other terminals; maintenance of the traction, rolling stock, and the permanent way.
TABLE 4.1
BR and RENFE: Network Comparison 1984
BR and RENFE are both among the major West European railways, although West Germany and France have considerably larger networks, higher traffic and more employees.
The main differences between BR and RENFE are summarized in table 4.1.
BR has a somewhat longer network, employs more than twice as many railway staff and carries considerably more passenger traffic than does RENFE.
Most of the British network is double track, while in Spain, four fifths of the network is single track.
However, the percentage of electrification in the Spanish system is much higher than in Britain and will remain so even after the completion of BR's current major electrification project on the East Coast Main Line.
In both networks, operations are organized on a geographical basis.
BR  has five regions, subdivided into ‘areas’, responsible for providing the rail services ‘contracted’ by the different business ‘sectors’(see below).
RENFE's operations are organized by seven geographical ‘zones’ which are in turn subdivided on a functional and geographical basis.
The Legacy of Historical Development
Both networks, and in particular the Spanish one, suffer the legacy of the age of private railway building during the nineteenth century.
The price of competitive development was overbuilding, which in other countries had been controlled by government regulation.
This was one cause of the severe financial problems of the railways in later years which led to increasing state intervention even before nationalization.
In Spain, linear state subsidies for building led to meandering lines (Carr 1982: 266) with the result that today, railway routes are often appreciably longer than the competing road route.
Increasing problems of indebtedness meant that railway development could not keep pace with changing population patterns.
In Spain this was particularly serious since the age of major railway building in the mid-nineteenth century preceded industrialization and the massive shifts in population and traffic that it was to bring, especially from the 1940s.
In Britain, by contrast, the ‘Railway Age’ occurred when the demographic patterns of the industrial revolution were already becoming clear and the main industrial centres well established.
In addition, one effect of the civil war of 1936–9 in Spain was considerable internal migration.
As a result, the major coastal population centres are now ill-served by what is still a predominantly radial network with lines emanating from Madrid in the centre of the country.
A further legacy of the financial difficulties of the Spanish companies was the failure to adapt the network to changing technological requirements.
Meandering of lines was compounded by steep gradients and curves (RENFE 1984a: 22), since tunnelling and bridging were costly.
The radial Spanish trunk network had to contend with one of the most difficult geographies in Europe, which means that most routes from Madrid to the coast have to cross at least one mountain range, while in Britain the major centres are connected across relatively easy terrain.
International connection is hampered by the use of a non-standard gauge of 1.67 metres (compared with normal international width of 1.44 metres).
The combined effect of these problems is currently felt in the Spanish railways' extremely low commercial speeds which greatly hamper competition with road and air transport.
For example, the main trunk services from Madrid to Bilbao, Barcelona and Seville have fastest average speeds of 80, 91 and 94 km per hour respectively, and in the early 1980s, the fastest long distance route, from Madrid to Valencia, achieved only 102 km per hour (RENFE 1984a: 24).
By contrast, BR's Intercity services attain much higher commercial speeds and, where High Speed Trains are used, average speeds may be over 160 km per hour.
Nationalization and Competition
In Britain and Spain the underlying financial weakness of the private railway companies, caused by lack of demand and later by increasing road competition, led first to increasing state intervention and then to nationalization.
RENFE  came into being in 1941.
BR's forerunner, the British Transport Commission (BTC), which ran the newly nationalized road haulage industry as well as the railways, began operations at the beginning of 1948.
In both countries the following decades were to be dominated by the issue of how to put the railways on a sound financial footing.
Once it was realized that financial self-sufficiency was no longer possible, the focus moved to forms of state control of the railway and the need for state resources to fund its deficit.
The main problem facing the railways was the inexorable growth of road competition.
Road haulage overtook rail as a carrier of freight in 1959 in Spain and in 1957 in Britain (by which time BTC no longer ran the road haulage industry).
Road passenger traffic exceeded rail traffic by the beginning of the 1950s in Britain, and by 1957 in Spain.
Thereafter, as in all other European railways, the share of railways in surface transport steadily declined, especially with the massive road building programmes of the 1950s and 1960s.
In 1969, nearly one third of Spain's freight and almost a quarter of Britain's still went by rail.
But, as table 4. 1 shows, by the early 1980s the railways' share of passenger traffic was well below 10 per cent in both countries, their share of freight traffic not that much higher.
And in Britain, freight's decline was absolute as well as relative.
Part of the growth of road transport reflected the political tolerance of what unions and rail pressure groups regarded as unfair competition.
In Britain, heavier lorries failed to pay an equitable share of the infrastructural costs of the road network while passenger transport was favoured by tax incentives for company cars equivalent to far more than the value of the annual rail subsidy (TEST 1984a; Potter and Cousins 1983; Bagwell 1984; ch. 1).
In Spain, a competitive framework that formally favoured rail was systematically infringed in practice as even the pro-deregulation 1962 World Bank report conceded (IBRD 1963: 173; El País, 18 September 1983, 10 October 1983).
The growth of competition put paid to repeated attempts by the railways and the political authorities to establish a financially viable railway.
During the 1950s, both railways hoped that major investment plans (BTC 1955; RENFE 1950; 1957m: ix) would allow them to modernize, reduce costs and attract sufficient traffic to break even.
Even in the mid-1960s, RENFE's revised statute (Decree Law 23-VII-64) embodied an expectation that the company would be able to dispense with state support: there were provisions for RENFE to pay back a portion of its gross income to the treasury.
But by the 1960s the emphasis was on the need to restore financial self-sufficiency through drastic pruning of the network.
In Britain, the Beeching Report on ‘Reshaping the Railways’(BRB 1963) led to a programme of closures and cutbacks that by 1968 had halved the number of stations, closed 8,000 km of route, halved the number of goods wagons and sharply reduced passenger services; by 1970, railway employment was less than half what it had been in 1963.
In Spain, however, the pressure of the World Bank on RENFE and the Spanish government to reduce the loss-making portions of the network (IBRD 1963: esp.
188) was largely ineffective, and at the beginning of the 1980s, the length of the network was slightly greater than it had been in 1964, despite proposals in the interim (usually tied to credit agreements with the World Bank) to consider for closure several thousand kilometres of route.
However, RENFE, like BR, did greatly reduce staff from the 1960s, largely as a result of technological modernization (see ch. 5).
Between 1962 and 1970, numbers were cut by a third, from 127,000 to 83,000.
This contributed to a temporary operating surplus between 1970 and 1974, though it was far from being able to fund investment and interest payments.
State Subsidy of the Railways
The long-term problem of the railways and the failure of earlier strategies to stem the tide of losses led to political awareness of the need for permanent state support and to steps, earlier in Britain than in Spain, to formalize the financial relationship between railways and the state.
In Britain, the Transport Act 1968 introduced subsidies for loss-making passenger services which the minister judged to be socially or economically desirable.
The system was unwieldy, since grant applications had to be submitted for some three hundred individual services, and there were problems in the calculations of costs and hence of the appropriate subsidy (Joy 1973: 127–31; Parker 1978: 7).
The Railway Act 1974 replaced the service-by-service approach with a block grant on the EEC model for ‘public service obligation’(PSO); support for metropolitan area rail services was also to be provided by the Passenger Transport Executives of the large metropolitan authorities.
According to a government minister at the time, the act recognized that the railways ‘are not a normal nationalized industry but a unique type of public corporation which exists to service social and environmental purposes as well as the economic needs’(Hansard, 24 June 1974).
Originally the ‘social railway’ encompassed the whole of the passenger service.
In 1977, however, it was decided that inter-city (as well as freight) rail services should not in principle be subsidized (Department of Transport 1977: chs. 6, 7), although in practice they continued to be.
In Spain, the principle of state financing of operating deficits was established in a 1954 law and enshrined in RENFE's 1964 statute, and a portion of RENFE's investment programme was financed directly through the general state budget.
RENFE repeatedly complained that deficit financing weakened management ‘which has not been motivated by economic or commercial considerations but purely by technical ones’(RENFE 1971m: 49).
Later, the company submitted provisional accounts showing forecast losses so that these could be included in the state budget.
But the budgetary credits finally approved tended to be substantially lower than those requested, and the state lagged increasingly behind in the settlement of the company's deficits.
In the words of a report of the ministry of economics and finance (cited in El País, 6 July 1983), ‘the losses that occur in practice tend to be higher even than those originally forecast because, among other reasons, of the increase in financial charges implied by the need to finance the lags in financial flows caused by insufficient budgetary provision’.
By 1982, the state's accumulated ‘debt’ with RENFE was rather more than the annual operating revenue (RENFE 1984a: 45).
RENFE's deficit, for reasons discussed in other chapters, exploded during the 1970s and the first half of the 1980s.
In real terms, it expanded by more than twelve times between 1973 and 1984, increasing from a low point of 0.16 per cent of GDP to 0.90 per cent.
It was only in 1984, with the entry of Spain into the EEC looming, that the principle of PSO grants calculated in advance was properly implemented for Spanish railways.
The grant was broken down for individual lines, as with the pre-1974 British system (RENFE 1984a: 55–7, 82).
Yet even the new system brought criticism that the budgeted grants were not in fact paid by the government (El País, 6 November 1985).
The Railway Deficit and State Control
As concern over state expenditure mounted, governments have looked for ways of cutting back the volume of support for the railways.
This process, characteristic of the whole of the public enterprise sector, occurred earlier in Britain than in Spain for reasons explained in previous chapters.
In both countries, optimistic expansion strategies fell victim to the harsher financial climate of the mid-1970s onwards.
BR's 1973 ‘Interim Rail Strategy’, which had initially received government approval, had proposed a doubling of the rate of investment up to 1981, and its impact was to be seen in the rise in staff numbers by nearly 6,000 during 1974–5, after years of virtually continuous decline.
In Spain, the concern with the public sector deficit put paid to the extremely ambitious ‘general railways plan’ of 1980.
The plan (see Guitart 1981; RENFE 1980m: 53–67) was expected to create 50,000 permanent new jobs and aimed to put RENFE on a par with the best European railways within a dozen years.
It failed to win government and parliamentary approval.
Perhaps surprisingly, the PSOE gave its approval in 1987 to another massive investment plan, the ‘railway transport plan’(PTF)(Trenes Hoy, May 1987).
It proposed expenditure of 2,100 billion pesetas (about £10 billion) by the end of the century on the modernization of the Spanish network.
But it differed from the earlier plan in its concentration on the inter-city and suburban commuter services for which there was high demand, and it was to be achieved with a falling labour force rather than an expanding one.
Moreover, by this time, a more rigorous framework of control was in place (see below).
There were also special political factors at work: in 1992 Spain was to host both the Olympic Games and celebrations for the 500th anniversary of the ‘discovery’ of the Americas, and an improved rail transport system was seen as essential.
But it remained to be seen whether the ambitious plan would withstand the impact of possible future austerity measures.
Both governments also attempted to control the financial demands of the railways by strengthening the framework of financial targets and constraints.
In Britain, successive revisions of the grant system had not brought financial stability and during the early 1970s BR showed major losses even after payment of the grant.
This led to the introduction of new controls.
Cash limits were imposed for the value of the PSO, external financing limits and total investment spending (MMC 1980: ch. 3).
In 1976, the government pegged the grant for future years to the 1975 level in real terms, while expecting a comparable service to be maintained.
The political priorities of the post-1979 Conservative government, focusing attention even more directly on the public enterprise sector and on BR, intensified  the financial pressures.
In 1983 BR, which was planning a gradual reduction in its PSO requirement, was asked by the transport minister to reduce it by a quarter within three years.
In 1986 the minister set BR the target of a further 25 per cent reduction by 1990.
The government also laid down target rates of return for the commercial sectors, that is freight, parcels and Intercity.
These objectives, however, proved vulnerable to external events, especially the disruption caused by the miners' strike of 1984–5, and the government was forced to revise them downwards.
In 1987 the target for the commercial sectors was a 2.7 per cent operating profit on net assets by 1990.
In Spain, RENFE has been set targets under the various modernization plans and international credit agreements to eliminate its operating deficit, and subsequently cover its depreciation costs and interest charges.
But it was only with the election of the PSOE in 1982 that a programme for braking the rise in RENFE's deficits was seriously implemented.
The condition of RENFE was seen by the new government as one of the most pressing problems that it had to face.
It found that the company's true deficit for 1982 was some 200 billion (CEFE 1984: 22), a sum equal to roughly 1 per cent of GDP, and that, unless it was checked, it could reach 400 billion pesetas or even higher by 1986.
The government's first priority was to impose discipline and reform RENFE's finances.
For the first time, detailed financial targets were set, under the 1984 programme contract between RENFE and the state (RENFE 1984a).
The contract consisted of a set of mutual commitments tied to precise targets over a three-year period.
It clearly defined the PSO payments, and committed the state to settling its accumulated debt with the company.
The contract included limits for external financing which had not been subject to overall control previously, and set RENFE a variety of financial objectives including a reduction in its call on state funds.
It also covered objectives on a wide range of physical and quality of service indicators, such as volume of traffic, physical productivity, and commercial speeds.
Programme contracts were also to govern the implementation of the 1987 rail transport plan.
These increasingly stringent financial targets, together with the need to finance investment largely from internal sources, have made the railway administrations look for ways to cut costs and increase efficiency.
At the same time, severe economic problems in both countries in recent years added to cost-cutting pressures by reducing traffic and revenues.
In BR's case at least, these pressures have been accompanied by government efforts to strengthen the competitive forces facing the railways.
The framework of regulation for the transport sector has been significantly loosened, especially by Conservative policy since 1979.
Increased maximum weights for ‘juggernaut’ lorries, competition from deregulated bus and coach services and the opening of new motorways, especially the London orbital M25, have posed major threats to BR's freight and long distance passenger traffic.
One indicator of the competitive climate was the loss of the Post Office's important parcels contract to road transport in the spring of 1986, and the subsequent loss of major newspaper contracts.
Since labour costs account for around 60 per cent of operating costs in BR and RENFE, these pressures for financial stringency and cost cutting have naturally  had a major impact on industrial relations in the two enterprises as later chapters will show.
But, as the arguments of chapter 3 suggest, the passage from government policies for reducing the deficit to concrete cost-cutting measures within the railway enterprises is complex and often beset with contradictions.
First, the relative autonomy of railway management means that the assessment of its performance by outside authorities is problematic.
This is compounded, second, by cross-cutting political objectives that conflict with the achievement of clear financial targets and make it difficult to hold management to account for its actions.
Third, even where priorities are clear and performance is relatively unambiguous, what sanctions are available in the event of ‘poor’ performance?
This raises a fourth question.
The railway organizations have complex internal structures that may impede the implementation of the state's objectives; transformations must take place in the strategies, organization and relationships of groups within the railway enterprises — both management and workforce — in order for external pressures to become effective.
In short, how is the cost-cutting imperative to be transmitted to and down through the railway organizations?
These issues are dealt with in the subsections that follow, though some of them naturally can only be dealt with fully in later chapters concerned with the details of industrial relations on the railways.
Ministerial Power, Managerial Autonomy and Control of Knowledge
The railways in both Britain and Spain are in theory governed by the principle of the autonomy of public enterprise management from the sources of political authority that formulate their objectives.
The alternative, of close integration of the railways into the central machinery of the state, has not proved suitable for the efficient conduct of complex productive activities; a Spanish experiment with direct ministerial control during the late 1950s (RENFE 1957m: vii, ix; IBRD 1963: 192–3) was shortlived, and the disadvantages of direct control have recently led the Italian government, for example, to remove the state railway from under the direct control of the transport ministry and endow it with an autonomous corporate structure (Railway Gazette International, December 1985: 926–7).
In both Britain and Spain the minister has statutory powers to approve budgets, plans and investment programmes, annual reports and accounts, overall price increases, and rail closures; to set the level of state support for the railways; and to make or confirm appointments to the board, including the chairman.
The British minister is also empowered to issue ‘general directions’ in the national interest, although this has rarely been used, or specific directions to the British Railways Board: for example in the interests of ‘national defence’, or to ‘discontinue any of their activities, dispose of any part of their undertaking, dispose of any assets held by them…’
(Transport Act 1962: section 27).
In Spain, the power of the government is represented, as in the French model, by ministerial delegates to the RENFE board, one for the treasury and one for the ministry of transport (before 1977 for the ministry of public works).
Managerial autonomy has been fostered by the growth of public sector commercialism based on the principle of allowing managements to operate freely within the framework of targets set for them by the state, and on the promotion  of an ‘entrepreneurial’ approach to the management of the railways.
Yet the strengthening of autonomy creates practical and conceptual difficulties of control and the transmission of state objectives.
The setting of targets and the control of performance depend on the political authorities having access to the relevant knowledge: the costs of services, the basis of investment appraisals and so on.
As was argued in chapter 3, this is problematic, and in the case of the railways it is especially so.
The central problem for the government is to determine the value of the subsidy to the ‘social’ railway, that is the services that would not exist or would be extremely highly priced without state support, and to set appropriate targets for the ‘commercial’railway.
There is, however, no simple way of fully dividing up total costs among the different parts of the railway, such as the provincial or suburban sectors in BR.
This is because only about 40 per cent of total costs are ‘specific’ to particular sectors; the rest represents facilities, such as track, signalling and administration, that are shared by the different sectors.
These costs vary only indirectly or not at all with changes in the level of traffic.
In recent years BR has been developing techniques for giving each of the business sectors responsibility for part of the network's infrastructure costs.
One sector is designated ‘prime user’ of a section of track, for example, and the other sectors only contribute to the extent that they cause additional ‘avoidable’costs.
However, this system was devised primarily as a means of internal management control over the business sectors, rather than as a guide to the allocation of the PSO grant.
An alternative approach, used on continental railways such as SNCF and RENFE, and on BR prior to 1974, is to allocate costs fully by ‘analytical’, that is arithmetical, accounting techniques based on traffic shares.
But ‘allocations to sectors based on measures of use have only the most tenuous relationship with cost generation’(MMC 1980: 27) and are essentially arbitrary.
The problem is compounded when attempts are made to find out the costs of individual services when subsidies are paid line-by-line, rather than for whole sectors; yet this is what RENFE's 1984 programme contract with the state claimed to achieve (RENFE 1984a: 80).
As a result there are areas of ambiguity in determining the value of state support for the railways.
It is not uncommon for the allocation of costs to be recalculated.
Ambiguities appear to be resolved through negotiation between railway management and the sponsor ministry.
In the days when BR's grant was allocated to over 300 individual services, a participant observed attempts to load some of the costs of main line services onto subsidized ones.
BR managers resisted probing by ministry officials of why a particular service operated in a particular way.
There was considerable leeway in deciding which services should be subsidized and the ‘right’ allocation would be determined by ‘talking it over between the railway managers and the official’(Joy 1973: 127–31).
Managerial control over information allows the railways to manipulate the public presentation of results to political effect.
For example, ministry officials and union leaders alike believed that RENFE deliberately gave overpessimistic forecasts so that actual results would be seen in a favourable light (Sanchez 1984; El País, 5 June 1984).
Constant changes in accounting criteria, for example in the allocation of items between operating and investment accounts, made it difficult for external controllers to calculate the true size of the deficit.
Observers believed that RENFE sometimes loaded items onto the capital account in order to reduce the apparent deficit, and sometimes did the reverse, boosting current costs in order to be able to get a higher grant from the state.
Yet the political authority was to an extent dependent on the company's sources of information, however suspect or inadequate they were seen to be; according to one civil servant interviewed, the PSO requirement was ‘basically calculated by taking on trust the figures which RENFE gave’.
The 1982 PSOE government tried to alleviate the problem of knowledge by placing senior government officials on the board of RENFE.
But the danger was that this would either interfere with managerial autonomy, or be ineffectual given the many other commitments of the appointees and the limited role of the board in decision-making.
Government appraisal of RENFE's investment proposals was similarly affected by the limitations of the information made available.
Under the 1977 law of the budget, state enterprises were required to submit an ‘action plan on investment and financing’ to an inter-ministerial committee on public investments.
But the action plan was merely a listing of the planned investments and control was little more than a bureaucratic formality, because of the notion that state enterprise management was autonomous.
In Britain too there was criticism of the ineffectiveness of ministerial checks on BR's investment projects, especially during the 1950s and 1960s (e.g. Joy 1973: 19; SCNI 1960: lxxxvii-viii).
The alternative to ‘taking things on trust’ was an excessive ministerial involvement in the detail of costing and investment appraisal (SCNI 1968: 177–8) and a subversion of managerial autonomy.
The Serpell committee argued that:
The Department has been deeply involved in the detailed examination of such projects as the programmes for the construction of new sleeper cars, electrical multiple units, and HST [High Speed Train]sets…
[I]t cannot be satisfactory for the Department to have to substitute its commercial judgment for the Board's in this way.
It blurs the lines of accountability and draws the Department deep into matters with which the industry should be competent to deal (Serpell 1983: 52).
Thus both the setting and the monitoring of performance of the railways in relation to the PSO grant, to investment programmes and to planning, are beset with problems of information.
In recent years governments, particularly the Conservatives in Britain, have tried to cut the Gordian knot by imposing cuts in state support and forcing the railways to adapt.
But unrealistic targets may be met by ‘creative accounting’: some railway managers have reported desperate attempts to stay within annual targets by, for example, cancelling trains to save overtime costs.
Moreover, efforts by the railways to make their internal planning more realistic may be thwarted, since plans are liable to arbitrary ministerial reduction.
But a further problem looms for control of the railways: what happens if targets are not met?
It will be argued below that management is provided with an alibi for poor performance by constant ad hoc ministerial interference.
Even if the case can be ‘proven’, however, the sanctions available to politicians when things go wrong may be limited.
The threat of bankruptcy and takeover is absent.
In theory, ministerial powers of appointment and dismissal can be used to  discipline management, but in practice the powers are not as great as they might seem.
As chapter 3 suggested, nationalized industry chairmen in Britain, on the rare occasions that they lose their positions, do so for political disagreements with ministers rather than through incompetent performance.
In Spain, turnover of chairmen of RENFE has been extremely rapid.
Since nationalization there have been 19, and their average period in office has been less than two-and-a-half years, half that of their British counterparts.
But this has nothing to do with the use of ministerial sanctions; it largely reflects the use of RENFE (as of other state enterprises) by aspiring politicians as a springboard to ministerial or other high office.
But the political authorities still of course have considerable power to control the railways.
At a fundamental level, they define the broad nature of the economic task that the railways must perform.
They also possess more subtle powers of political pressure and the use of persuasion.
Railways are politically very exposed because the service attracts so much public attention and because of the size of the state subsidy (e.g. SCNI 1968: 432).
Select committees in both countries frequently scrutinize the railways' behaviour and performance and hundreds of questions are asked in parliament about BR and RENFE: in 1966, for example, 550 questions were tabled in the British parliament and MPs addressed some 1,100 letters to the BRB chairman (BRB 1968: 160).
BR and RENFE are faced with powerful road lobbies with good access to the transport ministries, and with the pressures of user groups.
In the words of one politician, ‘given that the major public utilities are under constant political attack, it is in the interests of the chairmen to have the minister broadly defending the industry and not letting it be known in the ways the minister has at his disposal that he basically agrees with the critics’(fieldnotes).
Railway management is dependent on the minister ‘fighting its corner’ in battles in cabinet, especially over public expenditure, and in defending it before select committees.
Where major investment decisions, such as BR's electrification plan or RENFE's new investment plan, are pending, the minister may be in a strong bargaining position and be able to extract concessions from railway management in return for mustering support in cabinet.
While the power of dismissal may be of limited use, where the government has been able to appoint a new rail chairman, it has the opportunity to shape a management team more in tune with its thinking.
In BR, for example, the new chairman appointed by the transport minister in 1983 was considered to be more sympathetic than his predecessor to the government's objective of reducing financial support for the railways.
Ministers may also use committees of inquiry to place the railways under public scrutiny and help them to push through changes.
In Britain, BR has been investigated by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and by special inquiries such as the Serpell committee.
RENFE, according to one estimate, had seen some forty study commissions by the early 1980s (Nueva Empresa, no. 193, 15 October 1983), and a major commission of inquiry set up by the government reported in 1984 (CEFE 1984).
However, the railways are not passive recipients of such political pressure, but political actors and manipulators in their own right.
BR has defused critical scrutiny by skilful use of the media; for example, it was able to undermine criticisms in the Serpell report by focusing public  attention on the politically unacceptable options for a much reduced network.
In 1973, the board used the public outcry over leaked reports of proposed cuts in the network ‘to press for a higher level of investment, which they now thought they had a chance of being granted’(Pryke and Dodgson 1975: 23).
BR used press campaigns in the early 1980s to put the arguments for higher state support, basing its case on the higher subsidies of other European railways as a percentage of GNP.
It has also been adept at gaining support, for example for its electrification programme, by lobbying in parliament among MPs known to be interested in the rail sector, including the group of railway union-sponsored members.
In Spain, RENFE too keeps in touch with‘opinion formers’; the chairman will, for example , arrange meetings with the heads of major financial institutions to discuss the company's results.
Thus both sides have power resources which they may mobilize.
Government control depends on bargaining, rather than on formal sanctions that are generally ineffective.
Ministerial power is somewhat counterbalanced by railway management's control of internal information and by its own political resources.
In recent years, the Conservative government in Britain has increasingly been able to impose its agenda on the nationalized industries, including the railways.
This reflects complex changes in the relative power resources of government and enterprises that are described in later chapters.
Despite the growing assimilation by management of the new ‘rules of the game’, however, the distance between government objectives and enterprise behaviour remains.
Complex and Conflicting Objectives
Even with the advent of clear financial targets and greater ‘commercialism’, the continuing acknowledgement that the railway contains a major, if not predominant, ‘social’ element requiring continuous state support poses difficulties for state control.
The problem of establishing coherent, explicit and stable objectives for state enterprises applies with particular force to the railways.
Many of the ‘social’ or non-commercial objectives imposed on the railways by the state remain unacknowledged; they are not incorporated into calculations of state financial compensation and state control has thus been weakened since railway management has been given reasonable pretexts for failing to meet targets.
Moreover, the railways in both countries have served as instruments of broader macroeconomic goals such as price and wage control, employment stability and the health of the supplier industries.
In Britain prior to the 1968 Transport Act BR was, according to Joy (1973: 84–5), ‘working to a whole range of sub-goals, some imposed by the Government, others voluntarily assumed by BR, and all of which were in conflict with the basic break-even objective laid down by Parliament’.
The lack of clarity in government objectives meant that the criteria of government decisions often remained unclear to management.
This was particularly true of government approval of corporate plans during the 1970s.
Harris and Williams (1980: 129), writing with an insider's perspective, argue that no particular pattern was discernible in the rejection of proposals by government officials; rejection or acceptance seemed ‘very often to rely more on temporary political expediency than on any thought out policy’.
Thus planning became a ‘political patchwork based on the ‘art of the possible’‘.
These problems remained, even after objectives had been partially clarified and formalized through grant financing and stringent financial controls.
Objectives were still too diffuse to be encompassed within the scope of financial targets.
On the other hand, the growing emphasis on the achievement of targets could divert attention from the more substantive concerns of railway management with running a service to ‘meet the needs of industry and the public’, as BR's aims and objectives put it (BRB 1980r: 5).
Indeed, tighter financial targets increasingly conflicted with the consensual political decision to maintain a certain size of railway system.
BR complained that the result was likely to be deteriorating services, especially since there was simultaneous pressure to keep down tariffs, while BR's costs themselves were rising faster than the retail price index.
The corporation, and outside bodies such as the MMC, suggested that the government should define more closely the level and quality of rail services to be provided (BR 1979r: 5; MMC 1980).
In recent years, this particular conflict has become even sharper with government instructions to BR to reduce the PSO requirement drastically.
Cash limits have also led to underspending on investment ceilings (MMC 1980: 16–17), and real investment was falling sharply from 1980 (TEST 1984a: 32–5).
This affected BR's plans to reduce costs and increase traffic by renewing its ageing fleet and investing in modern High Speed Trains (see, e.g., SCT 1983: xvi), and was seen as making difficult the maintenance of even existing railway services.
The government (and the Serpell committee inquiry into railway finances) clearly believed that the circle could be squared by increases in efficiency.
As the Secretary of State for Transport told the chairman of BR in October 1983, ‘your guiding objective should be to run an efficient railway, providing good value for money.
Service to your customers should be reliable, attractive and punctual, at acceptable fares and charges; and the cost to the taxpayer should be reduced’(reprinted in MMC 1987: 257).
But the claims of the user organizations and of the trade unions were of declining standards and cuts in services ‘by stealth’.
The official railway ‘watchdog authority’, the Central Transport Consultative Committee, claimed to have amassed ‘a considerable amount of evidence of a direct link between a decline in some aspects of quality of service provided for passengers, and major reductions in government subsidy’(Financial Times (FT) 4 August 1987).
RENFE has experienced similar conflicts between maintaining the service, reducing its call upon state finances, and keeping prices low (e.g. CEFE 1983: 18).
(This has been intensified by the relative weakness of the financial framework of control until recently.)
For example, between 1973 and 1982 the retail price index rose 14 per cent more than freight tariffs and 32 per cent more than passenger fares; while short-term efforts to restrain the deficit, such as the 1984 programme contract, led, as in BR, to restraints on capital expenditure, jeopardizing longer-term possibilities of reducing the deficit by means of cost-saving and revenue-attracting investments.
Like BR, RENFE has been used to serve macroeconomic objectives, affecting the achievement of its own immediate goals in a manner not amenable to simple quantification.
Its view of itself as an instrument — and interpreter — of public policy (e.g. RENFE 1981m: 31) was reminiscent of BR's outlook until the 1960s.
Indeed, in the absence of clear definitions of its obligations and objectives, the company interpreted its public service task in a broad manner.
An internal management circular of 1980 talks of its role as an ‘element promoting Spanish development and stimulating employment’.
Its grandiose modernization plan of the early 1980s was presented as its contribution to the ‘struggle against unemployment’(RENFE 1982m: 9), and when in 1981 it negotiated with the unions an increase in staff of 7,000, the chairman defended the agreement as ‘an appropriate response to [RENFE's]public service task’(quoted in El País, 12 December 1981).
Its ‘public service’ role went well beyond that of BR's in two other respects.
First, RENFE was a strategic element in defence planning and, more importantly, in the military's contingencies for controlling the population and assuring internal ‘security’.
The transport of military equipment and troops had absolute priority on the railway network, and the military were determined opponents of programmes of line closures.
Second, RENFE in effect subsidized other sectors of the economy directly through so-called political prices, special low tariffs that were supposed to be compensated by the state but in practice were frequently not.
RENFE received compensation for some political prices, such as those used to support the Asturian coal mining industry.
But in addition government departments, notably the ministry of defence, enjoyed subsidized tariffs for their rail transport, and in some cases had large unpaid bills with RENFE amounting to many billions of pesetas; for many years RENFE carried the mail of the Spanish Post Office entirely without charge (IBRD 1963: 196).
Many commentators have urged governments to ‘define priorities among the ultimate objectives, frequently incompatible among themselves, that must govern the activity of public enterprises in general and of railway enterprises in particular’(CEFE 1984: 37).
This assumes that governments are willing to make all their objectives explicit, that they can specify them precisely, and that they are stable over time.
In fact, as we have argued, governments may have hidden agendas and their priorities may fluctuate according to political cycles.
Short-term electoral considerations such as the likely fate of marginal constituencies may determine decisions on issues such as line closures, for example(see Marsh 1978).
Government commitments, such as the 1984 programme contract with RENFE, may be very vulnerable to changes in the political and economic context.
The nature of representative politics may affect the continuity of policy.
Adversarial British economic policy-making (see Gamble and Walkland 1984) reduces the continuity of transport policies as governments change.
This pattern, which has also been a feature of aspects of Spanish policy-making since the return to democracy, contrasts with the relatively high degree of continuity, particularly on railway investment policy, of other countries.
As the TEST report on the European railways (1984a: 4) puts it, ‘it is interesting to see how apolitical continental European railway decisions often are.
The TGV system was introduced, and then authorised, within the Giscard presidency…
West Germany is also right of centre yet its rail investment plans are undiminished’.
The effect of adversary politics in Britain is intensified by the rapid turnover of government personnel.
Although there have been only five changes of  governing party in Britain since nationalization in 1948, there have been 21 transport ministers during that time, an average of one less than every two years.
In the unions' view, this is an indication of the low status attached to transport matters and hence to the transport portfolio within the government.
As well as reducing continuity, the rapid turnover also disrupts the bargaining relationship and understandings between the minister and the railway chairman; in the words of one respondent, each new minister had to be ‘taught in’ by railway management.
The clear definition of objectives is also impeded by the fragmentation of political authority that was discussed in chapter 3.
Policies that directly or indirectly impinge upon the objectives of the railways are formulated at a number of different sites within the state administration, and co-ordination between them is not always assured.
The independent agenda of the Spanish defence establishment, sometimes at odds with the policy objectives of the treasury and transport ministry, has been mentioned above.
While in theory the costs of the ministry of defence's demands on the railway system could be charged directly to it, in fact relations between parts of the state machine are governed by considerations of bargaining and relative power, rather than accounting clarity.
In Britain, the role of fragmented political authority in muddying the formation of objectives is illustrated by conflicts within the present Conservative government over BR's electrification plans, with close advisers of the Prime Minister, and according to some accounts the Treasury, undermining the efforts of the Department of Transport to secure cabinet approval.
This led the government, in the words of one senior manager, repeatedly to ‘move the goalposts’, in other words to change the criteria that BR had to meet for electrification schemes to be approved.
More generally, British transport policy itself is more fragmented and less coordinated than in other European countries, such as West Germany and France, which stress ‘intermodal’ planning.
For example, railway investments are not evaluated using the same cost-benefit techniques that are used in road planning, despite recommendations that this should be done (see, e.g., Leitch 1977).
This is likely to provide a further obstacle to clear and stable objectives for rail transport.
Fragmentation has also been a feature of Spanish transport policy, although the PSOE has been attempting to co-ordinate planning, establish a consistent competitive framework and draw up standardized criteria for investment in different modes.
Ad Hoc Government Intervention
The difficulty in defining coherent and stable goals has meant that in practice priorities among competing demands on the railways have frequently been established by ad hoc government intervention.
But these priorities have been predominantly short-term and fluctuating and often in open contradiction with the formal longer-term objectives of the railways.
Intervention also occurs because of the difficulty for the controlling authorities in finding out what is going on within the company and ensuring that policies are implemented in practice.
In the early 1960s, the World Bank report on Spain referred to the ‘constant interference by the State in the detailed administration of the railway system’(IBRD 1963: 192).
Indeed, as mentioned above, the railways were for some years under the direct control of the sponsor ministry (at that time the ministry of public works).
Two decades after the World Bank report, another commission of inquiry was complaining that the state ‘interferes excessively in the running of the [railway]companies, without that resulting in the clarification of the objectives that they should pursue or in exercise of effective control over them’(CEFE 1984: 33).
In Britain, too, observers have noted instances of direct government interference in the day-to-day running of the railways stretching back to the early days of nationalization.
Indeed, some participants have seen this interference as legitimate and necessary.
As a former transport minister, Barbara Castle, expressed it,
One's relationship with the nationalised transport industries must be a very close one because there is a continuing interaction between one's economic and social purposes and their own operating requirements and policies…
Transport has so many social implications of one kind or another that there can never be an arm's length relationship…
The minister could never say to the board, ‘right, now you have a logical remit, go away and fulfil it and so long as your rate of return is what it ought to be, we will not interfere’(SCNI 1968: 431, 434–6).
There was of necessity a ‘grey area’, and in this zone, BR and the sponsor ministry were habitually unable to agree ‘where the dividing line lies between each other 's responsibilities’(NEDO 1976: 38).
In both countries, the concern with the political and economic effects of price increases has led governments to intervene on tariffs.
The intervention has taken the form of more or less open ministerial arm-twisting rather than the invoking of statutory powers.
One case in the mid-1950s prompted a student of British nationalized industries to comment that it was a ‘particularly flagrant example of ministerial intervention because the Minister overrode the statutory duty of the Transport Commission to pay their way…’
(Robson 1962: 154).
But, from the perspective of this study the most significant area of state intervention is industrial relations.
Industrial relations in the railways have an impact on central macroeconomic policy issues such as inflation, pay policy and employment, and on a wide range of other pressing political concerns such as industrial peace and the continuity of public transport services.
It is this combination of factors that has led to a stream of government interventions over pay determination, productivity and working practices, investment and closure decisions, and industrial conflict.
Even where they are not directly linked to major matters of public policy, industrial relations may have a political resonance far beyond their apparent importance, entering the terrain of political symbolism: as exemplified perhaps by the gesture of Franco in intervening to prevent the closure of a railway workshop in Andalucía (Sur, 30 March 1968).
Cost-Cutting Pressures and Internal Organization
Government objectives, we have argued, are transmitted to the railways through bargaining relationships between the political controllers and railway management, rather than being directly and automatically imposed.
Transmission  depends not only on the external relations of the railway administrations with the government, but also on their internal structure.
New and more stringent financial constraints and other commercial pressures on management required appropriate organizational channels through which to take effect.
Both BR and RENFE, in common with railways elsewhere (Bouley 1985), have stressed the new ‘reality of competition’ and the need ‘to shift the emphasis from ‘running a railway’to providing a value for money service to the customer' (BRB 1985r: 5); in these conditions, it was ‘the market that has to give the orders’(RENFE chairman, cited in El Nuevo Lunes, 16 December 1985).
But traditionally neither has had an organization capable of responding to commercial pressures.
In BR, commercialism has led to radical organizational change.
The old system consisted of functional responsibilities, for activities such as engineering, superimposed on a geographical structure of regions, divisions (until the early 1980s) and areas.
According to the BR chairman, it was production led and cost conscious, but not motivated to bring income, expenditure and price into an optimum relationship…perhaps most significant of all, it was difficult to respond to government pressure to improve business performance without being able to identify the source and scope of costs incurred in providing uneconomic passenger services for which a revenue support public service obligation (PSO) grant is paid (Reid 1984: 258).
From 1982, a new structure was put into place, based on five ‘business sectors’.
Three of these, freight, parcels and Intercity, were the commercial services of the railway.
The other two, making up the subsidized ‘social’ railway, were the commuter services in the south east of England, centred on the metropolis (Network South East), and rural and local services (the Provincial sector).
Each sector was made responsible for its net revenue results; previously, there had been no responsibility for overall profit and loss below the level of the chief executive.
BR's corporate planning was reformed to fit in with the new structure by devolving responsibility for planning largely to the five businesses and by developing ‘action plans’ to commit lower level management to business objectives (Heath 1984: 221).
But the nature of the relationship between railway and government made internal reform of this kind problematic.
Planning in the railways has traditionally had an important political dimension that has sometimes been at odds with its use as an internal business tool.
Its role has been ‘to provide reassurance to the government, to give support to policies which BR wish to pursue, to provide briefing material for Department of Transport Ministers in argument and negotiations with ministerial colleagues, and to provide an atmosphere of professionalism and control over the business which governments — and the public — expect’(Heath 1984: 221).
The recent technical improvements in BR planning (Allen and Williams 1985: 92–6) are unlikely to eliminate political influences; indeed, as already noted, the effectiveness of action plans may be undermined by subsequent government alteration of planning objectives.
Moreover, the reform process itself is part of the currency of political debate.
Ministers are enabled to defend BR's interests by arguing  that its planning is now more ‘realistic’ and ‘professional’, rather than‘over-optimistic’(see, e.g., Serpell 1983: 51), and the entrepreneurial language of the ‘bottom line’and ‘value-for-money’enters the processes of political exchange and bargaining between politicians, civil servants and corporate actors.
RENFE, like BR, had, in the words of a Spanish government official, ‘not been at all concerned with capturing customers and markets, it was more a question of waiting for people to come and request its service’(fieldnotes).
It had traditionally lacked a commercial ideology.
Managerial pronouncements contrast sharply with those of their British counterparts in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Justifying the railway deficit in 1980, for example, the chairman maintained that ‘no one would think of talking of the deficit of the armed forces or of the fact that our state educational establishments show a deficit…’
(Cinco Días, 19 December 1980).
The company's structure was very hierarchical, centralized and dominated by the functional departments, on the French model.
Unlike BR, RENFE management was also politicized to a considerable degree.
Under the dictatorship, senior managers often had close connections with Francoist notables, while many technical and professional staff, as well as blue-collar railway workers, had fought in the civil war on the nationalist side against the Republic.
The influence of the Opus Dei lay catholic movement, whose members dominated Francoist economic policy for a time from the late 1950s, was particularly strong in RENFE.
When democracy returned, the chairmanship was used to reward political services and to advance careers.
In the words of the new Socialist minister of transport, RENFE was ‘at the same time a breeding ground and nursery for training ministers who then went into the government, and an elephant's graveyard for those leaving the government’(quoted in El Nuevo Lunes, 24–30 January 1983).
From 1985 RENFE planned to introduce a new structure more suited to the demands government was making on it, based on what they saw as the ‘Anglo-Saxon’ model.
The commercial function had previously been subordinate to operations, and according to a manager involved, its philosophy was ‘to sell what the operating departments produced’.
The commercial function now became the focus of the organization.
It was organized into twelve different product groups, four for passenger services and eight for freight, each with responsibility for its results and control over pricing, planning and investment decisions.
However, at the time of writing it is not clear how the new structure will work in practice, especially since RENFE's systems for determining costs of services appear to be less advanced than those used by BR.
Moreover, many in RENFE were profoundly sceptical of organizational reform.
Each new chairman, as the PSOE's transport policy document complained, brought with him a ‘cascade of appointments and political reorganisations’ in the company (PSOE 1981: 62), so that superficially at least RENFE was in constant upheaval.
This ‘affected primarily the redistribution of personnel at higher levels without reaching the heart of the problems…and…often resulted in incoherencies, contradictions and duplications’(CEFE 1984: 59).
A company of RENFE's size was, moreover, incapable of assimilating successive reorganizations.
As a result, a state of flux coexisted with ‘an excessive rigidity, a pronounced level of centralisation, a very numerous senior management group  and a bureaucratised mode of operation…’(59).
By contrast, the relative stability of organization in BR allowed major changes to be digested and implemented throughout the organization.
A further complication in RENFE was the continuing politicization of appointments under the PSOE.
The PSOE government at first tried to break the pattern by appointing a ‘professional’ businessman to the chairmanship in 1983, and by purging those who had come to RENFE as a result of their political connections with earlier governments (see Diario 16, 4, 5 February 1983); about twenty people who had held senior posts in the previous UCD administration were on RENFE's pay roll when the PSOE came to power (Cinco Días, 2 November 1983).
However, securing organizational change and a move to more entrepreneurial strategies demanded more than ever political skills and access to political resources, and this led to a reversion to earlier patterns with the appointment in 1985 of a chairman closely linked to the PSOE.
As in the past, he filled some key managerial positions with ‘hombres de su confianza’, men who had his confidence and trust and who were also holders of PSOE membership cards (see, e.g., El País, 22 November 1985).
Conclusions
This chapter has explored the consequences of the railways' 'relative autonomy' within the state at a time of economic crisis and increased political concern with public expenditure.
Two broad tendencies are at work.
The first, linked to the fiscal crisis of the state, is the growing effort of governments to control the railways' demands on the public exchequer by encouraging more commercial behaviour and imposing a framework of financial targets and constraints.
But this tendency, which increases managerial autonomy within prescribed limits, intermeshes with a second, more constant characteristic of the relationship between railways and the state: the tension between autonomy and control.
Objectives remain complex, diffuse, changing.
Priorities are not always easy to ascertain, even when government objectives are relatively clear.
This leads to ad hoc government intervention which in turn may undermine the consistency and stability of objectives still further.
In practice, priorities have to be established on a shifting, provisional basis through constant political bargaining between enterprise management, civil servants and politicians.
Even with greater commercialism and managerial autonomy, government intervention persists, partly because the drive to greater efficiency and economy in the public sector is a political process.
Governments may intervene in the railways in a way that undermines managerial autonomy and responsibility, but which makes sense from the point of view of political symbols and messages about productivity and efficiency; this will become clearer from the case studies in later chapters.
The processes that we have described were broadly similar in BR and RENFE.
In both cases, political programmes crystallized around the idea of rationalization, cost cutting and improved use of resources on the railways.
This contrasted with the more expansionary programmes of France, West Germany  and Italy; programmes which have been modified but not extinguished by the economic recession and the concern with state expenditure.
In these three countries, for example, major new high speed passenger lines are being constructed, and the level of state support as a percentage of GNP is considerably higher than in Britain or Spain (BRB/Leeds 1980; Nash 1985a).
In both countries, the nature of managerial autonomy and the existence of an internal organizational structure and interests poses problems of transmission which the state has attempted to solve by a variety of overlapping mechanisms: statutory and financial frameworks, the invocation of market forces, the creation of political pressures, political bargaining and exchange, and direct intervention.
Their aim has been to alter the way in which management perceives its interests, calculates costs and benefits, and establishes objectives.
The timing of the political programme was significantly different in Britain and Spain, however, reflecting the different ways in which economic forces have become translated into political strategies and ideologies in the two countries.
Most notably, the Spanish strategy was being implemented by a modernizing, socially reformist government, while in Britain the increasing pressures on the railways in recent years have come from a radical Conservative government hostile to the public sector in principle.
The Spanish railway ‘crisis’ was considerably more acute than the British, reflecting the interconnected factors of the lag in forming a political response to economic crisis, and the forces unleashed by Spain's transition to democracy.
The relative tardiness of the political response to the railway question in Spain meant that the formal framework of relationships was less developed than in Britain and thus the general problem of unclear objectives was more severe.
The bargaining relationship between the railways and the state could be expected to show different patterns in the two countries.
In Britain, the ethos of professional, arm's-length management of nationalized industries, including the railways, meant that politicization primarily affected the boundary between the board and the political authority.
In RENFE, by contrast, political manoeuvring was internalized within the organization, so that the management process itself was politicized.
The difference in the political context meant that the formulation and transmission of government objectives took on different forms and involved different actors in the two cases, most notably where the unions were concerned, as we shall see.
And the different dynamics of RENFE and BR as organizations, reflecting, for example, the very different ways in which each internalized political pressure, affected the way in which government objectives were construed and implemented within them.
The following chapters will illustrate these processes as they affected — and were affected by — the characteristic industrial relations of the two railway administrations.
Industrial Relations in BR and RENFE — Institutions and Actors
Introduction
The growing pressures on the railways for cost-cutting and rationalization have had profound consequences for industrial relations.
Railway managements have devised new labour strategies, and at the same time, other organizational changes in response to commercialism have had their own specific impact on industrial relations.
The ensuing changes have not taken place in a vacuum, but have had to take account of existing industrial relations institutions and practices.
For example, the formal machinery of collective bargaining, and the ‘culture’ of industrial relations that builds up around it, acts as a filter through which external pressures for change must pass.
The same is true of the organization, strategies, and interrelationships of the railway unions.
In this chapter, therefore, the existing patterns and institutions of industrial relations in BR and RENFE are examined, beginning with a description of the workforce and the unions in the two companies.
The Workforce and Patterns of Employment
Over the last three or four decades, BR and RENFE have had, in common with other major railways (with the notable exception of Italy), a steadily declining workforce (see table 5.1).
This fall largely reflects the technical modernization of the network, particularly the replacement of steam locomotives by diesel and electric, the introduction of power signalling and automatic level crossings, and mechanization of work on the permanent way.
In the British case, the fall has been compounded by cutbacks in the network of rural and provincial services from the 1960s under the Beeching strategy for ‘reshaping the railways’(BRB 1963).
This led to an especially sharp decline during the 1960s, from over half a million to well under 300,000.
The rationalization of remaining services, for example, the withdrawal from wagonload freight traffic and the related reduction in marshalling yards, has permitted a continuing steady fall in numbers.
In RENFE the pruning of little-used rural services has only just begun.
As a result, the fall in numbers has been slower, though still considerable: from a high point of nearly 140,000 during the 1950s, the workforce had fallen to 74,000 in 1984.
Unlike BR, where the decline has been virtually continuous, numbers in RENFE were more or less static between the mid-1970s and 1984.
This pause in the decline was a reflection of the influences of the transition to democracy in RENFE, especially the rapid reduction of the working week from 48 hours in 1976 to 40 hours in 1984.
Thereafter numbers fell sharply, showing the impact of the programme contract between RENFE and the government.
In three years, the workforce was cut by about 11,000.
TABLE 5.1
Employment in BR and RENFE 1950–1987
These changes have led to significant increases in labour productivity on the railways, despite the falling tendency of rail traffic.
The major increases took  place during the 1960s, but especially in BR with its steady job losses, the trend has continued (see table 5.2).
The nature of railway operations, revolving round the movement of passenger and freight trains along a network of tracks between stations and terminals, gives rise to the characteristic categories of railway work: the upkeep of the permanent way and its associated bridges, embankments, tunnels, overhead line equipment and so on; the maintenance of rolling stock and locomotives; the crewing of trains; the control of their movements by signalling etc.; the staffing of stations, depots and terminals.
The breakdown of these main categories of staff, together with administrative and other groups, is given in table 5.3.
Railway work is governed by complex rules and regulations stemming from the safety and technical requirements of operating the railway network.
It has also generated a wide variety of specific, untransferable skills among train crews, signalling staff, maintenance workers and so on.
Railway employment has, for the individual, been marked by great stability — it has traditionally been ‘a job for life’.
Compulsory redundancies have been rare (a major exception being the recent closures and cutbacks in the BR workshops subsidiary, British Rail Engineering Ltd).
An indication of this is the high average length of service of BR and RENFE employees.
In 1983, for example, the average length of service of RENFE workers was over 20 years.
Thirty-eight per cent of the workforce had been in the company for 32 years or more and 55 per cent of them were 50 years old or over (RENFE 1984b: 160–1).
These characteristics have engendered an ‘enclosed order of railwaymen’(Gourvish 1986: 577), with a strong loyalty, discipline and dedication to the railway among all groups of employees.
TABLE 5.2
BR and RENFE: Traffic Units (Passenger Kilometres + Freight Ton Kilometres) per Railway Employee 1960–87 (000's)
TABLE 5.3
BR and RENFE: Breakdown of Employment by Categories 1986
As Murdoch (1986: 25–6) notes, the railway labour market in Britain corresponds closely to Burawoy's (1979) description of the ‘pure’ internal labour market; the same point applies equally to Spanish railways.
Thus priority is given to existing employees in the allocation of individuals to posts, and entry points to the system are at the lowest level of any particular hierarchy.
In the case of a totally sealed labour market, new employees would only be drawn from the families of existing staff, and efforts would be made to ensure that individuals did not seek places outside the firm.
Although the  railways do not approach this extreme position, there is a strong element of family recruitment in both BR and RENFE.
According to a survey carried out in RENFE in 1984, for example, some 64 per cent of respondents claimed to be children of employees and 14 per cent to be grandchildren of railway workers (Encinas 1986: 53).
In BR, Robbins (1986) found that vacancies for the entry grade to the train drivers' (‘footplate’) line of promotion were still advertised only through internal channels.
The different occupational categories of railway worker have, to a greater or lesser extent, occupational hierarchies up which they proceed, during a lifetime's work on the railways, by a combination of aptitude and seniority, with the latter predominating.
Transfer between hierarchies is a complex procedure, often raising tricky questions concerning the loss or preservation of seniority rights.
In the extreme case of train drivers, there is no transfer into the hierarchy above the entry grade.
In both British and Spanish railways, these features of the occupational structure, closely guarded by the trade unions (see below), have meant that despite equal opportunities legislation, there is still a virtual absence of female employees among groups of workers such as train drivers, permanent way, workshop or signalling staff (on BR, see Robbins 1986).
Workforce Representation: The Unions in BR and RENFE
There are a number of important differences in the organization of trade unions in BR and RENFE.
The origins of British railway unions go back more than a century (Bagwell 1963; McKillop 1950; Murphy 1980), although it was only in 1911 that the unions won recognition, with the help of government intervention, from the railway companies.
As will be seen below, the unions' long and uninterrupted development contrasts with the fractured history of the Spanish railway unions.
There are currently three main unions in BR.
The largest is the National Union of Railwaymen (NUR) with about 90,000 members in BR.
It was formed in 1913 out of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, together with the General Railway Workers' Union and the United Pointsmen's and Signalmen's Society (Bagwell 1963).
Given its origins, the NUR saw itself as an industrial union; originally it organized most groups of BR workers, and it continues to be recognized by BR as representing all grades of staff other than management.
But it has become increasingly confined to manual staff other than footplate, and there has been a trend towards sectional, occupationally-based unionism in BR (Streeck et al.1981).
The principal union for train drivers and other footplate staff is the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen (ASLEF).
ASLEF started life as a breakaway from the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants in the 1880s and it retained its autonomy during the process of amalgamations that led to the formation of the NUR.
ASLEF now has a membership of about 20,000 in the railways, and the overwhelming majority of footplate staff are members of it.
Although the NUR still has some members among drivers, it agreed in 1983 that it would stop recruiting them.
The main white-collar union is the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association (TSSA), formerly the Railway Clerks' Association, with about 32,000 members in BR.
It competes with the NUR for the recruitment of clerical and supervisory staff, and now also includes many managerial staff.
A small union, the British Transport Officers Guild (BTOG), has joint recognition with TSSA for management grades.
In the mid-1980s it became part of the electricians' union the EEPTU.
Finally, the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions has joint recognition with railway unions for workshops engineering activities.
Breakaway unions have occasionally arisen, notably the Union of Railway Signalmen from the 1920s.
More recently, the Federation of Professional Railway Staff, created in the wake of the national strikes of 1982, was estimated to have some 1,600 members in 1987 (MMC 1987: 69).
But these unions have not been recognised by BR for negotiating purposes and their impact has been limited.
Although the activities of the three major BR unions are not confined to the railways, railway employees form the large majority of their membership.
Thus 78 per cent of the NUR's membership, 91 per cent of ASLEF, and 65 per cent of TSSA are in BR (Pendleton 1986: 91).
Their membership in sectors such as hotels, shipping, ports, buses and road haulage, usually reflects the historical association of these sectors with British Rail and before that with the British  Transport Commission.
They also have substantial membership in London Regional Transport.
BR's unions, in common with those of many British public sector organizations, have a very high membership rate.
Even during the 1920s and 1930s, density never fell below 50 per cent.
Since nationalization, it has been at least 80 per cent(Bain and Price 1983).
After 1970, the operation of union membership agreements pushed overall membership consistently above 90 per cent, and for some grades such as train drivers, unionization has been virtually total.
Since 1980, the membership agreements have been weakened by the Conservative government's trade union legislation.
In 1985, BR announced that it was withdrawing from existing agreements with the unions, although it seemed unlikely that this would seriously reduce the level of unionization.
The BR unions share the relative ideological homogeneity of the British labour movement as a whole.
All three major rail unions are affiliated to the Trades Union Congress and the Labour party, and the NUR in particular has a long tradition of sponsoring Labour MPs (Bagwell 1982: ch. 12), ‘equalled only by the miners’ union' (Eaton and Gill 1981: 41).
Thus the ideological conflicts of the kind that have characterized the union movement in Spain (see below) and elsewhere in Europe are almost entirely absent.
Instead, inter-union conflict in BR has been restricted to issues of occupational interests and representation (Bagwell 1982: ch. 12).
In recent years, the major underlying conflict, stoked up by personality clashes between union leaders, has been between the industrial union ethos of the NUR and the continuing craft aspirations of ASLEF.
This has repeatedly led to clashes over such questions as differentials, with ASLEF attempting to protect the elite status of its members.
Declining membership and the prospect of further job losses have raised the question of ASLEF's financial viability, and its future as a separate organization.
Moreover, changes in technology, notably the end of steam traction and more sophisticated technical aids for drivers, have called into question the exclusive craft character of drivers' skills.
The NUR has traditionally advocated a single union for railway workers, but this has been strongly resisted by ASLEF.
With improved personal relationships, however, steps have been taken in the last few years towards closer links.
In 1983, the two unions finally established a loose ‘railway federation’(which TSSA declined to join), and they subsequently worked in close co-ordination in areas such as the presentation of annual pay claims and a programme of opposition to cuts in services.
RENFE's unions differ in three main ways from those of BR.
In the first place, the two major railway unions  are part of wider union federations and confederations, the Unión General de Trabajadores (UGT) and the Comisiones Obreras (CCOO), respectively.
The Spanish unions are profoundly divided along ideological lines.
The UGT confederation is a socialist union with close historical and organizational ties to the PSOE that go back about a century.
The early railway unions that emerged during the 1890s were generally socialist in orientation, although in a few cases they were anarcho-syndicalist.
During the 1930s the UGT railway union was in the vanguard of the Spanish labour movement and had some 49,000 members.
Waged members of the PSOE are required to contribute a proportion of their income to the union.
A number of individuals  are prominent members of the governing bodies of both the union and the party, and some 40 union leaders, including the confederation's general secretary, were members of parliament in 1985.
Following the PSOE victory in the 1986 general elections, a senior member of the union, the confederal secretary for information, became Minister of Labour and Social Security.
The CCOO by contrast is closely associated with the Spanish Communist Party.
It emerged as a spontaneous, semi-clandestine, workplace-based movement in the early 1960s, often working through the existing Francoist vertical union and works council system.
In its early days it attracted support from a wide range of anti-Francoist groups, including Catholic workers' organizations, but subsequently it came increasingly under the control of the communist party.
In RENFE, the severity of the repression under the dictatorship largely stifled the emergence of an independent union organization.
But communist and other militants were active, especially in the railway workshops, and during the 1960s they managed to organize industrial action, put up their own candidates for elections within the vertical union framework, and published a sporadic newssheet (Martino de Jugo 1980; Bulnes 1967).
The CCOO railway union was formally established in 1977.
On the restoration of democracy and of union rights, the CCOO went through a process of institutionalization, establishing a federal and confederal structure similar to that of the UGT.
With the re-emergence of the UGT from its period of relative inactivity during Francoism (it had refused to participate in the vertical union system), the ideological divisions between the two unions became an important feature of the post-1975 Spanish labour movement.
These differences, which have largely supplanted the historical division between the socialist and anarcho-syndicalist traditions, were fully reflected at the level of the CCOO and UGT railway unions in RENFE.
The Spanish rail unions are members of their respective transport federations within the wider confederations.
This may affect their autonomy at least in terms of overall policy.
In the case of the UGT, for example, there appears to be a tendency towards greater federal control of the member unions.
The general secretary of the railway union is elected by the federal congress rather than by the railway delegates alone, and there is a growing concern to concentrate policy-making at federal level.
Both UGT and CCOO in RENFE generally respond to the broad political and strategic line of their respective federations and confederations.
In negotiations, the railway unions will often look to their federations and confederations to support their demands and to put additional pressure on management or on the administration.
Equally, however, the railway unions may be subject to pressure from higher levels to moderate their demands if these are seen to conflict with the union's national negotiating strategy.
In the words of one UGT leader,
on the one hand the transport federation and the confederation support the demands of the railway sector at the negotiating table, and on the other hand, let us say, they also call for prudence and moderation when they realise that these demands may not be achievable, and rather than lead people over the precipice and into more strikes that will not have positive  outcomes, they recommend the adoption of an approach based on increased dialogue and the moderation of demands.
The second major difference between RENFE's unions and those in BR is that the Spanish unions are not grade-based but compete across the board for membership.
There is no separate union for white-collar and management staff, and both unions organize well up the employment hierarchy.
The UGT includes relatively senior managers among its activists.
One of the major demands of the RENFE unions, achieved in 1984, was the inclusion of the 1,500 or so higher management staff within the scope of annual collective agreements.
Union competition for membership reflects the relatively unstable condition of union organization in Spain, which has been in a state of flux and development since the restoration of trade union rights.
The unions are still engaged in a struggle to establish themselves in the available ‘space’, a struggle that has very largely been resolved in the case of the BR unions where it was in any case mainly confined to representation of the footplate grades.
Nonetheless, CCOO has become the dominant union among certain occupational groups.
For example, in the mid-1980s it represented almost two-thirds of unionized traincrew staff, and the same proportion of staff in the workshops and on the permanent way.
The UGT, together with a smaller union, the Sindicato Libre Ferroviario (SLF) that merged with it in 1984, was predominant only among ‘movement’ staff (that is signalling and station staff handling the control and movement of trains), and among the scarcely unionized technical and managerial staff (Encinas 1986: 182).
However, in late 1986 a challenge emerged to the predominant pattern of unionization in the shape of a new grade-based union, the Sindicato Español de Maquinistas y Ayudantes Ferroviarios (SEMAF — Spanish Union of Train Drivers and Drivers' Assistants).
The union won 7 per cent of delegates in the 1986 union elections.
By late 1987 it claimed 3,200 of the 7,000 train driving staff, and was confident enough to launch paralysing one-day strikes in support of its demands.
The two major unions' struggle to establish themselves, together with the ideological differences between them, has led to repeated conflict, both at confederal level and within the railways.
Conflict has arisen over the unit of representation and forms of election to joint union committees within companies (see below), often reflecting national debates about union organization.
There have been frequent disagreements over the use of industrial action to bolster annual negotiations.
The UGT has on several occasions accused the CCOO of calling politically motivated strikes, aimed at disrupting the government's economic policy.
Conflict has also led to the UGT pursuing its own parallel negotiations with management, at times outside the formal negotiating structure.
The third major difference between BR and RENFE is that union density in the latter is very low by British standards, though high in the Spanish context where only an estimated 20 per cent of the wage-earning workforce were members of unions (Rijnen 1985: 235).
Total union membership in RENFE appears to be about 46 per cent of the workforce.
CCOO has about 17,000 members or 26 per cent of the workforce, and SLF-UGT 12–13,000 (of which something under 2,000 were brought into the union by the SLF).
A small  vestigial union, the Unión Sindical Obrera (USO), most of whose members had joined UGT in an earlier merger, had 700 members in the mid-1980s.
In 1986 the rump of USO also joined the UGT.
Industrial Relations in BR and RENFE: The Formal Machinery of Collective Bargaining
It is important to consider the institutional framework regulating relationships between employer and unions, since this will influence the way in which external political pressures for change are carried into the corporation.
The pre-existing structures of industrial relations shape and channel managerial response to external influences; and for that reason also themselves become the object of management's initiatives for reform.
This section will therefore describe the formal machinery of collective bargaining in BR and RENFE.
BR
Like other public corporations in Britain, BR has an elaborate formal machinery of consultation and negotiation.
The nationalization acts creating public corporations usually made it a statutory requirement for such machinery to be set up, although the form and details were left to the parties.
In the case of BR, the act merely sanctioned a lengthy historical tradition of formal industrial relations in the old private railway companies.
The Central and National Wages Boards, the precursors of the national level of the current machinery, were set up in 1920 and given statutory status in the Railways Act 1921.
The current machinery for the main railway grades was agreed in 1956.
Separate machineries exist for workshops, professional and technical staff, and for managerial staff.
The following description covers the main railway machinery, which applies to the great majority of railway employees in BR.
Negotiation BR's arrangements  make a clear formal distinction between negotiation and consultation.
The machinery of negotiation consists of a hierarchy of joint committees at workplace, regional and national levels.
The committees are composed of management and workforce representatives.
At the workplace level, that is in stations, depots, offices and so on, there are some 1600 ‘Local Departmental Committees’(LDCs) concerned with the details of local working and holiday arrangements, rosters, local seniority questions, health and safety and so on .
In footplate LDCs, one of the main activities has traditionally been the ‘scrutiny’ of alterations to work programmes or ‘diagrams’to ensure that they comply with agreements concerning continuous driving time, meal breaks, and so on.
According to the MMC (1980: 95), most of the drivers' LDCs on Southern Region spent almost all day every Thursday scrutinizing proposed alterations for the coming week.
This activity in the region amounted to a total of 6,000 paid days off in 1985–6 (MMC 1987: 70).
However, under the 1986 agreement on single manning of locomotives, footplate LDCs lost the right to scrutinize diagrams.
The staff representatives here as at other levels of the machinery must be members of the signatories to  the 1956 agreement, that is NUR, ASLEF and TSSA; union branches play no formal part in the LDCs, but in practice there are often close informal ties and overlapping membership (Edwards and Lloyd 1981).
In each of the five BR regions, there are four Sectional Councils covering broad occupational groups: footplate; ‘traffic’(i.e. guards, signalling, station and depot staff); other manual staff (permanent way, signals and telecommunications and overhead line staff); and salaried non-manual staff.
The Sectional Councils may reach agreements on matters affecting the region, and also, through a system of subcommittees, review a large volume of individual claims that have not been resolved at LDC level.
The great bulk of these items concern questions of grading, seniority and payments for rest day working (Anderson 1976).
At national level, there are two main tiers to the machinery.
It is in these that all agreements on pay, conditions of employment and working conditions are reached.
This highly centralized system reflects the view that the railways form an integrated network for which localized differences in terms and conditions would be inappropriate.
The Railway Staff Joint Council (RSJC) is organized, as at sectional council, according to occupational groups, with separate sections for footplate staff, other ‘conciliation’ grades (the term refers to the manual grades included in the original machinery established in the 1920s), and salaried staff.
A fourth section of the RSJC deals with general questions of interest to all three groups.
The RSJC has a dual function.
It is the final stage of machinery for ‘minor’ issues that have worked their way up the machinery from other levels, and the first stage for ‘major’issues such as proposed new staffing arrangements or working conditions affecting broad groups of staff throughout the railways.
The union side at this level is composed of senior officers and lay negotiators from the unions' national executive committees.
Management's team is made up of senior headquarters and regional industrial relations managers, together with functional specialists (for example representing ‘traction and train crew’).
The higher tier of the national level is the Railway Staff National Council (RSNC).
It deals with major negotiating items that have not been settled at the RSJC and in recent years has been the forum in which the unions present their annual pay claims.
The machinery also has a stage for voluntary arbitration through the Railway Staff National Tribunal (RSNT), composed of an agreed independent chairman and two other outside members, nominated by the unions and the BR board respectively.
The tribunal's main job is to give judgements (virtually always non-binding) on the interpretation of existing agreements, and on major items of negotiation not settled at the RSNC.
Reference to the tribunal has usually come from the unions, rather than from BR management.
Since 1948, there have been over 90 ‘decisions’ of the tribunal on questions such as annual pay claims, the length of the working week, bonus schemes and payments, and in recent years, changes in working practices.
Recourse has also been made to other external bodies outside the formal machinery of negotiation.
Such bodies as ACAS, the TUC, or ad hoc commissions of inquiry have intervened at the request of the parties or of government to avoid the breakdown of negotiations, or to resolve existing disputes.
Consultation The 1947 Transport Act refers to the promotion of measures on safety, health and welfare ‘and the discussion of other matters of mutual interest…including efficiency in the operation of the [British Transport]Commission's services’.
An elaborate structure of consultation has subsequently developed, in which major management decisions with implications for the staff, for example closure plans, service reductions or administrative reorganizations, are discussed at national level and then in greater detail in the regions and areas affected.
Unlike negotiation, consultation procedures do not generally allow disagreements to be referred up to higher levels of the machinery; once the formal consultation has taken place, management may implement its measures with or without agreement.
At national level, BRB and senior union leaders discussed corporate plans, business forecasts, financial performance, pricing, and major investment proposals at the British Railways Joint Consultative Council.
The Council's role was largely superseded by a new top level consultative body, the Rail Council, created in 1979 in response to the Labour government's promotion of industrial democracy in the nationalized industries.
The BR board chairman and his senior colleagues meet with union leaders to discuss a wide range of policy issues at an early stage.
BR hoped that the council would serve as a way of by-passing the cumbersome formal machinery and speed up new initiatives at a time of management efforts to increase productivity.
As will be seen later, it was used by management and unions in 1981 to make a joint approach to the Secretary of State for Transport to get more government support for the railways.
At regional and local level, consultation takes place within the Sectional Council and LDC structure.
Consultation items are placed on formally separate agendas, but in practice the distinction between consultation and negotiation is blurred and the relative strengths of the unions and management may determine the agenda on which a particular item is placed, especially at LDC level (see Edwards and Lloyd 1981: 21–5).
Consultation covers the way in which national programmes are to be introduced at these levels, and matters such as the efficiency of working arrangements, closure plans, staffing arrangements and relations with the public.
The machinery of negotiation and consultation in BR is striking in its extent and in the volume of business that it handles.
At LDC level, an extrapolation of the figures provided by Edwards and Lloyd (1981) suggests that there are something in the order of 14,000 local-level formal meetings a year.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC)(1980) found that in 1979 120,000 days were recorded as spent in negotiation and consultation by the staff side alone.
At sectional council, Anderson's study (1976) of one region reveals a workload of several hundred items a year.
Many items are small individual claims not settled at LDC.
Minor items may spend many years at the various stages before being settled.
At high levels of the machinery, the complexity of the structure creates lengthy delays in the processing of negotiating items, and the opportunities for procrastination (for example, in arranging meetings) are exploited by both management and unions to suit their purposes.
This complexity is partly the result of the ‘entrenched multi-unionism’(Pendleton 1986: ch. 4) which characterizes the machinery.
While the NUR represents less than 2 per cent of footplatemen, it is entitled to sit on the locomotive section of the RSJC.
Moreover, ‘a number of supervisors, footplate supervisors in particular, retain their original membership on promotion from wage grades, with the result that all three unions attend the salaried section (the RSJC (Salaried))’(1986: 93).
Management have consequently found it difficult to process new working practices and productivity measures through the machinery, while it in turn has sometimes delayed items to postpone their reaching the arbitration stage at the RSNT.
Alongside the formal structures, a network of informal relationships has grown up at all levels of the organization.
This helps to ensure the smooth working of the machinery by settling issues informally and clearly establishing areas of agreement and disagreement.
At national level, informal contacts have been important in maintaining long-term bargaining relationships, for example by ‘clarifying’ the signals sent out by union conferences, and indeed have been sometimes used in progressing major negotiating issues.
However, there is also a certain suspicion of informal bargaining, especially in ASLEF which has tended to advocate a strict constitutionalism with regard to the machinery.
RENFE
Unlike the BR machinery with its long historical roots, the RENFE system of negotiation is a recent development.
When the nationalists came to power in 1939, union organization in RENFE was systematically destroyed and republican supporters among the workforce were purged.
Thousands of workers lost their jobs, and the railways' staffing needs were met by an influx of combatants who had fought on the nationalist side in the civil war; a war that was commonly referred to by the victors, and indeed in RENFE documents of this period, as the ‘war of national liberation’.
Under the dictatorship, a hierarchical, authoritarian system of ‘vertical’ unions or ‘syndicates’, influenced by Fascist corporativist ideas, was established in Spain.
Each sector of economic activity had its own union to which all employees and employers belonged.
The movement as a whole, the ‘Organización Sindical’, remained under the control of a minister belonging to the Falangist tendency within the Francoist political coalition.
Senior union leaders, often powerful figures in the Francoist political system, were nominated from above, or chosen in elections under ministerial control.
Subsequently, a system of company councils and of union representatives was established as a vehicle for consultation and participation within the vertical system.
From the late 1950s, the pressures of economic development led to the ‘controlled liberalisation’(Fina and Hawkesworth 1984) of the system.
Elections for company councils were ‘democratized’ and a measure of collective bargaining was introduced.
Previously, collective bargaining had been prohibited, and wages and conditions had been determined by regulations issued by the ministry of labour.
The reforms were intended to contain developments such as the growth of wage drift in larger companies.
The introduction of bargaining and the capacity to negotiate collective agreements or ‘convenios’, although still closely controlled, gave the company councils a genuine industrial relations function for the first time and encouraged the workers' commissions' strategy of working through the official system and putting forward candidates to company council elections.
The success of this strategy led, despite a more  repressive turn from the later part of the 1960s, to the undermining from within of the formal Francoist system of labour regulation.
In RENFE, however, the developments of the 1960s had less impact.
Although some public enterprises, such as the state airline Iberia, were permitted to negotiate convenios from the mid-1960s, the pay and conditions of RENFE workers continued to be determined by ministry of labour directives.Extremely detailed ordinances covered every aspect of remuneration, working hours, staffing, recruitment, promotion, transfer and discipline.
The absence of even the controlled liberalization evident in other sectors of the economy appears to reflect RENFE's strategic position.
Military planning relied heavily on the rail network both for national defence and for maintaining internal control over the population in the event of civil unrest.
There were close links between the railway and the military, and military personnel played a role in RENFE management in the company's early years (Wais 1974: 664)(as indeed was the case in the British Transport Commission).
The links predated the Francoist regime; the army had long been responsible for the training of footplate, traffic and other staff who entered RENFE through military service (as they continued to do after the restoration of democracy).
Staff were thus subject to military law and discipline (Sartorius 1976) and the threat of militarization hung over them, although it was not actually used during the Franco period.
Discipline was enforced by the feared railways police, the so-called Railway Investigation Group of the guardia civil (Martino de Jugo 1980).
This climate severely limited the ability of opposition groups to mobilize within the existing vertical structure, although they did have some success in getting their candidates elected as workplace representatives and as members of the company council.
The council showed signs of being influenced by opposition demands, but it remained firmly in the hands of ‘officialist’ candidates.
On the whole, therefore, the machinery of collective bargaining was virtually non-existent in RENFE under Franco.
The death of Franco brought about a radical change in the institutions of industrial relations, in RENFE as in Spain as a whole.
In the immediate transition, industrial relations were in a state of flux as new forms of workforce representation emerged in a spontaneous way, with the semi-clandestine activists of the Francoist period playing a major role.
Until the abolition of the company council system, there was a sort of dual power structure in RENFE.
Management acknowledged the de facto authority of the so-called general plenum of representatives set up by opposition groups among the workforce (Martino de Jugo 1980: 202–4, El País, 3 November 1976).
The plenum won a labour amnesty for employees sacked by the nationalists after the civil war, and took the lead in negotiating the first collective agreement in 1976.
Thereafter, a formal machinery of collective bargaining was gradually set up.
The current machinery broadly follows the framework of collective bargaining laid down in the 1980 Workers' Statute.
Unlike BR with its three-tier system, RENFE has a two-tier structure.
The lower tier work centre committees operate at a level intermediate between workplace and zone (the RENFE equivalent of the BR region).
Each committee covers a major section of work within a  geographical area, linked to the activities of a broad management function, for example‘transport’(i.e. train crew, stations, signalboxes, etc.), ‘works and installations’(i.e. permanent way activities), offices and workshops.
The committees thus cover a far wider geographical and functional area than the LDC in BR.
There were 134 committees in 1984, composed of nearly 1,947 workforce representatives.
As with the LDCs, the committees are concerned with such issues as local establishments, rosters, overtime and holiday arrangements.
They are made up of representatives of the RENFE unions in proportion to the results obtained in the periodic union elections in which the whole workforce is entitled to participate.
The trend of the three elections that took place between 1978 and 1982 was for UGT to narrow the gap between itself and CCOO.
But the tendency was reversed in the 1986 elections which gave CCOO a clear majority of the votes (see table 5.4).
As in BR, there are fairly close, although informal, links between the local union branch or ‘section’, and the work centre committee.
At national level, negotiations are carried out between representatives of management and those of the joint union committee, the ‘comité general intercentros’(CGI).
The CGI nominates a negotiating committee to negotiate the annual (or bi-annual) convenios covering pay and a wide variety of conditions.
Between 1976 and 1987, there were seven collective agreements.
Between major negotiating rounds, a standing body of the CGI handles relations with management.
TABLE 5.4
Results in Union Elections in RENFE, 1978–86 — Percentage of Votes
In addition to the major annual negotiations covering pay and conditions for the workforce as a whole, there are national negotiations for different occupational groups such as drivers or station staff.
Agreements reached for these groups are incorporated into the convenio.
There are also a number of other national joint committees, covering appeals against disciplinary sanctions, health and safety and ‘social policy’.
Unlike BR, there is no provision within the machinery for independent arbitration.
In the event of deadlock in negotiations, there is a procedure for conciliation by the ministry of labour.
On two occasions, in 1980 and 1981, the failure of conciliation led the ministry to impose a binding settlement on the parties.
However, other less drastic methods of resolving  disagreements are available.
In 1984, for example, an external mediator was appointed following the breakdown of negotiations, and agreement reached under his auspices.
Traditional Patterns of Industrial Relations: Joint Regulation, Centralization and Conflict Avoidance
In both railways, the machinery has been the means by which the unions have come to exert a profound influence over the conduct of railway activities.
In BR especially, it has been the vehicle for the comprehensive internal regulation of railway affairs and for the resolution of both collective and individual conflicts.
This highlights perhaps the major difference between BR and RENFE in the way the machinery is used and the culture of industrial relations that has grown up around it: the handling of individual grievances.
In BR they are characteristically processed through the various stages of the machinery, in some cases up to RSJC level.
Despite the growing role of legal intervention in industrial relations as a result of the Conservative government's legislation, the recourse to legal remedies for individual grievances remains rare in Britain outside cases of unfair dismissal, redundancy, and racial and sexual discrimination.
By contrast, the pursuit of grievances through the legal route had traditionally been almost a way of life in RENFE.
The corporation's workforce is renowned for the phenomenon of ‘pleitismo’ which could be translated as litigiousness.
This was seen by critics (e.g. CEFE 1983: 27–33; 1984: 73) as a vestige of the Francoist past when the ‘objective’ protection of the law was important for the workforce in the absence of the ‘subjective’protection afforded by strong trade unions and collective bargaining.
An internal management machinery for the handling of individual grievances exists in RENFE (the procedure of ‘reclamación previa’, or prior claim, characteristic of the public administration), but time limits for application to the courts mean that many grievances are the subject of concurrent actions by employees in the labour courts.
There are thousands of such cases annually (the figure for 1983 was over 12,000), covering grading, overtime payments, and allowances for transfer, detachment and replacement at higher grade: the ‘classic and traditional subjects of litigation on the railways’, according to one industrial relations manager.
In recent years, by far the most important item has been individual demands for back payment of overtime earnings following court decisions on the method of calculating the hourly overtime rate.
The complexity, and at times the ambiguity, of the norms, regulations and negotiated agreements gives plenty of scope for legal action.
Indeed, one of the main sources of growth of the small SLF union following its foundation in 1981 was its willingness to take up the individual grievances of the workforce, very much in the tradition of the vertical union of the Franco era.
The law has also been used to pursue collective issues.
‘Collective conflicts’ under Spanish law are legal disputes over the interpretation of legal norms or clauses of collective agreements.
The use of legal paths of dispute settlement reflects the much greater role of legal regulation of labour relations in the  Spanish system than in Britain.
Substantive matters such as hours of work, overtime and shift working are covered by complex legislation that gives rise to legal battles over interpretation.
One of the most important areas of legal dispute in RENFE has been the calculation of overtime earnings, with matters taking several years to progress through the courts.
Such disputes in BR would most probably be settled by ultimate recourse to the Railway Staff National Tribunal.
RENFE management has also occasionally used the path of collective conflict, particularly to break a stalemate in negotiations.
In 1980, the procedure was a prelude to the obligatory pay award of the ministry of labour.
It is worth noting, too, that recent British labour legislation has led to an increasing use of the law in industrial disputes by BR management: notably to claim damages for industrial action carried out without a workforce ballot, and to obtain injunctions to prevent the NUR from blacking new equipment.
Beyond this difference in the scope and use of the machinery in the two companies, the pattern of industrial relations has shown some striking similarities.
In RENFE since 1976 and in BR over a far longer period, a wide range of agreements have been reached through the machinery, giving the unions influence over the determination of virtually all aspects of conditions of employment and work organization.
BR's conditions of service for conciliation staff run to some four hundred pages covering duties, hours, allowances, manning of trains, training, health and safety, and travel concessions.
The conditions are made up of a myriad of separate agreements, some going back to the 1920s.
A separate, major agreement regulates promotion, transfer between jobs and geographical areas, and redundancy arrangements.
The ‘PT&R Arrangements’ give the unions considerable control over the operation of BR's internal labour market.
The arrangements for train drivers, for example,
contain minute and complex detail of when, how and where a driver can be promoted, moved between depots or made redundant…
The system of advancement through the grades was (and is) tightly controlled, and was (and is) done strictly on the basis of seniority, and a driver is penalised if he breaks the chain: if his name is top of the list for promotion to a certain level, he is allowed to refuse such promotion twice (Murdoch 1986: 44; 30).
Thereafter a refusal will lead to the individual being expelled from the footplate line of promotion.
In RENFE, collective bargaining over the past decade or so has basically been a process of dismantling the framework of Francoist labour regulation and replacing it with a series of negotiated agreements.
The unions have thus been able to extend their influence over a comprehensive range of working arrangements, and to reduce the areas of sole managerial prerogative.
A number of the gains made by the unions are the direct result of changes in the labour legislation; for example, as noted above, the regular working week was reduced in stages from 48 hours to 40 hours.
But much of the collective bargaining went beyond legal minima.
Areas where the workforce extended their influence were in the procedures for promotion, where the power of managerial prerogative was weakened and increasing weight was given to seniority and skill tests; in joint determination of rosters tor footplate and train  staff; in the ending of split shifts; and in the reform of the authoritarian disciplinary system.
In this respect, RENFE benefited from its special status as a symbolic embodiment of the processes of democratization in the years following the death of Franco.
It was the ‘empresa modelica’, the model or pattern for other companies to follow in restoring trade union rights.
Its success in coming to collective agreements and avoiding industrial strife was seen as a gauge of the wider success of the national compacts between employers and unions (see, e.g., Pueblo, 3 March 1982).
Moreover, a collective managerial guilt was at work, attempting to ‘compensate for the forty years of Francoism suffered by the mass of the workforce’.
In the words of a senior industrial relations manager,
The UCD [Union of the Democratic Centre under the leadership of Adolfo Suárez]government consented to things which were not totally justified but which were necessary so that the mass of the workers could see that the country had changed and that dialogue was beginning.
…RENFE avoided all confrontations with the workforce, in the attempt to ensure that people no longer talked in terms of fascists and non-fascists but at the most in terms of left-wing and right-wing, in other words the company managed to dilute or avoid social and political tensions resulting from the transition (fieldnotes).
Thus RENFE unions achieved a position of influence over the day-to-day organization of railway work comparable to that exerted by the unions in BR.
While much of this consensual pattern in RENFE had its roots in the peculiar circumstances of the transition, a similar ethos of conflict avoidance has also been a feature of industrial relations in BR.
Union leaders and senior managers were traditionally involved in a tacit alliance’ based on common, and often shared, perceptions of problems and objectives' (Pendleton 1986: 67).
The underlying basis of this consensus was a common appreciation of the political pressures facing the railway: the parties recognised ‘that they both walked a political tightrope, and that if either party fell off the other would be likely to follow’(68).
In particular, disruption of the network as a result of conflict was a matter of great political sensitivity, making the railways vulnerable to the sort of external attack that both unions and management were constantly concerned to deflect.
This consensual relationship was revealed in the remarkable absence of overt conflict and the high degree of union co-operation in the major changes in employment and working practices that have taken place on the railways over the past decades (Hyman and Elger 1981).
Co-operation was underpinned by the willingness of BR management to avoid compulsory redundancies and to find alternative work for those displaced by schemes for change.
The ethos of conflict avoidance has also promoted a propensity on the part of both management and unions, and encouraged by the political concerns of governments, to avoid major industrial action.
As a result, strikes have been limited, either in number as in BR, or in duration as in RENFE (see below).
But there has been an additional weight put on the avoidance of strikes in Spain, reflecting a deep concern with social consensus as a prerequisite for the consolidation of democracy.
In both countries, the nature of railway work provides the workforce with a number of weapons short of strike action, notably bans on  overtime and rest day working, and the work-to-rule.
The latter is particularly appropriate to the railways with their highly bureaucratic, rule-bound organization and their emphasis on safety embodied in complex systems of regulations such as the ‘Rules for the Observance of Employees’ in BR or the ‘Reglamento de Seguridad en la Circulación’(Safety Regulations for Railway Traffic) in RENFE.
In RENFE, work-to-rules have often taken the form of safety campaigns.
For example, in May 1984, CCOO recommended to its train drivers the ‘exhaustive examination of all the equipment of the vehicle, noting all anomalous situations in the incident book…(and) in the event of atmospheric conditions (fog, snow, rain, etc.), a considerable reduction in the speed of the train'.
The delays caused by such action can have considerable impact on services because the integrated railway timetable is very susceptible to disruption.
There are nevertheless significant differences in the patterns of industrial action in the two companies, reflecting differences in the legal framework in Britain and Spain, and in the political context in which the two railways have operated.
In BR there has been a strong tradition of resolving disputes peacefully by negotiation through the various stages of the machinery.
According to the 1956 agreement on the machinery, industrial action should only be contemplated when all the relevant stages have been exhausted.
Similarly management would be expected to exhaust the machinery before attempting to implement changes without agreement with the unions.
As a result, large-scale ‘official’ industrial action has been rare in BR.
Official strikes have fallen into two broad categories.
The first is the one-day national or regional stoppage over some aspect of management policy such as closures, or over support for another group of workers.
Examples are token strikes in 1962 over the Beeching plan for cutting the network, and in 1984 in support of the miners.
The second category is the national stoppage resulting from the breakdown of negotiations and the exhaustion of the bargaining machinery.
The only important examples are the two-week stoppage over differentials by ASLEF in 1955, and the same union's two-week strike in the summer of 1982 (following a series of short strikes in January and February) over flexible rostering.
Strikes in RENFE have followed a different pattern.
From the resumption of collective bargaining in 1976 until 1986, there were over 30 national strikes, but almost without exception they lasted for 24 hours or less, often for only 4 hours.
This reflects their rather different function in the context of RENFE's industrial relations.
They have regularly been used to put pressure on management during major negotiations, and could be said to be part of the ritual of collective bargaining.
That is, they are a step on the way towards a negotiated solution, rather than a reflection of the exhaustion of negotiation as in BR.
The strike weapon is relatively weak in RENFE for two reasons.
First, union organization is weak compared with BR, and the majority of employees are unrepresented by unions.
Moreover, ideological divisions have frequently led to union rivalries which can undermine strike action, especially since the unions compete for the same grades of employees; in BR a single union can in most cases bring out most or all members of a grade.
Second, strikes have been seriously restricted since 1980 by a government decree (also applying to other public services such as the airlines) allowing management to maintain a minimum level of service during strikes.
As mentioned earlier, the state also has  powers to militarize railway staff in the event of industrial disputes, and militarization occurred in 1976.
Nonetheless, it is possible to exaggerate the extent of these limitations.
First, a strike by even a proportion of core workers such as train drivers or signalmen can paralyse the network.
Second, it is questionable how far militarization.remains a serious check on industrial action now that democracy has become more securely established in Spain.
Third, since 1984, unions in RENFE have won the right to negotiate over the level of minimum service, and management has not normally run services in excess of that level even if resources were available.
As a result it could be argued that, in a context of relatively low unionization, the imposition of minimum service levels provides the unions with a guaranteed degree of success with strike action.
The concern with consensus, and the desire of national railway management and union leaders to control industrial action, has reinforced the tendency towards centralization in collective bargaining.
Both management and unions tend to keep a tight grip on local activity to ensure that it keeps to national agreements and to avoid the embarrassment and disruption of uncontrolled local initiatives.
Nonetheless, in both companies there has been scope for local initiative on the margin of national agreements, and at times in violation of them.
BR's LDCs have considerable influence over issues such as the allocation of work between depots, and have strongly resisted changes to the established pattern of working, since this determines earnings levels.
Informal arrangements in contravention of a national agreement or against stated union or management policy have been noted in areas such as the use of overtime and rest day working.
On parts of the Southern region where the ‘round-the-houses’ short-haul commuter work is unpopular, for example, high overtime opportunities were provided in order to retain staff and avoid high training costs.
The MMC (1980: 97) found that in some guards' depots, twelve-hour days were routinely worked, and that, apparently, ‘those staff who wish to work their Sundays mostly have the opportunity to do so every other Sunday without strict regard to the numbers actually required to operate train services’.
In RENFE, centralized bargaining could not prevent national agreements, and even statutory provisions, on hours of work and overtime maxima from being regularly flouted.
The regulations on transfers and replacements at higher grade were also frequently infringed in practice (see IGAE 1984: 19, 42; Carril, September 1985: 13).
This was partly the result of the practical difficulties of running the railway with the resources available.
But it also reflected the problems of headquarters managers and union leaders in monitoring and controlling activities at lower levels of the organization, and in ensuring that national agreements and regulations were respected.
As one industrial relations manager in RENFE commented, ‘control is very difficult, and it is the responsibility of the head of a workplace to get the service out, which he is going to do however he can, as long as he doesn't overrun his budget’(fieldnotes).
An example of this was higher management's belief that overtime was often paid for although not worked.
For example, ‘in the case of shunting, the work should be covered by a foreman and three ‘station specialists’.
But if there are only two, they will divide up the work of the third in overtime hours, but will they actually be present at work during that period?’(fieldnotes).
Thus in RENFE, as in BR, there is scope for local action on the fringes of the nationally agreed framework.
Despite the extent of union influence and the predominantly co-operative patterns of industrial relations, collective bargaining has not brought BR and RENFE workers great financial rewards, even as a quid pro quo for job loss and changing working practices.
From the beginning of the period of rapid employment reductions in BR in the early 1960s up to the present, manual employees' earnings have scarcely reached average levels for industry as a whole.
Only briefly at the end of the 1960s and again in the mid-1970s did average earnings rise significantly above the all-industry average.
The BRB/Leeds (1980: 15) comparative study of productivity in ten European railways concluded that ‘mean earnings per hour for rail employees in Britain are substantially below those of all the other study countries, and also that British railwaymen fare worse in gross earnings terms in comparison with their continental colleagues than do all British manufacturing industry employees’.
The situation in RENFE appears somewhat different at first sight.
Collective bargaining brought a rapid growth of real wages as RENFE workers attempted to compensate for their position during the Franco years.
Earnings per employee rose over four times between 1975 and 1982, while the cost of living index rose only three times.
Nonetheless, this was a continuation of a growth that had begun during the mid-1960s, reflecting the transmission to RENFE of pressures for wage increases elsewhere in the economy.
Between 1966 and 1975, real earnings per employee rose by nearly 90 per cent in RENFE, although they were starting from a very low base in absolute terms (Ferner and Fina 1988).
Moreover, by the 1980s earnings still remained lower than average, and pay rates were in the bottom quartile, especially for non-skilled manual and clerical workers (RENFE 1984b: 169–71; 1984a: 38).
Railway workers in both countries have had to work exceedingly long hours even for these comparatively modest rewards.
In 1984, manual grades in BR worked an average of ten hours overtime per week, compared with an average of about five hours per week for all industries (Department of Employment Gazette).
The hours worked in the late 1970s were between a third and a quarter longer than those in all the other railways studied by the BR/Leeds team (1980: 15).
RENFE workers' overtime levels have also been high, though somewhat less than in BR where overtime and shift earnings are virtually the only way of supplementing basic pay.
In RENFE, basic pay has been supplemented by a plethora of bonuses and allowances (in 1983, there were well over 100 separate remunerative headings in addition to basic pay), and in contrast to BR, employees receive age-related increments at four-yearly intervals.
In 1977, RENFE manual staff worked an average of about seven hours per week overtime, but the figure had fallen to about 4–5 hours per week by 1983 (based on IGAE 1984: 14), and total overtime hours were some 15 million for the year (compared with around 60 million — including Sunday working — in BR).
Government Intervention and Industrial Relations in BR and RENFE
Industrial relations and collective bargaining in BR and RENFE have been profoundly conditioned by the railways' status as a major state-controlled public service.
Two different and sometimes incompatible impulses have been at work.
First, pay bargaining has been influenced by the state's concern with public expenditure and with macroeconomic policies such as wage control.
Second, governments have desired to avoid the politically damaging disruption of the network by industrial action.
As a result there has been repeated political intervention in the bargaining strategies of railway management, with the government even orchestrating the negotiations in detail, as Gourvish convincingly documents for BR (1986: chapters 7, 12).
The conflicting motives for intervention have sometimes led in practice to the government oscillating ‘wildly between stubborn resistance and instantaneous surrender’(560).
A typical pattern is described by a former minister of transport and subsequent chairman of BR: ‘Over and over again we could have settled much more cheaply by settling more quickly but, at each stage, we were told that we must not settle quickly because the Government really were going to fight this one to the bitter end…
The end result was an undignified collapse in the last few days’(Marsh 1978: 176).
Governments have been particularly concerned with the application of pay norms and incomes policies in the railways because of the industry's size and political salience.
In Spain, governments have been keenly aware of RENFE's position as the model whose pay and conditions were likely to have major repercussions for other firms throughout the economy.
Moreover, loss-making Spanish public enterprises have been subject to specific pay bands lower than those for profitable companies.
These bands are laid down in the state budget, and a committee of ministerial under-secretaries vets nationalized industries' collective agreements to make sure that they conform to pay limits.
The government's concern has led it to exert fairly direct, although informal, control over the pay bargaining process.
According to one senior management informant in RENFE, ‘the company could not in general make an offer for increased wages and salaries without first getting very direct approval from the government’; labour relations managers recalled urgent telephone calls from the minister in the early hours of the morning to determine the wage offer.
In Britain in recent years, pay determination in BR and other nationalized industries has been severely constrained in practice by the more indirect method of tight external financing limits (see ch. 4).
At other times, direct intervention has also been used to discourage management from accepting pay demands.
In the 1972 pay negotiations, for example, the government ignored BR's advice for appeasement and ‘demanded a hawkish response’, invoking the powers of the Industrial Relations Act 1971 to force a compulsory strike ballot (Gourvish 1986: 559–60; Bagwell 1982: 250–67).
The second impulse — the desire to avoid disruption — has frequently brought direct pressure on the parties from senior politicians, often in the face of imminent industrial action.
In 1979, the Spanish government bent its own guidelines on pay increases in deficit public corporations.
This followed the intervention of the finance minister, who defended his actions with the Spanish refrain that ‘the letter kills, and the spirit gives life’(El País, 17 January 1979).
In Britain, ‘whisky diplomacy’ was repeatedly used to resolve conflicts, and pressure was brought to bear by means of appeals to the parties from the Prime Minister, for example by Harold Wilson in 1966 (see Bagwell 1982: 168–71).
A notable example among many of government intervention to avoid strike action occurred in the 1954 pay negotiations.
It is interesting for the way it captures the conflicting impulses for restraining public expenditure and avoiding disruption.
According to Rab Butler, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Churchill
said to me, ‘We cannot have a railway strike, it would be so disturbing to all of us’…
I said at the time that it was rather important from the point of view of the economy that we should not have wage increases which we could not afford.
Winston, typical of his more human side, firmly backed Walter [Monckton, Minister of Labour]in his efforts to avoid a railway strike which would have paralysed the country over Christmas.
…I had an interesting experience.
I was rung up about midnight by Winston Churchill who said, ‘Walter and I settled the railway strike so you won't be troubled any more’.
I said, ‘On what terms have you settled it?’ and Winston answered me, ‘Theirs old cock!
We did not like to keep you up’.
I was up nearly every night until one o'clock doing my boxes.
Of course I could have been present
(Butler 1982: 137).
The episode ended with the appointment of a committee of inquiry, a device several times used by governments as a way of legitimating particular criteria of pay determination and hence avoiding industrial conflict.
In this case, the 1955 Cameron inquiry established the principle that, having willed the objective of a national rail system, ‘the Nation must will the means’ of providing it.
This implied ‘that employees of such a national service should receive a fair and adequate wage, and that, in broad terms, the railwayman should be in no worse case than his colleague in a comparable industry’(Cameron 1955: 6).
Where the desire of governments to avoid disruption conflicts with other priorities, such as the need to be seen to control public sector pay or working practices, intervention may well be secretive.
In 1984, leaked Department of Transport letters revealed that the Conservative government had put pressure on BR management during pay negotiations.
Similar intervention apparently occurred in RENFE in the 1985 bargaining round when an improved offer was made following a meeting between confederal leaders of the UGT and the minister of transport (see ch. 7).
The possibility of such interventions may undermine management's negotiating position and has sometimes meant that the autonomy of the bargaining machinery is more apparent than real: the government rather than management becomes the interlocutor in the last instance.
At times when the government has been responsive to union calls for intervention, appeal to the minister has become a defacto final stage of the machinery.
An example is the 1975 pay award in BR, which had already been through the RSNT when the Prime Minister Harold Wilson intervened to press management to resume negotiations and make a higher offer (see ch. 9).
Similarly, RENFE management's negotiating strategy in 1985 was effectively nullified by the political deal between the government and UGT leaders.
For the unions, the nature of state intervention in railway industrial relations emphasizes the importance of political  contacts and the ability to engage in political exchange.
This theme will be taken up in more detail in later chapters.