

DE CASTELNAU DECIDES
When one has the misfortune to make war in the interior of one's own country, pure strategy cannot always have the last word.
— LT. -COL.
DE THOMASSON, Les Préliminaires de Verdun
At Chantilly, news of the first two days' fighting had not particularly upset General Joffre.
The placid, petit bourgeois routine of life had continued as ever.
In the Illustrated London News a correspondent declared that Joffre had ‘been seen…literally rubbing his hands over the attack’.
On the 23rd, however, even after percolating the softening filters of G.Q.G. the reports sounded so bad that Joffre was persuaded to dispatch his Assistant Chief of Staff, Colonel Claudel, to Verdun to make an on-the-spot report.
Claudel seems to have possessed an abundance of the talents (notably optimism) required by his post.
The following afternoon — i.e. the day the Germans made their most menacing gains — he telephoned that the attack had ‘slowed down and it looked as though we would be able to hold out and even make a counter-attack’.
That evening, Joffre's supper was interrupted by a telephone call from General de Langle de Cary (as Commander of Army Group Centre, the immediate senior to General Herr) with a much gloomier account.
He asked permission to evacuate the whole of the Woevre Plain, now menaced by the rapid German advance on the Meuse Highlands.
To a French general, conscious that in the usual manner of things there must soon be a hunt after scapegoats for the Verdun disaster, Joffre's calmly non-committal response of ‘It's up to you’ can hardly have been comforting.
The Generalissimo returned to his meal.
An hour later, Joffre's second-in-command, General de Castelnau, arrived with three other generals to impress upon him the urgency of the situation at Verdun.
De Castelnau recommended that the entire Second Army, currently in reserve, should at once be transferred to Verdun, to defend the Left Bank.
Its commander was a General Philippe Pétain.
Joffre agreed.
At 11 o'clock de Castelnau, by now in receipt of further intelligence which seemed to presage the total collapse of the defence on the Right Bank, was back in Joffre's office.
But, in accordance with inflexible routine, the great man had already retired for the night.
One version of what then ensued caused an uproar in France when it was published, a few months later, in Le Matin — through the evident complicity of a coterie of officers ardently desiring to install de Castelnau on Joffre's throne.
This account had it that de Castelnau was first turned away by the orderly officer, saying that on no account was the Commander-in-Chief to be disturbed.
De Castelnau, however, persisted, and went to the Villa Poiret in person.
There he sent in an ADC to awake Joffre, who, unbarring the double-locked door, then appeared in his night shirt.
Telling Joffre how serious the situation had now become, de Castelnau requested authorisation to go to Verdun himself, armed with plenipotentiary powers, to take whatever measures he felt necessary.
According to Le Matin, Joffre (responding in much the same way as he had to General de Langle earlier), said ‘let him do what he wants’ and then went back to sleep.
Joffre firmly denied the episode; the Editor of Le Matin was killed at Verdun.
Whatever really happened, two facts are certain: de Castelnau had his request granted, and Joffre completed his night's rest.
In Joffre's own words, that night ‘I wished more than at any time of my life that I had the gift of omnipresence.’
But to have gone himself to Verdun at this hour would have demolished at a stroke the legend of imperturbability, upon which so much had been built, and the crash would have been deafening.
Besides — and in the way the French Army of those days functioned it is hard to believe such considerations did not pass through Joffre's mind — if things went badly wrong henceforth at Verdun, the Generalissimo's responsibility would now be shared by another.
De Castelnau's position at G.Q.G. was a curious one.
Following the disasters of 1915, pressure from above (principally from Gallieni, the gifted but ailing Minister of War) had forced a purge of the G.Q.G. upon Joffre.
Foremost among the changes had been the appointment in December of de Castelnau to be Chief-of-Staff, as a sort of éminence grise at Joffre's side.
It was hardly a secret that Gallieni, no admirer of Joffre (who, among other things, had stolen much of the honour due to Gallieni for the victory of the Marne), wanted eventually to pull him back to Paris in the largely administrative capacity of a CIGS, while placing the executive command of the armies in the field under de Castelnau.
Although the latter once jocularly remarked to Briand, the Premier, that in his relationship  with Joffre ‘apart from sleeping together, we couldn't do anything more to show our intimacy’ and although every afternoon — as part of the Chantilly ritual — he accompanied the Commander-in-Chief on his post-prandial stroll, Joffre and his coterie were as jealous as Turks of the brother-general placed so dangerously near the throne.
Nöel Marie Joseph Edouard, Vicomte de Currières de Castelnau, to give him his full title, was a warm-blooded Pyrenean like Foch and Joffre, but he was also a nobleman and the scion of a long line of fighting generals.
There were few French wars in which the de Castelnau clan had not distinguished itself; there had been a General de Castelnau under the great Napoleon, and another had been selected by Louis Napoleon to accompany him into exile after the dismal capitulation at Sedan.
Now sixty-five, the present head of the clan had also fought in the Franco-Prussian War.
Partly, perhaps, because of the impact of this degrading defeat, partly because of heritage, he had become the ‘High Priest’ of the de Grandmaison sect of ‘Attaque à outrance’.
It was he who in 1913 had told the Military Governor of Lille, General Lebas, that he would have ‘nothing to do’ with fortified strongholds.
But, unlike most of the other apostles of this sect among the French General Stat–, de Castelnau was a man of outstanding intellect, quick-witted and flexible.
No force had taken a worse drubbing in the first mad onrush of Plan XVII than the Second Army that had then been under his command; yet, in the moment of defeat, he had made an astonishing turnabout.
By a brilliant defence based on a clever choice of terrain that would have been beyond most of the other French generals at that time, de Castelnau saved the vital city of Nancy.
In the defence of Verdun, it will be recalled, de Castelnau had already rendered an invaluable service in the ‘Intermediary Line’, hastily constructed as a result of his coup d'oeil in January, and — had there been time for the completion of the Third Position that he had also prescribed then — there seems a chance that the German breakthrough on the 24th might have been prevented altogether.
Witness to de Castelnau's very real ability was the fact that he had managed to rise so high in the French Army.
For in Republican France, still on the rebound from the Dreyfus Affair, both his heredity and his religion told strongly against him.
Known throughout the army as ‘le Capucin Botté’(the Fighting Friar), in his entourage de Castelnau was always accompanied by his own private chaplain, a  Rabelaisian Jesuit who also happened to be his nephew.
It is held that, although he lived until the end of the Second World War, his clericalism and conservatism alone deprived him of his Marshal's baton.
Jean de Pierrefeu, who wrote a vivid and often caustic chronicle of the G.Q.G., describes de Castelnau as follows:
A jovial, dapper little man, of quick and kindly speech, he was, with his martial bearing and white moustache, the typical French cavalry officer.
He was absolutely worshipped by all disinterested persons at G.Q.G. When he entered the hotel, tapping the floor with his stick and looking about him with the mischievous and bright glances of a boy, every one came up to him instinctively, only too pleased to see him.
He had the art of lighting up the faces of those he met by a single kindly word, and so making them his admirers in a flash.
This little man, so alert and cheerful, radiated honesty and trustworthiness.
It was not only the sophisticated staff officers at Chantilly who fell to the de Castelnau spell; soldiers at the front were equally susceptible.
In some magical way, the sight of the dumpy figure in the long black cloak could rekindle the fighting spirit in utterly battleweary troops.
For all that de Castelnau had learned since 1914, he was still very much a ‘fighting general’ of the Foch school.
Indeed, according to Poincaré, when Foch himself expressed doubts about an Allied offensive in 1916, de Castelnau ‘exploded’ with impatience.
During the worst weeks of the Verdun fighting, de Castelnau impressed Colonel Repington (the elephantine Times correspondent who, in between the purveyance of social tittle-tattle from one dining table to another, was a fairly astute military critic) on his way to dine at the Ritz, with the words: ‘Rather than accept slavery at German hands the French race would die upon the battlefield.’
To tradition and instinct, de Castelnau could add personal reasons for wanting to hit hard at the enemy; three of his sons had already laid down their lives for France.
Such was the man who departed post-haste for Verdun shortly after midnight on the 24th/25th of February.
Brief as his role was to be in the battle, it was one of quite exceptional importance.
De Castelnau paused at Avize to quell the pessimism at de Langle's HQ and to telephone ahead a warning to poor Herr not to yield any more ground, or ‘the consequences would be most grave for him [Herr]’.
At breakfast time on the 25th, he reached Verdun.
There he found General Herr ‘depressed’, and ‘a little tired’; though this was hardly surprising.
Despite his sleepless night, de Castelnau at once went on to the Right Bank and plunged into the work of re-animating the defence.
While, at the front, the rout had still to reach its climax, behind the scenes, in the various headquarters, a transformation took place that was, by all accounts, miraculous.
That day’ wherever he went, decision and order followed him’As his eyes roved over the terrain, speedily the agile mind made its appreciation.
At 3.30 on the 25th, almost the precise moment when Sergeant Kunze was leaping into the moat of Fort Douaumont, de Castelnau was telephoning his conclusions to G.Q.G. Verdun could be saved.
An effective defence could be maintained on the remaining cross-ridges of the Right Bank.
There must be no retreat to the Left Bank.
Pétain, he recommended, should now be put in command not only of the Left Bank, but of the Right Bank as well; the ‘fatigued’ General Herr should be kept on for a while as Pétain's adviser, then quietly ‘limogé’.
(He would not be among strangers; among those preceding him at that limbo for disgraced generals were the unfortunate Bapst, de Bonneval and Chretien.)
Making use of his plenipotentiary powers, de Castelnau then dispatched the necessary order to Pétain, without awaiting Joffre's sanction.
De Castelnau's snap decision was one that in its fateful implications would affect not merely the course of the Battle of Verdun, or even of the war itself, but also the whole stream of subsequent French history.
Although, later, as the salvation of Verdun seemed assured, the Joffre coterie claimed the honours, there is nothing to suggest that, at the moment of de Castelnau's departure from Chantilly, Joffre had definitely made up his mind not to retreat to the Left Bank.
(One also has to recall Joffre's preoccupation during the six months preceding the German attack with the establishment of a line-of-withdrawal behind Verdun, on the Left Bank.)
So there seems little doubt that the vital decision was de Castelnau's, and his alone.
The little cavalryman, embodiment of all the ancient martial instincts and panache of the race, had taken up the German gauntlet.
France had done exactly what Falkenhayn had expected (and hoped) she would do.
At least in his judgment of French national psychology, Falkenhayn's appreciation had been accurate.
Now the ‘bleeding white’ could begin.
After the passage of nearly half a century, how easy it is to criticise the decision taken by a general in the midst of a most desperate battle.
Why did he not do this instead?
Why could he not have foreseen what we see now?
Already since the Second World War critics have arisen to castigate Montgomery for not pressing home with sufficient zeal the pursuit of the defeated Afrika Corps after Alamein.
Perhaps they are right.
But the stresses and strains of the moment, the all-important moral factors, tend to be submerged by time.
In the vision of the military critic writing ex post, the uncertain temper of the men of Britain's Eighth Army after years of consistent defeat becomes obliterated behind the imposing shapes of tactical and material considerations.
So at Verdun.
In the light of what we in our omniscience now know of Falkenhayn's intentions, and of the hideous tragedy that was to ensue at Verdun, we may say that France should not have decided to hold the city at all costs.
Winston Churchill, with extraordinary perspicacity, wrote at the time:
Meeting an artillery attack is like catching a cricket ball.
Shock is dissipated by drawing back the hands.
A little‘give’, a little suppleness, and the violence of the impact is vastly reduced.
Instead of standing stubbornly and heroically on the Right Bank, the French could have drawn back their hands from Verdun, which, since the dismantling of its forts, was in any case no longer such an indispensable defensive pinion.
Behind Verdun on the Left Bank the undulating hill and wooded country continues for some twenty-five miles, as far as Ste. Ménéhould.
Here a fighting withdrawal could have been staged, with the German advance checked by successive lines of defence on each feature.
With the means then available, a German breakthrough to the flat open country around Chalons-sur-Marne would have been virtually impossible.
Instead a terrible toll of the Crown Prince's manpower would have been exacted by the French 75s and machine guns in their prepared emplacements, at relatively little cost to the defenders.
The attack would have petered out, leaving the Germans exhausted and weakened to meet the Allied sledge-hammer blow on the Somme.
This is what could have happened.
Had Pétain, the man who was to carry out Castelnau's decision, been in de Castelnau's place it is probably what would have happened.
But a withdrawal, however fighting, was not in keeping with French military indoctrination of the First War; it was also not in keeping with the character of de Castelnau.
Above all, in formulating his decision, de Castelnau was influenced by psychological imponderables.
As Colonel de Thomasson, one of the more level-headed French writers on Verdun, remarks: ‘Sometimes sentiment provokes a courage which could not be otherwise inspired by cold reason.’
The army at Verdun was in a state of demoralisation bordering on rout.
Eighteen months of unremitted, bloody, disheartening failures lay behind it.
Who knew whether it could now be called upon to fight a steady fighting withdrawal?
Who could tell whether the rout might not merely be accelerated, turning into a complete collapse and unbarring the most direct approach to Paris?
In the Franco-Prussian War in which de Castelnau had fought as a young officer he could recall all too vividly how, once it had started retreating, the French Army had never ceased until it was rounded up piecemeal.
He knew his French soldier.
With more spirit and élan on the attack than the dogged Britisher, he was also much more impressionable in adversity, altogether less capable of the kind of orderly, defensive retreat such as Britain's soldiers have been accustomed to during so much of her military history.
Moreover, these were French peasants fighting on French soil, every inch of it hallowed.
In these circumstances, as de Thomasson remarks, ‘pure strategy cannot always have the last word’ Finally, could the nation morally survive the shock of losing Verdun, with all its legendary mystique?
De Castelnau was committed; and so too was the man appointed to carry out de Castelnau's decision.
PÉTAIN
There had emerged a leader who taught his army to distinguish the real from the imaginary and the possible from the impossible.
On the day when a choice had to be made between ruin and reason, Pétain received promotion
…
COLONEL CHARLES DE GAULLE, France and her Army (1938)
Marshal Pétain has traced in our history pages some of which remain luminous while others give rise to interpretations that still conflict and arouse lively passions.
We must celebrate the first.
We cannot ignore the second.
— ANDRÉ FRANÇOIS-PONCET (1953)
Six weeks before the assault on Verdun, the French Second Army had been relieved by the rapidly expanding British Army, and was pulled back out of the line to form a general reserve.
After the hard autumn fighting in the Champagne the rest was felt to be well deserved.
For the Army Commander, ensconced at Noailles, life had become extremely leisurely, consisting of daily rides in the beautiful forest.
In fact, limited as are the distractions in any French provincial town, it was really almost too quiet.
When the first order announcing Pétain's appointment was received by his staff, there was consternation at Noailles.
It was after 10 p.m. and the General was to report to Joffre in Chantilly at 8 the next morning.
But the General was not in his office; he was not in his quarters; he could be found nowhere.
Alarm!
France in her hour of need called for her saviour, but the saviour-designate was missing.
Fortunately for her, however, Pétain's Staff-Captain, Serrigny, knew — as a good ADC — something of the elderly bachelor's habits.
Ordering a staff car, he drove at top speed through the night to Paris.
As he wrote years later in his long unpublished memoirs, ‘hazard or Providence made me knock on the door of the Hôtel Terminus of the Gare du Nord.’
It was now 3 a.m.
The proprietess at first energetically — and no doubt with the liverishness customary to Parisian hôteliers roused at this hour — denied that Pétain had visited her hotel that evening.
Serrigny played on her  finer feelings, insisting that it was ‘a matter of life or death for France’.
Eventually the proprietress admitted that the General was in the hotel, and somewhat hesitantly led Serrigny upstairs.
Outside a bedroom door stood ‘the great commander's yellowish boots with the long leggings, which, however, on that evening were agreeably accompanied by some charming little molière slippers, utterly feminine.’
Undeterred, Serrigny knocks at the door.
Wearing ‘the scantiest of costumes’, the General emerges.
There, in the dingy station-hotel corridor, ensues a brief conference; in its historic connotations — though perhaps rather different circumstances — a little evocative of Drake at Plymouth.
Serrigny relays the summons from Joffre.
Sobs from within the unlit bedroom.
Pétain, impassive, decisive, tells Serrigny he must find a bed in the hotel.
In the morning they will journey together to G.Q.G. Meanwhile the night imposes its own duties.
To these Pétain now returns.
What manner of man was this amorous general who was soon to earn from his countrymen so much honour and love, that would later be replaced by so much hatred and dishonour?
At the time of which we write, Pétain was a bachelor of sixty, with commendable vigour for his age.
After the war, a doctor who gave him a check-up (incredibly enough not recognising him) remarked: ‘One can see that you weren't in the war.’
(Alas, but for his robustness, the final degradation might have been spared him.)
With the commanding posture that was the unmistakable and indelible mark of St. Cyr, and clad in the uniform of ‘horizon blue’, there was no more impressive sight on a French parade ground.
To have seen him and de Castelnau together, one might well have assumed that Pétain was the born aristocrat, the squat and rather swarthy general the peasant; though in fact it was the reverse.
The cynical, observant Pierrefeu writes of Pétain on his advent to G.Q.G.:
I had the impression of a marble statue, of a Roman senator in a museum.
Big, vigorous, of imposing figure, impassive face and pale complexion, with a direct and thoughtful glance…
And Francois-Poncet, on succeeding him at the Academie:
…a majestic carriage, naturally noble…his blue eyes contained a certain mystery.
One would think they were made office…from his whole personality emanated an air of sovereignty 
…
Wherever he appears, he imposes…
Whoever once saw this figure, will never forget it.
Certainly women never did.
His easy success often led him into precarious adventures; in 1917 the French intercepted a cable from the German Ambassador in Madrid reporting to Berlin that he had found a mistress for the new Commander-in-Chief, for the modest fee of 12,000 pesetas a month.
Many of Pétain's peasant characteristics remained with him throughout his life.
One was his simplicity — which he shared in some measure with Joffre.
That was about all they had in common.
He was early to rise and late to bed.
In rare moments of leisure he liked to potter around the garden, and always said he would take up farming when he retired.
His favourite pastime of an evening was to leaf through historical albums, studying portraits of the men who had made their mark on Europe during the past half-century.
He seldom went to bed before midnight, and then often read the plays of Corneille till 2 a.m.
In contrast to Foch always ready to adopt the conqueror's pose, one foot before the other, Pétain so hated being photographed that the only portrait Repington could find in 1918 for The Times was one of him characteristically glaring at the camera.
At his trial in 1945, he himself insisted on wearing the very simplest uniform of a Marshal of France, his only decoration the Médaille Militaire.
Not entirely unrelated to this dislike of show and publicity was Pétain's chronic contempt for all forms of intrigue, and especially for politics and politicians.
Already as a subaltern, when most of his contemporaries, mindful of where lay the springs of promotion in the Third Republic, were assiduously sucking up to the politicians, Pétain had the audacity to place a reservist Deputy under arrest for some minor military infringement.
In his well-known ‘boutades’ against politicians Pétain appeared to fear no one; to Poincaré he once remarked acidly that ‘nobody was better placed than the President himself to be aware that France was neither led nor governed.’
In 1939, Pétain refused to be a candidate for the Presidency, recalling that he had once described it as only ‘suitable for defeated marshals’.
In 1917 Pétain threw a share of the blame for the mutinies upon the frequent visits of Deputies to the front.
The distrust had become mutual; about the same time, Abel Ferry, one of the more impressive French Deputies of the epoch, wrote in his diary: Pétain is a bastard.
He has command, but he is closed to everything which is not exclusively pertaining to military order.
Hesees only the defects of parliamentary collaboration.
The sourness in Pétain's relations with parliamentarians may partly have been due to a curiously unexpected timidity in his makeup, derived from the insecurity of his humble background.
Instead of‘rolling himself into a ball’ like Joffre when ‘got at’by politicians, Pétain retreated behind a barrier of wounding, cold irony.
Whatever the explanation, the facts remain, and the antipathy was an unfortunate one.
The slight to Poincaré alone was never forgotten, and would later prove both detrimental to Pétain's career and — more disastrously — to the conduct of the war.
In many ways Pétain appears as the odd-man-out in the French military hierarchy of the First War.
Where Joffre, Foch and de Castelnau were Pyreneans, Pétain came from a peasant family in the Pas-de-Calais and had all the characteristics of a northerner.
The Pétains had never boasted of a military tradition.
Aged fifteen when the Franco-Prussian War ended, Pétain, unlike Jot–re and de Castelnau, had been too young to participate.
His choice of the army seems to have been inspired by the anecdotes of a nonagenarian great uncle who had been a veteran of the Grand Army.
Having worked his way through the Spartan mill of St. Cyr, he opted to join the newly formed Chasseurs Alpins.
Five years' rigorous service with them no doubt accounted in part for his splendid physique.
He then transferred to the infantry at Besançon, where he became friends with a Lieutenant Herr.
Pétain was extremely industrious, yet advancement went slowly for him; unusually so even by peacetime standards; five years a sous-lieutenant, seven years a lieutenant, and ten a captain.
He was forty-four before he got his battalion.
The outbreak of war found him a colonel of fifty-eight, who had never served abroad.
Imminent retirement lay ahead after a career of almost sub-average distinction, in anticipation of which he had already bought a small house on the edge of St. Omer.
Then, in the space of eighteen months, from commanding a regiment of a few thousand men he was to rise to be an Army Commander with over half-a-million at his behest.
Confession had not been a factor in the slowness of Pétain's promotion in the way that it had checked the career of Foch, de Castelnau and other ardent Catholics; indeed, Pétain could boast  that he had not been to Mass for thirty years, so on this score alone he should have been earmarked, as things stood, for rapid advancement.
But in an age where friends-at-court were vital to a military career, Pétain the peasant from St. Omer had no influence.
Nor, it might be said, had Joffre, the cooper's son, but he had been quick to cultivate what he lacked, whereas Pétain never made an effort to conceal the contempt of the Third Republic that he had acquired early in his career.
In sharp contrast to most of his contemporaries, Pétain seemed unambitious almost to the point of self-extinction; when offered the post of Commandant to the Rifle School, he refused because it would have meant his promotion over the heads of more senior majors.
What told most against Pétain, however, was that while Joffre, Foch and de Castelnau all swam vigorously with the current, he alone stood against the prevailing tide of the de Grandmaison movement.
While the others seemed still obsessed with the catastrophe of 1870, Pétain was assiduously and pragmatically studying more recent campaigns such as the Boer War and the RussoJapanese War of 1905, where the defence had given so good an account of itself.
The potentialities of the new weapons that the Grandmaisonites contemptuously dismissed from their armoury, the machine gun and the heavy howitzer, and even of the humble rifle in its modern form (he was himself a remarkably good shot) did not escape Pétain.
The nucleus of Pétain's discoveries was that ‘firepower kills’.
Carried to their logical conclusion his theories meant that (if he were right) the attaque à outrance could be broken by a well-organised defence long before it reached the enemy.
It was sheer heresy.
For a long time, the way ahead barred, Pétain found no opening for preaching his gospel.
It was not till 1906 that a post as instructor at the École de Guerre gave him an opportunity.
There, with the de Grandmaison wave at its peak, his lectures seemed singularly unglamorous alongside those of the fiery Foch and Colonel de Maud'huy, the Chief of the Infantry Course, who was alleged to make his sons pray each evening to become as ‘brave as Bayard’ Pétain's students nicknamed him ‘Précis-le-sec’.
But he had his converts, too.
One of them was a thoughtful, gangly young man called Charles de Gaulle, who, so impressed was he by Pétain's teachings, applied on leaving St. Cyr to join the regiment then under his command, the 33rd.
To Pétain, for whom the future seemed to hold nothing but the obscurity of a colonel in retirement, the war and the dramatic failure of Plan XVII brought an unexpected opportunity to prove his ideas.
Joffre's ruthless limogeage of inept generals resulted in rapid promotions for those who had shone, and Pétain was foremost among these.
The stonewall defence, the deadly concentrated firepower of his troops in the retreat from the frontiers, and then at the Marne, impressed friend and foe alike.
At the end of August 1914 he was promoted to Brigadier on the field; so suddenly that an elderly spinster had to furnish him with stars unsewn from her father's uniform.
His rise to Divisional, then Corps Commander followed in rapid succession.
In the abortive Artois offensive of May 1915, the attack by Pétain's Corps at Vimy Ridge was so well prepared that for a moment it seemed as if the whole German front might collapse.
In the autumn, in Champagne, Pétain had one of his few failures.
The intense preliminary bombardment, so characteristic of Pétain, was just too prolonged and sacrificed the vital element of surprise.
But at least Pétain, unlike most of the other First War Commanders — and in opposition to de Castelnau, then his immediate superior — knew when to stop, instead of trying to redeem failure fruitlessly, and at terrible cost in lives.
All the time, Pétain was learning with a rapidity almost unique among his fellows, and with an adaptability rare for his age.
Says Spears, ‘at every stage of the war he was just a little ahead of practice, theory and thought of the moment’.
In an age when infantrymen and gunners almost prided themselves in their ignorance of each other 's function, Pétain, the St. Cyrien, had learnt more about the use of artillery than many gunners would ever know.
During the Artois offensive, it was said that Pétain laid every gun himself.
Even Haig was agreeably impressed by his first encounters with him: ‘I found him businesslike, knowledgeable, and brief in speech.
The latter is, I find, a rare quality in Frenchmen!’
By the end of 1915 — now an Army Commander widely respected by the army elite, though still little known to the public — Pétain had developed his theories on firepower into a series of pithy axioms and coherent formulae.
‘The offensive is the fire which advances; the defensive the fire which stops,’ said Pétain; ‘Cannon conquers, infantry occupies’(a conclusion he had reached well before Falkenhayn composed his Verclun Memorandum).
In explaining the suspension of his corps' operations during the spring Artois offensive, Pétain coldly and sardonically assaulted the most sacred litany of the French Army:
It is always prejudicial to cede ground to the enemy.
But these inconveniences cannot be related to those which could result at a given moment from the capture by the enemy of three or four battalions, with a loss, by consequence, of several thousands of men.
After the failed offensives of the autumn, Pétain wrote a report which conveyed a barely disguised criticism of Joffre's bull-headed striving for a percée.
Because of the Allies' inadequate resources of heavy artillery, he declared, it was impossible to
carry with the same élan the successive positions of the enemy…one does not seek, in fact, to produce a breakthrough.
In this first offensive act, what one wants is to inflict such casualties on the enemy that it will be possible later on to attack in depth, at certain chosen points, with superiority.
Pétain was also a disciple of attrition, but in an entirely different sense from Joffre and Haig with their inhumanly simple calculations that the Germans could be beaten in the long run through losing man for man, by virtue of the Allied superiority in cannon fodder.
‘One does not fight with men against materiel’, was one of Pétain's favourite maxims; attrition had to be performed by guns, not infantrymen.
In his belief in a series of minutely planned, economical offensives with limited objectives — each adding to the total exhaustion of the enemy until the moment for the ‘definitive effort’ arrived, instead of the one ‘Big Push’— Pétain bore some resemblance to the great Turenne.
He might also be likened to Montgomery, in that he judged this ‘definitive effort’ could not take place until there was certainty of success; until the attacking force had three-to-one superiority.
Another of his favourite maxims was: ‘audacity is the art of knowing how not to be too audacious.’
It was a tenet that lay at the roots of his later reputation as the over-cautious general, later still as a pessimist, and finally, a defeatist.
But this caution, this frugal husbanding of manpower, was not founded purely on cold reasoning.
To those close to him in rank — and particularly to visiting politicians and journalists — Pétain gave an impression of regal, almost inhuman chilliness, accentuated by the statuesque majesty of his figure.
After dining with Pétain in 1918 (where he had clearly not enjoyed his wonted social success), Colonel Repington noted in his diary: ‘Freezing formality as usual.
Pétain inspires terror except among a few of his old hands.
He reminds me of the average royal personage, who is one person in company and another when alone…
As usual no one addressed Pétain unless he first addressed them, and only one person spoke at a time.’
A violently hostile book written in 1943 tells of Pétain's icy formality when taking over the 35rd Regiment as a colonel.
A lieutenant-colonel, who had evidently been a close friend in his class at St. Cyr, greeting the new C.O. had addressed him as tu, only to receive a shrivelling rebuff: ‘Colonel, I must request you to keep your distance.
I shall require you to salute me, to speak to me only as vous, and, when you must address me, I should prefer to be called mon colonel.’
Even allowing for the passions of the moment, the story is probably true; it is thoroughly in keeping with Pétain's character (and the 33rd was suffering from lack of discipline when he took it over).
But for all Pétain's coldness to his near-equals, the reputation he enjoyed with the poilus was legendary, and unique among French commanders.
He was the paternal figure, the leader who really cared for his men, who suffered what they suffered.
Word had quickly got round that at the Marne, in contrast to the generals of the Plaza-Toro breed, who led attacks from the various Chateaux of France, Pétain had moved up into the front line when the infantry quailed under the German shells.
Later, inspecting a decimated regiment, he said:
You went into the assault singing the Marseillaise; it was magnificent.
But next time you will not need to sing the Marseillaisc.
There will be a sufficient number of guns to ensure your attack's a success.
He kept his word.
After the 1915 offensives, the troops had come to believe that if Pétain called for an attack there must be some point to it, that it would not be a senseless sacrifice of lives in the way of those over-ambitious generals, out to gain recognition from the conquest at any price of a few yards of enemy trench.
Those long years in junior command had given him an intimacy with the poilu denied to most of the other French chiefs, and because of his low rank in 1914 he knew — unlike Haig and Joffre — very well what wounded men looked like.
In his rapid rise to stardom he still retained a measure of the paternalism of the good C.O. He  knew how much apparently little things mattered to the fighting soldier.
Neglect of them could throw him into a searing rage; as when he discovered that a rest camp for troops out of the line had been placed within sound of the guns.
‘What an idiot!’ cried Pétain, on learning at Verdun that a battalion commander, having received the order of alert just as the rations arrived, had ordered his men to depart forthwith on empty stomachs; ‘He doesn't deserve to be a corporal.’
Like a Napoleon or a Montgomery, in fact like any truly great captain, Pétain enhanced his magnetic influence over rank-and-file by frequent surprise visits to the front, presenting medals in person immediately after an attack, enquiring about the wounded.
The northern, pale-blue eyes seemed to be everywhere, and he was reputed to have a remarkable instinct for knowing whom to praise and whom to blame.
Though he was apparently deeply affected by his visits to hospitals, Pétain refused to allow squeamishness to deter him from his duty.
On one such occasion he was so moved by meeting a hopelessly wounded eighteen-year-old that he arranged, at his own expense, for the young soldier to see his mother.
Many years later, at the nadir of tragedy, when Pétain, in his dotage, was being pressed to closer collaboration with the Nazis, the faithful Serrigny remarked to him: ‘You think too much about the French and not enough about France.’
Perhaps it was true.
Certainly Pétain's love for the French soldier in 1916 seems to have been entirely naive and genuine, remarkably free (whatever may have been written more recently) of bogus popularity seeking; in any case, soldiers the world over are phenomenally quick to distinguish the genuine from the phony.
As Pierrefeu says of him, after his appointment to the Supreme Command:
Never did Pétain cease to be himself in the presence of the troops.
No familiarity, no fatherly affection, no display of sentiment; for such do not deceive the soldier for a moment.
He remained calm and imposing, a true Commander-in-Chief wielding sovereign authority.
He spoke as man to men, dominating them with his prestige, without trying to put himself on a lower level, as do those who form a false picture of the people.
But there was such sincerity and seriousness in his tone, he seemed so absolutely honest, just, and human, that nobody doubted his word.
The General derived all his strength, in fact, from his humanity.
As has been seen, the choice of Pétain to command at Verdun was made less because of his qualities than because he happened to be available at the moment.
Yet obviously his two great assets — his understanding of the defensive and the devotion he inspired among the troops — ideally suited him to the task there.
It was the tragic irony of Fate that, because of the terms of reference to which de Castelnau had committed him in advance, this uniquely humanitarian general would be called upon to subject the men under his command to what was shortly to become the most inhuman conflict of the whole war.
THE TAKE OVER
A la Guerre, les hommes ne sont rien; c'est un seul homme qui est tout.
— NAPOLEON I
ON reporting to Chantilly on the morning of February 25th, Pétain and Serrigny found that ‘the panic was at its peak’ The fall of Verdun was expected momentarily, ‘and everybody was saying that General Herr should be shot’Somehow it leaked out that Pétain had come from Paris, not Noailles, and the word was quickly passed round by those veterans of intrigue that he had first been to see the Minister of War, Galliéni, the implacable foe of G.Q.G. Doubtless the rumour helped augment the alarm in the air.
Only Joffre himself, true to form, seemed unaffected by it all.
Greeting him with the words ‘Eh bien!
Pétain, you know that things really aren't bad at all,’ he gave a laconic resume of the situation, then sent the new Commander on his way, remarking cryptically, ‘Now you are easy in your mind.’
The party set forth on the road for Verdun.
At Châlons-sur-Marne, Pétain stopped to lunch with Général Gouraud, the one-armed hero.
By now Pétain appeared to have sunk into a kind of gloom (and no doubt fatigue), as betrayed by a nervous tic of the right eyelid.
Always the perfect aide, Serrigny tried to distract him with Rabelaisian reminiscences from army life of twenty years ago.
In the course of the conversation, it was revealed that Nini, the garrison belle of Amiens, with whom Gouraud had been passionately enamoured as a Captain, had in fact bestowed her favours on all three oflicers in the course of time.
Gouraud's manifest disconcertion delighted Pétain, and — according to Serrigny — he ‘left Châlons in complete serenity’.
But his earlier mood soon returned.
Deep snow-drifts and sheet ice slowed down the party's progress, and beyond Bar-le-Duc it was reduced to an average of two miles an hour, on running into the chaotic rear of the Verdun army.
All the unmistakable  signs of defeat greeted Petain's eyes in his first glimpse of the men he was to command.
Every few yards the narrow road was blocked with an indescribable melee.
Convoys of reinforcements intermingled with men from the depots of Verdun, civilian refugees and shattered regiments all streaming back to the rear.
Disorder was accentuated by the terrible conditions.
Horses drawing guns slithered helplessly on the icy road, ambulances full of wounded skidded into ditches.
The spectacle, especially of the broken infantrymen, strongly affected Pétain.
A lieutenant filing past with seventy-five mud-stained survivors of the decimated 2nd Zouaves noted that the new general was unable to hold back his tears; it was a detail he remembered all his life.
Reaching Herr's headquarters at Dugny, Serrigny recalls he ‘had the impression very clearly that we had entered a lunatic asylum.
…Everybody was talking and gesticulating at the same time.’
Herr, on the verge of breakdown, made little sense.
His Chief of Staff (Ops) did not even seem to know what were the boundaries of the various corps under command; there was no map of troop positions, and no one could state just what orders had been issued.
All they could tell Pétain with certainty at Dugny was the dreadful news that Douaumont had fallen.
Quickly taking stock of the atmosphere, Pétain remarked icily to Serrigny: ‘In these circumstances we shall install ourselves at Souilly, where I hope we may find a little more calm.’
Retracing his footsteps to the little village of Souilly that lay astride the main Barle-Due/Verdun road, Pétain was met by de Castelnau, to whom he relayed the dire tidings about Douaumont.
Tearing out a sheet from his notebook, de Castelnau scribbled down his historic order that Verdun must be defended at all costs on the Right Bank, and handed it to Pétain.
The command of all forces at Verdun was to be taken over at midnight.
It was already 11 p.m. and; at first Pétain demurred on the grounds that he was not yet au fait with the situation.
But de Castelnau was adamant, having already promulgated (unknown to Pétain) this second order.
The ebullient little général now disappears from the picture, his dramatic rôle at Verdun completed.
At midnight Pétain in his first act of command telephoned General Balfourier, the commander of XX Corps:
‘Allo!
C'est moi, général Pe'tain.
I have taken over command.
Tell your troops.
Hold fast.
I have confidence in you.’
Balfourier replied:
‘C'est vous, mon ge'neral?
C'est bien!
Now everything is going to be all right.’
A similar call was made to General de Bazelaire, now commanding units on the Left Bank.
In his memoirs Pétain recorded tersely:
‘La liaison morale, du chef aux exécutants, était assurée.’
By now Colonel de Barescut, his Chief-of-Staff, had arrived, and with a thick charcoal Pétain traced out the front to be held by his command.
All that could be done that day had been done.
It now remained to find the general somewhere to lay his head for the night.
There was barely room for a primitive headquarters in the tiny Mairie at Souilly, let alone anywhere to sleep.
Eventually Serrigny found a small house belonging to the local solicitor.
Attempts to light a fire in the glacial dining-room had to be abandoned when it smoked out the house.
After a meagre supper of beans left over from the orderlies' meal, Pétain slept, huddled in an armchair.
The next morning the inevitable occurred.
For an elderly man, even with the robust constitution of Pétain, the long chase through snow and night, the unheated house — added to the exertions of the previous night — proved too much.
Pétain awoke with a high fever, and a doctor diagnosed double pneumonia.
In the days before M and B, there was no 48-hour wonder cure; the general would be confined to his bed for at least five or six days.
The disease might even be fatal.
Was there no limit to the disasters besetting France?
The doctor was pledged to secrecy, and an iron curtain of security was rung down on the headquarters lest news of the new commander's prostration further demoralise the men with their backs to the Meuse.
De Barescut and Serrigny were despatched again and again to the front as Pétain's eyes, and — like Saxe on his litter at Fontenoy — over the next days he directed the battle, shaking with fever, from his sickbed.
Somehow the secret was remarkably well kept.
With astonishing rapidity the sick man-gathered the threads of the battle into his hands.
Order began to replace chaos.
He quickly realised that, tactically, the situation at Verdun was not quite as desperate as it had seemed at first sight.
Only one bastion of prime importance to the city's defence had been lost so far: Douaumont.
In his opinion, ‘the fact that Verdun still remained in our hands on February 25th constituted a real success’.
Balfourier's ‘Iron’ XX Corps had now reached the front in its entirety; two further corps were on their way, and a third standing by; Haig, with rather ill  grace, had agreed to take over a further sector of the line from the French, so an adequate supply of reinforcements seemed assured.
If only Verdun could hold out another two or three days, it would be safe, Pétain thought.
But, ‘Our façade, so rudely shaken, could crumble from one moment to another.’
There was no room for any more deadly mistakes.
Methodically, Pétain set about ensuring there would be none.
De Castelnau, true to form, had dictated the immediate recapture of Fort Douaumont, but after one suicidal failure Pétain immediately rescinded the order.
‘Conserve your strength,’ he told his commanders; ‘the counter-offensive will follow.’
Instead, a ‘position de barrage’ a well-organised defensive wall was to be erected along the ‘Line of Resistance’that Pétain had traced out the night he took over command.
The backbone of this line would be formed by the neglected and despised forts.
Orders were sent out to rearm them, to neutralise the demolition mines, and infantry garrisons were despatched complete with fourteen days' rations and solemn instructions never to capitulate.
(At the same time, though its existence was naturally concealed from the rank-and-file, a ‘Line of Panic’ was also drawn up on the inner circle of forts, Belleville, Souville, Tavannes and Moulainville.
If all went awry and there was to be a last ditch fight for the city, this is where it would take place.)
No component of the French forces at Verdun was more conscious of the influence of the new commander than his ancient passion, the artillery.
Pétain himself virtually took over control of the artillery, asking his commanders each morning: ‘What have your batteries been doing?
Leave the other details till later.’
Again and again he insisted that the artillery ‘give the infantry the impression that it is supporting them and that it is not dominated.’
While the infantry was still too weak to wrest the initiative from the enemy, carefully prepared artillery ‘offensives’ were directed by Pétain, to cause maximum loss to the enemy at minimum cost to himself.
For the first time in the battle the French guns ceased their uncoordinated, spasmodic flea-biting and became welded into one concentrated, fearsome weapon.
Nothing quite like it had been seen on the Allied side hitherto.
The impact on the Germans was immediate; from this moment, said the Reichs Archives, ‘began the flanking fire on the ravines and roads north of Douaumont that was to cause us such severe casualties.’
Though, in the last desperate days of February, it may hardly have seemed the most dramatic, undoubtedly the gravest problem  confronting Pétain was one of communications.
Only the most precarious of lifelines now connected Verdun with the rest of France.
Before 1916, G.Q.G. had stolidly resisted the Army Commission's recommendations to establish new railway lines to Verdun.
Now the main line up the Meuse was severed by the enemy astride it at St. Mihiel.
The second, to Paris via Ste. Menehould, was under steady bombardment by the Crown Prince's naval guns.
Already its dislocation had forced the Verdun artillery to cut its ammunition expenditure sharply.
There remained only a narrow gauge track, reminiscent of an Emmett railway and called the Meusien, that was designed to supply the wants of a peacetime garrison, and the second-class road that ran alongside it for some fifty miles from Barle-Due.
This road represented the sole act of prescience displayed by the French High Command at Verdun prior to the German attack.
In 1915 it had been widened to seven yards, just large enough for an up- and down-column of trucks.
But for this Verdun would have been doomed to die of slow strangulation.
As it was, to Pétain, mindful of the chaos he had witnessed on the icy road the day of his arrival, there was room for every possible doubt.
Soon the Verdun army would total half a million men and 170,000 animals; Pétain's ravenous guns would be demanding twice and treble their previous flow of shells.
Could this huge array be supplied without straining to breaking-point the thin lifeline?
Certainly no army of this size had ever been maintained by road before.
Pétain's organising genius was ably supplemented by the engineer responsible for transportation to Verdun: Major Richard.
Together they laid down strict rules to keep the vital traffic moving.
The road was divided up into six cantonments, each with its own crews of pioneers and vast workshops to service the primitive vehicles.
It was to be reserved exclusively for motor transport, all marching columns to keep to the field on either side; any truck breaking down was at once to be heaved into the ditch.
There could be no hold-ups.
At the same time ten battalions of Territorials were set to work building a new broad-gauge railway to Revigny.
But were there enough motor vehicles in the French Army to sustain the flow?
The new invention had been badly neglected in the French Army before the war, like most others.
In 1914 there were only 170 vehicles in the whole army, and throughout the war the officer in charge of the French Service Corps never held a higher rank than lieutenant-colonel.
Fortunately the brilliant improvisation of the Marne aroused G.Q.G. to the  possibilities of motor transport.
At the time of the German attack, the combined resources of the RFVI and the neighbouring Third Army could raise 700 trucks, representing a daily capacity of 1,250 tons.
But it was estimated that the forces at Verdun would require at least 2,000 tons a day, plus another 1OO for every additional division brought up.
Major Richard and his men scoured France for transport.
Once again the miracle of the taxis of the Marne was repeated; this time in Paris the price of vegetables doubled as one by one the civilian camions disappeared off the streets.
Even by the time Pétain took over, Richard had somehow assembled 3,500 assorted vehicles.
It was an astonishing feat for a mere major.
But still there was a chronic shortage of trained crews.
After fifty, sometimes seventy-five hours without a break, drivers began to collapse at their wheels, and another precious vehicle would be written of–.
Senegalese brought into the service depots at first ate the grease supplied to lubricate the strange monsters.
Lack of skill combined with the sheer unreliability of the primitive mechanisms kept Richard's workshops constantly overflowing.
The antics of the vehicles with their solid, treadless tyres on the icy roads reminded an American observer of the irregular march of young elephants: ‘Many of them slid over the edge, turning upside down, and others caught fire.’
But still the traffic kept flowing.
Seen from a distance at night, the dimly lit vehicles resembled ‘the folds of some gigantic and luminous serpent which never stopped and never ended’ On either side of the road their headlamps lit up the bowed backs of the endless columns of marching men.
It seemed as if all the vitality of France were flowing up this narrow artery.
Then, on February 28th, disaster struck.
There was a drastic thaw, and in a matter of hours the unmetalled road turned to liquid mud.
At places it was sinking up to eighteen inches.
The young elephants threatened to flounder to a halt, and with them the flow of life-blood to Verdun.
Delegated complete powers by Pétain, Richard in desperation summoned up all available Territorials.
Almost shoulder to shoulder they were lined along the road, hurling gravel non-stop under the wheels of the passing trucks.
An anxious Pétain telephoned Richard:
‘Will the road hold?’
‘The road will hold.’
‘Good.
Otherwise I was going to give the order to evacuate the Right Bank.’
The road held.
During the critical week beginning February 28th, over 25,000 tons of supplies and 190,000 men were brought in over it to Verdun.
At its peak, in June, when 12,000 vehicles were employed, one passed along it every fourteen seconds, and it was estimated that the mileage accrued each week along its short fifty miles added up to twenty-five times the earth's circumference.
To ensure that the crisis of February could never be repeated, Pétain employed the equivalent of more than a whole division of men permanently mending the road.
All the colourful components of France's Colonial Empire were to be found at work keeping the Verdun lifeline open; powerful Senegalese, with their chants of ‘cassa-le-caillou’, wielded picks next to industrious little Annamites, clad in yellow uniforms.
During the ten months the siege was to last, Richard's road gangs were said to have shovelled nearly three-quarters of a million tons of metal on to the road.
Aptly compared by one historian to General Grant's Chattanooga railway of 1863, it established military history.
With something like two-thirds of the whole French Army to pass along it bound for the dreadful Calvary of Verdun, the title Maurice Barres coined for it was hardly a profanity: the Voie Sacrée.
At the front the news ‘Pétain is in control’ had an instant and magical effect.
‘France has her eyes on you,’ he had told them in his first Order of the Day, and the troops had their eyes on Pétain; even though for the best part of a week they were not actually to see the new commander in person.
What the appearance of de Castelnau had done to raise morale at the various HQs, the mere name of Pétain did among the ordinary soldiers.
The sagging line stiffened, and finally froze.
The 27th of February, the Reichs Archives recorded as being ‘the first day of the Battle for Verdun that, despite the heroic fighting of the troops and despite great and bloody sacrifices, brought German arms no success anywhere.’
The elite XX Corps was now fully entrenched on the Right Bank, and, as already noted, other big reinforcements were on their way to Verdun.
Even the gaping hole left by de Bonneval's precipitate retreat on Belleville Ridge had been plugged before the over-cautious Germans could exploit it — although it had been left open for twelve hours.
A hastily assembled group of the famous 75s had been pushed forward on to Froideterre, and its lethal barrage had given one of the fresh divisions of XX Corps just enough time to move up through the ebbing debris of de Bonneval's 37th African Division and establish a firm line from Bras to Haudromont.
It was around Douaumont Village that the main fury of the fighting raged.
For the best part of a week it continued.
Three times the Germans attacked in vain.
Under cover of the machine-gun turrets in the fort (operated by von Brandis) the 24th Brandenburgers were thrown into the fray again, still flushed with their triumph.
But this time they suffered their heaviest casualties since the battle began.
A new regiment of Saxons made its appearance, only to be massacred by its own heavy guns.
On the 27th, a Jäger battalion lost 413 killed.
Several times the village actually changed hands.
The 420s were then deployed to flail its ruins with their one-ton projectiles.
A French lieutenant holding a bunker in the village noted that under the bombardment ‘this vast block, 30 metres square, oscillated, at times actually rising up, like a ship’ Yet still the suicide machine-gun nests stayed behind in the pulverised debris and mowed down the German assault waves.
The grey carpet that lined the slopes leading up to Douaumont grew thicker.
The French 95th Regiment which had held the village on the disastrous day of February 25th was withdrawn, decimated, from the battle.
Other regiments followed.
At last, by a strange quirk of irony, Pétain's own, the 33rd, took its turn at Douaumont.
On the way to the line, an officer of the 33rd wrote to his parents with premonition, ‘Is this farewell?’
For many it was.
Within three days word came back to Pétain that one whole battalion of his old regiment had been virtually wiped out, and one of its companies reduced to nineteen men.
On the list of officer casualties appeared the name of a young company commander who Pétain recalled had been particularly eager to join his regiment, and had seemed to have quite a promising future.
Now, badly wounded, he had been taken prisoner.
His name was Captain Charles de Gaulle.
Early on the morning of March 4th, the remnants of the 33rd were mopped up and the fragmented stones that had once been Douaumont village fell to the Germans.
Still the local commander attempted to retake it by one of those spontaneous counter-attacks, but Pétain now intervened, crying hold, enough.
With the fall of the village the first phase of the battle ended, and an even grimmer one began.
REAPPRAISALS
Up till March the impression was that Verdun was a German victory
…
GENERAL LUDENDORFF
There are military leaders who need no advice, who evaluate things themselves and decide; their entourage has only to carry things out.
But these are stars of the first order, which are barely produced once in a hundred years.
In the majority of cases, the commander of an army will not wish to dispense with advice…
— MOLTKE THE ELDER, Italian Campaign of 1859
ON February 27th, Franz Marc, the artist, wrote home in an awed tone from the Verdun front; ‘…the whole French line is broken through.
No man.who has not experienced it can have an idea of the fantastic rage and force of the German attack…’ adding, with a characteristic note of compassion, ‘the poor horses!’
A letter dated March 2nd already betrays some misgiving through its protestation: ‘I don't for one minute doubt about the fall of Verdun.’
March 3rd, pure gloom; ‘For days I have seen nothing but the most terrible things that can be painted from a human mind.’
The next day a French shell put an end to the correspondence, and to a great talent.
One of the things that makes war so fascinating to its students and so frustrating to its participants is that in a moment of supreme crisis it is rarely given for one side, obsessed by its own difficulties, to see just how bad things are in the enemy camp.
Though the hardpressed French could not see it at the time, something had in fact gone dramatically wrong with the meticulous German plans; that is, with the Crown Prince's plans.
For all its terrifying initial impetus, by the end of February the attack had bogged down, and to a large extent of its own accord.
In one most important sense, the bogging down was quite literal.
Pursuant to Falkenhayn's scheme of grinding the French Army to pieces by sheer weight of artillery, the Fifth Army's guns had orders to move up to new positions as soon as the enemy first line had been overrun.
The timetable for leap-frogging them forward had been a masterpiece of staff work, but — as not infrequently occurs to the end products of the thorough German military mind — one small omission arose to defeat it.
No  allowance had been made for the physical difficulty of getting heavy guns over a battlefield where all roads had been obliterated and every inch of ground thrown up into huge mounds and craters by the attackers' own bombardment.
The thaw which had so earnestly menaced France's lifeline to Verdun became, on balance, more her ally than her foe; it turned the pulverised earth into a glutinous quagmire that sucked off the close-fitting knee-boots of the German infantry; the 8-ton howitzers sank up to their axles in it, and the Germans' new motor tractors were too few and too under-powered to extract them.
There remained only the horses and human muscle.
With brute strength (it took at least ten horses to shift even one medium field gun), the Germans eventually moved their guns forward but the delays involved meant that many of the deadly 21Os, so essential a part of the German offensive technique, were hors de combat over long periods of the battle during its most critical phase.
Caught out in the open, the German guns had a heavy toll exacted by the long-range French 155s, now arriving in ever-increasing quantities.
A splinter killed the commander of III Corps Field Artillery, brave old General Lotterer who had seldom been far from his forward guns during the first phase of the battle.
Particularly terrible was the suffering of Franz Marc's horses; in one day alone, 7,000 died, and 97 were killed by a single shot from a French naval gun.
The mere wear-and-tear of the prolonged firing contributed to German losses; after superhuman efforts, one of the monster 420s had been moved up to the Bois des Fosses in order to knock out Fort Souville, but on the third shot a shell exploded in the worn barrel, killing almost the entire crew.
When at last the guns were in position, utter exhaustion on the part of the gunners sorely reduced both the rapidity and accuracy of their fire.
Finally, over the devastated battlefield and the approach roads — the latter rendered quite chaotic by the even more viscous mud of the Woevre, and clogged with the moving gun-teams — it was impossible to bring up enough ammunition to sustain anything like the rate of fire of the first four days.
Supplies became so critical that by March 3rd several batteries of howitzers had to be withdrawn altogether.
The effect of this decline in German firepower at a moment when the French artillery, reorganised by Pétain, was beginning to be effective, was immediate and lethal.
More and more frequently the assaulting infantry discovered that French machine-gun nests had been left untouched by the artillery.
It was all becoming depressinglv similar to the mournful experiences of every Allied offensive on the Western Front.
What, now, of Falkenhayn's promise that the infantry would just walk into Verdun once the artillery had done its stuff?
The casualty lists were growing longer and longer.
In the period February 21st-26th, the French losses amounted to 25,000 men, and, although during that time the ratio of French and German casualties was reliably estimated at three to one, by the 29th German losses had already passed the 25,000 mark.
On March 1st a French listening post overheard a German remark on the telephone: ‘if it goes on like this we shan't have a man left after the war’.
In III Corps, one battalion of the Prussian Leib Grenadiers had been reduced to 196 strong in the fighting for Douaumont village, and another regiment of the same brigade had, by the second day of March, lost 38 officers and 1,151 men.
In XVIII Corps, the three Hessian regiments of the brigade that had overwhelmed Driant in the Bois des Caures had also lost over a thousand men each.
Both Corps had to be pulled out of the line, exhausted, on March 12th; by which time the XVIIIth alone had lost 10,309 men and 295 officers.
But perhaps the most punishing — and undeserved — losses had been suffered by von Zwehl's VII Reserve Corps, which had done so brilliantly in the first days of the battle.
In its rapid advance up the right bank of the Meuse, it had increasingly exposed its flank to the French on the hills the other side of the river.
By February 27th Pétain had amassed a powerful array of heavy batteries there.
Even though, forged before the introduction of recoil mechanism, they bounced back and had to be relaid after each shot just like cannon of the Napoleonic era, the elderly French 155s cracked and thundered with remarkable accuracy.
Firing visually into the dense grey packs moving across their front on the slopes opposite, only a few thousand yards off, gunners can seldom have had so superb a target.
One particularly exposed ravine running down to the Meuse was nicknamed the ‘Bowling Alley’ by the Germans, and indeed the image was an apt one.
With extremely heavy losses, the advance of the 77th Brigade over Talou Ridge was stopped in its tracks.
The usury paid merely to hold the conguered ground became daily more prohibitive.
Nowhere seemed to be safe from the searching French guns; during the first days of March one regiment lost more men while behind the lines in reserve than during its assault on Haumont Wood the first day of the offensive.
Worse, the Germans seemed helpless to stop the slaughter.
Every available battery was brought to bear on the French guns, but many of these had taken up position behind the parapets of the forts clustered on the Bois Bourrus ridge and were consequently most difficult to hit.
To General von Zwehl the slaughter of his triumphant corps was particularly galling.
On three separate occasions before the war he had taken part in manoeuvres dedicated to the capture of Verdun, and each had ended with the conclusion that the attack would have to be made simultaneously on both banks to obviate the danger of flanking fire.
Before the offensive began he had tried in vain to impress this upon his superiors.
Now it was his men that were paying the penalty.
In desperation he attempted at dawn on the 27th to throw a force across the Meuse at Samogneux, but the attackers were caught up on wire entanglements hidden beneath the flooded river.
Almost all of them were either drowned or captured.
Von Zwehl now dispatched his Chief of Staff to the Crown Prince to urge once again, and in no uncertain terms, that a full-scale attack be launched on the Left Bank.
As the German losses mounted, an eye-witness tells of a battleshocked captain, summoned to his Battalion Commander, exclaiming: ‘What!…
Battalion?
Is there still such a thing?’
Elsewhere a General described the spectacle of wounded men that streamed back uncontrollably past his HQ as being ‘like a vision of hell’.
Each commander began to beseech his immediate superior for reinforcements.
But, by February 25th, the day when the way to Verdun was wide open, the whole Fifth Army had only one fresh regiment left in reserve.
The Crown Prince telephoned Falkenhayn urgently for the reinforcements he had been promised.
They were not, and would not be, forthcoming.
Battalions that had lost four hundred men received half that number of replacements, in driblets.
Meanwhile, the two promised divisions, which, had they been available at the right moment, would almost certainly have presented Verdun to the Germans, were still firmly held at Metz, two day's march away.
And Falkenhayn had no intention of releasing his grip on them until the bulk of the French Army had been lured into his trap.
The  remainder of the German reserves on the Western Front were sitting uselessly opposite the British, awaiting the relief offensive that Haig manifestly had neither the will nor the wherewithal to make.
Thus Falkenhayn through his pusillanimity, his passion for half-measures and his obsession with the ‘bleeding white’ experiment, on February 25th-26th lost the opportunity of bringing off one of the greatest triumphs of the war.
It was one that would never recur.
Little did he know then, but he had thrown away probably the last good chance that Germany had of winning the war.
Among the German miscalculations that on various historical occasions have seemed Heaven-sent to save the Allies, Falkenhayn's denial of reserves to the Crown Prince reminds one of Hitler halting his Panzers before they closed in on the BEF at Dunkirk, different though the motives may have been.
But whatever blame for the German failure in the first week at Verdun may attach to Falkenhayn (and in his Memoirs the Crown Prince heaps all of it on him), the Fifth Army Command was not entirely beyond reproach.
It is felt by responsible military critics, French and German, that the Crown Prince could still have taken Verdun on the initial thrust without the reserves withheld by Falkenhayn.
Certainly, in its execution of the attack the Fifth Army had displayed a cumbersomeness and excess of caution that would never have been countenanced by most of Hitler's captains.
By limiting itself to cautious probing on the 21st (all except for the disobedient von Zwehl who had registered the day's only success), it had lost a valuable day.
As late as the 24th, when it was obvious the whole French front was collapsing, the German storm troops still waited for a renewed artillery preparation, and then moved circumspectly, as if half-expecting to walk into some kind of –rap.
It seemed as if , after eighteen months of complete stalemate on the Western Front, with neither side able to make a breakthrough, the subordinate German commanders at Verdun had lost confidence to succeed where so many others had failed.
On the last day of February a conference took place between the Crown Prince and his staff, and General von Falkenhayn.
What was the Fifth Army to do next?
The atmosphere was hardly warm.
All Falkenhayn could set against the Fifth Army's disappointment at Verdun was the news that the simultaneous U-boat campaign (as ordained in his Memorandum to the Kaiser) had already had outstanding success.
As he dwelt particularly on the menace of the French positions on the Left Bank, the Heir to the Throne must have  had some difficulty hiding a note of ‘I-told-so-you-so’ For Falkenhayn, in his insistence on limiting the attack to one bank only, had stood in an isolation that was hardly splendid.
General de Rivieres, the creator of Verdun fortress had warned that its Achilles Heel lay on the Left Bank.
There was the lesson of the pre-war German manoeuvres, and the fact that all Falkenhayn's artillery advisers had stressed the necessity of attacking on both sides of the Meuse.
And even Crown Prince Rupprecht, far removed from Verdun, had warned him days before the offensive began that the advance would be halted by flanking fire from the Left Bank.
But the cold, aloof Commander-in-Chief had asked no one for advice, and had taken none.
In his Memoirs he claims feebly he had foreseen the dangers, but believed that with the limited forces available an attack on the Left Bank would have been stopped by the ‘well-constructed’ enemy position.
(In fact, the French lines there on February 21st were no better prepared than they had been on the Right Bank, and the rejoinder that if he had not had adequate forces he should not have undertaken the offensive in the first place is almost too obvious).
Asked for his views on the future of the offensive, the Crown Prince said, however, that he thought it should continue.
Undoubtedly progress would henceforth be more difficult now surprise had been lost, but the prospects of a ‘considerable moral and material victory’ were still immensely enticing.
He insisted on three conditions.
Firstly, the offensive must be spread at once to the Left Bank; not, now, because this might represent the best way to Verdun, but ‘rather on the tactical necessity of relieving our main attack’.
Secondly, he must be ‘absolutely assured that the High Command was in a position to furnish us with the necessary men and material for the continuance of the offensive, and that not by driblets, but on a large scale’ Thirdly, the campaign should be halted the moment ‘we ourselves were losing more heavily and becoming exhausted more rapidly than the enemy’.
Falkenhayn's precise reply has not been recorded, but it appears to have satisfied the Crown Prince and General von Knobelsdorf.
Preparations were set in hand for a major effort on the Left Bank on March 6th, for which a new Army Corps, the VI Reserve, was earmarked (representing, in terms of manpower, an outlay of rather more than the reserves Falkenhayn had withheld in February).
Conjointly, a second attack was to be launched the following day on the Right Bank to capture Fort Vaux, whose enfilading guns had also  stopped the Fifth Army on its other flank.
Until these two menaces were eradicated the centre, anchored on Fort Douaumont, would stand still.
The so-called ‘Battle of the Wings’ was about to begin.
Like a fast-growing tumour, Falkenhayn's ‘limited’ offensive had already doubled in size.
At his headquarters behind the Somme, the astute Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria noted down in his diary: ‘I hear that at Verdun the Left Bank of the Meuse is to be attacked now, too.
It should have been done at once; now the moment of surprise is lost.’
Geographically, the two banks of the Meuse stand in appreciable contrast to each other.
The one is broken by frequent, sudden gullies and steep ridges thickly clad with woods; ideal, as it had proved, for the practice of German infiltration techniques.
The other, the Left Bank, is open rolling country where sheep graze prosperously on the broad grassy slopes; valleys are wide, hills less crowded, the cover sparse, and views extensive.
It is, in fact, not unlike Salisbury Plain.
Of the features between Verdun and the front line, the chief objective designated by the German command was a long, bare barrow running at right angles to the river, and topped with twin hillocks.
It was called le Mort Homme.
Though its elevation was some three hundred feet lower than Fort Douaumont, the field of vision in every direction from it was remarkable.
Capture of the Mort Homme would eliminate the most injurious of the French field gun batteries that were crouched behind it, and would effectively dominate the next ridge towards Verdun, the vital Bois Bourrus where the French heavies were concentrated.
Just two miles from the German forward positions, the Mort Homme seemed hardly beyond the scope of a determined thrust — especially when it was recalled that the Fifth Army had advanced three times as far during the first four days alone on the Right Bank.
But in fact the Mort Homme, with its sinister name acquired from some long-forgotten tragedy of another age, was to be the centre of the most bitter, see-saw fighting for the best part of the next three months.
When, each morning of that first anxious week, Colonel de Barescut attended the sickbed at Souilly to report on the events of the previous night, he had been asked the same question: ‘What's new on the Left Bank?’
As still the expected attack did not materialise — despite constant intelligence warnings of long columns of troop transports, of construction of the now familiar Stollen on the Left Bank — Petain was heard to remark, ‘They don't know their  business.’
This time France would not, at least, be caught by surprise.
Defences were feverishly reinforced, and unremitting artillery fire forced even the Crown Prince to admit that ‘our preparations for the attack were considerably interrupted’.
By the morning of the 6th, when the thunderous German bombardment began to roll over the French positions, General de Bazelaire had four divisions up in the line on the Left Bank and a fifth in reserve.
It was the nearest thing to a coherent defence system yet seen at Verdun.
Nevertheless, the new German onslaught at once chalked up some depressingly easy successes.
With an intensity comparable to the devastating bombardment of February 21st, the heavy German shells rained down on a French division of mediocre calibre, the 67th, whose experience of this kind of thing had so far been limited to second-hand accounts from across the river.
Within half an hour, all telephone lines to the rear were, as usual, severed.
Morale was shaken.
Then, with less delay this time, the German infantry attacked.
In a driving snowstorm, the German 77th Brigade crossed the flooded Meuse at Brabant and Champneuville, redeeming its earlier failure.
Ingeniously General von Zwehl had smuggled up an armoured train whose well-protected guns gave the infantry close support across the river.
The watchful French gunners behind Bois Bourrus soon pin-pointed the train by the tell-tale smoke from its engine, and it was forced to retire, a little ignominiously.
But the damage was done; von Zwehl's men were established on the Left Bank, well behind the French first line.
Now a quite unexpected calamity overtook the French; the Bois Bourrus gunners rained down a murderous hail on the advancing Germans but in the soft swampy ground bordering the Meuse many of the shell fuses failed to explode.
Dismay spread among the defenders.
Moving speedily up the Left Bank of the river, General Riemann's 22nd Reserve Division joined up with von Zwehl's men, to effect a neat pincer on the French hemmed within the bend of the river at Regneville.
The defence was feeble.
By nightfall the Germans had taken the villages of Forges and Regneville and the important Height 265 on Goose Ridge (Côte de l'Oie).
At its western extremity this ridge merged into the Bois des Corbeaux that flanked the Mort Homme directly from the northeast.
Already, the swift-moving German vanguard was groping its way into the Bois des Corbeaux; the only wood near the Mort Homme, where those well-tried infiltration tactics could be used to excellent advantage.
However the frontal, main attack towards the Mort Homme had barely moved from its point of departure; stopped by a veritable wall of gunfire from the French artillery that had been anticipating attack from this direction for many days.
Repeatedly the hoarse-voiced Feldwebels tried to rally their men forward in one more supreme effort, but the result was always the same.
Already an established feature in the fighting of Verdun, success or otherwise of the opposing artillery entirely predetermined the fortunes of the infantry.
On the French side, consternation.
The 67th Division had given ground too readily.
By the end of the second day's fighting, over 3,000 of its men had surrendered; more than 1,200 from the 211th Regiment alone.
The customary draconian edict was dispatched from General de Bazelaire's HQ (alas, also to fall into German hands); the commander at Forges had failed in his duty and would be court-martialled; artillery and machine guns would be turned upon any unit retreating further.
It was easy to divine German intentions, and how menacing they suddenly seemed.
The crucial Mort Homme was to be taken by a flanking attack from the northeast, via the Bois des Corbeaux.
By the afternoon of the 7th, to the accompaniment of barrages enveloping the whole sector that seemed to reach a crescendo of fury, the Germans captured the whole of the Bois des Corbeaux; including the wounded Colonel of the 211th, saved no doubt from savage disgrace himself by a spirited last-ditch defence.
At all costs the Bois had to be retaken.
With a crack regiment drawn from the other end of his line, de Bazelaire decided to throw in at dawn on the 8th one of those swift counter-attacks.
Selected to lead this desperate attack was the elegant Lt-Colonel Macker, whose upswept moustachios seem to epitomise all the pride, spartanism, tradition and fanatical courage that constituted the St. Cyrien of pre-1914 France.
His action reads more like a page from Austerlitz or Borodino than from the grey annals of the First World War.
Aroused by his orderly before dawn, le beau Colonel, under a tumultuous bombardment, composedly and meticulously groomed himself for the fray, washing his moustachios in pinard, in the absence of water.
Like a Napoleonic formation, the regiment lined up shoulder to shoulder in three tight echelons, the colonel at its head brandishing his cane and calmly smoking a cigar.
At a steady walk the regiment began to cover the 400 yards to the wood.
Great holes were torn in it by the German machine guns and shrapnel, but with a discipline that would have honoured the Old Guard, it closed ranks.
At one hundred yards, Macker's men fixed bayonets and charged.
Inside the wood the somewhat precarious salient formed by the German advance had been inadequately reinforced.
Thoroughly taken aback by the superb élan of the French attack coming at them with steel glinting grey in the snowy twilight, and further unnerved by the early death of their commander, the German force now fell back.
By 7.20 a.m. virtually the whole of the Bois des Corbeaux was again in French hands.
News of its loss disjointed German overall plans on the Left Bank at a most critical moment.
A bombardment of the Mort Homme that was to prelude an all-out final attack was abruptly called off, and all efforts switched to holding the territory conquered on the 6th against fresh French sallies.
Seldom had an impromptu French counter-attack succeeded so well.
By March 9th when the Germans were ready to make a renewed attempt on the Mort Homme, via Bethincourt to the northwest, the French were well-consolidated after their initial setback; the Reichs Archives chronicle the ‘tragedy of the first utterly collapsed assault on the Left Bank’ But le beau Colonel, alas, was barely to outlive his triumph.
In yet a second, spirited dawn attack on the 10th, his regiment had pushed the Germans out of another small wood adjacent to the Bois des Corbeaux.
Afterwards Macker moved forward to congratulate one of his battalion commanders.
Both were struck dead by a German machine-gunner.
At this very moment, the Germans attacked again and, as so often happens on the death of an inspired leader, Macker's men lost heart.
Once more the Bois des Corbeaux changed hands, but German losses were so high (one Silesian battalion was reduced to 300 men) that they could advance no further.
For the next month the front on this approach to the Mort Homme barely shifted.
Meanwhile, on the Right Bank the renewed German endeavour had met with even less success.
Up to the last minute the enormous problems of ammunition supply to the guns had not been overcome.
Even the tough German infantrymen had been used as human mules, lugging the heavy shells up on their backs.
But the gas shells to be used in the big trench mortars had displayed a nasty unreliability and troops were not unnaturally reluctant to carry them.
In the end the attack had had to be postponed forty-eight hours, so that, once again , the advantage of a sychronised effort on both sides of the Meuse was lost.
The impetus of the initial onslaught carried it into the outskirts of Vaux village and to the very edge of the fort.
But there it petered out in a welter of bloody, confused fighting.
Amid the confusion (Vaux village is said to have changed hands thirteen times during the March fighting), word came back to the German Divisional Commander, bearing the imaginative name of von Guretzky-Cornitz, that the fort had actually been taken.
Without bothering to confirm the report, Guretzky-Cornitz passed it on to Army HQ, embellished with a few boastful addenda of his own.
Again without a query, the news was triumphantly relayed all over the world, with the simultaneous announcement that the Kaiser had bestowed the Pour le Mérite upon Guretzky-Cornitz.
German troops marched off in column of four, without reconnaissance, to take over the fort.
Like tin soldiers they fell; for none of their nation had yet set foot in Fort Vaux.
At G.Q.G. the propagandists — still deflated from their bludgeoning over Douaumont — seized on the German blunder and ensuing attempts at justification with shrieks of joy.
Joffre himself was jubilant at the news of the German attacks being held all along the line, proclaiming victory and standing by to take most of the credit himself.
To the men of the Second Army he declared in a vibrant Order of the Day: ‘You will be those of whom it will be said —‘they barred the way to Verdun!’’
To the National Defence Council he asserted that of course there had never been any intention of abandoning the Right Bank.
To an annoyed Pétain he began talking about an early major counter-offensive at Verdun.
THE MORT HOMME
The enemy can renew his endeavours…
France, reassured and confident, knows that the barricades with which the army will oppose them will not be thrown over.
— GENERAL GALLIÉNI
NEITHER Pétain nor any of the French commanders at Verdun entirely shared Joffre's optimism.
For the Crown Prince was far from having shot his second bolt.
The promised reserves were flowing more freely this time, and on March 14th — the first radiant day of spring sunshine — a new all-out attack was launched frontally on the Mort Homme with no less than six divisions.
Day after day it continued.
To the French it seemed as if there were no limit to the amount of men and shells the enemy was prepared to expend in order to gain possession of this one desolate hill.
A monotonous, deadly pattern was established that continued on this one tiny sector of the battlefield almost without let-up for the next two months.
After hours of saturating bombardment, the German assault troops would surge forward to carry what remained of the French front line.
One could not speak of trenches; they no longer existed.
What the advancing Germans occupied were for the most part clusters of shell-holes, where isolated groups of men lived and slept and died defending their ‘position’ with grenade and pick-helve.
For once the Germans were no better off; there were no materials with which to build their beloved Stollen, even had the French artillery provided a respite.
When once the German impetus had exhausted itself, ground down by the lethal barrages from the Bois Bourrus guns, the inevitable French riposte would — within 24 hours — push the survivors back again.
But always, always the movement was like that of the incoming tide; each wave in its flow and ebb brought the sea of Feldgrau a little further forward.
At what cost!
In the fury of the battle casualties on either side were mounting appallingly.
A contemporary cartoon in London's Land and Water, entitled ‘Verdun.
Storming Le Mort Homme’, depicted the Kaiser and the Crown Prince flogging German soldiers on into the arms of Death.
By the end of March the totals had reached 81,607 Germans to 89,000 French.
Compressed as the battle  arena had become, losses suffered among the senior commanders were every bit as grievous as among the rank-and-file; in one French division, three out of four full colonels were killed during the mid-March fighting.
On the Left Bank the Germans began to find themselves at an increasing tactical disadvantage.
Gone were the woods and broken country where their infiltration methods could excel.
The terrifying flame-throwers had now largely become suicide weapons, an immediate target the moment they appeared in the open.
In horrible fascination French troops watched as the fuel  canisters , punctured by a grenade or shell, turned their bearers into writhing torches; or when, wounded, the German Pioneers spun round to hose their own companions with the hellish liquid.
But worst of all these tactical disabilities was the flanking fire that was crippling their frontal assaults the moment they debouched into open ground.
The Fifth Army had spread its attack across the Meuse to eliminate the guns that were gnawing its right flank.
Now, in turn, that secondary attack was being eviscerated by French guns that had set up to its right, on a ridge that was the western twin of the Mort Homme, called simply Côte 304.
As the Allies had discovered in all their abortive offensives, however wide the front might be there would always be a devilish machine gun on a flank that could hold up a whole division; broaden the front to eliminate that machine gun, and inevitably there would be yet another on the new flank.
Like a surgeon treating galloping cancer, the knife is enticed even farther from the original point of application.
Thus now the Germans, after the costly failure of their first series of attacks on the Mort Homme, decided they could proceed no further until Côte 304 was theirs.
As before, their first effort was crowned with an unattended disaster for the French.
In their initial — and nearly successful — attempt on the Mort Homme the Germans had sought to outflank it from the northeast, and now they tried a similar movement on Côte 304 from the west.
The point they selected was the western extremity of the Verdun salient, between the villages of Malancourt and Avocourt, where the front swung south through the tip of the Forest of Hesse.
Here, in the Bois d'Avocourt, was a dangerous re-entrant in the French lines, but recognised as such and heavily fortified.
Well-concealed redoubts were guarded by a triple barrier of barbed wire, fifty yards deep.
It was probably the strongest section of the French line on the Left Bank.
To the Germans, however, it  presented the key to Côte 304, which was the key to Mort Homme, which in turn was the key that would unlock the Right Bank, und so weiter.
The task fell to the 11th Bavarian Division, a unit that had recently distinguished itself under von Mackensen in the Serbian and Galician campaigns.
Its commander, von Kneussl, had won the Pour le Merite for the capture of the Russian fortress of Przemysl.
For a long time the industrious Bavarians had been preparing for such an attack.
The usual deep Stollen had been dug, and sappers had run several mineshafts beneath the French defences.
None of this had escaped French notice, and some of the heaviest mortars they could muster had been brought up; resulting in the burying alive of many of the Bavarians underneath their Stollen.
Moreover, at the critical moment at least one of the mines failed to go off.
However, none of these preparations were necessary; success was presented to the Bavarians in quite another way.
The French 29th Division holding the Bois d'Avocourt had been just too long in the trenches.
Many of its men came from the soft and dreamy Midi.
Morale was low and desertion high.
From deserters von Kneussl's intelligence officers gained very precise information on the passages through the enemy wire; even the French themselves afterwards claimed that ‘doubtful elements’ had entered into parleys with the Germans, and actually shown them the way.
Whichever the true cause (and the mystery has never been entirely solved, the German official history still preferring to attribute the success to the sheer ‘force’ of the Bavarian attack), within four hours on the morning of March 20th the entire position fell, with negligible losses to the attackers.
A whole French brigade was surrounded and compelled to surrender; the total bag amounting to 2,825 troops, twenty-five machine guns and twelve assorted cannon, and a box full of brand new Croixde-Guerres — a discovery which delighted German war correspondents.
Among the fifty-eight French officers captured were the Brigadier and two Regimental Commanders, the former taken in his dugout before he had heard a shot fired.
To those in the know in France, the disaster at Avocourt was a stunning blow.
President Poincaré wrote gloomily in his diary: ‘Encore une défaillance!‘, revealing that this was not the first news he had received of a lapse of morale at Verdun.
In the opinion of General Palat this episode was ‘perhaps the most deplorable to occur on our side during the Great War’ The disgrace, coupled  with the new grave menace it presented, roused the Left Bank defenders to a new fury, and the French 155s made tenancy of the Bois d'Avocourt as disagreeable as possible for the Bavarians.
On the 22nd, a major German attempt to capitalise on the Avocourt success was caught by brilliantly sited French machine guns, firing at them from three sides.
Rain had turned the battlefield to a swamp, and it proved impossible to move up heavy mortars to knock them out.
The French machine-gunners fired until whole battalions were slaughtered, almost to a man.
The Reichs Archives speak of the day's fighting being ‘one of the most heroic’ of the entire battle, an adjective not infreqently used by First World War officialdom when casualties had been particularly hideous.
In fact, the losses of the comparatively few German battalions engaged in this small corner of the Verdun front that day alone exceeded 2,400, little less than the total British casualties on D-Day in 1944.
The gain was nil.
On March 29th, the French tried to replug the menacing hole in their lines at Bois d'Avocourt.
The attack was led by a distinguished French military writer, Lt-Colonel de Malleray.
He retook part of the wood, but, as so often happened, was mortally wounded soon afterwards, with both his legs severed.
The story has it that young de Malleray, a second-lieutenant in the same regiment, having heard the first news but not the sequel, was himself on the way up to the line that evening, and encountered his father's Colonel.
‘Are you pleased with my father, mon Colonel?’ the son asked proudly.
‘Ah! mon pauvre petit!’ was all he could reply.
Signs of exhaustion were growing among the attackers.
One lieutenant-colonel in his prime died of a heart attack, and the German M.O.s began expressing serious concern about the physical state of the troops.
For the first time there were reports of German units refusing to ‘go over the top’, or surrendering too easily.
Increasingly familiar became the tone of letters home like the following: ‘Of my section, which consisted of 19 men, only 3 are left…
Those who got away with a Heimatschuss (a’ blighty wound ‘) say they were lucky.’
Part of the trouble lay in the German command's ruthless system of keeping divisions in the line over lengthy periods, constantly topping up the losses with new replacements.
As the leavening of hardened veterans became sparser and sparser, so the pathetic eighteen-year-olds fresh from the parade grounds in the Fatherland showed themselves less and less capable of standing up to the remorseless demands of the Verdun fighting.
Their faltering affected  the hitting power of whole regiments.
In his usual cold manner, Falkenhayn summed up the March results as follows: ‘owing to the peculiar conformation we could not use these successes to bring our artillery far enough forward, and consequently the preparatory work here had to be continued.’
Despite the omens of stress and the disappointing results, the Germans kept up their ‘preparations’, doggedly battering away on the Left Bank, regardless of cost.
Steadily the grey tide inched forward.
On March 31st, Malancourt fell; on April 5th, Haucourt, and April 8th, Bethincourt.
For the French, thought the German commanders, circumstances must be so much worse, casualties so much higher; how much more could they stand?
On April 1st, the Kaiser — publicly exposing the German hand for the first time — declared: ‘The decision of the War of 1870 took place in Paris.
This war will end at Verdun.’
Again the Germans changed their tactics.
Now, on April 9th, they decided to mount a full-scale offensive along the whole Verdun front, on both banks of the Meuse; doing what should have been done on February 21st.
Côte 304 and the Mort Homme were both to be assaulted simultaneously.
The Fifth Army command had been streamlined, with General von Mudra placed in command of the whole Right Bank, and General von Gallwitz brought back from the Balkans to command the Left Bank sector.
Von Gallwitz was a talented artillerist, having been the Inspector General of the Field Artillery just before the war, and more recently had added to his lustre in leading the Eleventh Army to victory in Serbia.
With him came a young staff officer destined to become one of Germany's greatest commanders in the Second World War; Erich von Manstein.
But hardly had General von Gallwitz arrived at Verdun before he was forcibly impressed by the potency of the French artillery; it had just blown to pieces one of his divisional commanders in his car.
Gloomily he confided to his diary, ‘Too great a task, undertaken with inadequate reserves.’
For the actual conquest of the elusive Mort Homme, none other than the elder brother of the Commander-in-Chief had been selected; General of the Cavalry, Eugene von Falkenhayn, commander of the XXII Reserve Corps, and childhood tutor to the Crown Prince.
He seems to have had his full share of the family cautiousness; complaining of his methodical slowness, von Gallwitz remarked sarcastically: ‘We shall be in Verdun at the earliest by 1920.’
Under the relentless pressure all along the front, French  commanders of every sector were desperately appealing for reserves; which often were simply not there.
Yet, for all the massive support on either side of him, all the elder Falkenhayn could achieve was to push the line up on to the north crest of the Mort Homme.
Great was the rejoicing, briefly, in the German camp; for their maps marked this crest as the Mort Homme itself.
The rejoicing was not shared by the weary infantrymen who had just fought their way on to it.
Beyond, a few hundred yards distant, lay yet another summit, 100 feet higher, the true Mort Homme, which was still firmly held by the French.
Few mountaineers can ever have experienced more bitter frustration.
For this latest effort, the greatest since February 21st, the Germans had expended seventeen trainloads of ammunition and many thousands more men.
One of the elder Falkenhayn's divisions alone left 2,200 men on the blood-soaked northern slopes of the Mort Homme.
But everywhere, with a minor dent here and there, the French line had held.
Once again, much of the German casualty list had been caused by those infuriating guns behind Côte 304.
In a rare note of optimism Pétain issued an Order of the Day, beginning, ‘The 9th of April was a glorious day for our forces,’ and ending with a famous paraphrase of Joan of Arc: ‘Courage, on les aura!’
After April 9th it was often difficult to tell to whom the Mort Homme, smoking like a volcano from the concentrated fire of both artilleries, actually belonged.
Back and forth between its two summits, Points 265 and 295, swayed the opposing forces, locked together in a crescendo of desperation that typified the worst of the months of ceaseless combat on the Left Bank.
The diaries of a twenty-two-year-old French Second Lieutenant, Roger Campana, who had already had one spell at Verdun, provide one glimpse of how the savage formlessness of the battle seemed to those caught up in it.
Taking up positions on Point 265 and the northerly slopes of the Mort Homme on April 6th, Campana was agreeably surprised by the relative calm.
A lieutenant of one of the forward companies, a peacetime mathematician, asked for a candle to continue his studies in his dugout.
The calm lasted for two more days.
Then, on April 8th, while on patrol the ‘Lieutenant Mathematician’ captured two German deserters, who conveniently warned them of the coming attack.
The following morning, a peerless sunny Sunday, incredibly the larks were singing  on the Mort Homme and it seemed quite impossible that there could be an attack that day Suddenly, a single shell landed, and the tornado descended.
By 11 a.m. the bombardment intensified to the point where Campana could count the shells raining down on two neighbouring companies at a rate of five a minute.
In a trench to his rear that he had ordered to be abandoned the previous night, eight shells burst almost simultaneously.
At midday, the German assault waves appeared out of their holes, bayonets fixed; ‘They ran forward a few metres, then under the tac-tac of our machine gun, collapsed….
Not a single German got to his trench.’
Some hoping to escape evidently pretended to lie dead, ‘like rabbits’, but sooner or later lost their nerve and bounded up to regain their trenches, only to be picked off by Campana's men, who found the spectacle rather diverting.
The shelling was resumed, and the machine gun finally knocked out by a heavy shell.
Once again Campana saw the Germans line up; ‘In a few minutes the slopes of Hill 265 were covered with enemy advancing on us.
This time we only had our rifles to stop them, and that was not sufficient.’
Below, in the mathematician's trench, they were already fighting hand to hand.
Campana fired a red rocket, and for once the 75s replied; right in the middle of the advancing Germans.
Still they advanced.
When they were thirty yards off, Campana gave the order to fix bayonets, but just at that moment the Germans were caught between salvoes of short-falling 75s and the French rifle fire.
Like rats in a burning barn, ‘they ran frantically to the right and left’.
Through his binoculars, Campana now watched a counter-attack go in to retake the lost trenches, led by a young lieutenant of his class at St. Cyr, wearing white gloves.
A few minutes later, he saw his classmate stretched on the ground, hands crossed on his chest ‘like two white flecks on his blue overcoat’.
Night came, and with it a respite in the fighting.
In the sinister light of a large red moon, Campana counted over 180 German bodies in front of his platoon.
For another week, he and his men remained on the Mort Homme.
On being relieved, the decoration parade, with a general galloping at the head of his elegant staff past the tattered and gap-ridden ranks of the 151st, seemed to young Campana ‘the most beautiful day of my life’.
To another Second Lieutenant of the same regiment, twenty-six-year-old Raymond Jubert (later killed at Verdun), the fighting on the  Mort Homme that day presented a rather more confused picture.
The officers of Jubert's company, then in reserve, were playing cards when word came back that the forward positions had been overrun and had to be instantly retaken.
Atop the Mort Homme, all was chaos; under the permanent canopy of smoke, impossible to tell which holes were tenanted by friend or foe.
His company decimated by murderous shell-fire even before reaching the objective, Jubert found himself alone, possibly the only surviving officer, and sent off a message to his battalion commander: ‘I do not know where I am, but the position is of the first importance, and I have only ten men to hold it.’
Urgently he requested to be reinforced by at least two companies.
Back came a reply typical of that desperate day: ‘There are no reinforcements.’
For another thirty-six hours, under non-stop bombardment, Jubert somehow held his post.
On returning, dazed and impressed by the sheer ineffectualness of man amid this inferno of mat–riel, Jubert wrote humbly:
In the middle of combat, one is little more than a wave in the sea…a stroke of the brush lost in the painting…
Courage, in our days, is a currency that is not depreciated, but tarnished by usage.
The official citation, more dramatic, states that under his command the remnants of II Company retook half a mile of what were once trenches, ‘lined up as for a tattoo, singing and laughing, and saved the 151st Regiment’
Like Jubert, and in contrast to Campana, Captain Augustin Cochin of the 146th Regiment sat on the Mort Homme — from April 9th to April 14th — without once seeing a German infantryman; a not uncommon experience at Verdun.
Nevertheless, each day the company under his command suffered an average of 20–30 casualties from the shelling; his Company HQ, a hole in a shattered trench, ‘inundated with the blood of the wounded, who came to take refuge close to me, as if I could do anything, alas…’ his mother on reaching the Mort Homme during the calm before the storm, he described it as ‘an excellent corner, the best in the sector’.
But, on April 14th:
I have returned from the toughest trial that I have ever seen I he had already been wounded, for the third time, near Douaumont on February 25th]— four days and four nights — ninety-six hours  — the last two days soaked in icy mud — under terrible bombardment, without any shelter other than the narrowness of the trench, which even seemed to be too wide; not a hole, not a dugout, nothing, nothing.
The Boche did not attack, naturally, it would have been too stupid.
It was much more convenient to carry out a fine firing exercise on our backs…result: I arrived there with 175 men, I returned with 34, several half mad.
And a platoon of little Chasseurs is now in our place.
It's the next course; there will be yet another to serve before long, for the appetite of the ogre is insatiable…
My poor Biffins who were half mad; their round eyes, not replying any more when I spoke to them.
On the Somme that July — where he was to meet his death — Cochin noted contemptuously that the artillery bombardments had nothing to compare with Verdun.
Of the April gth offensive the Tägliche Rundschau wrote, in terms that can hardly have been convincing even to its malleable German readers, of
the masterpiece of tactics and strategy of the Great German General Staff, so different to the brutal French attempts at a breakthrough….
Following a pre-conceived plan, we are advancing slowly, methodically, step by step; we are not seeking, as did the French in the Champagne Battle, to achieve the destruction of a single point, we are demolishing their defences piece by piece.
Thus we are avoiding excessive losses….
It would have been interesting to know what the men at the front thought of this account of their endeavours.
Certainly General von Gallwitz had no illusions about the brilliance of the ‘pre-conceived plan’.
With some force he told von Knobelsdorf, the Crown Prince's Chief-of-Staff, that it would be pointless pursuing the attacks on the Mort Homme until Côte 304 was finally conquered.
With characteristic ingenuity, the Germans set to boring two mile-long tunnels — appropriately called ‘Gallwitz’ and ‘Crown Prince’— in order to bring troops right up to the northern base of the Mort Homme in safety.
Meanwhile, persistent French counter-attacks during April retook the whole crest of the Mort Homme, wiping out virtually all the German gains of April 9th, and the Côte 304 guns continued to reap their heavy toll.
For twelve days after the April 9th attack, it rained solidly, suspending all operations.
The misery of the troops of both sides, clinging to their wretched holes in the corpse-reeking mud, multiplied.
The Reichs archives recorded:
Water in the trenches came above the knees.
The men had not a dry thread on their bodies; there was not a dugout that could provide dry accommodation.
The numbers of sick rose alarmingly….
But at least the enforced postponement saved the Germans from setting off yet another attack at half-cock.
To Gallwitz, the gunnery expert, the new attempt on Côte 304 would be a pure artillery exercise; it would literally blast the French off the hill; moreover, it would succeed.
Never before — not even on February 21st — would such a concentration of firepower have been seen.
On May 3rd, a day of oppressive heat, over 500 heavy German cannon opened fire along a front of little over a mile.
For two days and a night the bombardment continued, until French aviators reported the columns of smoke rising to an altitude of two-and-a-half-thousand feet.
To the men on the ground it seemed ‘as if to finish things off the Germans had decided to point one cannon at each one of us.’
Casualties among the French, badly deficient of deep shelters after the weeks of heavy shelling, were appalling.
One French officer describes how he was buried three times that day in his trench, and dug out each time by his men.
Others were less fortunate.
Of one battalion, only three men were said to have survived; many of the remainder were simply buried alive by the shells.
One by one the French machine guns were destroyed.
For over two days no food or supplies could be got through to the defenders, nor any wounded evacuated.
Reinforcements fortunate enough to arrive got lost in the chaos atop the ridge, wandering all night to find their new positions.
One company commander who survived the attack recalled that ‘nobody knew exactly the location of the mixed-up regiments…it was impossible to move.
Orders had pushed up men on top of men and set up a living wall against the monstrous German avalanche.’
Finally, under the obscurity of dust and smoke the Germans managed to get a foothold on the summit, but it took three more days of bitter close combat before the vital Côte 304 was finally theirs.
One of the first demands of the conquering Germans was tor a double ration of tobacco — to mask the intolerable odour of corpses.
When the balance sheet was finally totted up after the war, it was estimated that 1O, OOO Frenchmen alone had laid down their lives on this one small corner of France.
The capture of Côte 304 represented the first breach in the ‘Line of Resistance’ that Pétain had prescribed on taking up his command, and with it the stage was set for the final German attack on the Mort Homme, with the elder Falkenhayn once again in command.
This time he could afford to make no mistake; his former pupil, the Crown Prince, was there at his elbow, watching every move.
Never since 1914, said the Crown Prince in glee,
have I been able to see a fight so clearly…
The intense barrage fire of our artillery sweeping the whole slope of the hill was at once a magnificent and awe-inspiring sight; the Mort Homme flamed like a volcano, and the air and the earth alike trembled at the shock of thousands of bursting shells.
As zero hour was reached, and punctually to the very minute our barrage lifted, through my glasses I could clearly observe our skirmishers leave their trenches and move steadily forward; here and there I could even distinguish the smoke puffs of bursting bombs.
Close behind followed reserves, carrying-parties and entrenching companies.
How were things going?
Then from the French trenches were to be seen streaming back to our lines, first a few prisoners here and there, then more and more, and at last whole columns of them; I breathed freely once more!
There followed a perceptible pause.
My Chief-of-Staff, who had been following the progress of the attack from a more distant position in Consenvoye Wood on the eastern bank, telephoned to me that the attack had failed and that everywhere our men could be seen falling back.
I was able to correct him; what he had seen were the crowds of prisoners!
By the end of May, the Germans had taken the whole of the Mort Homme, as well as to its east the important village of Cumieres.
At one time the tide, before it was checked, had reached the railway station at Chattancourt and was lapping around the very foot of the Bois Bourrus ridge.
It was the end of the German offensive on the Left Bank.
The Crown Prince had achieved what he set out to do in March; though his small auxiliary clearing action had taken him  nearly three months and cost at least as many lives as the whole of the rest of the fighting to date.
Worse still, by the end of May there were indications that for the first time German losses might be exceeding those of the French; within a week one completely new brigade had been as good as wiped out.
But the margin of retreat for the French had become very narrow indeed, and now the full weight of the Germans in the West could be thrown against Pétain's men on the Right Bank of the Meuse.
WIDENING HORIZONS
A Dieu! que la guerre est jolie
Avec ses chants ses longs loisirs.
GUILLAUME APOLLINAIRE, L'Adieu du Cavalier
…
The best thing of all has been the chance of taking part in this war…
Every day one goes on learning, every day one's horizon widens.
— from German Students' War Letters (ed.
Philip Witkop)
ALTHOUGH from March to the end of May, the main German effort took place on the Left Bank of the Meuse, this did not mean that the Right Bank had become a ‘quiet sector’.
Far from it!
Frequent vicious little attacks undertaken by both sides to make a minor tactical gain here and there regularly supplemented the long casualty lists caused by the relentless pounding of the rival artilleries.
Within the first month of the battle the effect of this non-stop bombardment, by so mighty an assemblage of cannon, their fire concentrated within an area little larger than Richmond Park, had already established an environment common to both sides of the Meuse that characterised the whole battle of Verdun.
The horrors of trench warfare and of the slaughter without limits of the First War are by now so familiar to the modern reader that further recounting merely benumbs the mind.
The Battle of Verdun, however, through its very intensity — and, later, its length — added a new dimension of horror.
Even this would not in itself warrant lengthy description were it not for the fact that Verdun's peculiarly sinister environment came to leave an imprint on men's memories that stood apart from other battles of the First War; and predominantly so in France where the nightmares it inspired lingered perniciously long years after the Armistice.
To a French aviator, flying sublimely over it all, the Verdun front after a rainfall resembled disgustingly the ‘humid skin of a monstrous toad’ Another flyer, James McConnell,(an American, later killed with the Lafayette Squadron) noted after passing over ‘redroofed Verdun’—; which had ‘spots in it where no red shows and you know what has happened there’— that abruptly  there is only that sinister brown belt, a strip of murdered nature.
It seems to belong to another world.
Every sign of humanity has been swept away.
The woods and roads have vanished like chalk wiped from a blackboard; of the villages nothing remains but grey smearsm…
During heavy bombardments and attacks I have seen shells falling like rain.
Countless towers of smoke remind one of Gustave Dore's picture of the fiery tombs of the arch-heretics in Dante's ‘Hell’…
Now and then monster projectiles hurtling through the air close by leave one's plane rocking violently in their wake.
Aeroplanes have been cut in two by them.
With the noise of the battle drowned out by his aircraft's motor, ‘it is a weird combination of stillness and havo…’.
The first sounds heard by ground troops approaching Verdun reminded them of ‘a gigantic forge that ceased neither day nor night’.
At once they noted, and were acutely depressed by, the sombre monotones of the battle area.
To some it was ‘yellow and flayed, without a patch of green’ to others a compound of brown, grey and black, where the only forms were shell holes.
On the few stumps that remained of Verdun's noble forests on the Right Bank, the bark either hung down in strips, or else had long since been consumed by half-starved pack-horses.
As spring came, with the supreme optimism of Nature, the shattered trees pushed out a new leaf here and there, but soon these too dropped sick and wilting in the poisonous atmosphere.
At night, the Verdun sky resembled a ‘stupendous Aurora Borealis’, but by day the only splashes of colour that one French soldier-artist could find were the rose tints displayed by the frightful wounds of the horses lying scattered about the approach routes, lips pulled back over jaws in the hideousness of death.
Heightening this achromatic gloom was the pall of smoke over Verdun most of the time, which turned the light filtering through it to an ashy grey.
A French general, several times in the line at Verdun, recalled to the author that while marching through the devastated zone his soldiers never sang; ‘and you know French soldiers sing a lot’.
When they came out of it they often grew crazily rapturous simply at returning to ‘a world of colour, meadows and flowers and woods…where rain on the roofs sounds like a harmonic music’
A mile or two from the front line, troops entered the first communication  trenches; though to call them this was generally both an exaggeration and an anachronism.
Parapets gradually grew lower and lower until the trench became little deeper than a roadside ditch.
Shells now began to fall with increasing regularity among closely packed men.
In the darkness (for obvious reasons, approach marches were usually made at night) the columns trampled over the howling wounded that lay underfoot.
Suddenly the trench became ‘nothing more than a track hardly traced out amid the shell holes’.
In the mud, which the shelling had now turned to a consistency of sticky butter, troops stumbled and fell repeatedly; cursing in low undertones, as if fearful of being overheard by the enemy who relentlessly pursued them with his shells at every step.
Sometimes there were duckboards around the lips of the huge shell craters.
But more often there were not, and heavily laden men falling into the water-filled holes remained there until they drowned, unable to crawl up the greasy sides.
If a comrade paused to lend a hand, it often meant that two would drown instead of one.
In the chaos of the battlefield, where all reference points had long since been obliterated, relieving detachments often got lost and wandered hopelessly all night; only to be massacred by an enemy machine-gunner as dawn betrayed them.
It was not unusual for reliefs to reach the front with only half the numbers that set out, nor for this nightmare approach march to last ten hours or longer.
One of the first things that struck troops fresh to the Verdun battlefield was the fearful stench of putrefaction; ‘so disgusting that it almost gives a certain charm to the odour of gas shells’.
The British never thought their Allies were as tidy about burying their dead as they might be, but under the non-stop shelling at Verdun an attempt at burial not infrequently resulted in two more corpses to dispose of.
It was safer to wrap the dead up in a canvas and simply roll them over the parapet into the largest shell-hole in the vicinity.
There were few of these in which did not float some ghastly, stinking fragment of humanity.
On the Right Bank several gullies were dubbed, with good cause, ‘La Ravine de la Mort’ by the French.
Such a one, though most of it in French hands, was enfiladed by a German machine gun at each end, which exacted a steady toll.
Day after day the German heavies pounded the corpses in this gully, until they were quartered, and re-quartered; to one eye-witness it seemed as if it were filled with dismembered limbs that no one could or would bury.
Even when buried,
shells disinter the bodies, then reinter them, chop them to pieces, play with them as a cat plays with a mouse.
As the weather grew warmer and the numbers of dead multiplied, the horror reached new peaks.
The compressed area of the battlefield became an open cemetery in which every square foot contained some decomposed piece of flesh:
You found the dead embedded in the walls of the trenches, heads, legs and half-bodies, just as they had been shovelled out of the way by the picks and shovels of the working party.
Once up in the front line, troops found that life had been reduced, in the words of a Beaux Arts professor serving with the Territorials, ‘to a struggle between the artillerymen and the navvy, between the cannon and the mound of earth’ All day long the enemy guns worked at levelling the holes laboriously scraped out the previous night.
At night, no question of sleep for the men worn out by the day's shelling (it was not unknown for men in the line to go without sleep for eleven days).
As soon as darkness fell, an officer would lay out a white tape over the shell ground, and the ‘navvies’ began to dig; feverishly, exposed, hoping not to be picked up by enemy flares and machine guns.
By dawn the trench would probably be little more than eighteen inches deep, but it had to be occupied all day, while the enemy gunners resumed their work of levelling.
No question of latrines under these conditions; men relieved themselves where they lay, as best they could.
Dysentery became regarded as a norm of life at Verdun.
Lice, made much of by combatants on other fronts, receive little mention.
With luck, by the second morning the trench might have reached a depth of barely three feet.
Over and again eye-witnesses at Verdun testify to the curious sensation of having been in the line twice, three times, without ever having seen an enemy infantryman.
On going into the line for the first time, Jubert's colonel gave the officers of his regiment instructions that must have been repeated a thousand times at Verdun:
You have a mission of sacrifice; here is a post of honour where they want to attack.
Every day you will have casualties, because they will disturb your work.
On the day they want to, they will massacre you to the last man, and it is your duty to fall.
Battalion after battalion decimated solely by the bombardment would be replaced in the line by others, until these too had all effectiveness as a fighting unit crushed out of them by the murderous shelling.
After nights of being drenched by icy rain in a shell-hole under non-stop shelling, a twenty-year-old French corporal wrote:
Oh, the people who were sleeping in a bed and who tomorrow, reading their newspaper, would say joyously —‘they are still holding!’
Could they imagine what that simple word ‘hold’ meant?
The sensation provoked by being under prolonged bombardment by heavy guns is something essentially personal and subjective; firsthand accounts cover a wide range of experience.
To Paul Dubrulle, a thirty-four-year-old French Jesuit serving as an infantry sergeant at Verdun, whose journals are outstanding for their un-embellished realism, it seemed as follows:
When one heard the whistle in the distance, one's whole body contracted to resist the too excessively potent vibrations of the explosion, and at each repetition it was a new attack, a new fatigue, a new suffering.
Under this regime, the most solid nerves cannot resist for long; the moment arrives where the blood mounts to the head; where fever burns the body and where the nerves, exhausted, become incapable of reacting.
Perhaps the best comparison is that of seasickness…finally one abandons one's self to it, one has no longer even the strength to cover oneself with one's pack as protection against splinters, and one scarcely still has left the strength to pray to God…
To die from a bullet seems to be nothing; parts of our being remain intact; but to be dismembered, torn to pieces, reduced to pulp, this is a fear that flesh cannot support and which is fundamentally the great suffering of the bombardment…
Dubrulle survived Verdun, but was killed in the Nivelle Offensive of the following year.
More than anything else, it was the apparently infinite duration of the Verdun bombardments that reduced even the strongest nerves.
Sergeant-Major Céar Méléra, a tough adventurer, who had sailed around the world in peacetime and who appeared little affected by the horrors of war, describes his experience of Verdun shell-fire initially with an unemotional economy of words: ‘Filthy night, shells.’
Three days later he was confiding to his diary that the night bombardment made him ‘think of that nightmare room of Edgar Allan Poe, in which the walls closed in one after the other.’
The following day: ‘Oh how I envy those who can charge with a bayonet instead of waiting to be buried by a shell,’ and, finally, the admission:
Verdun is terrible…because man is fighting against material, with the sensation of striking out at empty air…
Méléra survived Verdun and the rest of the war, to be killed a fortnight before the Armistice.
With the steadily increasing power of the French artillery, experiences of the infantryman on both sides became more and more similar.
In June a soldier of the German 50th Division before Fort Vaux declared that ‘the torture of having to lie powerless and defenceless in the middle of an artillery battle’ was ‘something for which there is nothing comparable on earth’.
Through this common denominator of suffering, a curious mutual compassion began to develop between the opposing infantries, with hatred reserved for the artillery in general.
To Captain Cochin on the Mort Homme, it seemed as if the two artilleries were playing some idiotic game with each other, to see which could cause the most damage to the two unhappy lines of infantrymen.
What the PBI felt about their own gunners may be gauged from a French estimate that out of ten shells falling on a Verdun trench, ‘on an average two were provided by the friendly artillery’.
Sergeant Elie Tardivel tells how in June seven men from a neighbouring platoon had just been killed by a single French 155 shell.
I met the company commander; I told him I had brought up some grenades and barbed-wire; I asked where I was to put them.
He replied: ‘Wherever you wish.
For two hours our own guns have been bombarding us, and if it goes on I shall take my company and bombard the gunner with these grenades!’
Emotions between the infantry and gunners resembled those sometimes held towards the heavy-bomber crews of World War II, whom the ground troops viewed as sumptuously quartered well away from the enemy, making brief sorties to spray their bombs indiscriminately over both lines.
A French company commander, Charles Delvert, describes passing two naval batteries en route for Verdun:
Not a single man on foot.
Everybody in motors.
The officers had a comfortable little car to themselves…
I looked at my poor troopers.
They straggled lamentably along the road, bent in two by the weight of their packs, streaming with water, and all this to go and become mashed to pulp in muddy trenches.
Other infantrymen were irked by the impersonal casualness with which the heavy gunners crews emerged from their comfortable shelters to fire at targets they could not see, ‘appearing to be much less concerned than about the soup or the bucket of wine which had just been brought’
This picture is to some extent endorsed by the artillery themselves.
Staff-Sergeant Fonsagrive, serving with a 105 mm.
battery wrote in his journal during the peak of the March battle on the Right Bank; ‘the fine weather continues, the days lengthen; it is a pleasure to get up in the morning…’
Watching the planes dog-fighting overhead, there was plenty of leisure time for day-dreaming about wives and families.
Later, Fonsagrive notes with some vexation:
One day when, quietly sitting underneath an apple tree, I was writing a letter, a 130 mm.
shell landed forty metres behind me, causing me a disagreeable surprise.
Major Henches, another artilleryman (killed on the Somme that autumn) found time to write to his wife during the May fighting at Verdun:
Tell the children we have a poor refugee dog which suffers from a terrible fear and displeases me because he is dirty and snores at night.
Two swallows have made their nest near us…
Not all French gunners, however, were as fortunate as Sergeant Fonsagrive.
When death came from the long-range German counter  battery guns, it came with frightening suddenness.
A gunner sipping his soup astraddle his cannon, a group of NCOs playing cards would be expunged by an unheralded salvo.
In action, the field artillery particularly had even less cover than the infantry; often reduced still further by officers of the old school of that notably proud French arm, ‘La Reine des Batailles’, who believed (and there were still many like them) that to take cover under fire was almost cowardice.
Casualties among some batteries were in fact often at least as high as among the infantry.
Captain Humbert, a St. Cyrien of the 97th Infantry Regiment, testifies to the effect of the German artillery's systematic sweeping of the back areas, knowing that the French field batteries must all be there:
Nobody escapes; if the guns were spared today, they will catch it tomorrow…
Whole batteries lie here demolished…
Lieutenant Gaston Pastre, though also a heavy gunner, provides a very different picture to Fonsagrive.
Arriving at Verdun in May, he found the unit he was relieving had lost forty per cent of its effectives; ‘If you stay here a month, which is normal,’ they warned him, ‘you will lose half of yours too.’
The reverse slopes up to Fort St. Michel on the Right Bank, where Pastre's battery was sited, were crammed with every calibre of gun; it was ‘nothing more than one immense battery, there are perhaps 500 pieces there.’
A wonderful target for German saturation fire —‘anything that falls between Fort St. Michel and the road is good.’
There were generally only two periods of calm in the day; between 4 and 6 a.m. and between 4 and 7 p.m. when, like subhuman troglodytes, the French gunners emerged from the ground to repair the damage.
For the rest of the time, to move from one shelter to another — a distance of about twenty yards —; required considerable courage.
By night the solitary road from Verdun came under constant fire from the German gunners, certain that French munition columns must be coming up it nose to tail.
It presented ‘a spectacle worthy of Hell’, in which men not killed outright were often hurled off their gun carriages by shell blast.
to be run over and crushed by their own caissons in the dark.
Next to the incessant bombardment, the stink of putrefaction and the utter desolation of the battlefield, Verdun combatants testify again and again to the terrifying isolation, seldom experienced to the same degree in other sectors.
Verdun was the epitome of a ‘soldier's  battle’ Within an hour or less of the launching of each organised attack or counter-attack, leadership even over the lower echelons ceased to play any significant role.
Company commanders would lose all but the most spasmodic and tenuous contact with their platoons, often for days at a time.
The situation where one French machinegun section found itself holding a hole in the front two hundred yards wide with its two machine guns for several days in complete detachment from the rest of the army, was by no means unique.
To add to this demoralising sense of isolation, the tenacious curtain of smoke from the bombardment meant that the front line frequently could not see the supporting troops behind; nor, worse still, could their rockets of supplication asking for the artillery to bring down a barrage, or cease shelling their own positions, be seen at the rear.
Countless were the true heroes of Verdun, fighting small Thermopylaes in the shell-holes, who remained unsung and undecorated because no one witnessed their deeds.
After twenty months of fighting, where twenty times I should have died [Raymond Jubert admitted]I have not yet seen war as I imagined it.
No; none of those grand tragic tableaux, with sweeping strokes and vivid colours, where death would be a stroke, but these small painful scenes, in obscure corners, of small compass where one cannot possibly distinguish if the mud were flesh or the flesh were mud.
Of all the participants qualifying for the title of hero at Verdun, probably none deserved it more than three of the most humble categories: the runners, the ration parties and the stretcher-bearers.
As a regular lieutenant in charge of the divisional runners at Souville stated, simply: ‘The bravery of the man isolated in the midst of danger is the true form of courage.’
With telephone lines no sooner laid than torn up by shellfire, and the runner become the sole means of communication at Verdun, the most frequently heard order at any HQ was ‘send two runners’.
From the relative protection of their holes, the infantry watched in silent admiration at the blue caps of the runners bobbing and dodging among the plumes of exploding TNT.
It was an almost suicidal occupation.
Few paths were not sign-posted by their crumpled remains, and on the Mort Homme one regiment lost twenty-one runners in three hours.
Perhaps demanding even more courage, though, was the role of 
the cuistot, ravitailleur, or homme-soupe, as the ration parties were variously called, in that it was played out in the solitariness of night.
Under danger, in the dark, one feels a kind of particular horror at finding oneself alone.
Courage requires to be seen [noted Jubert].
To be alone, to have nothing to think about except oneself…to have nothing more to do than to die without a supreme approbation!
The soul abdicates quickly and the flesh abandons itself to shudders.
On account of the shelling, motor transport could approach no closer than a cross-roads nicknamed ‘Le Tourniquet’ at the end of the Voie Sacrée.
The massacre of the horses, unable to take cover upon the warning whistle of a shell, had become prohibitive.
Thus all rations for the men at the front had to come up on the backs of other men.
The cuistots, three or four to a company, were generally selected from among the elderly, the poor shots and the poor soldiers.
One of the most moving pictures printed in L'Illustration during the war was of one of these unhappy cuistots crawling on his stomach to the front at Verdun, with flasks of wine lashed to his belt.
Each carried a dozen of the heavy flasks, and a score of loaves of bread strung together by string, worn like a bandolier.
They often made a round trip of twelve miles every night; even though, bent under their loads, at times they could barely crawl, let alone walk, in the the glutinous mud.
They arrived, collapsing from fatigue, only to be cursed by comrades, desperate from hunger and thirst, on finding that the flasks of precious pinard had been punctured by shell fragments, the bread caked with filth.
Frequently they never arrived.
Fixed enemy guns fired a shell every two or three minutes on each of the few well-known routes with the accuracy of long practice.
Crossing the worse danger zones was like some horrible game of ‘Last Across’; they told you that forty cuistots had got across safely since the last casualty; you waited for the explosion, then staggered frantically over the open space, knowing that if you were No. 41 the next shell probably had your name on it.
For all the gallantry and self-sacrifice of the cuistots, hunger and thirst became regular features at Verdun, adding to the sum of misery to be endured there.
Second Lieutenant Campana, whom we have seen earlier on the Mort Homme, recalls dispatching a ration party of eight men one night in March.
The following morning  five came back — without rations.
That night another eight set out.
None returned.
The next night some hundred men from all companies set forth, but were literally massacred by violent gunfire.
After three days without food, Campana's men were reduced to scavenging any remnants they could find upon the bodies lying near their position.
Many had been decomposing for several weeks.
The experience was more the rule than the exception; so too, as winter sufferings gave way to a torrid summer, was this spectacle:
I saw a man drinking avidly from a green scum-covered marsh, where lay, his black face downward in the water, a dead man lying on his stomach and swollen as if he had not stopped filling himself with water for days…
Worst of all was the lot of the stretcher-bearers, which usually fell — until the supply was used up — to the regimental musicians.
The two-wheeled carts that comprised the principal means of transporting the wounded on other French sectors proved quite useless over the pock-ridden terrain at Verdun; the dogs used to sniff out the wounded went rabid under the shelling.
Unlike the runners or the cuistots, when carrying a wounded man the unhappy musiciens/ brancardiers could not fling themselves to the ground each time a shell screamed overhead.
Often the demands simply exceeded what human flesh could obey.
Response to pleas for volunteers to carry the wounded was usually poor, and the troops at Verdun came to recognise that their chances of being picked up, let alone brought to medical succour were extremely slim.
During the Second World War, there were cases when the morale of even veteran British Guardsmen suffered if, in the course of an action, they were aware that surgical attention might not be forthcoming for at least five hours.
On most Western battlefields, it was normally a matter of an hour or two.
Surgical teams and nursing sisters — copiously provided with blood plasma, sulfa-drugs and penicillin, worked well forward in the battle area, so that a badly wounded man could be given emergency treatment without having to be removed along a bumpv road to hospital.
For the more serious cases, there was air transport direct to base hospital, possibly hundreds of miles to the rear.
In contrast, at Verdun a casualty — even once picked up — could reckon himself highly fortunate if he received any treatment within twenty-four hours.
During the desper  ate days of July, the wounded lingered in the foul, dark, excrement-ridden vaults of Fort Souville for over six days before they could be evacuated.
Poorly organised as were the French medical services, demand far outstripped supply almost throughout the war, but several times at Verdun the system threatened to break down altogether.
There were never enough surgeons, never enough ambulances, of course no ‘wonder drugs’, and often no chloroform with which to perform the endless amputations of smashed limbs.
If a casualty reached the clearing station, his ordeals were by no means over.
Georges Duhamel, a doctor at Verdun and later a member of the Academy, vividly describes the chaos in one of these primitive charnel houses in ‘La Vic des Martyrs.’
Arriving during the early stages of the battle, he noted in despair, ‘there is work here for a month’.
The station was overflowing with badly wounded who had already been waiting for treatment for several days.
In tears they beseeched to be evacuated; their one terror to be labelled ‘untransportable’.
These, not merely the hopelessly wounded, but those whose wounds were just too complicated for the frantic surgeons to waste time probing, or who looked as if they would be little use to the army again, were laid outside in the bitter cold.
It was not long before German shells landed among this helpless pile, but at least this reduced the doctors' work.
Inside, the surgeons, surrounded by dustbins filled with lopped-off limbs, did the best they could to patch up the ghastly wounds caused by the huge shell splinters.
Later Duhamel and his team were visited by an immaculate Inspector-General who told them they really ought to plant a few flowers around the gloomy station.
As he left, Duhamel noticed that someone had traced ‘Vache’ in the dust on the brass-hat's car.
At the clearing stations the backlog of even the partially repaired mounted alarmingly as, with the constant demand of the Voie Sacrée supply route, all too few vehicles could be spared for use as ambulances.
British Red Cross sections appeared on the front (among them the poet Laurence Binyon), and later American volunteers.
Though the crews drove 24 hours at a stretch, unable to wear gasmasks because they fogged up, still there seemed to be more wounded than the ambulances could hold.
Meanwhile in the overcrowded, squalid base hospitals, those who had survived so far were dying like flies, their beds immediately refilled.
Clyde Balsley, an American very badly wounded with the ‘Lafayette Squadron’ noted in contrast that  the miracles of science after the forced butchery at Verdun…made a whole year and a half at the American Hospital pass more quickly than six weeks in the [French]hospital at Verdun.
The wounded in these hospitals lived in terror of the periodical decoration parades; because it had become a recognised custom to reward a man about to die with the Croix de Guerre.
Of slight compensation were the visits of the ‘professional’ visitors, such as the patriotic, exquisite, ‘Lady in Green’, described by Duhamel, who spoke inspiredly to the grands mutilés of
the enthusiastic ardour of combat!
The superb anguish of bounding ahead, bayonet glittering in the sun…
Equipment in these hospitals was hopelessly inadequate, but at Verdun the situation was exacerbated still further by the poisonous environment, virulently contaminated by the thousands of putrifying corpses.
Even the medically more advanced Germans noted the frequency of quite minor wounds becoming fatal.
Gas gangrene, for which an effective cure was not discovered till a few weeks before the Armistice, claimed an ever-increasing toll; during the April fighting on the Right Bank, one French regiment had thirty-two officers wounded of whom no fewer than nineteen died subsequently, mostly from gas gangrene.
In an attempt to reduce infection of head wounds, Joffre issued an order banning beards; the poilus complained bitterly, and still the wounded died.
After the war, it was estimated that, between February 21st and the end of June, 23,000 French alone had died in hospitals as a result of wounds received at Verdun.
How many more died before ever reaching hospital can only be conjectured.
So much for the physical; and what of the spiritual effects of this piling of horror upon horror at Verdun?
Many were affected like the young German student, highly religious and torn with doubts about the morality of the war, who wrote home shortly before being killed at Verdun on June 1st:
Here we have war, war in its most appalling form, and in our distress we realise the nearness of God.
As in every war men confronted with death who had forgotten, or never knew how, began to pray fervidly.
Sergeant Dubrulle, the Jesuit priest, was revolted above all by the hideous indignities he had seen TNT perpetrate upon the bodies God had created.
After one terrible shelling early in the battle when human entrails were to be seen dangling in the branches of a tree and a ‘torso, without head, without arms, without legs, stuck to the trunk of a tree, flattened and opened,’ Dubrulle recalls ‘how I implored God to put an end to these indignities.
Never have I prayed with so much heart.’
But, as day after day, month after month, such entreaties remained unanswered, a growing agnosticism appears in the letters from the men at Verdun.
Later, on the Somme, even Dubrulle is found expressing singularly un-Catholic sentiments:
Having despaired of living amid such horror, we begged God not to have us killed — the transition is too atrocious — but just to let us be dead.
We had but one desire; the end!
At least this part of Dubrulle's prayers was answered the following year.
For every soldier whose mind dwelt on exalted thoughts, possibly three agreed with Sergeant Marc Boasson, a Jewish convert to Catholicism, killed in 1918, who noted that at Verdun ‘the atrocious environment corrupts the spirits, obsesses it, dissolves it.’
Corruption revealed itself in the guise of brutalisation.
As twenty-one-year-old Lieutenant Derville (killed on the Aisne, 1918) predicted at Verdun well before the battle even started:
Perhaps we shall soon all reach the degree of brutishness and indifference of the soldiers of the First Empire.
It was indeed not very exalting to watch wounded comrades-in-arms die where they lay because they could not be removed.
One Divisional Chaplain, Abbé Thellier de Poncheville, recalls the spectacle of a horse, still harnessed to its waggon, struggling in the mud of a huge crater.
‘He had been there for two nights, sinking deeper and deeper,’ but the troops, obsessed by their own suffering, passed by without so much as casting a glance at the wretched beast.
The fact was that the daily inocculation of horror had begun to make men immune to sensation.
Duhamel explains:
A short time ago death was the cruel stranger, the visitor with the flannel footsteps…today, it is the mad dog in the house…
One eats, one drinks beside the dead, one sleeps in the midst of the dying, one laughs and one sings in the company of corpses…
The frequentation of death which makes life so precious also finishes, sometimes, by giving one a distaste for it, and more often, lassitude.
A period of conditioning on the Verdun battlefield manufactured a callousness towards one's own wounded, and an apathetic, morbid acceptance of mutilation that seem to us — in our comfy isolation — almost bestial.
Captain Delvert, one of the more honest and unpretentious of the French war-writers, describes his shock on approaching the Verdun front for the first time, when his company filed past a man lying with his leg shattered by a shell:
Nobody came to his assistance.
One felt that men had become brutalised by the preoccupation of not leaving their company and also not delaying in a place where death was raining down.
In sharp contrast to the revolted and tortured Dubrulle, young Second Lieutenant Campana recounts how, at the end of his third spell in the line at Verdun, he cold-bloodedly photographed the body of one of his men killed by a shell that hit his own dugout,
laid open from the shoulders to the haunches like a quartered carcass of meat in a butcher's window.
He sent a copy of the photograph to a friend as a token of what a lucky escape he had had.
Returning from the Mort Homme, Raymond Jubert introspectively posed himself three questions:
What sublime emotion inspires you at the moment of the assault?
I thought of nothing other than dragging my feet out of the mud encasing them.
What did you feel after surviving the attack?
I grumbled because I would have to remain several days more without Pinard.
Is not one's first act to kneel down and thank God?
No.
One relieves oneself.
This kind of moral torpor was perhaps the commonest effect of a spell at Verdun, with even the more sensitive — like Jubert — who resisted the brutalising tendency admitting to a congelation of all normal reactions.
Jubert also recalls the man in his regiment who, returning from the front, was overjoyed to find his house on the outskirts of Verdun still intact; but, on discovering that all its contents had been methodically plundered, he simply burst into laughter.
To troops who had not yet been through the mill at Verdun, passing men whom they were about to relieve was an unnerving experience; they seemed like beings from another world.
Lieutenant Georges Gaudy described watching his own regiment return from the May fighting near Douaumont:
First came the skeletons of companies occasionally led by a wounded officer, leaning on a stick.
All marched, or rather advanced in small steps, zigzagging as if intoxicated…
It was hard to tell the colour of their faces from that of their tunics.
Mud had covered everything, dried off, and then another layer had been re-applied…
They said nothing.
They had even lost the strength to complain…
It seemed as if these mute faces were crying something terrible, the unbelievable horror of their martyrdom.
Some Territorials who were standing near me became pensive.
They had that air of sadness that comes over one when a funeral passes by, and I overheard one say: ‘It's no longer an army!
These are corpses!’
Two of the Territorials wept in silence, like women.
Most of the above accounts come from the French sources.
For, compressed in their hemmed-in salient and hammered by an artillery that was always superior, maintained and succoured by organisation that was always inferior, things were almost invariably just that much worse for the French.
But, as time went on, the gap between the suffering of the opposing armies became narrower and narrower, until it was barely perceptible.
By mid-April German soldiers were complaining in letters home of the high casualties suffered by their ration parties; ‘many would rather endure hunger than make these dangerous expeditions for food’ General von Zwehl whose corps was to stay at Verdun, without relief, during the whole ten months the battle lasted, speaks of a special ‘kind of psychosis’that infected  his men there.
Lastly, even the blustering von Brandis, the acclaimed conqueror of Douaumont for whom war previously seems to have held nothing but raptures, is to be found eventually expressing a note of horror; nowhere, he declares, not even on the Somme, was there anything to be found worse than the ‘death ravines of Verdun’.
IN ANOTHER COUNTRY
…
We agreed that we should be considered rather callous to go on with our usual life when we were reading of 3,000 to 4,000 casualties a day…
— COLONEL REPINGTON, The First World War
They are different men here, men I cannot properly understand, whom I envy and despise.
I must think of Kat and Albert and Muiler and Tjaden, what will they be doing?…
Soon they will have to go up to the front-line again.
— ERICH MARIA REMARQUE, All Quiet on the Western Front
ONE of the characters in Barbusse's great war novel, Le Feu, comments bitterly while on leave; ‘We are divided into two foreign countries.
The front, over there, where there is too much misery, and the rear, here, where there is too much contentment.’
It was a sentiment shared in full measure by combatants of both sides at Verdun.
After a spell in the line men felt as if they belonged to some exclusive monastic order whose grim rites were simply beyond the comprehension of the laymen at the rear.
More and more the soldiers felt a certain indefinable malaise during their brief periods of leave at home.
Many young Germans, with that strong national instinct for cameraderie, regarded their periods of recuperation at rest camps, set amid the glorious woods and hills of Alsace and spent in the company of those with whom they had shared the common experience of Verdun, as among the more idyllic moments of the war.
Home leave in the Vaterland, austere and grey under the privations of war, all too often presented a sad contrast.
Returning soldiers found the civil population too obsessed with their own hardships to try to understand what they were being subjected to at Verdun.
Of all the major belligerents, Germany by 1916 was feeling the pinch of war most.
There was no mistaking the deadly effectiveness of the British blockade.
Everywhere there were shortages.
Deprived of the fertilisers so essential to the poor soil, German farms were beginning to conform to the law of diminishing returns.
In 1915 the first major demonstration of the war had taken place in Berlin, when five hundred housewives protested before the Reichstag that the quality of whipped cream was not up to pre-1914 standards.
The following year they protested no longer, as there was no cream at all and butter had become very scarce.
Coffee was a nauseous substitute concocted from acorns; bread had already been rationed by the beginning of 1915 to about 2 Ibs a week, and goodness knows what was added to the flour to make it so grey and gritty!
Things were steadily getting worse, until the following winter would become known as ‘the turnip winter’.
Most of the copper roofs had disappeared off public buildings, to make driving bands for the shells being so voraciously expended at Verdun, and the park railings were about to follow the roofs.
In the streets, vehicles clattered along on tyreless wheels, with the day not so far of– when even at the front the airforce would be forced to encase plane wheels in wooden clogs when being wheeled from the hangar, just to save precious rubber.
An acute shortage of cotton had already reduced the civil hospitals to using bandages made of paper, and it was hardly surprising that there was also a human shortage in the country, so that soon after the Somme conscription of labour was decreed for the ages of seventeen to sixty.
Far removed from this Spartan scene reigned the Kaiser, in an environment that to some of his disquieted advisers seemed rapidly to be regaining the splendour of pre-war days in inverse proportion to the hardships what were mounting in the rest of the country.
Since the first disappointments at Verdun, the All-Highest had withdrawn still further into his fairy-tale world, a world whose contact with reality relied principally upon those improbable ‘trench anecdotes’ that were imported from the front for his insatiable consumption; or often simply invented.
The hunting expeditions had become more numerous; more and more time was spent in the isolated, leisurely magnificence of Schloss Pless in Upper Silesia, or with the Kaiserin and her entourage taking the waters at Bad Homburg.
The evenings were whiled away in endless games of skat (which the Kaiser seldom appeared to win) with the bored but acquiescent courtiers.
At Berlin and GHQ Charleville-Mézières, the Kaiser's appearances were becoming so infrequent that even his senior counsellors were openly expressing disapproval at his aloofness from the war.
Nevertheless, the authoritarian structure of Imperial Germany, censorship, and the natural self-discipline of the Germans were such that disenchantment remained largely confined to the upper echelons.
Liebknecht's attempt to hold an anti-war rally in the Potsdamer Platz on May 1st, 1916, was not yet anything more  than a flash in the pan.
The solid bulk of the nation was as dedicated as ever to the war, phlegmatic and unquestioning, turning a closed mind and a deaf ear to the tales men brought back from Verdun, in much the same way as when, to the succeeding generation, rumours began to filter out from the concentration camps.
On reaching the City of Verdun itself, French troops just out of the line experienced a sensation not altogether different from the delight of the Germans transported to Alsace's Elysian Fields.
In one of the city's music halls, the little Green Rooms still bore the traces of the wistful decorum of peacetime garrison life, in the form of notices decreeing:
By Order of the Police, artistes are forbidden to receive in their rooms during the show.
But the artistes had all long since departed, and smashed-up mechanical pianos cluttered the abandoned music-hall.
Already by early March, Verdun had become a ghost town.
The civil population had been summarily evacuated; a few enterprising and courageous camp-followers, evading the grasp of the gendarmes, had clung on to the last, but eventually all that remained were three elderly townsmen permitted to run a canteen for the troops.
Much of the centre of the city had been destroyed by the German 380 mm long-range guns.
On every deserted street gutted houses sagged open, their contents indecently exposed to view.
In one house pulverized by a shell all that remained was a bust of Napoleon, arms folded and facing north as if defying the Germans with its stony glare.
But, melancholy as the deserted and shattered city might seem to a casual visitor, to men out of the line it spelled life.
In the subterranean catacombs deep below Vauban's Citadel, there was safety, a hot meal, a bunk, possibly even a bath; but above all a respite from the German shells.
In 1916 conditions of life behind the French lines stood roughly midway between those prevailing in Britain and Germany.
Britain had still not mobilised her war effort quite to the same extent as France; even the good-living Colonel Repington was slightly shocked to note, by the following year, that at home
the only signs of war are that the men now usually wear short coats and black ties in the evenings, the dinners are shorter, and the servers are fewer and less good.
Albeit, one of his hostesses still managed to employ ‘twenty pretty maids’.
But in contrast to Germany, the French population suffered relatively little from commodity shortages.
(The exception was, of course, in the occupied areas of the north-east; but even there life on the whole was considerably more bearable than it was in Occupied France under the Nazis.)
The worst scarcity was in coal, some forty per cent of French production having been lost owing to the German invasion of the Lille area, and the population shuddered at the approach of each winter.
For all the agricultural losses, food rationing had never become a serious matter; in 1914, the fabrication of croissants was banned, but permitted again after only five months.
In the autumn of 1915 the Government had assumed powers to requisition at fixed prices all cereal products; in 1916 these powers were extended to sugar, milk and eggs, but only limited use was made of them.
As in post-Pearl Harbour U.S.A., a meatless day each week was decreed, but little effort made to enforce it.
It was not until 1917, when the U-boat campaign had reached its zenith, that a Ministry of Food was created; which then ordered the butchers to close their doors two days a week, forbade the bakers to sell fancy cakes, and at last reluctantly began issuing ration cards.
Meanwhile, the gastronomic-minded citizens grumbled, but made shift with the aid of the black-market, so that throughout 1916 the food scarcity was still barely noticeable.
On his infrequent leaves, the permissionaire from Verdun naturally gravitated towards Paris.
Though a mere 150 miles away, it was indeed like entering another country, another world.
Sometimes he wondered whether the Capital knew about the War at all.
The natural effervescence of Paris can never be suppressed for long, and it had begun to burst forth from the restraint of the early days so that , by mid-1916, it presented to the war-weary world a facade of miraculous brilliance; to the men from Verdun it was an Arabian Night Baghdad.
Like London in the nineteen-forties, Paris seemed to have assembled every uniform and race loyal to the Allied cause; and what variety, what colour the Moroccans and the Senegalese, Annamites and Malgaches, presented as they mingled down the Champs Elysées with immaculate cavalry officers, Foreign Legionnaires, kilted Highlanders, pretty nursing sisters, and now a sprinkling of American flyers from the Lafayette Squadron!
In the initial  fervour of war, the Opera and the theatres had closed their doors, but both had opened again shortly before the Germans attacked at Verdun.
Mistinguett was drawing huge crowds at the FoliesBergeres; the great Bernhardt, though aged and ailing, was still as seductive as ever, dividing her time between the theatre and her hospital for the wounded at the Odéon; at the Opéra Comique Manon was all the rage, and in May, when the Germans were hammering their way on to Côte 304, there was a glittering film premiere of Salammbô and once again the Spring Flower Show was reinstated in all its pre-war glory.
Into most theatrical productions there was somehow woven a patriotic strain; at the close of a performance celebrating the birth of Molière, Marthe Chenal appeared draped in a tricolor to give a passionate rendering of the Marseillaise; and at the music halls, a night seldom went by without the singing of the new favourites imported by the British, Tipperary and Rose of Picardy.
In 1914 the art schools had all but atrophied; the models had gone off to the munitions factories, and students had been replaced by retired businessmen seeking distraction from their troubles.
Already the ranks of the creative arts had been woefully thinned; Braque badly wounded, Léger gassed, Derain unscathed but reduced to decorating shell cases; Péguy and Alain-Fournier had been killed, and Apollinaire wounded in the head.
Yet somehow the galleries were open again and doing a brisk trade, and publishers could not remember when they had sold so many books.
The men from Verdun viewed this dazzling scene with mixed feelings.
Captain Delvert, appraising in April 1916 the crowds of gorgeous well-dressed women who promenaded in the Bois de Boulogne on the arms of their escorts, was reminded of
a national holiday or Longchamp Races…
It appears I he added sourly]that the nation is suffering and that all energies are being strained towards the goal of ultimate victory; however this effort does not diminish the number of promenaders.
Dining out the following day, he noted:
At Weber's, at the Boeuf à la Mode, everywhere there is the same affluence.
If the war is prolonged — which seems probable — it will make the fortune of the restaurateurs.
And elsewhere during his leave he comments with uncharacteristic bitterness:
Life is good…one can understand these people behind the lines resigning themselves to the war…
What is consoling is that one may be perfectly sure that if one perishes in the barbed wire, they will not be too much affected by the loss.
It was with almost a certain sense of relief that Delvert returned to his regiment.
Beyond the sparkling bravado of Paris, in the country at large the inevitable distortions and corruptions that war breeds were readily detectable.
By 1916 these were beginning to rankle sorely with the men at the front.
There were the embusqués, who had somehow dodged the war, and the profiteers who had already amassed sizeable fortunes (from which they were rapidly enriching the restaurateurs and the jewellers, who had never known business to be better).
Even the humblest worker in a war plant was earning 1OO sous a day, compared to the poilu's five.
As a result, inflation was gaining speed; by the beginning of 1916, the cost-of-living index had reached 120 (July 1914 = 1OO), and at the end of the year it would be 135.
There was a vigorous black-market, and from time to time the authorities had to cajole citizens to cease hoarding gold.
There had been bad and costly muddles in the early days of the war; agriculture had been disrupted by the number of peasants called to the colours, and eventually some had had to be returned to the fields; the great Renault motor works was closed down, all but for a small shop making stretchers — motor vehicles evidently being considered a luxury with little application to the war effort.
(What would have happened at Verdun had Renault remained out of business can readily be deduced from what has already been said about the Voie Sacrée.)
But somehow the economy functioned, often inexplicably, under what was derisively known as the ‘système D’(a derivation from the verb ‘se débrouiller’, meaning literally ‘to muddle through’).
The periodic convulsions that resulted under ‘système D’ usually came of good intentions.
Less innocent were the scandals such as that exposed in 1916 of Hospital 27, where a crooked doctor had been providing bogus discharges from the army at several thousand francs a time.
The offenders got off with unduly light sentences, and ugly  rumours persisted that there had been some urgent covering-up by Deputies, and even Ministers, who had been embroiled.
Still more sinister were the activities of the defeatists, ranged around the Bonnet Rouge newspaper and headed by Malvy, a former Minister of the Interior, and of the downright traitors who earned millions of francs from German sources for their work of demoralisation.
It was not until well into 1917 that the reckoning came; Malvy was sentenced to five years' banishment, Bolo Pasha and Mata Hari shot, and Almeyreda found strangled in his cell.
But, more than the muddlers, the embusqués, the profiteers and the defeatists, of all the excrescences growing at the rear, the fighting men probably resented most of all the so-called bourreurs de crâne.
These were the writers and newspapermen, paid hacks of the propaganda machine and tools of ‘Anastasie’, the censor, who from their comfortable offices in Paris wrote of the nobility of war in the terms of Déroulède; of the brave boys dying beautifully pour la Patrie; who described the piling up of ‘mounds of German dead’ at each attack at Verdun, to the accompaniment of ‘negligible’French losses; and who published photographs of the grands mutilés with such captions as ‘A Soldier Who Has Lost Both Feet, Yet Walks Fairly Well With Clever Substitutes,’or ‘Who Has Lost Both Hands, Yet Can Handle a Cigarette and Salute as Before.’
Nothing enraged the men submitted to the inferno of Verdun more than nauseous effusions like these, and their officers often went to extraordinary lengths to obtain copies of Le Journal de Genève, for a reasonably accurate rapportage of the war.
If the gaiety of Paris was only skin-deep, so the various scandals of inefficiency and corruption were infections that had as yet penetrated but little further.
Beneath, the flesh and organs of France were still sound, healthy enough to resist worse privations, and to withstand more savage slashes of the surgeon's knife.
True, in a body wearied and weakened by sacrifices at Verdun, these diseases were to display a certain malignance the following year, but the time  had not yet come.
Despite her losses and suffering, France — like Germany — still displayed a remarkable solidarity towards the pursuance of the war.
Propping up this solidarity were predominantly two staunch columns; Union Sacrée and the women of France.
For a nation of radicals and independents such as France, the creation of the Union Sacrée whereby men of all political hues submerged their feuds in the interests of national unity was one of the miracles of all time.
Its spirit was reminiscent of that which (temporarily) demolished the social barricades in Britain during the Blitz.
There was that staunch anti-militarist, socialist and crypto-anarchist, Anatole France,(having attempted to enlist, aged seventy) resuming his seat among the Conservatives of the Académie which he had abandoned shortly after the Affair.
There was that eater of clerics, Clemenceau, observed kissing an Abbe on both cheeks.
What was even more surprising was that this Union, so unnatural to France, should still endure after nearly two years of war and reverses.
It was significant that when the International Revolutionary Socialists had held their conference of April 1916 in Switzerland, barely any of the French Socialists voiced support for their resolutions calling for an immediate peace.
Almost the sole exception was a young Deputy called Pierre Laval.
To the women of France, the war had brought an emancipatory revolution.
Never had they been so great a power in the country.
At the outbreak of war, to a woman they had rushed off to become nurses, fill the administrative gaps left by the men, work in the munitions factories.
The soldiers grumbled on returning home to find their wives turned yellow by picric acid, but they had little redress.
Initially, the women were doubtless drawn by the glamour of the nurse's uniform and by a sense of adventure; later, as the French women who had not lost a husband, lover or brother became fewer and fewer, the more frivolous motives became replaced by a formidable dedication.
Most of them had become marraines to one or more soldiers, according them benefits ranging merely from encouraging letters to parcels of food and woollies to the highest a woman can offer a man.
All of them in their letters exhorted their adopted soldier to ‘tenir coûte que coûte’ and their influence was mighty.
No other section of the French community was boosting the will to war more substantially than the women; and it was certainly no accident that, as a source of inspiration, La Madelon had almost replaced La Marseillaise.
Perhaps symbolic of the whole spirit of  1916 was the divine Sarah Bernhardt, one leg amputated, but still stumping the boards with a wooden leg.
Here was France herself, mutilated but undaunted.
And so, as the fighting at Verdun was reaching a climax of frightfulness, the continuance of both the war and the battle was assured by a firmness on the home fronts of the adversaries that would not be seen again.
THE AIR BATTLE
There won't be any after the war for a fighter pilot.
RAOUL LUFBERY, Lafayette Squadron.
They are the knighthood of this war, without fear and without reproach; and they recall the legendary days of chivalry, not merely by the daring of their exploits, but by the nobility of their spirit.
— DAVID LLOYD-GEORGE, House of Commons, October 29th, 1917
In the eyes of the unhappy infantry, the heavy gunners may have been a breed apart, but beyond them lay one small body of men that seemed to be not even of the same world.
Out of the seething hell of the Mort Homme in May, Raymond Jubert gazed up with envy as the vermilion plane of Navarre performed triumphant aerobatics above the French lines to proclaim yet another victory.
For these ‘happy pilots’, he reflected, triumph or defeat ‘gains equally the cheers of those who die beyond glory of any sort.
They are the only ones who in this war have the life or death of which one dreams.’
Compared with the prolonged torment and mutilations of life on the ground, the knowledge that a pilot's expectancy of survival was far poorer even than a machine-gunner's could not detract from the infantryman's envy; even though death commonly meant being burned alive, at least it was quick, clean — and witnessed by thousands.
Coupled with envy was a terrible sense of inferiority.
The planes circling overhead, and the double lines of hovering artillery observation balloons they protected, made the infantrymen feel like some protectionless rodent under the penetrating gaze of an eagle endowed with Jovian powers of destruction.
To the airmen themselves, unable to hear the monstrous fracas, and detachedly observing the tiny sparks like flashes of a mirror and the puffs of smoke bubbling up below them, it was impossible to grasp what a sum of human suffering all that represented.
To begin with, the actual battlefield seemed so absurdly small.
Even from the low altitudes attainable by First War aircraft, observers could see simultaneously their own long-range guns and the targets being pounded far behind the enemy lines.
Night patrols over the front sometimes  had in sight the lights both of their own base and of enemy airhelds, glowing in the distance as if the soil had been smeared with phosphorus.
Flying over the battlefield the reaction of an airman was often one of disgust mingled with a certain arrogance, the contempt of the individualist for the herd; ‘What cowardice to accept such a situation without revolt!’ exclaimed Observer Bernard Lafont.
‘This is the cowardice of the measureless mass.’
The aviators had more than one ground for their sense of superiority.
While the wretched biffin was receiving five sous a day for his services, on the French side a mere corporal in the airforce received two francs a day, an officer ten francs, as extra flying pay.
Each enemy plane shot down brought the victor three days' leave, and a palm-leaf to add to his ribbons.
In addition, ‘bounty money’ was paid from a fund created by Michelins, the tyre manufacturers; Guynemer, the French ‘as des as’, earned before he died the huge sum of approximately 15,000 francs (which he handed over to a foundation for wounded airmen).
Above all, in this drab war of amorphous anonymity where the public yearned for identifiable heroes, the air aces received an acclaim far in excess of anything known by ‘The Few’ of 1940.
A Press, frustrated by censorship, built them into almost comic-strip heroes, daily recounting and exaggerating their latest exploits, revelling in the eccentricities of their uniforms.
Out of the blue came invitations from well-known actresses begging the aces to spend their next leave in Paris with them; eulogizing sonnets and adoring letters (Germany's Oswald Boelcke received an average of twenty-thirty a day) poured in.
When Max Immelmann, the first of the great German aces, was killed, a Crown Prince and twenty generals attended his funeral.
Guynemer came to be accorded something close to deification.
One day he flew into a cloud and no trace of either plane or pilot was ever seen again; a legend sprang up among a generation of French schoolchildren that he had been translated bodily to Heaven.
Some of the aces found this lionization distasteful; the modest Boelcke, visiting the opera on leave, was mortified and fled from the house after a special verse in his honour had been inserted in the midst of an aria.
Popular appeal was of course related to the scarcity of their numbers and the sheer novelty of their weapon.
In 191O the Commandant of the French Staff College, exemplifying the orthodox military  mind, declared that ‘the aeroplane is all very well for a sport, for the army it is useless’.
France went to war with less than 150 planes, and Germany few more; nevertheless, after the first month the Commandant's opinion had already been refuted by Galliéni's use of aircraft to spy out von Kluck's classic mistake on the Marne.
By the end of the war, despite tremendous efforts at expansion, the personnel of the French airforces totalled no more than 13,000 (to get an idea of the aces' prospects of survival, one may compare with this total the figures of 3,500 men killed in combat; 2,000 killed on training alone; and another 3,000 injured in flying accidents).
Disorganised French industry was slow to get into gear, and when it did it committed the traditional error — not emulated by the Germans — of having too many models.
The first of France's war pilots flew in Blériots that cruised at fifty m.p.h. and took an hour and a half to climb to 6,000 feet.
Later came the Farmans, aptly named ‘cages à poules’, and the Caudrons, of which a French flyer remarked at the time that between these and the current German types ‘there was all the difference between a lorry and a Rolls Royce’.
Guynemer once claimed that if the Germans used such planes he could have guaranteed a bag of one a day.
It was not until the appearance of the 107 m.p.h.
Nieuport fighter in the spring of 1916, at Verdun, that the French pilots could compete with the Germans on anything like equal terms.
But the Germans really had little to boast about; they too had made a major blunder early on by concentrating on the construction of Zeppelins, and their maintenance of technical superiority during most of the war was almost entirely thanks to the brilliance of a twenty-five-year-old Dutchman, Tony Fokker.
Arms and equipment were equally primitive.
Radio was a latecomer, and for the most part artillery observation planes communicated with their batteries by dropping messages (generally in the form of marked-up maps) in capsules attached to a banderole, or long streamer.
The ground forces in turn indicated targets by laying out markers on the ground, or letters composed of white canvas sheets six feet long.
This was an activity not much favoured at Verdun, as it invariably attracted a tornado of enemy fire.
When the first attempts had been made to adapt the Wright Brothers' invention as a lethal instrument, pilots went aloft with steel darts and took pot shots at one another with service revolvers.
Rifles had followed, then machine guns, but the biggest breakthrough of the whole war came  with Fokker's introduction, in 1915, of a synchronising gear that enabled guns to be fired through the propellor.
Here too the French lagged.
The faults of their guns drove the French aces into a frenzy; in the air, they jammed at critical moments; on landing, they had a nasty habit of firing unexpectedly, often shooting up ground crews.
While the German weapons could rattle off 1, OOO rounds without reloading, their own magazines only contained forty-seven.
Changing a magazine in mid-air was a major act of skill and daring, which involved climbing half out of the cockpit while flying the plane with one's knees clamped on the joystick; all the time with the enemy possibly circling for the kill.
In the combat tactics of the early days, however, the French shone, for this was a form of warfare ideally suited to their individualistic temperament (though, later, it was to be the cause of grievous losses).
‘We are the refuge,’ said a French airman, ‘of all those who fear too close a confinement of the spirit, the discipline of the corps of troops…’
Never since the Middle-Ages and the invention of the long-bow had the battlefields of Europe seen this kind of single combat.
When the champions of either side met to fight spectacular duels in and out of the clouds, the rest of the war seemed forgotten; even the men in the trenches paused to watch as the hosts of Greece and Troy stood by when Hector and Achilles fought.
Accompanying this personalised warfare, there returned a chivalry and a sporting instinct that had all but vanished with the advent of the army of the masses.
A remarkable cameraderic grew between enemies.
Once a German pilot dropped one of his expensive fur gloves during a raid over a French airfield.
The next day he returned to drop the other; with a note begging the finder to keep it, as he had no use for only one glove.
With medieval courtesy, the recipient dropped a thank-you note over the donor's base.
Fewer flyers took after the cold killer, von Richthofen, than after Boelcke and Navarre, who both hated killing and aimed whenever possible for the engine instead of the pilot.
The death of a renowned foe usually brought mourning rather than triumph to the victorious camp; when Boelcke himself was killed (in collision with his best friend), planes from every British airfield within range dropped wreaths on his base, regardless of the risk involved.
But though this sense of chivalry endured throughout the war, Verdun was to spell the end of the solitary ace and single combat.
It was at Verdun that the word ‘Airforce’ first began to have a meaning.
In January 1916 Joffre and de Castelnau had given President Poincaré a vehement assurance as to the superiority of French aviation.
Nevertheless, at Verdun when the battle began it had been outmatched — in numbers alone — by nearly five to one.
In frustration the hard-pressed French infantry saw the skies above full of German Fokkers, roaming the battlefield unchallenged, precisely directing the hellish bombardment.
But the French air service rallied with quite exceptional speed.
Colonel Barés, its organisational head and a man with an outstanding grasp of air strategy, at once established his headquarters at Bar-le-Duc.
Although the army, still sceptical of the new weapon and uncooperative, were unable to provide him with either maps or even straw for the pilots' bunks, within a week he had installed on the Verdun front six out of France's total of fifteen fighter squadrons, and a further eight reconnaissance squadrons; equalling 120 machines.
It was a striking demonstration of air mobility.
In command of this large force was a mere major, the Marquis de Rose, whose mission from Bares was simply to ‘sweep the skies’.
A forty-year-old ex-cavalry officer described by Spears as a ‘gay and gallant spirit’ appearing to design his own uniforms, de Rose was killed in a flying accident in May; but by then his mission was all but accomplished.
De Rose had set about it by gathering together some sixty top pilots, a sparkling galaxy of stars, many of them banded together in the famous ‘Groupe des Cigognes (Storks).’
Few of the great names were absent.
Over the span of the years their young faces (most of them were in their very early twenties), alert and clean-shaven in sharp contrast to the beards of the poilus and the fierce, straggly mustachios of their officers, seem to us like the faces of the future.
There was the commander of the Cigognes, Captain Brocard, wounded during the first days of the fighting at Verdun, and relieved of his command the following year — because he simply could not adapt to the new conditions of air warfare the old form of single combat that had brought the Cigognes such renown in the early days.
There was the astonishingly tough Lieutenant Nungesser.
A boxer before the war, Charles Nungesser had been smashed up so badly that by the time of Verdun he had to be lifted bodily into the cockpit and could only use one leg on the rudder controls.
Yet he was such a skilful flyer that to an American of the Lafayette Squadron it seemed as if a plane obeyed his thoughts rather than the controls, and at Verdun alone he shot down six German aircraft and a balloon.
He  had an artificial jaw held together by a gold armature, and his twisted smile revealed two solid rows of gold teeth.
Despite his injuries, he burned the candle furiously at both ends; often, after a heavy day's fighting, he would roar up to Paris, 150 miles away, in his huge open sports car, then return after a night of carousal and heavy drinking to fly a dawn patrol.
Though wounded seventeen times, he was one of the very few aces to survive the war.
There was the handsome, twenty-year-old Warrant Officer Jean Navarre, who chalked up the Cigognes' first victories at Verdun with a right-and-a-left over Fort Douaumont the day after its fall.
The son of a wealthy paper manufacturer and something of a playboy, Navarre loathed killing and claimed he flew only because he had to.
He took poorly even to relaxed airforce discipline; was incapable of keeping a log-book, and was at one time placed under arrest for disobedience.
The men in the trenches adored him because when there was no enemy in the air he would ‘distract’ them by hurling his red plane (a colour scheme later appropriated by von Richthofen) into terrifying — and strictly forbidden — aerobatics over the front line.
In all he fought 257 combats at Verdun, most of them against heavy odds, and shot down eleven planes.
Wounded, he displayed violent bad temper in hospital; shook Paris by his wild debauches on convalescent leave; and finally ended the war in a mental home, suffering from chronic depression into which he had sunk after the death of his brother.
In 1919, while preparing a stunt to fly under the Arc de Triomphe, he was killed in collision with telephone wires under circumstances that suggested suicide.
Above all, there was the great Guynemer.
Aged twenty-one and just commissioned when the Cigognes moved to Verdun, he had first leapt to fame the previous summer when, as a Corporal, he had despatched three German planes in a morning.
The Guynemers could trace courageous ancestors back to Charlemagne, but few heroes looked less the part than Georges, with his almost effeminate beauty and frail, spindly body that was three times rejected as unfit for military service.
He dressed as foppishly as any stat– officer, always wearing his medals in full ceremonial order.
Fascinated as a youth by Colonel Driant's imaginative writings about submarines and airships, he took both the war and flying as intensely earnest, and personal affairs.
On leave, he showed no interest in the worshipping beauties who crowded to sleep with him, but spent his time in conversation with the aircraft designers.
He knew every inch of the  three planes in his own private ‘stud’, and every day spent hours examining engine and guns.
‘My plane is nothing for me but a flying machine gun,’ he said, and he was a fantastic marksman.
These were the secrets of how he lasted so long, for he had none of that cool meticulousness or subtlety in the air of those who, like René Fonck, Navarre and Nungesser, survived the war.
Highly nervous, he rushed into combat like a wound-up spring, diving on his foe in the impetuous manner that cost the life of many an inexperienced young aviator.
Again and again he was saved only by the uncanny accuracy of his shooting.
According to his biographer, Henry Bordeaux, even when he landed he remained in a trance ‘as if electrified by the fluid still passing through his frame’ Though through so many dogfights he seemed to bear a charmed life, this kind of nervous impulsiveness seemed bound to lead to disaster.
It very nearly did at Verdun.
On the way to the front with the Cigognes, he despatched his eighth German.
Then, on March 13th, he was tackled by two planes at once, firing at him from a range of ten yards.
Two bullets hit him in the left arm, and numerous metal fragments flew into his face, including a piece in his jaw which could never be extracted.
Half-blinded by blood from his cuts, he put the plane into a dive and somehow managed to land the right side up — despite the appearance of a third enemy plane which tried to polish him off on the way down.
It was the end of his career at Verdun.
On April 26th, his wound still unhealed, he escaped from hospital, but was returned from the front like a naughty boy.
He was wounded eight times altogether, and on the last occasion he succeeded in getting into the air before the scars were properly healed.
In September 1917, Guynemer disappeared into a cloud and all France mourned.
He had accounted for fifty-four German planes.
At Verdun in February 1916 the Germans had achieved the greatest concentration of air power yet seen — 168 planes, fourteen ‘Drachen’ balloons, four Zeppelins.
However, by two grave tactical errors, they frittered away this supremacy without ever realising its value.
The first of these errors lay in devoting their whole strength, defensively, to the ‘aerial barrage’ that was notionally to seal the air space above the German lines.
To do this the Germans had divided the Verdun front into a number of very small sectors, each of which was to be patrolled twenty-four hours a day by two planes.
Because of fuel problems each patrol could stay in the air no more than two hours, and only relatively slow and cumbersome two-seater  planes could be used.
It is reckoned that, at the speed of 1916 aircraft, such a blockade of the air would have required a minimum of 720 planes, not 168, to have been in the least bit effective.
In fact, it barely sufficed to keep out reconnaissance sorties by the handful of French planes which had been in Verdun at the outset.
When the dashing Cigognes arrived they pounced with glee on the dispersed German planes flying up and down in the ‘barrage’, tearing through it with impunity to shoot up the Drachen balloons, the vital eyes of the German artillery.
Within ten days the French by their verve and offensive spirit had wrested superiority in the air from the Germans, though still outnumbered and outclassed.
Then Oswald Boelcke arrived.
The son of a Saxon clergyman turned schoolmaster, Boelcke was now twenty-five, had already shot down nine planes and was the youngest to win the ‘Pour le Mérite’.
At the end of January 1916 he had been transferred in great secrecy from Douai to Jametz north of Verdun, to take part in the ‘aerial barrage’.
To his intense disappointment he was taken to hospital with an internal disorder, and missed the opening of the battle.
Nevertheless, he somehow bribed his way out of hospital to shoot down an impudent intruder strafing his base.
By March 11th the German Air Command was distinctly worried and gave Boelcke, though a mere lieutenant, a carte blanche to carry the fight into the enemy camp.
At once, he moved his base from Jametz, which — at about fourteen miles from the front — he claimed was too distant, to Sivry-sur-Meuse, six miles from the Mort Homme.
(Owing to the very short range of the aircraft of the period, it was not an uncommon experience to land on one's base actually under enemy shell-fire.)
Within the first ten days, Boelcke personally added four more planes to his bag.
Sore losses were inflicted upon the French; in the Cigognes alone its commander, Captain Brocard, Guynemer and several more of its top pilots had been rendered temporarily hors de combat.
Once again the initiative passed to the Germans; artillery spotting improved, materially affecting the success of their attacks on the Left Bank at the end of March.
On April 11th, Boelcke wrote gloomily: ‘Business gets worse every day.
The French no longer come over us, they fly far behind their front.’
But measure and counter-measure follow each other with rapidity in air warfare.
The French now took to flying in concentrated, though loosely controlled, groups.
It was the first step away from the old gladiatorial techniques.
Boelcke notes: ‘They were sending out  as many as twelve fighters to protect two observation machines.
It was seldom that we could get through this protecting screen to reach the observation aircraft.’
Numerical superiority was also beginning to tell, for once, against the Germans.
Through sheer organisational brilliance, Barés and de Rose had, by mid-April, built up the Verdun air strength to 226 machines; a concentration which Falkenhayn, with his policy of security-on-all-fronts was unable, or unwilling, to emulate.
On May 7th, German troops massing at Thiaumont for an attack were suddenly blanketed by accurate air-directed artillery fire, and noted bitterly that, virtually for the first time, their fighters were unable to drive away the French observation planes.
Later in the same month, French flyers, firing special rockets invented by a naval officer, in one day alone transformed five of the Crown Prince's precious Drachen into searing bundles of flame.
Boelcke, promoted captain after his eighteenth victory, now came out with the idea of creating a Jagdstaffel, or ‘hunting pack’(later given the soubriquet of ‘Flying Circus’ by the Royal Flying Corps), a group of twelve planes divided into flights of three, and flying in closely interdependent formation.
But before his ‘Flying Circus’ could be properly established at Verdun, there came the shattering news on June 18th of the death of Immelmann.
Germany could not risk the loss of her other great air hero, and on the Kaiser's personal order a frustrated Boelcke was grounded and sent on training tours of the Russian front.
Had Immelmann's death not intervened, the appearance of Boelcke's ‘Flying Circus’ at Verdun would almost certainly have spelled disaster for the individualist French flyers.
For when the Battle of the Somme broke out in July, Boelcke — having persuaded his seniors of his indispensability at the front — accounted for fiftyone planes with his ‘Flying Circus’, of which twenty were his own personal bag.
That autumn the German Airforce reached the summit of its achievement, downing 123 Allied planes in one month over the Somme, for a loss of only twenty-seven.
The fighter tactics of World War II had been born.
Meanwhile, at Verdun, their true birthplace, air superiority never again left French hands.
In June and July, the time when Pétain's forces were in gravest danger of breaking, the German airforce was at its most impotent.
Had it been otherwise the battle might well have had a different outcome.
An outstanding victory for the French Airforce, the effort seemed however to prove too much for it.
From Verdun onwards.
it went into  a steady decline, with the air war becoming more and more of a straight contest between the British and the Germans.
The second German mistake in the air over Verdun, and by far the most disastrous of the two, was their failure to utilise initial superiority to cut the French supply routes to Verdun.
Bombing was already an established function of airpower (as early as September 1914 German Taube aircraft had bombed Paris), and the Germans had the machines available.
Why they did not use them in a manner that would almost certainly have sealed the fate of the French at Verdun seems to us almost incredible, and so indeed it seemed to contemporary German critics.
Hans Ritter, writing shortly after the war, remarks:
What disruption carefully organised and constantly renewed bomb attacks would have wreaked upon this communications' artery (i.e. the Voie Sacrée), crammed to the most extreme limits of its capacity, requires no details.
Even after the first attacks numerous destroyed, burning vehicles would have blocked the road.
Exploding munitions' transports would have increased the confusion.
Craters of heavy bombs would have cut the road in many places.
A chaos that could not be disentangled must have arisen.
He goes on to point out that the Germans had standing by three squadrons of heavy ‘C-Machines’, seventy-two in number, each capable of dropping a 200Ib. bomb, which could reach their targets after half an hour's flying.
Thus twenty tons of explosives could have been rained down on the Voie Sacrée each day, not to mention demoralising night attacks.
But for some extraordinary reason these bombers were wasted on attacking rail junctions that were already under effective artillery bombardment.
In addition, for longer range bombing, there were seven Zeppelins at the call of the Crown Prince's Army, including the LZ.95, Germany's largest and latest, capable of climbing to 12,000 feet, beyond the effective reach of fighters.
But it was not until June that important communication hubs, such as Bar-le-Duc, were seriously bombarded.
Another German military critic, Hermann Wendt, points out that no concentrated attempt was ever made to destroy any of the vital Meuse bridges.
During the whole battle, only one out of thirty-four was knocked out, and this on February 28th, when French demolition charges exploded by mistake.
Why these extraordinary German lapses?
Perhaps the closest one can get to the truth lies in a remarkable admission made by the Chief of the Luftwaffe himself, General Hoeppner; that, at Verdun, ‘We did not exactly know what should be required of aviation.’
On May 18th, 1916, a German reconnaissance plane was lumbering home after a sortie in a nice quiet sector of Alsace.
As it crossed its own lines, a plane suddenly dived on it out of the early morning sun.
There were tricoleur roundels on its wings, but on the fuselage the fierce head of an Indian brave in full war feathers was an insignia that had not been seen before.
The German observer stood up in his cockpit to ward off the attacker, but in a matter of seconds both he and his pilot were dead, their plane spinning groundwards.
The episode would never have become more than a statistic in a communique, but for the nationality of the victorious pilot; Caporal Kiffin Rockwell of Asheville, North Carolina.
Rockwell's victory was the first to be scored by the newly formed 124 Squadron, otherwise known as the ‘Escadrille Americaine’— until pressure from the Isolationist lobby in Washington shortly caused it to be changed to the ‘Escadrille Lafayette’.
The Squadron had originated as the idea of a New Englander, Norman Prince, who had learned to fly in Massachusetts in 1914, and then set off to France with the intention of forming a unit for American volunteer flyers.
In Paris, he enlisted the aid of an influential American physician, Dr. Edmund L. Gros, who had had a hand in the creation of the American Ambulance Field Service.
He and Gros pulled every string, while canvassing for suitable volunteers from the Foreign Legion and the Field Service.
But it was over a year before the enormous propaganda potential of such a formation dawned upon the reluctant French authorities.
April 16th, 1916, was the official birthday of the Squadron.
It began life with seven Americans, all NCOs, under two French officers — Captain Thenault and Lieutenant de Laage de Meux.
Equipped with new and speedy Nieuports, the Lafayette Squadron's initial role was to fly escort to a French bomber group based on Luxeuil in the Vosges.
The Americans that comprised it, then and later, were an odd mixture; rich and poor, playboys and college boys, professional flyers and soldiers-of-fortune.
If there was a common denominator it was  that mystical influence that France has wielded over young Americans ever since the Marquis de Lafayette sailed to the aid of George Washington's embattled colonists.
Most of the seven founder members had already been serving in France.
William Thaw, the first to get a commission, had owned a hydroplane while still at Yale, which made him acceptable as a French bomber pilot.
Reputed to have been the first man to fly under a bridge, Thaw had the face, physique and drinking habits of a Hemingway; after being wounded, his arm froze — to the rough mirth of the squadron — permanently in the crooked position.
Victor Chapman, a Harvard graduate, had been at the Paris Beaux Arts when the war broke out and promptly joined the Foreign Legion as a private.
So did Kiffin Rockwell, the twenty-one-year-old medical student from North Carolina, both of whose grandfathers had been officers in the Confederate Army.
Chapman and Rockwell spent nearly a year in the trenches, Rockwell receiving a bad thigh wound in May 1915.
James McConnell, another Southerner, and Elliot Cowdin, both came from the American Ambulance Service.
Bert Hall, a true Texan soldier-of-fortune, already had a colourful pre-war flying career behind him.
In 1912 he had signed on with Sultan Abdul Hamid to fly his own plane ‘freelance’ against the Bulgarians.
But, wisely, he had insisted on being paid in gold, daily.
The Sultan's bounty soon ran out.
Joining the Foreign Legion in 1914, and later the French Airforce, Hall became the first to capture a German plane intact, by forcing it to land behind the French lines.
Among the later additions came a namesake, James Hall, who had started off the war as a private in Kitchener's ‘First Hundred Thousand’ It was in the Lafayette that Hall, a flyer with almost superhuman luck (he once came down intact with an unexploded AA shell sticking out of his engine), founded the literary partnership with another pilot, Charles Nordhoff, that was to produce ‘Mutiny on the Bounty’Joining the Squadron a few days after its inception was Raoul Lufbery, who, like Bert Hall, had also been a professional flyer before the war.
Born in France, his parents had emigrated to the United States, but in 1912 Lufbery had joined forces with a daredevil French aviator called Marc Pourpe.
For two years they toured the Far and Near East, giving exhibitions in an old Bleriot and narrowly escaping with their lives from superstitious Chinese villagers.
In 1914 Pourpe enlisted and was killed in one of the first air battles.
Lufbery became obsessed by the urge to avenge his friend, which evidently pursued him until his own death in May 1918, and he was to be the first American to earn the title of ace.
On arriving at Luxeuil amid the wild beauty of the Vosges mountains, the volunteers who had come from a year in the trenches with the Legion or from the spartan discomfort of the Ambulance Service, thought that life was almost too good to be true.
They were quartered in a sumptuous villa next to the Roman baths and messed with their officers (a notable departure from French Army custom) at the best hotel in the town.
James McConnell, one of the four out of the first seven who did not survive the war, wrote with foreboding:
I thought of the luxury we were enjoying; our comfortable beds, baths, and motor cars, and then I recalled the ancient custom of giving a man selected for the sacrifice a royal time of it before the appointed day.
But nobody voiced such thoughts; the atmosphere was predominantly gay.
Life between sorties was so organised that there was little opportunity to think.
Pilots played poker and bridge endlessly and with a furious concentration, while in the background a gramophone wheezed out over and over again a well-worn recording of Who Paid the Rent for Mrs. Rip Van Winkle? and the Squadron's mascot, a young lion cub called Whiskey, prowled amiably about the mess.
When there was a party, it often ended in the complete sacking of the local hotel; which simultaneously shocked and impressed the more orderly French pilots.
On the day after Kiffin Rockwell chalked up the Lafayette's first victory, orders were received transferring the Squadron to the Verdun front.
Verdun was to be its first big test.
In bitter scrapping over Douaumont on May 24th, Thaw shot down a Fokker and then went back in the evening for more, but was cornered by three enemy planes.
His plane was riddled with bullets, and one cut an artery in his arm, but he managed to land safely in the French lines.
For his day's exploits, he became the first American in the war to be awarded the Légion d'Honneur.
That day also, Bert Hall shot down a plane and was wounded.
Casualties began to spiral.
On June 17th, the day before Immelmann died, Chapman ran into the great Boelcke and was badly shot up.
His right aileron control was severed and he himself was wounded in the head, but Chapman somehow made a remarkable landing, holding the severed end of the aileron wire.
The next day, a new member, Clyde Balsley, received a hideous wound in the thigh from an explosive bullet, fragments of which perforated his intestines in a dozen places.
Rescued from his plane by French firstline troops, he was found by Chapman in a squalid French hospital, burning with fever and suffering from an appalling thirst.
He murmured that he was desperate for an orange to suck, as rare a commodity in 1916 France as it was in Britain during World War II.
Hearing that Balsley was not expected to live, Chapman literally scoured France for oranges.
By June 23rd he had found some, and took off to fly the bag to Balsley in his hospital.
On the way he was set upon by five German planes.
With the death of Victor Chapman, the first of the Lafayette to fall and perhaps its most beloved member, a new mood came over the Squadron.
Pilots spent longer and longer in the air, searching bitterly and recklessly for a quarry.
The inevitable happened.
Rockwell wrote to his brother: ‘Prince and I are going to fly ten hours tomorrow, and we'll do our best to kill one or two Germans for Victor.’
Each fulfilled his promise that day, but on the morrow Rockwell was shot down.
A few days after that Norman Prince, the founder of the Lafayette, flying long and late in an attempt to avenge Rockwell, hit a high-tension cable as he came in to land in the dark.
Long after the United States entered the war in 1917, the Lafayette Squadron continued to fly under French colours.
When it was finally wound up in February 1918, every single one of its survivors, by a cruel irony, was found medically unfit to join the new American Air Corps!
Yet by then it had gained the distinction — shared only with Guynemer's squadron of the Cigognes — of being entitled to wear the shoulder lanyard of a twice cited unit.
Of the thirty-eight Americans who served in the Lafayette, nine had been killed (including four of the original seven) and many wounded.
During the first six months of its existence it recorded 156 combats and seventeen confirmed victories; most of these at Verdun, where it fought intermittently from May to Though still only partially fledged, the Lafayette's direct contribution to the Battle of Verdun had been significant; but this was nothing to what, indirectly, its presence there did for the French cause.
From the moment of its entry into action as the first all-American unit involved in the war, the Lafayette Squadron became the object of immense publicity throughout the United States.
Its activities, perhaps naturally enough, received press coverage out of all proportion to the rest of the war.
Letters from its members were widely passed around, and often ended in the columns of the local newspaper.
For the first time since the war began, Americans at home began to feel a personal link with one of the great land battles of the Western Front.
Through the Lafayette — and perhaps more particularly through the heroism of Victor Chapman at Verdun — there began to develop in the United States an appreciation and sympathy for the poilus themselves such as had never been provoked by any other battle.
Verdun seized American imaginations as did the Battle of Britain in 1940; compared to it the titanic clash on the Somme was to arouse little interest.
Beyond the immediate challenge of German U-Boat warfare, France's resolute defence of Verdun probably did as much as anything to pave the way, emotionally, to the United States' entry into the war in April 1917.
THE CROWN PRINCE
Anything is better than retreat.
Foch
DURING the months of March, April and May, while at Verdun the Germans were painfully inching forward towards the summits of Le Mort Homme and Côte 304, in the world outside there was little enough the belligerents could find of positive comfort.
For the first time in British history, and after a long struggle, Conscription had become law; but in Dublin the ‘Easter Rising’ had set the spark to Ireland, and in Mesopotamia General Townshend had surrendered to the Turks at Kut.
The Russians had taken Trebizond from the Turks, but had suffered bloodily in the Narocz marshes after a noble response to Joffre's plea for a diversionary offensive to relieve Verdun.
On the seas, the packet-steamer Sussex had been torpedoed with several Americans aboard, bringing a sharp ultimatum from President Wilson; and both sides were shortly to claim victory in the Battle of Jutland.
In Berlin's Potsdamer Platz, Liebknecht had tried to hold an anti-war rally, leading to Germany's first war-time strikes.
In Switzerland, Socialists from all over the world had met to condemn the war and prophesy mutual exhaustion.
The war went on.
At the other end of the world, Shackleton had reached South Georgia Island after two years' isolation in Antarctica:
‘Tell me, when was the war over?’
I asked.
‘The war is not over,’ he answered.
‘Millions are being killed.
Europe is mad.
The world is mad.’
At Verdun, the three months represented the period when the least progress was made by either side, for the highest cost.
We have already seen how, on the Left Bank, with a fearful expenditure of lives, the German all-out offensive had bought possession of two hills of secondary importance.
On the Right Bank the fighting surged back and forth within a small area, well named the ‘Deadly Quadrilateral’ at the southerly approaches to Fort Douaumont.
In a series  of sharp, local attacks, the initiative lay alternatively with either side.
During most of April, von Zwehl's VII Reserve Corps found itself preoccupied in a see-saw battle for one small feature, the stone quarries at Haudromont.
Over the whole period, the front on the Right Bank never shifted as much as 1, OOO yards; for the Germans, a bitter contrast to the five miles they had advanced in the first four days of the offensive.
Meanwhile, never for a second was there any lifting in the murderous artillery blanket laid down by the cannon of the opposing sides, now nearly 4,000 strong.
Have so many ever died for so little gain?
Between April 1st and May 1st, the casualty totals had mounted from 81,607 Germans and 89,000 French to 120,000 and 133,000 respectively; by the end of the month, French losses alone had reached approximately 185,000 (roughly equal to the overall German losses in the Battle of Stalingrad).
As the casualty lists mounted, so signs of strain began to appear within the higher commands on both sides, almost simultaneously.
At the end of March, the Crown Prince and his Chief-of-Staff, von Knobelsdorf, were still dedicated to the capture of Verdun, come what may; equally, Falkenhayn was still true (in his indecisive fashion) to his aim of bleeding the French Army to death at Verdun, regardless of whether or not the city fell in the process.
But gradually a change in positions becomes apparent.
On February 29th, it will be recalled that Falkenhayn had agreed to a spreading of the offensive, to ‘clear’ the Left Bank, and had allocated some of his jealously guarded reserves for the purpose.
Now, after the Fifth Army's first abortive assaults on the Mort Homme, Falkenhayn wrote on March 30th to the Crown Prince, noting that ‘the employment of four fresh divisions…had led to no successes’, and asking for information as to his future intent and expectations.
A reply framed by Knobelsdorf on the following day, still full of optimism, declared that the offensive had already forced the French to bring ‘by far the largest part of their reserves to Verdun’.
(Falkenhayn wrote caustically in the margin: ‘unfortunately not!
‘) Because of their losses at Verdun, continued Knobelsdorf, the French were capable of carrying out local attacks, but no major operation.
(Falkenhayn: ‘Wrong; because there are also fourteen British divisions available!
‘) Summing up, Knobelsdorf said, ‘I therefore incline unreservedly towards the view that the fate of the French Army will be decided at Verdun.’
He urged a  continuation of the offensive, recommending that the thrust be resumed on the Right Bank as well, with the object of pushing forward to the line Ouvrage de Thiaumont — Fleury — Fort Souville — Fort Tavannes.
But, said Knobelsdorf, the new attacks would demand the ‘same replacements as before’(Falkenhayn's marginal note: ‘That is impossible!‘)
Four days later, the Fifth Army leaders received a cold and curiously revealing reply from Falkenhayn.
Their appreciation of March 31st was, he said, ‘not correct in certain essential points’.
He criticised them for being ‘too optimistic as to what is and what is not possible to us’, and also for under-estimating the enemy's ability to launch a major offensive.
He went on to chide the Fifth Army:
The hypothesis that we are in a position to keep up a constant supply of fresh and highly-trained troops to replace those exhausted in battle, and also of the necessary supplies and ammunition, is erroneous.
Even with the best will in the world, we could not do it.
With this caveat, he endorsed the Fifth Army proposal for resuming the offensive on the Right Bank.
Then, in a remarkable display of vacillation, he proceeded to pour cold water on Knobelsdorf's assertion that ‘the fate of the French Army will be decided at Verdun’ though this had been the very foundation of his own Memorandum of less than four months earlier.
As soon as it becomes clear that the new attacks would not achieve their objectives within a reasonable period, then we must abandon them and ‘seek a decision elsewhere’ said Falkenhayn half-heartedly, adding:
Our chances of ending the war quickly would certainly be greatly increased if the battle were won; but if we failed to win it, even after what had already been achieved, our victory would merely be postponed and not rendered impossible, especially if we resolved in good time not to persist with our useless efforts at Verdun, but to take the initiative of attack elsewhere.
To an Army Commander, plunged up to the hilt by his superior in the most desperate battle of the war, this last can have provided little of encouragement or inspiration.
Nevertheless, says the Crown Prince, ‘I agreed absolutely with his proposal that the question as to whether the offensive should be continued or broken off should be settled by the result of the partial attack on the East [Right]Bank.’
It was the last time he and Falkenhayn would be in such agreement.
Now it is clear that Falkenhayn was already beginning to lose interest in the ‘bleeding white’ experiment.
On April 6th, unbeknown to the Hohenzollern Crown Prince, he was asking Crown Prince Rupprecht whether his Sixth Army might not be able to carry out a swift blow at Arras, against the British Army, whose anticipated (by Falkenhayn) relief attack had not yet materialised.
This latest change of mind must have thoroughly exasperated Rupprecht.
On March 21st, a despatch from Falkenhayn admitted that Rupprecht had been right about the British not being able to take the offensive, and at the same time it ordered the withdrawal of three of his divisions for the general reserve.
Ten days later, Falkenhayn was on the telephone himself, expressing the fear that the British were after all about to attempt a relief operation, ‘and probably a landing attempt’ It was hardly surprising that on April 17th Rupprecht — irritated and not keen to be involved in another of Falkenhayn's half-measure offensives that he deplored — coolly declined his invitation to attack the British, pointing to the strong reinforcements now in the line.
Reluctantly, Falkenhayn was forced to switch his gaze back to Verdun.
Meanwhile, a blow that would add still further to Falkenhavn's disillusion was about to fall from a totally different direction.
The ‘second pillar’ of his Memorandum had been the launching of unrestricted submarine warfare, to cut off supplies bound for the French front.
Initially, the new campaign had shown great promise, but the sinking of the Sussex provoked an unexpectedly violent reaction from President Wilson.
This alarmed the Kaiser and his Chancellor, Falkenhayn's arch-enemy, ‘the Good Theobold’ Bethmann Hollweg, who from the beginning had opposed unleashing the U-boats.
In a walk around the garden of GHQ on April 30th, Falkenhayn, with that sure touch of his, managed to reassure his master, who then declared to Bethmann: ‘Now you have the choice between America and Verdun!’
But the next day a conversation with Gerard, the American Ambassador, convinced the Kaiser that the United States would indeed sever diplomatic relations if the sinkings continued, and, abruptly changing his mind, he promised an immediate ban on unrestricted submarine warfare.
Piqued, Falkenhayn tendered his resignation to the Kaiser, but it was rejected.
Following Falkenhayn's letter of April 4th, the Fifth Army energetically began preparations for its offensive towards Fort Souville on the Right Bank.
But April passed, and then May, without it materialising.
Three factors combined to cause repeated postponement; firstly, bad weather throughout most of April impeded the digging of jumping off trenches; secondly, the French — under a new local commander on the Right Bank — had taken to launching a series of costly, but annoying, counter-attacks; but thirdly, and most important, the attack along the Left Bank had fallen far behind schedule, and before those deadly flanking batteries could be mastered there was little prospect of an advance on the Right Bank.
Instead, General von Mudra, the commander on the Right Bank, recommended a system of local advances on a small scale.
However, after the spirited French defence of April 9th-11th, even von Mudra admitted that this new technique was not likely to succeed.
A sharp row flared between himself and Knobelsdorf, with von Mudra — one of the ablest German Corps Commanders — expressing pessimism as to the whole future of the Verdun offensive.
On April 21st, he was sent back to his corps in the Argonne by Knobelsdorf, but before departing he gave vent to his doubts in a memo to the Crown Prince.
April 21st was a redletter date for the German Command at Verdun.
It was the day the Crown Prince, swayed by von Mudra, came to the irrevocable conclusion that ‘Operation GERICHT’ had failed, and should be called off altogether.
He writes: I was now convinced, after the stubborn to-and-fro contest for every foot of ground which had continued throughout the whole of April, that although we had more than once changed our methods of attack, a decisive success at Verdun could only be assured at the price of heavy sacrifices, out of all proportion to the desired gains.
I naturally came to this conclusion only with the  greatest reluctance; it was no easy matter for me, the responsible commander, to abandon my dreams of hope and victory!
The Crown Prince could recall how, the previous year, when Hindenburg and Ludendorff had stood seemingly on the very brink of a Russian collapse, Falkenhayn had terminated the immensely successful Gorlice offensive.
More recently, it was impossible to forget how he personally had been let down over the reserves pledged for the first phase at Verdun.
On top of Falkenhayn's natural indecisiveness, the Crown Prince now knew enough of what lay behind his frequent references to ‘bleeding the French white’ to suspect that, even once a critical point had been reached in the battle, the C-in-C could not be relied upon to provide replenishments for ‘heavy sacrifices’involved.
Thus all the Fifth Army's efforts would end in a futile waste.
With one exception, says the Crown Prince, his views were supported by the Operations Staff of the Fifth Army; ‘that exception was my Chief-of-Staff’ That same day, Knobelsdorf replaced the pessimistic von Mudra by General von Lochow, the commander of the Prussian III Corps, who in his views on warfare was roughly equivalent to the more ardent disciples of the ‘attaque à outrance’in France.
His role was to ‘introduce a quicker tempo’ in the Verdun offensive.
Also that day, to the Crown Prince's surprise and considerable annoyance, Knobelsdorf engineered — without consulting him — the transfer of his own personal staff officer, Lieutenant-Colonel von Heymann, who was evidently the only officer in the Crown Prince's entourage who could stand up to the iron will of Knobelsdorf.
War was now declared between the Hohenzollern heir and his Chief-of-Staff.
On May 8th, the Crown Prince's resolve was strengthened by a dreadful disaster that occurred inside Fort Douaumont.
Repeatedly the Fort's Artillery Officer had warned, in vain, against the danger of an accidental explosion.
Though no eye-witness survived, there is reason to believe that it all began with some Bavarian soldiers brewing up coffee — in a delightfully careless South German way — on upturned cordite cases, using explosive scooped out of hand grenades as fuel!
A small explosion resulted which detonated a store of hand grenades, which in turn set off a number of flamethrower fuel containers.
In a matter of minutes, the flaming liquid was flowing through the corridors of the fort.
Before any action could  be taken, it had reached a magazine full of 155 mm.
shells.
It exploded.
Those of the fort's garrison who were not instantly blown to pieces had their lungs burst by the blast waves travelling along the corridors.
Further away, others that survived the explosion became asphyxiated by its fumes.
All lights were extinguished, and panic broke out.
An even more tragic fate befell many who, amid the crazed stampede, were able to get out of the fort.
As they emerged through the smoke and chaos, with uniforms shredded and faces blackened, they were taken by their countrymen defending the fort outside to be that most feared of enemies — French African troops — and were relentlessly mown down.
Six hundred and fifty Germans, including the whole Regimental Staff of the 12th Grenadiers, perished.
To this day most of them lie walled-up in one of Douaumont's casemates that were devastated by the explosion.
Five days after the disaster at Douaumont, on May 13th, the third major conference of the campaign took place at the Crown Prince's headquarters.
Lt.-Col. Hoffman von Waldau, the Chief-of-Staff of X Corps, which now formed the spearhead on the Right Bank, opened with a thoroughly gloomy report.
Front-line troops were being used up quicker than units pulled out into reserve could recover; moreover, they were demoralised by what had happened inside Douaumont.
The centre division of his corps, the 5th, was incapable of any further effort.
But, poorly placed as X Corps was for any new attack, its position on either side of Fort Douaumont was so untenable that just by sitting still it was losing 230 men a day to French shellfire.
Therefore, on balance he thought, reluctantly, it would be better to push forward on to the high ground on the line Thiaumont-Fleury.
The other Chief-of-Staff from the Right Bank, Major Wetzell, was no more confident, making the old familiar complaint of the lack of forces available.
Whereupon, the Crown Prince hastily intervened to say that ‘we were only bound to attack if leaders and troops were fully confident of success’.
Obviously they were not, so he recommended that once again the ‘great offensive’ on the Right Bank be postponed.
Surprisingly enough, Knobelsdorf agreed.
Furthermore, he went so far as to express readiness to try to gain approval from Falkenhayn for the termination of all operations at Verdun.
The Crown Prince was delighted.
But, on arriving at Charleville-Mezieres, Knobelsdorf in fact took quite the opposite line with Falkenhayn.
Pointing out that on  thc Left Bank, Côte 304 and most of the Mort Homme had now been captured, he urged the irresolute Commander-in-Chief that all could yet be won at Verdun, if only the offensive were continued on the Right Bank.
Falkenhayn wavered, finally gave his permission for the new attack, and even allocated a fresh division for it.
When news of the new decision reached Stenay, the Crown Prince was thrown into ‘despair’:
I exclaimed: ‘Your Excellency tells me one thing today and another tomorrow!
I refuse to order the attack!
If Main Headquarters order it, I must obey, but I will not do it on my own responsibility!’
And, indeed, Main Headquarters shortly afterwards issued instructions for the continuance of the attack on Verdun!
Three days later, Falkenhayn himself arrived at Stenay.
The Crown Prince writes, utterly disenchanted:
I now became quite clear in my own mind as to the agreement between him and General von Knobelsdorf.
The attack now projected, with the aid of the promised reinforcements, was to be only a prelude to a further offensive on a great scale.
Of the three German principals, the Crown Prince was now all for ending the whole Verdun offensive; Falkenhayn had lost interest and could be wafted either way by the prevailing wind; there remained only Knobelsdorf, the most subordinate of the three, who in his conversion to Falkenhayn's ‘bleeding white’ dogma had become more Catholic than the Pope, and who supported continuation at all costs.
Konstantin Schmidt von Knobelsdorf was undoubtedly a most forceful personality.
His contemporaries described him as being ‘oak-hard’, and in his photographs the bullet-head, the upswept moustaches and rather piglike eves remind one more of a typical Prussian Feldwebel, with all its connotations of brutal, unimaginative single-mindedness.
No elegant, indecisive Falkenhayn this!
Well can one imagine Knobelsdorf, swept along by ambition, seeing himself as the organiser of victory at Verdun, exalted to become the Ludendorff of the Western Front.
Over both his superiors to some small extent he wielded a moral advantage; on the Army List, he was Falkenhayn's senior and had been his immediate predecessor  in command of the 4th Guard Regiment; and just before the war he had been the Crown Prince's mentor in tactics and strategy.
But, for all the toughness of Knobelsdorf, one may well ask why the Crown Prince, with his unique access to the ear of the All-highest, could not prevail over the views of his Chief-of-Staff?
In the Sixth Army an order seldom went out without the full support of Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria; why, then, was the influence upon policy by the heir to the throne of all Germany not still greater?
The truth lies in the Crown Prince's own background.
‘Little Willy’, as he had come to be nicknamed in Britain, was probably one of the most maligned figures of the whole war.
The leptic, unfinished-looking figure, with the narrow, sloping shoulders and almost deformed Modigliani neck in its high collar, and the elongated features of an amiable greyhound, was a boon to the caricaturists.
The two whippets that accompanied him even at the front and the outsize shako of the Death's Head Hussars he usually wore rounded out the picture.
He looked an ineffectual fool, and in some ways he was both ineffectual and foolish.
But this was not entirely his fault.
The Crown Prince was just six years old when his father came to the Imperial Throne, and from that moment on all communication — even the most personal — between himself and the Kaiser took place through the formal intermediary of the Chief of the Military Cabinet.
His education was placed in the hands of a series of military tutors, and before the pathetic little boy was seven he had been appointed the youngest corporal in the Prussian Army and made to congratulate his father on his thirtieth birthday in full uniform.
It was perhaps no wonder that he reacted against the spartan, puritanical environment of Potsdam.
Initially his reaction took the form, from an early age, of a series of not always well-chosen amorous adventures.
All his long life the taste never abandoned him.
On a pre-war state visit to India, he outraged officialdom by cutting a banquet to slip away to a pretty Burmese princess he had met at the Middlesex Regiment Ball.
During the war, his entourage was frequently scandalised by his affairs with Frenchwomen in occupied France, and when, in 1923, he was secretly smuggled back to Germany from exile in Holland, his friends hustled him through breakfast out of fear that he might fall in love with some hotel chambermaid and thus jeopardise the whole plot.
In many ways the Crown Prince's relationship to his stern father  bears a passing resemblance to that of the Prince of Wales and King George V. Like his cousin, he was intensely bored by pomp and ceremony; after an official visit to Konigsberg, he dispatched a typical wire to the Kaiser, reporting ‘seventy-five speeches, four and a half hours’ duration and the usual horrible banquet’On another occasion, he was actually placed under house arrest by the Kaiser for skipping a state function.
He loved sport (from which his crippled father was of course precluded), and in 1909 shocked the Court by flying with Orville Wright.
He had an eclectic, and democratic circle of acquaintances, and was in touch with social and political trends in Germany that to many seemed dangerously avant garde.
Many were the times when he had his knuckles rapped sharply for meddling in politics or foreign policy.
He had a genuine interest in the stage and opera (his longest-lived passion was the American singer, Geraldine Farrar).
Most evenings after dinner there was music at his Headquarters in Stenay, with the Crown Prince himself sometimes playing the violin, at which he was a fair performer.
Of all his kinsmen, it was hardly surprising that his favourite had been gay, great-uncle Edward — his father's bête noire.
As the war approached, the Crown Prince had become closely identified with the warmongering, Pan-German faction.
At the time of the Agadir crisis, he had declared bombastically that it was ‘high time this insolent clique in Paris should be made once more to feel what a Pomeranian Grenadier can do’ He edited a book for children, entitled ‘Germany in Arms’, glorifying war, and was fond of speaking to German youth about the forthcoming ‘happy — cheerful war’whatever that meant.
At dinner, he once shocked the wife of an Allied ambassador by saying that it was ‘his cherished dream to make war and lead a charge at the head of his regiment’ America's ambassador in Berlin, James W. Gerard remarks that the Crown Prince
surrounded by his remarkable collection of relics and reminders of Napoleon, dreamed only of taking the lead in a successful war of conquest,…said that he hoped war would occur while his father was alive; but, if not, he would start a war the moment he came to the throne.
However [adds Gerard]I cannot subscribe to the general opinion of the Crown Prince.
I found him a most agreeable man, a sharp observer, and the possessor of intellectual attainments of no mean order.
For those bombastic outbursts, Gerard shrewdly blamed ‘the effect of his infernal military education, commencing when he was a child’ and here indeed, when one recalls the poses being struck throughout pre-war Europe, the Crown Prince appears as little more than a child of the age.
What was remarkable, and commendable, was that once the tragedy had begun, quicker than anybody else in Germany, the Crown Prince realised where it would lead.
Impetuous, irresponsible playboy that he may have been, the Crown Prince was endowed beneath it all with an insight, a basic commonsense that was certainly deficient in his father.
(Had he been permitted to use these qualities, who can tell how different the fate of Germany, and all Europe, might have been?)
Long afterwards, giving evidence at the Nuremberg Trials in 1947, the Crown Prince made this interesting remark:
My father said that the Crown Prince has a woman's instinct in political matters.
I wished my father had listened more to me.
When something unpleasant was about to happen, I always had a cold feeling — purely physical.
I also had it in the World War.
And if I had this cold feeling, the operation in most cases failed too.
At the time of the Marne, the Crown Prince had communicated his concern to the Kaiser about the difficulties von Kluck's right wing had run into — only to receive the patronising rebuff: ‘My dear boy!
Your fears are quite groundless.’
After the Marne, the Crown Prince astonished an American correspondent by stating openly at Stenay, ‘We have lost the war.
It will go on for a long time but lost it is already.’
In December 1915, at the very time Falkenhayn was submitting his Memorandum, he was writing to his father about the possibility of a separate peace with England or Russia, ‘if we do not want our fatherland to keep on fighting until complete exhaustion’.
At the end of April 1916, he is reputed to have expressed to General Gallwitz his readiness to come to terms with France, and even to hand back Metz.
That this playboy prince-cum-amateur-soldier should have seen the writing on the wall before the professionals hardly enhances one's admiration of the First War military mind.
And amateur he was indeed.
A corporal at seven, captain at twenty-three and Major at  twentyfive, his advancement had been deleteriously rapid.
In 1911, aged twenty-nine, the Crown Prince was sent off to Danzig to command a Hussar Regiment (it was a fairly transparent form of exile to preserve him from the temptations of political and amorous indiscretion in Berlin), but he showed himself singularly adept at escaping from the tedium of regimental duties.
Simplizissimus lampooned him as clad in tennis clothes and remarking: ‘Danzig, Danzig!
I've heard that name somewhere before!’
Thus, when promoted general (aged thirty-two) on the outbreak of war, he was manifestly Germany's most inexperienced commander.
Herein lay one main source of the weakness of his position vis-a-vis Knobelsdorf.
Upon mobilisation, the Duke of Wurtemberg and the Crown Prince of Bavaria promptly received the command of an army each.
It was dynastically imperative that the Prussian heir should be placed at the head of an army, too.
But, unlike him, the other two were serious professional soldiers and were entitled to their commands on their own merits.
The Kaiser left his son in no doubt about this fact.
At the same time he appointed the Crown Prince's former mentor, von Knobelsdorf, to be his Chief-of-Staff, with the injunction: ‘Whatever he advises you, you must do.’
And the Kaiser did everything he could to ensure that his son should be no more than a figurehead in the army given under his command.
At a parade a few years before the war, when the Crown Prince was a major rising thirty, the Kaiser had shown him up before all his men by calling out to the Brigadier, ‘teach the boy how to ride!’, and now their relationship was as distant and difficult as ever.
Although the war had had, in the words of Winston Churchill, ‘a sobering and concentrating effect upon a hitherto careless mind’ he was still rigidly refused direct access to his father.
To Ludendorff, the Crown Prince complained:
If I want to talk personally with my father about something and am admitted to him, he talks for an hour about something or other and then the time of the talk is over and I have not been able to say what I had wanted to say.
If I present my ideas in writing, my father marks them for the appropriate offices…
In 1915, Grand Admiral von Tirpitz confided to his diary: ‘The Kaiser does not give him a chance.’
Thus, just at the moment when the Battle of Verdun was about to enter its grimmest phase, the one man on the German side who could have put an end to the butchery was impotent to do so.
And a similar state of affairs had meanwhile come about on the other side of the lines.