

Sales Technique
Sales Responsibilities and Preparation
4.1 SALES RESPONSIBILITIES
The primary responsibility of a salesperson is to conclude a sale successfully.
This task will involve the identification of customer needs, presentation and demonstration, negotiation, handling objections and closing the sale.
These skills are discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
In order to generate sales successfully a number of secondary functions are also carried out by most salespeople.
Although termed secondary, they are vital to long-term sales success.
These are:
(i)
prospecting;
(ii)
maintaining customer records and information feedback;
(iii)
self-management;
(iv)
handling complaints;
(v)
providing service.
4.1.1 PROSPECTING
Prospecting is the searching for and calling upon customers who, hitherto, have not purchased from the company.
This activity is not of uniform importance across all branches of selling.
It is obviously far more important in industrial selling than retail selling; for example, a salesperson of office equipment may call upon many new potential customers, whereas a furniture salesperson is unlikely to search out new prospects — they come to him as a result of advertising and, perhaps, high street location.
A problem sometimes associated with salespeople who have worked for the same company for many years is that they rely on established customers to provide repeat orders rather than actively seeking new business.
Certainly, it  is usually more comfortable for the salesperson to call upon old contacts, but the nature of much industrial selling is that, because product life is long, sustained sales growth depends upon searching out and selling to new customers.
Sources of prospects
(i)
EXISTING CUSTOMERS.
This is a highly effective method of generating prospects and, yet, tends to be under-used by many.
A wealth of new prospects can be obtained simply by asking satisfied customers if they know of anyone who may have a need for the kinds of products or services being sold.
This technique has been used successfully in life insurance and industrial selling but has application in many other areas also.
Having obtained the names of potential customers, the salesperson, if appropriate, can ask his customer if he may use his name as a reference.
The use of reference selling in industrial marketing can be highly successful since it reduces the perceived risk for a potential buyer.
(ii)
TRADE DIRECTORIES.
A reliable trade directory such as Kompass or Dunn and Bradstreet can prove useful in identifying potential industrial buyers.
The Kompass directory, for example, is organised by industry and location and provides such potentially useful information as:
name, address and telephone number of companies;
names of board members;
size of firm, by turnover and number of employees;
type of products manufactured or distributed.
For trade selling, the Retail Directory provides information regarding potential customers, organized by various types of retail outlet.
Thus a salesperson selling a product suitable for confectioners and newsagents could use the listing of such retailers under the CTN heading (confectioners, tobacconists and newsagents) to obtain relevant names, addresses, telephone numbers and, also, an indication of size through the information given regarding number of branches.
(iii)
INQUIRIES.
Inquiries may arise as a natural consequence of conducting business.
Satisfied customers may by word-of-mouth create inquiries from ‘warm’ prospects.
Many companies stimulate inquiries, however, by advertising (many industrial advertisements use coupon return to stimulate leads), direct mail and exhibitions.
This source of prospects is an important one and the salesperson should respond promptly.
The inquirer may have an urgent need seeking a solution and may turn to the competition if faced with a delay.
Even if the customer's problem is not so urgent, slow response may foster unfavourable attitudes towards the salesman and his company's products.
The next priority is to screen out those inquiries which are unlikely to result in a sale.
A telephone call has the advantage of giving a personalised response, and yet is relatively inexpensive and not time consuming.
It can be used to check how serious the inquiry is and to arrange a personal visit  should the inquiry prove to have potential.
This process of checking leads to establish their potential is known as qualifying.
(iv)
THE PRESS.
Perhaps underused as a source of prospects, the press is nevertheless important.
Advertisements and articles can give clues to potential new sources of business.
Articles may reveal diversification plans which may mean a company suddenly becomes a potential customer; advertisements for personnel may reveal plans for expansion, again suggesting potential new business.
(v)
COLD CANVASSING.
This method involves calling in every prospect who might have a need for the salesperson's product.
A brush salesperson, for example, may attempt to call upon every house in a village.
A variant of this method is the ‘cool canvass’, where only certain groups of people are canvassed, i.e. those who are more likely to buy since they possess some qualifying feature; for example, only companies over a certain size may be judged viable prospects.
Calling cold on big company buyers is unlikely to be successful, however.
A more effective approach is to send a letter in advance explaining the business the company is in, followed by a call to make an appointment (Lee, 1984).
4.1.2 CUSTOMER RECORDS AND INFORMATION FEEDBACK
A systematic approach to customer record-keeping is to be recommended to all repeat-call salespeople.
An industrial salesperson should record the following information.
(i)
Name and address of company.
(ii)
Name and position of contact(s).
(iii)
Nature of business.
(iv)
Date and time of interview.
(v)
Assessment of potential.
(vi)
Buyer needs, problems and buying habits.
(vii)
Past sales with dates.
(viii)
Problems /opportunities encountered.
(ix)
Future actions on the part of salesman (and buyer).
Record cards should be provided by management and salespeople encouraged to use them as part of the sales plan before each visit.
Salespeople should also be encouraged to send back to head office information which is relevant to the marketing of company products.
Test market activity by competition, news of imminent product launches, rumours of policy changes on the part of trade and industrial customers, competitors, and feedback on company achievement regarding product performance, delivery and after-sales service are just some of the kinds of information which may be useful to management.
4.1.3 SELF-MANAGEMENT
This aspect of the sales job is of particular importance since he is often working alone with the minimum of personal supervision.
A salesperson may have to organise his or her own call plan.
This involves dividing territory into sections to be covered day by day and deciding the best route to follow between calls.
Often it makes sense to divide a territory into segments radiating outwards, with the salesperson's home being at the centre.
Each segment is designed to be small enough to be covered by the salesperson during one day's work.
Many salespeople believe that the most efficient routing plan involves driving out to the furthest customer and, then zig-zagging back to home base.
However it can be shown that adopting a round-trip approach will usually result in lower mileage.
Such considerations are important with respect to efficiency, as an alarming amount of time can be spent on the road as opposed to face to face with buyers.
A survey conducted on behalf of the Institute of Marketing into selling practice in the UK (PA Consultants, 1979) found that, on average, only 20–30 per cent of a salesperson's normal working day is spent face to face with customers.
Although this study was conducted over 10 years ago, matters have not improved since then.
In fact, this figure is now nearer 20 per cent rather than 30 because salespeople are increasingly called upon to carry out ancillary work such as customer surveys, service work and merchandising.
Some companies take this responsibility out of the salesperson's hands and produce daily worksheets showing who is to be called on and in what order.
Another factor which may be the responsibility of the salesperson is deciding on call frequency.
It is sensible to grade customers according to potential.
For example, consumer durable salesmen may categorise the retain outlets they are selling into A, B and C grades.
A grade outlets may be visited every fortnight, B grade every month and C grade once every three months.
The principle applies to all kinds of selling, however, and may be left to the salesperson's discretion or organised centrally as part of the sales management function.
The danger of delegating responsibility to salespeople is that the criteria used to decide frequency of visit are ‘friendliness with the buyer’ or ‘ease of sale’rather than sales potential.
On the other hand, it can be argued that a  responsible salesperson is in the best position to decide how much time needs to be spent with each customer.
4.1.4 HANDLING COMPLAINTS
Dealing with complaints may seem, at first, to be a time-consuming activity which diverts a salesperson from his primary task of generating sales.
A marketing orientation for a sales force, however, dictates that the goal of an organisation is to create customer satisfaction in order to generate profit.
When dissatisfaction identifies itself in the form of a complaint, this necessary condition for long-term survival is clearly not being met.
Complaints vary in their degree of seriousness and in the authority which the salesperson holds in order to deal with them.
No matter how trivial the complaint may seem, the complainant should be treated with respect and the matter dealt with seriously.
In a sense, dealing with complaints is one of the after-the-sale services provided by suppliers.
It is therefore part of the mix of benefits a company offers its customers, although it differs in essence since the initial objective is to minimise its necessity.
Nevertheless, the ability of the salesperson to empathise with the customer and his problem and to react sympathetically can create considerable goodwill and help foster long-term relationships.
With this in mind, many companies give the customer the benefit of the doubt when this does not involve high cost, even though they suspect that the fault may be caused by inappropriate use of the product on the part of the customer; for example, garden fork manufacturers may replace prematurely broken forks, even though the break may have been caused by work for which the fork was not designed.
When the salesperson does not have the authority to deal with the complaint immediately, his job is to submit the relevant information in written form to head office so that the matter can be taken further.
4.1.5 PROVIDING SERVICE
Salespeople are in an excellent position to provide a ‘consultancy’ service to their customers.
Since they meet many customers each year, they become familiar with solutions to common problems.
Thus an industrial salesperson may be able to advise his customers on improving productivity or cutting costs.
Indeed the service element of industrial selling is often incorporated into the selling process itself, e.g. computer salespeople may offer to conduct an analysis of customer requirements and produce a written report in order to complete a sale.
The salesperson who learns solutions to common problems and provides useful advice to his customers builds an effective barrier to competitive attacks and strengthens buyer-seller relationships.
Another area where salespeople provide service is in trade selling.
They may be called upon to set up in-store displays and other promotions for wholesalers and retailers.
Some companies employ people to do this on a full-time basis.
These people are called merchandisers and their activities provide support to traditional salespeople, who can thus spend more time selling.
Salespeople may also be called upon to provide after-sales service to customers.
A sales engineer may be required to give advice on the operation of a newly acquired machine or provide assistance in the event of a breakdown.
Sometimes he may be able to solve the problem himself, while in other cases he will call in technical specialists to deal with the problem.
4.2 PREPARATION
The ability to think on one's feet is of great benefit to a salesperson, since he will be required to modify his sales presentation to suit the particular needs and problems of his various customers and to respond quickly to unusual objections and awkward questions.
However, there will be much to be gained by careful preparation of the selling task.
Some customers will have similar problems; some questions and objections will be raised repeatedly.
A salesperson can therefore usefully spend time considering how best to respond to these recurring situations.
Within this section attention will be given to preparation not only for the selling task, in which there is little or no scope for the salesperson to bargain with the buyer, but also for where selling may involve a degree of negotiation between buyer and seller.
In many selling situations, buyers and sellers may negotiate price, timing of delivery, product extras, payment and credit terms, and trade-in values.
These will be termed sales negotiations.
In others, the salesperson may have no scope for such discussions; in essence the product is offered on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.
Thus, the salesperson of bicycles to dealers may have a set price list and delivery schedule with no authority to deviate from them.
This will be termed pure selling.
4.2.1 PREPARATION FOR PURE SELLING AND SALES NEGOTIATIONS
A number of factors can be examined in order to improve the chances of sales success in both sales negotiations and pure selling.
Product knowledge and benefits
Knowledge of product features is insufficient for sales success.
Because people buy products for the benefits they confer, successful salespeople relate product features to consumer benefits; product features are the means by which benefits are derived.
The way to do this is to look at products from the customer's point of view.
Table 1 shows a few examples.
By analysing the products he is selling in this way, a salesman will communicate in terms which are meaningful to buyers and therefore be more convincing.
In industrial selling, the salesperson may be called upon to be an adviser or consultant who is required to provide solutions to problems.
In some cases this may involve a fairly deep understanding of the nature of the customer's business, in order to be able to appreciate his problems fully and to suggest the most appropriate solution.
Thus the salesperson must not only know his products' benefits but the types of situation in which each would be appropriate.
In computer selling, for example, successful selling requires an appreciation of which system is most appropriate given customer needs and resources.
This may necessitate a careful examination of customer needs through a survey conducted  by the seller.
Sometimes the costs of the survey will be paid for by the prospective customer, later to be subtracted from the cost of the equipment should an order result.
Product features and customer benefits
Preparation of sales benefits should not result in an inflexible sales approach.
Different customers have different needs which implies they seek different benefits from products they buy.
One high-earning salesperson of office equipment attributed his success to the preparation he conducted before every sales visit; this involved knowing his product's capabilities, understanding his client's needs, and matching these together by getting his wife to test him every evening and at the weekend (Kennedy et al., 1980).
Knowledge of competitors' products and their benefits
Knowledge of competitive products offers several advantages.
(i)
It allows a salesperson to offset the strengths of competitors' products, which may be mentioned by potential buyers, against their weaknesses.
For example, a buyer might say ‘Competitor X's product offers cheaper maintenance costs’, to which a salesperson might reply ‘Yes, but these cost savings are small compared to the fuel savings you get with our machine.’
(ii)
In industrial selling sales engineers may work with a buying organisation in order to solve a technical problem.
This may result in a product specification being drawn up in which the sales engineers may have an influence.
It is obviously to their benefit that the specification reflects the strengths and capabilities of their products rather than competition.
Thus knowledge of competitive strengths and weaknesses will be an advantage in this situation.
Competitive information can be gleaned from magazines, e.g. Which? sales catalogues and price lists, from talking to buyers and from direct observation, e.g. of prices in supermarkets.
It makes sense to keep such information on file for quick reference.
Sales presentation planning
Although versatility, flexibility and the ability to ‘think on one's feet’ are desirable attributes, there are considerable advantages to presentational planning.
(i)
The salesperson is less likely to forget important consumer benefits associated with each product within the range he is selling.
(ii)
The use of visual aids and demonstrations can be planned into the presentation at the most appropriate time to reinforce the benefit the salesperson is communicating.
(iii)
It builds confidence in the salesperson, particularly the newer less experienced type, that he is well-equipped to do the job efficiently and professionally.
(iv)
Possible objections and questions can be anticipated and persuasive counter-arguments prepared.
Many salespeople who, to an outsider, seem naturally quick-witted have developed this skill through careful preparation beforehand, imagining themselves as buyers and thinking of objections that they might raise if they were in such a position.
For example, many price objections can be countered by reference to higher product quality, greater durability, high productivity and lower offsetting life-cycle costs, e.g. lower maintenance, fuel or manpower costs.
Setting sales objectives
The essential skill in setting call objectives is to phrase them in terms of what the salesperson wants the customer to do rather than what the salesperson will do.
The type of objective set may depend upon the sales cycle of the product and the stage reached in that cycle with a prospective customer.
The sales cycle refers to the time which can reasonably be expected to pass before an order is concluded.
With many retail sales this is short; often, unless a sale is concluded during the first visit, the customer will buy elsewhere.
In this situation it is reasonable to set a sales close objective.
With capital goods, like aeroplanes, gas turbines and oil rigs, the sales cycle is very long, perhaps running into years.
Clearly, to set a sales objective in terms of closing the sale is inappropriate.
For producers with longer sales cycles, sensible objectives may be:
(i)
for the customer to define clearly what his requirements are;
(ii)
to have the customer visit the production site;
(iii)
to have the customer try the product, e.g. fly on an aircraft;
(iv)
to have the customer compare the product versus competitive products in terms of measurable performance criteria, e.g. for pile driving equipment this might be the number of metres driven per hour.
The temptation, when setting objectives, is to determine them in terms of what the salesperson will do.
An adhesive salesperson may decide that the objective of his visit to a buyer is to demonstrate the ease of application and adhesive  properties of a new product.
While this demonstration may be a valuable and necessary part of the sales presentation, it is not the ultimate goal of the visit.
This may be to have the customer test the product over a four-week period, or for him to order a quantity for immediate use.
Understanding buyer behaviour
The point was made in Chapter 2 that many organisational buying decisions are complex, involving many people whose evaluative criteria may differ, and that the purchasing officer may play a minor role in deciding which supplier to choose, particularly with very expensive items.
The practical implication of these facts is that careful preparation may be necessary for industrial salespeople, either when selling to new companies or when selling to existing customers where the nature of the product is different.
In both situations, time taken trying to establish who the key influencers and decision-makers are will be well rewarded.
In different companies there may be different key people, e.g. secretaries,(office stationery), production engineers (lathes), design engineers (components), managing directors (computers), so the salesperson needs to be aware of the real need to treat each organisation individually.
Other practical information which a salesperson can usefully collect includes the name and position of each key influencer and decision-maker, the times most suitable for interview, the types of competitive products previously purchased by the buying organisation, and any threats to a successful sale or special opportunities afforded by the situation.
Examples in the last category would include personal prejudices held by key people against the salesperson, his company, or its products, while positive factors might include common interests which could form the basis of a rapport with the buyer, or favourable experiences with other types of products sold by the salesperson's company.
4.2.2 PREPARATION FOR SALES NEGOTIATIONS
In addition to the factors outlined in the previous section, a sales negotiator will benefit by paying attention to the following additional factors during preparation.
Assessment of the balance of power
In the sales negotiation, seller and buyer will each be expecting to conclude a deal which is favourable to themselves.
The extent t–which each is successful will depend upon their negotiating skills and the balance of power between the parties.
This balance will be determined by four key factors.
(i)
THE NUMBER OF OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO EACH PARTY.
If a buyer has only one option — to buy from the seller in question — then that seller  is in a powerful position.
If the seller, in turn, is not dependent on the buyer, but has many attractive potential customers for his products, then again he is in a strong position.
Conversely, when a buyer has many potential sources of supply, and a seller has few potential customers, the buyer should be able to extract a good deal.
Many buyers will deliberately contact a number of potential suppliers to strengthen their bargaining position.
(ii)
THE QUANTITY AND THE QUALITY OF INFORMATION HELD BY EACH PARTY.
(‘Knowledge is power’— Machiavelli .)
If a buyer has access to a seller's cost structure then he is in a powerful position to negotiate a cheaper price, or at least avoid paying too high a price.
If a seller knows how much a buyer is willing to pay, then his power position is improved.
(iii)
NEED RECOGNITION AND SATISFACTION.
The greater the salesperson's understanding of the needs of the buyer and the more capable he is of satisfying those needs, the stronger will be his bargaining position.
In some industrial marketing situations, suppliers work with buying organisations to solve technical problems in the knowledge that to do so will place them in a very strong negotiating position.
The more the buyer believes that his needs can be satisfied by only one company, the weaker his negotiating stance.
In effect, the seller has reduced the buyer's number of options by uniquely satisfying his needs.
(iv)
THE PRESSURES ON THE PARTIES.
Where a technical problem is of great importance to a buying organisation, its visibility high and its solution difficult, any supplier who can solve it will gain immense bargaining power.
If, on the other hand, there are pressures on the salesperson, perhaps because of low sales returns, then a buyer should be able to extract extremely favourable terms during negotiations in return for purchasing from him.
The implications of these determinants of the balance of power are that before negotiations (and, indeed, during them) a salesperson will benefit by assessing the relative strength of his power base.
This implies that he needs information.
If the seller knows the number of companies who are competing for the order, their likely stances, the criteria used by the buying organisation when deciding between them, the degree of pressure on key members of the decision making unit, and any formula they might use for assessing price acceptability, an accurate assessment of the power balance should be possible.
This process should lessen the chances of pricing too low or of needlessly giving away other concessions like favourable payment terms.
Judicious negotiators will at this stage look to the future to assess likely changes in the balance of power.
Perhaps power lies with the supplier now, but overpowering or ‘negotiating too sweet a deal’ might provoke retribution later when the buyer has more suppliers from which to choose.
Determination of negotiating objectives
It is prudent for negotiators to set objectives during the preparation stage.
This  reduces the likelihood of being swayed by the heat of the negotiating battle and of accepting a deal which, with hindsight, should have been rejected.
This process is analogous to a buyer at an auction paying more than he can afford because he allows himself to be swept along by the bidding.
Additionally, when negotiation is conducted by a team, discussion of objectives helps coordination and unity.
It is useful to consider two types of objectives (Kennedy et al., 1980).
(i)
‘MUST HAVE’ OBJECTIVES.
The ‘must have’ objectives define a bargainer's minimum requirements; for example, the minimum price at which a seller is willing to trade.
This determines the negotiating breakpoint.
(ii)
‘WOULD LIKE’ OBJECTIVES.
These are the maximum a negotiator can reasonably expect to get; for example, the highest price a seller feels he can realistically obtain.
This determines the opening positions of buyers and sellers.
Figure 14 describes a negotiating scenario where a deal is possible since there is overlap between the highest price the buyer is willing to pay (buyer's ‘must have’ objective) and the lowers price the seller is willing to accept (seller's ‘must have’objective).
The price actually agreed will depend upon the balance of power between the two parties and their respective negotiating skills.
A negotiating scenario (adapted from Winkler, 1981).
Concession analysis
Since negotiation implies movement in order to achieve agreement, it is likely that concessions will be made by at least one party during the bargaining process.
Preparation can aid negotiators by analysing the kinds of concessions which might be offered to the other side.
The key to this concession analysis is to value concessions the seller might be prepared to make through the eyes of the buyer.
By doing this it may be possible to identify concessions which cost the seller very little and yet be highly valued by the buyer.
For example, to offer much quicker delivery than is usual may cost a seller very little because of spare capacity, but if this is highly valued by the buyer the seller may be able to trade it in return for a prompt payment agreement.
Below are listed the kinds of issues which may be examined during concession analysis.
(i)
Price.
(ii)
Timing of delivery.
(iii)
The product — its specification, optional extras.
(iv)
The price — ex works price, price at the buyer's factory gate, installation price, in-service price?
(v)
Payment — on despatch, on receipt, in working order, credit terms?
(vi)
Trade-in terms, e.g. cars.
The aim of concession analysis is to ensure that nothing which has value to the buyer is given away freely during negotiations.
A skilful negotiator will attempt to trade concession for concession so that ultimately an agreement which satisfies both parties is reached.
Proposal analysis
A further sensible activity during the preparation stage is to estimate the proposals and demands the buyer is likely to make during the course of negotiation, and the seller's reaction to them.
This is analogous to the anticipation of objections in pure selling — it helps when quick decisions have to be made in the heat of the negotiation.
It is also linked to concession analysis, for when a buyer makes a proposal, for example favourable credit terms, he is really asking the seller to grant a concession.
The skilful salesperson will ask for a concession in return — perhaps a less onerous delivery schedule.
By anticipating the kinds of proposals the buyer is likely to make, the seller can plan the kinds of counter-proposals he wishes to make.
In some situations, the appropriate response may be the ‘concession close’(see Chapter 5).
4.3 CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has examined the responsibilities of salespeople, i.e. to gain sales, to prospect for new customers, to maintain customer records and provide information feedback, to manage their work, to handle complaints, and to provide service.
An important element in managing their work is preparation, this being examined in detail.
A distinction is made between sales negotiations, where a certain amount of bargaining may take place, and pure selling, where the salesman is given no freedom to bargain.
Important in preparation is:
(i)
product knowledge and customer benefits;
(ii)
knowledge of competitors' products and their benefits;
(iii)
sales presentation planning;
(iv)
setting sales and negotiation objectives;
(v)
understanding buyer behaviour;
(vi)
assessing the power balance;
(vii)
concession analysis;
(viii)
proposal analysis.
The next chapter on personal selling skills considers how to use this preparation in the actual selling situation.
PRACTICAL EXERCISE — THE O'BRIEN COMPANY
The O'Brien Company manufactures and markets a wide range of luggage including suitcases, handbags and briefcases.
The company is organised into two divisions — consumer and industrial.
The consumer division sells mainly through retail outlets whereas the industrial division markets direct to companies, who buy luggage (especially briefcases) for use by their executives.
You have recently been appointed as a salesperson for the industrial division and have been asked to visit a new potential client with a view to selling him briefcases.
The potential customer is Brian Forbes, the managing director (and owner) of a medium-sized engineering company in the Midlands with subsidiaries in Manchester, Leeds and Bristol.
They employ a sales force of twenty men selling copper piping.
In addition, it is estimated that the company employs around forty marketing, personnel, production and accountancy executives.
The O'Brien Company markets two ranges of executive briefcase.
One is made from good quality plastic, with  imitation hide lining.
It is available in black only and is priced at £25 for the lockable version and £22 for the non-lockable type.
The other de-luxe range is manufactured from leather and real hide and is priced at £95.
Colours available are black, brown, dark blue and claret.
Additional features are a number-coded locking device, a variable depth feature which allows the briefcase to be expanded from its usual 3½ inches to 5½ inches, individual gilt initialling on each briefcase, an ink-resistant interior compartment for pens, and three pockets inside the lid to take different sized papers/documents.
The plastic version has only the last of these features and is 3 inches in depth.
Quantity discounts for both ranges are as follows:
Very little is known about Brian Forbes or his company apart from the information already given.
However, by chance, an acquaintance of yours who works as a salesman for a machine tool company has visited Mr Forbes earlier in the year.
Discussion questions
1
What are your sales objectives?
What  extra information would be useful?
2
Prepare a sales presentation for the briefcases.
3
Prepare a list of possible objections and your responses to them.
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
1
What considerations should be taken into account when deciding on the amount of prospecting a salesperson should do?
2
Discuss the contribution of preparation to the selling process.
Personal Selling Skills
The basic philosophy underlying the approach to personal selling adopted in this book is that selling should be an extension of the marketing concept.
This implies that, for long-term survival, it is in the best interests of the salesperson and his or her company to identify customer needs and aid customer decision-making by selecting from the product range those products which best fit the customer's requirements.
This is not to deny the importance of personal persuasion.
In the real world, it is unlikely that a product has clear advantages over its competition on all points, and it is clearly part of the selling function for the salesperson to emphasise those superior features and benefits which his product possesses.
However the model for personal selling advocated here is that of a salesperson acting as a need identifier and problem solver.
The view of the salesperson as being a slick fast-talking confidence trickster is unrealistic in a world where most sellers depend upon repeat business and where a high proportion of selling is conducted with professional buyers.
As with the development of all skills, the theoretical approach described in this chapter needs to be supplemented by practical experience.
Many companies use role playing as a method of providing new salespeople with the opportunity to develop their skills in a situation where sales trainees can observe and correct behaviour.
An example of such an exercise, where students and salespeople can apply some of the techniques outlined in this chapter is given at the end of Chapter 10.
In order to develop personal selling skills it is useful to distinguish six phases of the selling process.
(i)
The opening.
(ii)
Need and problem identification.
(iii)
Presentation and demonstration.
(iv)
Dealing with objections.
(v)
Negotiation.
(vi)
Closing the sale.
These phases need not occur in this order; objections may be raised during presentation, or during negotiation or a trial close may be attempted at any point during the presentation if buyer interest is high.
5.1 THE OPENING
Initial impressions can cloud later perceptions, and so it is important to consider the ways in which a favourable initial response can be achieved.
Buyers expect salespeople to be business-like in their personal appearance and behaviour.
Untidy hair and a sloppy manner of dress can create a lack of confidence.
Further, the salesperson who does not respect the fact that the buyer is likely to be a busy person, with many demands on his time, may cause irritation on the part of the buyer.
The salesperson should open with a smile, a handshake and, in situations where he or she is not well known to the buyer, introduce himself and the company he represents.
Common courtesies should be followed.
For example, he should wait for the buyer to indicate that he can sit down or, at least , ask the buyer if he may sit down.
Attention to detail, like holding one's briefcase in the left hand so that the right can be used for the handshake, removes the possibility of an awkward moment when a briefcase is clumsily transferred from right to left as the buyer extends his hand in greeting.
Opening remarks are important since they set the tone for the rest of the sales interview.
Normally they should be business-related since this is the purpose of the visit; they should show the buyer that the salesperson is not about to waste his time.
Where the buyer is well known and where, by his own remarks, the buyer indicates a willingness to talk about a more social matter, the salesperson will obviously follow.
This can generated close rapport with the buyer, but the salesperson must be aware of the reason for him being there, and not be excessively diverted from talking business.
Opening remarks might be:
TRADE SALESPERSON: Your window display looks attractive.
Has it attracted more custom?
INDUSTRIAL SALESPERSON: We have helped a number of companies in the same kind of business as you are in to achieve considerable savings by the use of our stock control procedures.
What methods do you use at present to control stock.
RETAIL SALESPERSON: I can see that you appear to be interested in our stereo equipment.
What kind of system had you in mind?
The cardinal sin which many retail salespeople make is to open with ‘Can I help you?’ which invites the response ‘No, thank you, I'm just looking.’
5.2 NEED AND PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION
Most salespeople have a range of products to sell.
A car salesperson has many models ranging from small economy cars to super luxury top-of-the-range models.
The computer salesperson will have a number of systems to suit the needs and resources of different customers.
A bicycle retailer will have models from many different manufacturers to offer customers.
A pharmaceutical salesperson will be able to offer doctors a range of drugs to combat  various illnesses.
In each case, the seller's first objective will be to discover the problems and needs of his customers.
Before a car salesperson can sell a car, he needs to understand the circumstances of his customer.
What size of car is required?
Is the customer looking for high fuel economy or performance?
Is a boot or a hatchback preferred?
What kind of price range is being considered?
Having obtained this information the salesperson is in a position to sell the model which best suits the needs of the buyer.
A computer salesperson may carry out a survey of customer requirements prior to suggesting an appropriate computer system.
A bicycle retailer should ask who is the bicycle for, what type is preferred, e.g. BMX or racing bicycle, and the colour preference, before he can make sensible suggestions as to which model is most suitable.
A pharmaceutical salesperson will discuss with doctors the problems which have arisen with patient treatment; perhaps an ointment has been ineffective or a harmful side-effect has been discovered.
This gives the salesperson the opportunity to offer a solution to such problems by means of one of his company's products.
This ‘needs analysis’ approach suggests that early in the sales process the salesperson should adopt a question-and-listen posture.
In order to encourage the buyer to discuss his problems and needs, salespeople tend to use ‘open’ rather than‘closed’questions.
An open question is one which requires more than a one word or one phrase answer.
(i)
‘Why do you believe that a computer system is inappropriate for your business?’
(ii)
‘What were the main reasons for buying the XYZ photocopier?’
(iii)
‘In what ways did the ABC ointment fail to meet your expectations?’
A closed question, on the other hand, invites a one word or one phrase answer.
These can be used to obtain purely factual information, but excessive use can hinder rapport and lead to an abrupt type of conversation which lacks flow.
Examples of closed questions are:
(i)
‘Would you tell me the name of the equipment you currently use?’
(ii)
‘Does your company manufacture 1000 cc marine engines?’
(iii)
‘What is the name of your chief mechanical engineer?’
In practice, a wide variety of questions may be used during a sales interview (DeCormier and Jobber, 1989).
Thirteen types of question and their objectives, together with examples are given in Table 2.
Salespeople should avoid the temptation of making a sales presentation without finding out the needs of their customers.
It is all too easy to start a sales presentation in the same rigid way, perhaps by highlighting the current  bargain of the week, without first questioning the customer as to his needs.
Types of question used in personal selling
At the end of this process, the salesperson may find it useful to summarise the points that have been raised to confirm an understanding with the buyer.
For example:
Fine, Mr and Mrs Jones.
I think I have a good idea of the kind of property you are looking for.
You would like a four-bedroom house within fifteen minutes drive of Mr Jones' company.
You are not bothered whether the house is detached or semi-detached, but you do not want to live on an estate.
The price range you are considering is between £120,000 and £150,000.
Does this sum up the kind of house you want, or have I missed something?
5.3 THE PRESENTATION AND DEMONSTRATION
Once the problems and needs of the buyer have been identified, the presentation follows as a natural consequence.
The first question to be addressed is presentation of what?
The preceding section has enabled the salesperson to choose the most appropriate product(s) from his range to meet customer requirements.
Second, having fully discussed what the customer wants, the salesperson knows which product benefits to stress.
A given product may have a range of potential features which confer benefits to customers, but different customers place different priorities on them.
In short, having identified the needs and problems of the buyer, the presentation provides the opportunity for the salesperson to convince the buyer that he can supply the solution.
The key to this task is to recognise that buyers purchase benefits and are only interested in product features in as much as they provide the benefits that the customer is looking for.
Examples of the relationship between certain product features and benefits are given in Chapter 4.
Training programmes and personal preparation of salespeople should pay particular attention to deriving the customer benefits their products bestow.
Benefits should be analysed at two levels: those benefits which can be obtained by purchase of a particular type of product; and those that can be obtained by purchasing that product from a particular supplier.
For example, automatic washing machine salespeople need to consider the benefits of an automatic washing machine compared with a twin-tub, as well as the benefits that his company's automatic washing machines have over competitors' models.
This proffers maximum flexibility for the salesperson in meeting various sales situations.
The danger of selling features rather than benefits is particularly acute in industrial selling because of the highly technical nature of many industrial products, and the tendency to employ sales engineers rather than salespeople.
Perkins Diesels found this to be a problem with their sales team after commissioning market research to identify strengths and weaknesses of their sales and marketing operation (Reed, 1983), but it is by no means confined to this sector.
Hi-fi salespeople who confuse and infuriate customers with tedious descriptions of the electronic wizardry behind the products they sell are no less guilty of this sin.
A simple method of relating features and benefits in a sales presentation is to link them by using the following phrases:
(i)
‘which means that’;
(ii)
‘which results in’;
(iii)
‘which enables you to’.
For example, an estate agent might say, ‘The house is situated four miles from the company where you work (product feature) which means that you can easily be at work within fifteen minutes of leaving home’(customer benefit).
Or an office salesperson might say ‘The XYZ photocopier allows streamfeeding (product feature) which results in quicker photocopying’(customer benefit).
Finally, a car salesperson may claim that ‘This model is equipped with overdrive (product feature) which enables you to reduce petrol consumption on motorways’(customer benefit).
The term ‘presentation’ should not mislead the salesperson into believing that he alone should do all the talking.
The importance of asking questions is not confined to the needs and problem identification stage.
Asking questions as part of the presentation serves two functions.
First, it checks that the salesperson has understood the kinds of benefits the buyer is looking for.
After explaining a benefit it is sound practice to ask the buyer ‘Is this the kind of thing you are looking for?’
Second, asking questions establishes whether the buyer has understood what the salesperson has said.
A major obstacle to understanding is the use of technical jargon which is unintelligible to the buyer.
Where a presentation is necessarily complicated and lengthy, the salesperson would be well advised to pause at  various points and simply ask if there are any questions.
This gives the buyer the opportunity to query anything that is not entirely clear.
This questioning procedure allows the salesperson to tailor the speed and content of his presentation to the circumstances which face him.
Buyers have different backgrounds, technical expertise and intelligence levels.
Questioning allows the salesperson to communicate more effectively because it provides the information necessary for the seller to know how to vary his presentation to different buyers.
Many sales situations involve risk to the buyer.
No matter what benefits the salesperson discusses, the buyer may be reluctant to change from his present supplier or change his present model because to do so may give rise to unforeseen problems — delivery may be unpredictable or the new model may be unreliable.
Assurances from the salesperson are, of themselves, unlikely to be totally  convincing — after all, he would say that wouldn't he!
Risk is the hidden reason behind many failures to sell.
The salesperson accurately identifies customer needs and relates product benefits to those needs; the buyer does not offer much resistance, but somehow he does not buy.
A likely reason is that he plays safe, sticking to his present supplier or model in order to lessen the risk of aggravation should problems occur.
How, then, can a salesperson reduce risk?
There are four major ways:
(i)
reference selling;
(ii)
demonstrations;
(iii)
guarantees;
(iv)
trial orders.
5.3.1 REFERENCE SELLING
Reference selling involves the use of satisfied customers in order to convince the buyer of the effectiveness of the salesman's product.
During the preparation stage a list of satisfied customers, arranged by product type, should be drawn up.
Letters from satisfied customers should also be kept and used in the sales presentation in order to build confidence.
This technique can be highly effective in selling, moving a buyer from being merely interested in the product to being convinced that it is the solution to his problem.
5.3.2 DEMONSTRATIONS
Demonstrations also reduce risk because they prove the benefits of the product.
A major producer of sales training films organises regional demonstrations of a selection of them in order to prove their quality to training managers.
Industrial goods manufacturers will arrange demonstrations to show their products' capabilities in use.
Car salespeople will allow customers to test drive cars.
For all but the most simple of products it is advisable to divide the demonstration into two stages.
The first stage involves a brief description of the features and benefits of the product and an explanation of how it works.
The second stage entails the actual demonstration itself.
This should be conducted by the salesperson.
The reason behind this two-stage approach is that it is often very difficult for the viewers of the demonstration to understand the principles of how a product works while at the same time watching it work.
This is because the viewers are receiving competing stimuli.
The salesperson's voice may be competing for the buyers' attention with the flashing lights and noise of the equipment.
Once the equipment works, the buyers can be encouraged to use it themselves under the salesperson's supervision.
If the correct equipment, to suit the buyers' needs, has been chosen for demonstration, and it performs reliably, the demonstration can move the buyers very much closer to purchase.
There now follows more practical advice upon what must be regarded as an  extremely important part of the personal selling process, for without a demonstration the salesperson is devoid of one of his or her principal selling tools.
Pre-demonstration
(i)
Make the process as brief as possible, but not so brief as not to be able to fulfil the sales objective of obtaining an order, or of opening the way for further negotiations.
It is basically a question of ‘balance’, in that the salesperson must judge the individual circumstances and ‘tailor’ the demonstration accordingly.
Some potential buyers will require lengthier or more technical demonstrations than others.
(ii)
Make the process as simple as possible, bearing in mind that some potential purchasers will be more technically minded than others.
Never ‘over-pitch’ such technicality, because potential buyers will generally pretend that they understand, and will not want to admit that they do not because of‘loss of face’.
They will see the demonstration through, and probably make some excuse at the end to delay the purchase decision.
The likelihood is that they will not purchase (or at least not purchase from you).
This point is deliberately emphasised, because it is a fact that many potential sales are lost through demonstrations that are too technical.
(iii)
Rehearse the approach to likely objections with colleagues (e.g. with one acting as an ‘awkward’ buyer).
Work out how such objections can be addressed and overcome through the demonstration.
The use of interactive video is useful here, as you can witness your mistakes and rehearse a better demonstration and presentation.
(iv)
Know the product's selling points and be prepared to advance these during the course of the demonstration.
Such selling points must, however, be presented in terms of benefits to the customer.
Buyer behaviour must, therefore, be ascertained beforehand.
By so doing, it will be possible to maximise what is euphemistically called the ‘you’ or ‘u’benefits.
(v)
The demonstration should not go wrong if it has been adequately rehearsed beforehand.
However, machines do break down and power supplies sometimes fail.
Be prepared for such eventualities (e.g. rehearse an appropriate verbal ‘routine’, and have a back-up successful demonstration available on video).
The main point is not to be caught out unexpectedly and be prepared to launch into a contingency routine as smoothly as possible.
Conducting the demonstration
(i)
Commence with a concise statement of what is to be done or proved.
(ii)
Show how potential purchasers can participate in the demonstration process.
(iii)
Make the demonstration as interesting and as satisfying as possible.
(iv)
Show the potential purchaser how the product's features can fulfil his or her needs or solve his or her problems.
(v)
Attempt to translate such needs into a desire to purchase.
(vi)
Do not leave the purchaser until he or she is completely satisfied with the demonstration.
Such satisfaction will help to justify ultimate expenditure and will also reduce the severity and incidence of any complaints that might arise after purchasing.
(vii)
Summarise the main points by re-emphasising the purchasing benefits that have been put forward during the demonstration.
Note that we state purchasing benefits and not sales benefits because purchasing benefits relate to individual buying behaviour.
(viii)
The objective of a demonstration should be:
(a)
to enable the salesperson to obtain a sale immediately (e.g. a car demonstration drive given to a member of the public); or
(b)
to pave the way for future negotiations (e.g. a car demonstration drive given to a car fleet buyer).
(ix)
Depending upon the objective above, in the case of (a) ask for the order now, or in the case of (b) arrange for further  communication in the form of a meeting, a telephone call, a letter, an additional demonstration to other members of the decision making unit, etc.
Advantages of demonstrations
(i)
Demonstrations are a useful ancillary in the selling process.
They add realism to the sales routine in that they utilise more human senses than mere verbal descriptions or visual presentation.
(ii)
When a potential customer is partaking in a demonstration it is easier for the salesperson to ask questions in order to ascertain buying behaviour.
This means that the salesperson will not need to emphasise inappropriate purchasing motives later in the selling process.
(iii)
Such demonstrations enable the salesperson to maximise the ‘u’ benefits to potential purchasers.
In other words, the salesperson can relate product benefits to match the potential buyer's buying behaviour and adopt a more creative approach, rather than concentrating upon a pre-prepared sales routine.
(iv)
Customer objections can be more easily overcome if they can be persuaded to take part in the demonstration process.
In fact, many potential objections may never even be aired, because the demonstration process will make them invalid.
It is a fact that a sale is more likely to ensue if fewer objections can be advanced initially, even if such objections can be satisfactorily overcome.
(v)
There are advantages to customers in that it is easier for them to ask questions in a more realistic way in order to ascertain the product's utility more clearly and quickly.
(vi)
Purchasing inhibitions are more quickly overcome and buyers declare their  purchasing interest sooner than in face to face selling/  buying situations.
This makes the demonstration a very efficient sales tool.
(vii)
Once a customer has participated in a demonstration there is less likelihood of ‘customer remorse’(i.e. the doubt that value for money is not good value after all).
By partaking in the demonstration and tacitly accepting its results, the purchaser has bought the product and not been sold it.
5.3.3 GUARANTEES
Guarantees of product reliability, after-sales service, and delivery supported by penalty clauses can build confidence towards the salesperson's claims and lessen the costs to the buyer should something go wrong.
Their establishment is a matter for company policy rather than the salesperson's discretion but, where offered, the salesperson should not under-estimate their importance in the sales presentation.
5.3.4 TRIAL ORDERS
The final strategy for risk reduction is for salespeople to encourage trial orders, even though they may be uneconomic in company terms and in terms of salespeople's time in the short term, when faced with a straight re-buy (see Chapter 2).
Buyers who habitually purchase supplies from one supplier may recognise that change involves unwarranted risk.
It may be that the only way for a new supplier to break through this impasse is to secure a small order which, in effect, permits the demonstration of his company's capability to provide consistently high-quality products promptly.
The confidence, thus built, may lead to a higher percentage of the customer's business in the longer term.
5.4 DEALING WITH OBJECTIONS
Objections should not always be viewed with dismay by salespeople.
Many objections are simply expressions of interest by the buyer.
What the buyer is asking for is further information because he is interested in what the salesperson is saying.
The problem is that he is not, as yet, convinced.
Objections highlight the issues which are important to the buyer.
An example will illustrate these points.
Suppose an industrial salesperson working for an adhesives manufacturer is faced with the following objection: ‘Why should I buy your new adhesive gun when my present method of applying adhesive — direct from the tube — is perfectly satisfactory?’
This type of objection is clearly an expression of a desire for additional information.
The salesperson's task is to provide it in a manner which does not antagonise the buyer and, yet, is convincing.
It is a fact of human personality that the argument which is supported by the greater weight of evidence does not always win the  day; people do not like to be proved wrong.
The very act of changing a supplier may be resisted because it may imply criticism of a past decision on the part of the buyer.
For a salesperson to disregard the emotional aspects of dealing with objections is to court disaster.
The situation to be avoided is where the buyer digs his heels in on principle, because of the attitude of the salesperson.
So, the effective approach for dealing with objections involves two areas: the preparation of convincing answers; and the development of a range of techniques for answering objections in a manner which permits the acceptance of these answers without loss of face on the part of the buyer.
The first area has been covered in the previous chapter.
A number of techniques will now be reviewed to illustrate how the second objective may be accomplished.
5.4.1 LISTEN AND DO NOT INTERRUPT
Experienced salespeople know that the impression given to buyers by the salesperson who interrupts the buyer in midstream is that the salesperson believes that:
(i)
the objection is obviously wrong;
(ii)
it is trivial;
(iii)
it is not worth the salesperson's time to let the buyer finish.
Interruption denies the buyer the kind of respect he is entitled to receive and may lead to a misunderstanding of the real substance behind the objection.
The correct approach is to listen carefully, attentively and respectfully.
The buyer will appreciate the fact that the salesperson is taking the problem seriously and the salesperson will gain through having a clear and full understanding of what the problem really is.
5.4.2 AGREE AND COUNTER
This approach maintains the respect the salesperson shows to the buyer.
The salesperson first agrees that what the buyer is saying is sensible and reasonable, before then putting forward an alternative point of view.
It therefore takes the edge off the objection and creates a climate of agreement rather than conflict.
For example:
BUYER: The problem with your tractor is that it costs more than your competition.
SALESPERSON: Yes, the initial cost of the tractor is a little higher than competitors' models, but I should like to show you how, over the life-time of the machine, ours works out to be far more economical.
This example shows why the method is sometimes called the ‘yes…but’ technique.
The ‘yes’ precedes the agree statement, while the ‘but’prefaces the counter-argument.
There is no necessity to use these words, however.
In fact, in some sales situations the buyer may be so used to having salespeople use them  that the technique loses some of its effectiveness.
Fortunately there are other approaches which are less blatant.
For example:
(i)
‘I can appreciate your concern that the machine is more expensive than the competition.
However, I should like to show you…’
(ii)
‘Customer XYZ made the same comment a year ago.
I can assure you that he is highly delighted with his decision to purchase because the cost savings over the life-time of the machine more than offset the initial cost difference.’
(iii)
‘That's absolutely right!
The initial cost is a little higher.
That's why I want to show you…’
The use of the reference selling technique can be combined with the agree and counter method to provide a powerful counter to an objection.
For example, salespeople of media space in newspapers which are given away free to the public often encounter the following objection.
BUYER:(e.g. car dealer): Your newspaper is given away free.
Most of the people who receive it throw it away without even reading it.
SALESPERSON: I can understand your concern that a newspaper which is free may not be read.
However a great many people do read it to find out what second hand cars are on the market.
Mr Giles of Grimethorpe Motors has been advertising with us for two years and he is delighted with the results.
5.4.3 THE STRAIGHT DENIAL
This method has to be handled with a great deal of care since the danger is that it will result in exactly the kind of antagonism which the salesperson is wishing to avoid.
However it can be used when the buyer is clearly seeking factual information.
For example:
BUYER: I expect that this upholstery will be difficult to clean.
SALESPERSON: No, Mr Buyer, absolutely not.
This materials is made from a newly developed synthetic fibre which resists stains and allows marks to be removed simply by using soap, water and a clean cloth.
5.4.4 QUESTION THE OBJECTION
Sometimes an objection is raised which is so general as to be difficult to counter.
In this situation the salesperson should question the nature of the objection in order to clarify the specific problem at hand.
Sometimes this results in a major objection being reduced to one which can easily be dealt with.
BUYER: I'm sorry but I don't like the look of that car.
SALESPERSON: Could you tell me exactly what it is that you don't like the look of?
BUYER: I don't like the pattern on the seats.
SALESPERSON: Well in fact this model can be supplied in a number of different upholstery designs.
Shall we have a look at the catalogue to see if there is a pattern to your liking?
Another benefit of questioning objections is that, in trying to explain the exact nature of the objection, the buyer may himself realise it is really quite trivial.
5.4.5 FORESTALL THE OBJECTION
With this method, the salesperson not only anticipates an objection and plans his counter, but actually raises the objection himself as part of his sales presentation.
There are two advantages of doing this.
First, the timing of the objection is controlled by the salesperson.
Consequently, it can be planned so that it is raised at the most appropriate time for it to be dealt with effectively.
Second, since it is raised by the salesperson, the buyer is not placed in a position where, having raised a problem, he feels that he must defend it.
The danger with using this method, however, is that the salesperson may highlight a problem the buyer had not thought of.
It is most often used where a salesperson is faced with the same objection being raised time after time.
Perhaps buyers are continually raising the problem that the salesperson is working for one of the smallest companies in the industry.
The salesperson may pre-empt the objection in the following manner: ‘My company is smaller than most in the industry which means that we respond quicker to our customers’ needs and try that bit harder to make sure our customers are happy.’
5.4.6 TURN THE OBJECTION INTO A TRIAL CLOSE
A trial close is where a salesperson attempts to conclude the sale without prejudicing the chances of continuing the selling process with the buyer should he refuse to commit himself.
The ability of a salesperson to turn the objection into a trial close is dependent upon perfect timing and considerable judgment.
Usually it will be attempted after the selling process is well under way, and the salesperson judges that only one objection remains.
Under these conditions he might say the following: ‘If I can satisfy you that the fuel consumption of this car is no greater than that of the Vauxhall Cavalier, would you buy it?’
When dealing with objections, the salesperson should remember that heated arguments are unlikely to win sales — buyers buy from their friends not their enemies.
5.4.7 HIDDEN OBJECTIONS
Not all prospects state their objections.
They may prefer to say nothing because to raise an objection may cause offence or may prolong the sales interaction.
Such people may believe that staying on friendly terms with the salesperson and at the end of the interview stating that they will think over the proposal is the best tactic in a no-buy situation.
The correct salesperson response to hidden objections is to ask questions in an attempt to uncover their nature.
If a  salesperson believes that a buyer is unwilling to reveal his or her true objections, he or she should ask such questions as
(i)
‘Is there anything so far you are unsure about?’
(ii)
‘Is there anything on your mind?’
(iii)
‘What would it take to convince you?’
Uncovering hidden objections is crucial to successful selling because to convince someone it is necessary to know what he/she needs to be convinced of.
However, with uncommunicative buyers this may be difficult.
As a last resort the salesperson may need to ‘second guess’ the reluctant buyer and suggest an issue which they believe is causing the problem and ask a question such as:
‘I don't think you're totally convinced about the better performance of our product, are you?’
5.5 NEGOTIATION
In some selling situations, the salesperson or sales team have a degree of discretion with regard to the terms of the sale.
Negotiation may therefore enter into the sales process.
Sellers may negotiate price, credit terms, delivery times, trade-in values and other aspects of the commercial transaction.
The deal which is arrived at will be dependent upon the balance of power (see Chapter 4) and the negotiating skills of the respective parties.
The importance of preparation has already been mentioned in the previous chapter.
The buyer's needs, the competition which the supplier faces and knowledge about the buyer's business and the pressures upon him should be estimated.
However, there are a number of other guidelines to aid the salespeople actually engaged in the negotiation process.
5.5.1 START HIGH BUT BE REALISTIC
There are several good reasons for making the opening stance high.
First, the buyer might agree to it!
Second, it provides room for negotiation.
A buyer may come to expect concessions from a seller in return for purchasing.
This situation is prevalent in the car market.
It is unusual for a car salesperson not to reduce the advertised price of a car to a cash purchaser.
When considering how high to go, the limiting factor must be to keep within the realistic expectations of the buyer, otherwise he may not be willing to talk to the seller in the first place.
5.5.2 ATTEMPT TO TRADE CONCESSION FOR CONCESSION
Sometimes it may be necessary to give a concession simply to secure the sale.
A buyer might say that he is willing to buy if the seller drops his price by £100.
If the seller has left himself negotiating room, then this may be perfectly acceptable.
However in other circumstances, especially when the seller has a degree of power through being able to meet buyer requirements better than competition, the seller may be able to trade concessions from the buyer.
A simple way of achieving this is by means of the ‘if…then’ technique (Kennedy et al., 1980).
(i)
‘If you are prepared to arrange collection of these goods at our premises, then I am prepared to knock £10 off the purchase price.’
(ii)
‘If you are prepared to make payment within twenty-eight days, then I am willing to offer a 2 ½%; discount.’
This is a valuable tool at the disposal of the negotiator since it promotes movement towards agreement and yet ensures that proposals to give the buyer something are matched by proposals for a concession in return.
It is sensible, at the preparation stage, to evaluate possible concessions in the light of their costs and values, not only to the seller but also, to the buyer.
In (i) above, the costs of delivery to the seller might be much higher than the costs of collection to the buyer.
The net effect of the proposal, therefore, is that the salesperson is offering a benefit to the buyer at very little cost to himself.
5.5.3 BUYERS' NEGOTIATING TECHNIQUES
Buyers also have a number of techniques which they use in negotiations.
Sellers should be aware of their existence, for sometimes their effect can be devastating.
Kennedy et al.(1980) describe a number of techniques designed to weaken the position of the unsuspecting sales negotiator.
First, the shot-gun approach involves the buyer saying ‘Unless you agree immediately to a price reduction of 20% we'll have to look elsewhere for a supplier.’
In a sense, this is the ‘if…then’ technique played on the seller, but in this setting the consequences are more serious.
The correct response depends upon the outcome of the assessment of the balance of power conducted during preparation.
If the buyer does have a number of options, all of which offer the same kind of benefits the seller's product offers, then the seller may have to concede.
If the seller's product offers clear advantages over competition, then the salesperson may be able to resist the challenge.
A second ploy used by buyers is the ‘sell cheap, the future looks bright’ technique: ‘We cannot pretend that our offer meets you on price, but the real pay-off for you will come in terms of future sales.’
This may be a genuine statement — in fact the seller's own objective may have been to gain a foothold in the buyer's business.
At other times it is a gambit to extract the maximum price concession from the seller.
If the seller's position is reasonably strong he should ask for specific details and firm commitments.
A final technique is known as ‘Noah's Ark’— because it's been around that long!
The buyer says, tapping a file with his finger, ‘You'll have to do much better in terms of price.
I have quotations from your competitors which are  much lower.’
The salesperson's response depends upon his level of confidence.
He can call his bluff and ask to see the quotations; he can take the initiative by stating that he assumes the buyer is wishing for him to justify his price; or, if flushed with the confidence of past success, he can say ‘Then I advise you to accept one of them.’
5.6 CLOSING THE SALE
The skills and techniques discussed so far are not, in themselves, sufficient for consistent sales success.
A final ingredient is necessary to complete the mix the ability to close the sale.
Some salespeople believe that an effective presentation should lead the buyer to ask for the product without the salesperson needing to close the sale himself.
This sometimes happens, but more usually it will be necessary for the salesperson to take the initiative.
This is because no matter how well the salesperson identifies buyer needs, matches product benefits to them and overcomes objections, there is likely to be some doubt still present in the mind of the buyer.
This doubt may manifest itself in the wish to delay the decision.
Would it not be better to think things over?
Would it not be sensible to see what competitor XYZ has to offer?
The plain truth, however, is that if the buyer does put off buying until another day it is as likely that he will buy from the competition.
While the seller is there he is at an advantage over the competition; thus part of the salesperson's job is to try to close the sale.
Why, then, are some salespeople reluctant to close a sale?
The problem lies in the fact that most people fear rejection.
Closing the sale asks the buyer to say yes or no.
Sometimes is will be no and the salesperson will have been rejected.
Avoiding closing the sale does not result in more sales, but rejection is less blatant.
The most important point to grasp, then, is not to be afraid to close.
Accept the fact that some buyers will inevitably respond negatively, but be confident that more will buy than if no close had been used.
A major consideration is timing.
A general rule is to attempt to close the sale when the buyer displays heightened interest or a clear intention to purchase the product.
Salespeople should therefore look out for such buying signals and respond accordingly.
Purchase intentions are unlikely to grow continuously throughout the sales presentation; they are more likely to rise and fall as the presentation progresses (see Fig. 15).
The true situation is reflected by a series of peaks and troughs.
An example will explain why this should be so.
When a salesperson talks about a key benefit which exactly matches the buyer's needs, purchase intentions are likely to rise sharply.
However the buyer then perhaps raises a problem, which decreases the level, or perhaps doubts arise in the buyer's mind as to whether the claims made for the product are completely justified.
This causes purchase intentions to fall, only to be followed by an increase as the salesperson overcomes the objection or substantiates his claim.
The level of buyer's purchase intentions throughout a sales presentation.
In theory the salesperson should attempt to close at a peak.
In practice, judging when to close is difficult.
The buyer may be feigning disinterest, and throughout a sales interview several peaks may be expected to occur.
Which peak should be chosen for the close?
Part of the answer lies in experience.
Experienced salespeople know intuitively if intentions are sufficiently favourable for a close to be worthwhile.
Also, if need and problem identification has been conducted properly, the salesperson knows that a rough guide to when to close is after he has matched all product benefits to customer needs; theoretically, intentions should be at a peak then.
Not all buyers conform to this theoretical plan, however, and the salesperson should be prepared to close even if his planned sales presentation is incomplete.
The method to use is the trial close.
This technique involves asking for the order in such a way that if the timing is premature the presentation can continue with the minimum of interruption.
Perhaps early in the presentation the customer might say ‘Yes, that's just what I'm looking for’, to which the salesperson replies ‘Good, when do you think you would like delivery.’
Even if the buyer says he has not made up his mind yet, the salesperson can continue with his presentation or ask the customer a question, depending on which is most appropriate to the given situation.
A time will come during the sales interview when the salesperson has discussed all the product benefits and answered all the customer's questions.
It is, clearly, decision time; the buyer is enthusiastic but is hesitating.
There are a number of closing techniques which the salesperson can use.
5.6.1 SIMPLY ASK FOR THE ORDER
The simplest technique involves asking directly for the order.
(i)
‘Shall I reserve you one?’
(ii)
‘Would you like to buy it?’
(iii)
‘Do you want it?’
The key to using this technique is to keep silent after you have asked for the order.
The salesperson has asked a closed question implying a yes or no answer.
To break the silence effectively lets the buyer off the hook.
He will forget the first question and reply to the salesperson's later comment.
5.6.2 SUMMARISE AND THEN ASK FOR THE ORDER
This technique allows the salesperson to remind the buyer of the main points in the sales argument in a manner which implies that the moment for decision has come and that buying is the natural extension of the proceedings.
Well, Mr Smith, we have agreed that the ZDXL4 model meets your requirements of low noise, high productivity and driver comfort at a cost which you can afford.
May I go ahead and place an order for this model?
5.6.3 THE CONCESSION CLOSE
This involves keeping one concession in reserve to use as the final push towards agreement: ‘If you are willing to place an order now, I'm willing to offer an extra 2½ per cent discount.’
5.6.4 THE ALTERNATIVE CLOSE
This closing technique assumes that the buyer is willing to purchase but moves the decision to whether the colour should be red or blue, the delivery should be Tuesday or Friday, the payment in cash or credit, etc.
In such circumstances the salesperson suggests two alternatives, the agreement to either thus closing the sale.
(i)
‘Would you like the red one or the blue one?’
(ii)
‘Would you like it delivered on Tuesday or Friday?’
This technique has been used by salespeople for many years and consequently should be used with care, especially with professional buyers who are likely to have experienced its use many times and know exactly what the salesperson is doing.
5.6.5 THE OBJECTION CLOSE
This closing technique has been mentioned briefly earlier in this chapter.
It involves the use of an objection as a stimulus to buy.
If the salesperson is convinced that the objection is the major stumbling block to the sale, he can gain commitment from the buyer by saying: ‘If I can convince you that this model is the most economical in its class, will you buy it?’
A positive response from the buyer and reference to an objective statistical comparison by the seller effectively seals the sale.
5.6.6 ACTION AGREEMENT
In some situations it is inappropriate to attempt to close the sale.
For many industrial goods the sales cycle is long and a salesperson who attempts to close the sale at early meetings may cause annoyance.
In selling pharmaceutical products, for example, salespeople do not try to close a sale but instead attempt to achieve ‘action agreement’ whereby either the salesperson or the doctor agree to do something before their next meeting.
This technique has the effect of helping the doctor-salesperson relationship to develop and continue.
A useful characteristic for salespeople is persistence.
Making a decision to spend large quantities of money is not easy.
In most sales situations, no one product is better than its competitors on all evaluative criteria.
This means that the salespeople for all of these products stand some chance of success.
The final decision may go to the one who is the most persistent in his attempts to persuade the customer that the product meets the buyer's needs.
Children learn very quickly that if they are initially refused what they want, asking a second or third time may be successful.
The key is knowing where to draw the line before persistence leads to annoyance.
Once the sale is agreed, the salesperson should follow two rules.
First, he should never display emotions.
No matter how important the sale is, and how delighted the salesperson feels, he should remain calm and professional.
There will be plenty of opportunity later to be euphoric.
Second, he should leave as quickly as is courteously possible.
The longer he stays around, the greater the chance the buyer will change his mind, and cancel the order.
5.7 CONCLUSIONS
The skills involved in personal selling are explored in this chapter.
The necessary skills are examined under the following headings.
(i)
The opening.
(ii)
Need and problem identification.
(iii)
Presentation and demonstration.
(iv)
Dealing with objections.
(v)
Negotiation.
(vi)
Closing the sale.
The emphasis in this chapter is on identifying the needs and problems of the potential buyer and presenting a product or service as a means of fulfilling that need or solving that problem.
Having identified the skills necessary for successful selling, Part Three examines the types of environment in which selling takes place.
PRACTICAL EXERCISE — THE MORDEX PHOTOCOPIER COMPANY
You have an appointment to see George Kirby, sales office manager of Plastic Foods Ltd, with regard to the hire of a Mordex photocopier.
You are bristling with anticipation as you know the present contract which Plastic Foods has with Clearprint, your closest competitor, is up for renewal.
You have not met Mr Kirby before.
As you enter Mr Kirby's office you notice that Mr Kirby appears a little under pressure.
After introducing yourself, you say ‘I'd like to talk with you about how we can improve the efficiency of your photocopying operation.
I see that you use the Clearprint ZXR photocopier at the moment.
What kinds of documents do you photocopy in the sales office?’
The discussion continues, with you attempting to assess his staff's requirements as regards photocopying facilities and his attitude towards the Clearprint machine.
One need is the ability of the photocopier to collate automatically, since some of the documents which are photocopied are quite lengthy.
Another requirement is for the photocopy to be of the highest quality since it is usual for photocopies of standard letters to be sent to clients.
The Clearprint photocopier does not have a collating facility, and the quality, while passable, is not totally satisfactory.
Further, there are sometimes delays in repairing the machine when it breaks down, although generally it is quite reliable.
At the end of the discussion you summarise the points that have been raised: staff time is being wasted collating lengthy documents, the quality of photostat is not totally satisfactory, repairs are not always carried out promptly.
Mr Kirby agrees that this is a fair summary.
Discussion questions
During the sales interview the following objections were raised.
How would you deal with them?
1
‘I'm sorry, I have an urgent meeting in ten minutes time.
Can we make it quick?’
2
‘We haven't had any major problems with the Clearprint so far.’
3
‘Doesn't your firm have a bad reputation?’
4
‘Aren't your hiring charges much higher than Clearprint's?’
5
‘How do I know your service will be any better than Clearprint's?’
6
‘My staff have got used to using the Clearprint.
I'll have to spend time showing them how to use your machine.’
7
‘Let me think about it.
The Clearprint rep. is coming next week.
I should like to discuss the points you've raised with him.’
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
1
If the product is right and the sales presentation is right, there is no need to close the sale.
Discuss.
2
Discuss the ways in which a salesperson can attempt to identify buyer needs.
PART THREE
Sales Environment
Sales Settings
6.1 SALES CHANNELS
Before industrialisation, distribution was a simple matter, with producers selling to their immediate neighbours, who often collected the goods themselves.
Modern day manufacturing, more cosmopolitan consumers, better transportation and communications, and business specialisation has meant that channel decisions are now quite complex.
Distribution costs have risen relative to production.
In fact, as a result of automation and computerisation, production costs as a percentage of total cost are now considerably lower than they were only a few years ago.
Marketing management must continually reappraise its channels of distribution in an attempt to effect cost savings.
Company policy decides the marketing channels and this determines how the sales force is organised.
A sales channel is merely the route that goods take through the selling process from a supplier to a customer.
Sometimes the channel is direct, and the goods sold are incorporated into a manufacturing process which results in a different end-product.
This, in turn, is sold through a different channel.
Such a product example is carburettors, which are sold to automobile manufacturers; the automobiles are then sold to car distributors and the car distributors sell to the end consumers.
When one considers a product from the raw material stage to the end product, many different sales channels can be involved at different stages in the manufacturing process.
A sales channel can also be indirect, whereby a manufacturer sells to a wholesaler or agent, who sells in smaller lots to other customers.
This process is known as ‘breaking bulk’.
6.1.1 SELECTING/REAPPRAISING SALES CHANNELS
When selecting or reappraising channels, the company must take into consideration a number of factors.
(i)
The market.
(ii)
Channel costs.
(iii)
The product.
(iv)
Profit potential.
(v)
Channel structure.
(vi)
Product life-cycle.
(vii)
Non-marketing factors.
The market
This must be analysed with a view to ensuring that as many potential consumers as possible will have the opportunity to purchase the product or service.
Channel compatibility with similar products in the market place is important; consumers are quite conservative and any radical move from the accepted norm can be viewed with suspicion.
Unless there are sound reasons for so doing, it does not make sense to go outside the established channel.
For instance, a canned food processor would not normally consider selling through mail order unless the company was providing a very specialist type of food or perhaps providing it as part of a hamper pack.
Instead, the company would use the traditional distribution outlets like food multiples and cash and carry.
Channel costs
Generally the shortest channels are the costliest.
Thus the company selling direct will achieve a large market coverage, but in addition to increased investment in the sales force the firm will also incur heavier transportation and warehousing costs.
However, against this must be balanced the fact that there will be a greater profit margin, by virtue of the fact that distributive intermediaries are obviated and their margins will not have to be met.
In addition to these financial criteria, short channels have the advantage of being nearer to the end users, which means that the company is in a better position to anticipate and meet their needs.
There has been a trend in recent years for manufacturers to shorten their channels in order to control more effectively the distribution of their products, particularly where expensive advertising has been used to pre-sell the goods to the consumer.
The product
Generally, low-cost low-technology items are more suited to longer channels.
More complex items, often requiring much after-sales service, tend to be sold through short channels.
This is why most industrial products are sold direct from the producer to the user.
The width of the product line is also important, in that a wide product line may make it worthwhile for the manufacturer to market direct because the salesperson has a larger product portfolio with which to interest the customer, and this makes for more profit-earning potential.
A narrow product line is more suited to a longer channel because, along the distribution chain, it can be combined with complementary products of other manufacturers, resulting in a wider range of items with which to interest the customer.
In this particular case the distributive intermediaries, not the manufacturers, are performing the final selling function.
A good illustration of the above is the manufacturer of bathroom fittings who would normally sell to builders' merchants.
Builders' merchants then sell these fittings to builders alongside other merchandise that builders require.
Profit potential
There comes a point when the costs of attempting to obtain more sales through the channel outweigh the revenue and profits to be gained from those increased sales.
For instance, a manufacturer of an exclusive and expensive perfume would not distribute through supermarkets or advertise during peak time television viewing.
If the company did, then sales would no doubt increase, but the costs of achieving those sales would make it an unprofitable exercise.
It is really an accounting problem, and a balance must be struck between channel expense, profit and gross margins.
A manufacturer using short channels is more likely to have high gross margins, but equally higher channel expenses.
The manufacturer using longer channels will have relatively lower gross margins, coupled with lower channel expenses.
Channel structure
To a great extent a manufacturer's choice of distributive intermediaries is governed by the members in that channel.
If the members of the channel are strong (by virtue of, say, a powerful trade association), then it will be difficult for the manufacturer to go outside the established channel.
In some cases it may be difficult to gain entry to the channel unless the product is somehow differentiated by way of uniqueness or lower price than those products already established in the channel.
A good example here would be the potential difficulty that a new detergent manufacturer would have in attempting to sell products through food multiples.
The manufacturer would have to convince members of the channel that the detergent was in some way better than those already on the market, or offer advantageous prices and terms.
In addition, detergent is mainly marketed using a ‘pull’ strategy of marketing, relying upon consumer advertising to create brand loyalty and pre-sell the product.
The manufacturer would thus have to spend a lot on mass advertising to create brand loyalty for the product, or attempt to ‘push’ the product through the channel by providing trade incentives, with probably a lower end price than competitive products coupled with a larger profit margin for retailers.
It can, therefore, be seen that it would be a very daunting task for a new detergent manufacturer to enter the market in a big way without large cash resources at its disposal.
Product life-cycle
Considerations must be given to how far the product is along the product life-cycle.
A new concept or product just entering the life-cycle may require intensive distribution to start with to launch it onto the market.
As it becomes established it may be that after-sales service criteria become important, leading to a move to selective distribution, with only those dealers that are able to offer the necessary standard of after-sales service being allowed to sell the product.
In the case of television sets the wheel has turned full circle, from intensive distribution to selective distribution (for the reasons just mentioned) and back to intensive distribution.
This is because the servicing of televisions has now become a relatively simple matter, in that televisions are now constructed similarly and standard units are replaced when repairs are needed.
A television repairer no longer needs to be a specialist in one particular brand.
Television manufacturers now realise that, with comparative parity between models, consumers are less likely to be drawn towards a particular brand because of its supposed technical superiority or standard of after-sales service.
The most crucial factor now is price.
Thus, maximum exposure at the point of sale has become the manufacturer's objective.
Non-marketing factors
These usually relate to the amount of finance available.
It may be, in the case of, say, an innovative product, that the firm is unable to exploit this to its fullest advantage because of financial constraints.
In such a case the firm may have to distribute through a middleman because it cannot afford to employ a field sales force.
Conversely, the firm may use a non-conventional channel like mail order which requires minimal investment in salespeople, although the physical characteristics of the product may not make it suitable for mail order.
Non-marketing factors often apply when selling internationally, since many companies unfortunately view export orders as a supplement to home trade and are prepared to offer an agency to anybody who is likely to obtain orders, irrespective of their commercial standing.
A fuller discussion of international aspects takes place in Chapter 7, but it is worth noting that there are cases of companies who entered into export agency agreements when they were small and exporting was relatively unimportant to them.
As the companies grew they came to regard exporting as being essential, but it proved difficult and expensive to unwind hastily entered-into agency agreements.
The companies in many cases had to persevere with the original arrangements, often against long-term best interests.
6.1.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF SALES CHANNELS
It should be realised that marketing channels are one of the more stable elements in the marketing mix.
A channel is costly and complex to change, unlike, say, price which is relatively easy to manipulate.
For instance, a switch from selective to intensive distribution is a top management policy decision which will have a direct effect upon sales force numbers, and even upon the type of selling methods to be used.
The main problem that companies have to face is in choosing the most appropriate channel, and from the viewpoint of sales management this includes the type of sales outlet that must be serviced.
Basically, a manufacturer has the choice of one of four types of distribution at its disposal.
(i)
DIRECT.
Here the manufacturer does not use a middleman, and sells and delivers direct to the customer.
(ii)
SELECTIVE.
Here the manufacturer sells through a limited number of middlemen who are chosen because of their special abilities or facilities to enable the product to be marketed more effectively.
(iii)
INTENSIVE.
The intention is to achieve maximum exposure at the point of sale, and the manufacturer will sell through as many outlets as possible.
The servicing and after-sales aspects are probably not so important here.
Product examples are cigarettes, breakfast cereals and detergents.
(iv)
EXCLUSIVE.
The manufacturer sells to a restricted number of dealers.
An obvious example is the car industry, where distributive intermediaries must provide the levels of stockholding, after-sales service, etc., deemed appropriate by manufacturers; their reputations depend ultimately upon the service backup given by their distributors.
A discussion of different sales setting follows later in the chapter, but consideration is first made of segmentation, which has a direct bearing upon the choice of channel.
6.2 SEGMENTATION
When a company decides to sell to a specific target market, it is employing market segmentation.
This is basically an attempt to group or to classify customers according to similar needs or purchasing characteristics.
These needs can relate to non-product as well as product benefits.
To be effective, market segments must be clearly identifiable and substantial enough to be potentially profitable.
The objective of segmentation is to group individuals so that their collective response to marketing inputs is similar.
Broadly speaking, segmentation partitions the market into industrial, retail, wholesale, consumer and international areas.
Each of these is dealt with later in this chapter.
More specific segmentation includes the following.
(i)
CULTURAL.
This is important in international markets, as well as in domestic markets where large cultural or ethnic groupings occur.
(ii)
DEMOGRAPHIC.
This contains factors such as age, income, sex, occupation, size of family, type of dwelling, religion, social class or grade.
(iii)
GEOGRAPHIC.
Here, segmentation includes nations, regions within a nation, areas within regions, cities and districts.
(iv)
PSYCHOGRAPHIC.
This is concerned with groupings based upon personality types, including life styles.
It could also include interests and hobbies.
Once the company has achieved segmentation it can more clearly concentrate and aim its promotional effort at a particular target market.
(By promotional effort is meant all the marketing activities that are employed in getting the goods or service from the company into the hands of the customer.)
The main marketing elements involved in achieving this goal are selling and advertising.
In a ‘sellers market’, similar to that which pertained in the United Kingdom after World War Two, there was little need for promotional activity because demand exceeded supply and whatever was produced was taken up immediately by the market.
This also applies in a state socialist society where the government can control the economy by limitation or expansion of production, which should (in theory) match demand.
In a free market economy, supply normally exceeds demand (assuming no artificial shortages) and, as a result, companies use various promotional tactics in an attempt to attract more customers.
Sales promotions can be directed either to the trade or to consumers, and these are considered in the next section.
6.3 SALES PROMOTIONS
Sales promotions embrace a variety of techniques that organisations can use as part of their total marketing effort.
Examples of possible objectives that may be achieved through sales promotional activities include:
(i)
the encouragement of repeat purchases;
(ii)
the building of long-term customer loyalty;
(iii)
the encouragement of consumers to visit a particular sales outlet;
(iv)
the building up of retail stock levels;
(v)
the widening or increasing of the distribution of a product or brand.
Sales promotions include:
(i)
price reductions;
(ii)
vouchers or coupons;
(iii)
gifts;
(iv)
competitions;
(v)
lotteries;
(vi)
cash bonuses.
In turn the techniques can cover:
(i)
consumer promotions;
(ii)
trade promotions;
(iii)
sales force promotions;
(iv)
sponsorship.
The importance of sales promotions has increased steadily since the 1960s, as has the sophistication of methods used.
It is sometimes implied that sales promotion is a second rate or peripheral marketing activity, but companies are increasingly realising the importance of a well-planned and coordinated programme of sales promotion.
Within the United Kingdom, sales promotional activities have matured since the late 1960s.
At that time few attempts were made to measure the effectiveness of such activity, and advertising agencies tended to branch out into sales promotions with the aim of offering an all-inclusive package to their clients in an attempt to combat competition from the emerging sales promotion agencies.
The mid-1970s brought increased economic pressure to bear on all business activities, and this had the effect of making advertising agencies become more concerned about reductions in company advertising budgets.
They began to pay greater attention to the effectiveness of sales promotions, and began to adopt a more integrated approach to advertising and sales promotion.
There was also a move towards fee-based sales promotional agencies, which implied a longer-term relationship between agency and client, rather than the ad hoc commission structure that had existed before.
As a result of this increased competition from sales promotional agencies, advertising agencies have tended, since the late 1970s, to concentrate more upon sales promotional activities, and have begun to offer sales promotion alongside advertising as an integrated promotional package.
Hence, since the late 1960s there has been a gradual erosion of the line between sales promotion and advertising.
Sales promotions can be divided into three main areas of activity:
(i)
consumer promotions;
(ii)
trade promotions; and
(iii)
personnel motivation.
Each of these is examined separately.
6.3.1 CONSUMER PROMOTIONS
These are often referred to as ‘pull’ techniques, in that they are designed to stimulate final demand and move products through the sales channel, with the consumer providing the impetus.
The most widely used consumer promotion is the price reduction or price promotion.
There are various techniques which fall into this category.
(i)
The item is marked ‘x pence off’.
This can be manufacturer or retailer organised.
(ii)
An additional quantity is offered for the normal price, e.g. ‘two for the price of one’ or ‘10% bigger — same price as before.’
(iii)
Price-off coupons, either in or on the pack, may be redeemed against future purchase of the product.
(iv)
Introductory discount price offers on new products.
A view held by many organisers of such promotions is that the consumer, in economically difficult times, is more likely to be attracted by the opportunity to save money than by incidental free offers or competitions.
Price promotions are predominantly used by fast-moving consumer goods producers, especially in the grocery trade.
Premium offers are marketing techniques which give extra value to goods or services in the short term as part of a promotional package.
Under this category are the following.
(i)
SELF-LIQUIDATING PREMIUMS.
An offer of merchandise is communicated to the customer in, on or off the pack.
The price charged to the customer covers the cost of the item to the promoter.
The promoter is able to purchase such merchandise in bulk and thereby pass savings on to the customers who feel that they are getting good value for money.
Such promotions are usually linked with the necessity to collect labels or cut out tokens, etc., from a number of purchases of the same, or same range of, products.
Thus the premium need not necessarily be connected with the product that carried the premium; the idea is to stimulate purchases of the product — selling the premium is of secondary importance.
Recently, there has been a move towards customised self-liquidating premiums, an example being luxury bathrobes bearing the company logo.
Such items are offered by drink and tobacco companies who face advertising restrictions, but other producers are beginning to adopt this type of promotion.
(ii)
ON-PACK GIFTS.
Here the premium is usually attached to the product.
The premium may be product-related, e.g. a toothbrush attached to toothpaste, or not product-related, e.g. an item of merchandise such as shampoo taped to a magazine for women.
(iii)
CONTINUITIES.
These are sets of merchandise which can be collected through a series of purchases, e.g. picture cards, chinaware, glassware, etc., forming part of a set.
The premium is either with the product or the purchaser has to send off for the premium.
(iv)
COUPON PLANS.
Coupons, contained within the pack, may be collected over time and exchanged for a variety of products in a catalogue.
Coupon techniques may be used by one producer or supplier as a promotion for its goods or services, or the plan may include a number of different producers' products under one name.
These schemes have largely replaced trading stamps, which were used in a similar way although trading stamps are now making a comeback.
(v)
FREE SAMPLES.
These are sample packs of products offered with brand-related products, attached to magazines, given away separately in retail outlets, delivered door-to-door, etc.
Merchandise as a premium does not have the universal appeal of money, but it may have a more pointed appeal than cash or a price reduction.
The premium chosen, and the way in which it is offered, may pre-select a specific type of customer, but the offer can at least be targeted at the right market segment.
Providing the additional response generated more than covers the cost of the premium and the administration/distribution costs, the promotion will be cost effective.
The choice of premium and sales promotional technique is a crucial decision, and the problem is to find a premium which is ‘different’ or unusual, has broad customer appeal and is available in sufficient quantity to meet demand.
Lotteries and competitions are widely used in North America as are consumer promotions.
They are also popular in the United Kingdom, but since 1980 they have suffered a decline.
The advantage of running a competition is that it should be cost effective if the cost of the prizes is spread over a large enough number of entrants.
Competitions for consumer goods are usually promoted on the pack concurrent with in-store promotion.
The entry form is usually located on or near the product and it is usually required that each entry is accompanied by proofs of purchase.
More recently, free draws have become popular whereby a purchase is not necessary and one shopper merely fills in his or her name on an entry form and ‘posts’ it in an entry box in the retail outlet.
There is much scope for individuality and creativity in this method of promotion.
It does, however, need much pre-planning and administration, which is probably the reason why competitions tend to be aimed at the national level, and involve high value prizes such as holidays and cars, so that consumer response is great enough to cover the costs of the promotion.
Lotteries and sweepstakes are also used as promotional techniques, particularly by the retail outlets, which use them to attract custom into the store.
Joint promotions are not specific to consumer goods, but are to be seen more often as companies attempt to find new promotional techniques.
They may involve two or more companies, who tend to be related not by product type but rather by similar customer profits.
There are a number of such arrangements.
(i)
Between retailer and producer, where a branded good may carry a voucher redeemable at a particular store or chain.
(ii)
Between two or more producers, where one manufacturer's product carries a promotion for the other, and vice versa.
Here the relation by customer profile and not product similarities becomes evident.
(iii)
Between a service organisation and a producer, e.g. between a travel company and a breakfast cereal manufacturer, or a dry cleaner and a clothes manufacturer.
6.3.2 TRADE PROMOTIONS
The aim of trade promotions is usually to ‘push’ products through the sales channel towards the customer.
Similar to consumer promotions, incentives are  offered in the form of extra rewards such as cash discounts, increased margins on sales, dealer competitions, exhibitions, provision of demonstrators, holidays (often in the guise of a conference or product launch), etc.
The objectives of retailer-distributor promotions are:
(i)
to achieve widespread distribution of a new brand;
(ii)
to move excess  stocks on to retailers' shelves;
(iii)
to achieve the required display levels of a product;
(iv)
to encourage greater overall stockholding of a product;
(v)
particularly in the case of  non-consumer products, to encourage salespeople at distributor level to recommend the brand;
(vi)
to encourage support for overall promotional strategy.
There are a number of problems associated with trade promotions.
Too frequent use of promotions can mean that a salesperson directs his or her attention to the one product involved and neglects other products in the product line.
The objectives of the promoter may conflict with those of the retailer or distributor; consequently some sales employees are not permitted to accept incentives or participate in trade contests because their management wish to maintain strict control over their selling activities.
There is also a danger that a trade promotion may be used to push an uncompetitive brand or inferior product.
Therefore, long-term measures to promote sales are not feasible, and the manufacturer would be better advised to look to product improvement as part of long-term strategy.
The British Code of Sales Promotion Practice states:
No promotion directed towards employees should be such as to cause any conflict with their loyalty to their employer.
In case of doubt, the prior permission of the employer, or his responsible manager should be obtained.
Although business gifts are not strictly speaking sales promotions, they are relevant to this section.
The business gift sector is characterised by seasonal demand, and it is estimated that 80 per cent of this business is conducted in the last two months of every year.
Apart from the obvious connotation that it puts the recipient under some moral obligation to purchase, it also serves as an advertising medium if the company logo is incorporated in the gift.
From 1981 the Institute of Purchasing and Supply has taken a serious and critical interest in the use of business gifts, especially where the ‘giving’ was tied to the placing of orders.
They argued that such gifts could influence the buyer's objectivity, and that they should be restricted to such nominal items as calendars, diaries, pens, etc.
Recently, the giving of business gifts has declined, as employers have placed restrictions upon what their employees may receive, and the Institute of Purchasing and Supply has published a ‘blacklist’ of companies operating what they consider to be gift schemes over and above items of nominal value.
6.3.3 PERSONNEL MOTIVATION
These are essentially promotions to the sales force, but many apply to distributors and retailers.
The most widely used sales force promotion is the sales incentives  scheme.
Rewards are offered to all participants on an equal basis and these rewards are over and above the normal sales compensation.
Such rewards are offered as prizes in a competition to those individuals or groups who perform best against a specific set of objectives.
The problem is that average or below average performers may not feel sufficiently motivated to put in any extra effort if they consider that only top performers are likely to win.
Thus, competitions tend to be used for group or area sales force motivation.
When establishing a sales force incentive scheme one must consider objectives, timing, scoring methods and prizes/rewards.
Typical objectives of such a scheme may be:
(i)
the introduction of a new product line;
(ii)
the movement of slow selling items;
(iii)
to obtain wider territory coverage;
(iv)
to develop new prospects;
(v)
to overcome seasonal sales slumps;
(vi)
to obtain display; and
(vii)
to develop new sales skills.
The timing of the scheme may depend upon the size of the sales force, the immediacy of action required and the nature of the objectives to be achieved.
An incentive programme runs on average for between two and six months.
Scoring, or measuring performance, may be simply based upon value or unit sales.
In order to overcome territorial differences, quotas may be established for individual regions, areas or salespeople.
Points, stamps, vouchers, etc., may be awarded on the achievement of a pre-stated percentage of quotas or levels of sales, and continue to be awarded as higher levels are achieved.
These tokens, etc., may then be exchanged for merchandise, cash, etc., by the recipient.
Frequently catalogues are supplied giving a range of merchandise for the salesman or his family to choose from.
Vouchers for redemption or exchange in retail stores are also used as prizes or rewards.
During a scheme additional bonus points may be awarded for the attainment of more specific short-term objectives such as increased sales of a particular product, increased number of new customers, training and display objectives.
In this way a long-running scheme can be kept active and exciting for participants.
Another form of sales force motivation is the award of recognitions in the form of a trophy or ‘salesperson of the year’ award.
It is not the purpose of this chapter to examine the detailed operation of sales incentive schemes as this is covered later in the sales management section (Part Four).
The remainder of this chapter is an extension of the broad aspects of segmentation discussed in section 6.2.
The first topic to be considered is that of selling to industrial/  commercial /public authority purchasers.
6.4 INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL/PUBLIC AUTHORITY
These categories are grouped together because the selling approach to each is similar and the behavioural patterns exhibited by each conforms to organisational buyer behaviour (discussed in Chapter 2).
There are a number of characteristics in these types of market that distinguish them from consumer markets.
6.4.1 FEWER CUSTOMERS
Institutions and businesses purchase goods either for use in their own organisations or for use in the manufacture of other goods.
There are consequently few potential purchasers, each making high-value purchases.
6.4.2 CONCENTRATED MARKETS
Industrial markets in particular are often highly concentrated, a good example being the textile industry in the United Kingdom which is centred in Lancashire and Yorkshire.
An industrial salesperson who sells into one industry may deal with only a few customers in a restricted geographical area.
6.4.3 COMPLEX PURCHASING DECISIONS
Buying decisions often involve a large number of people, particularly in the case of a public authority where a purchasing committee may be involved in a major purchase.
Many industrial buying decisions involve more than the buyer and in some cases the technical specifier, production personnel and finance personnel are involved.
This can lengthen the negotiation and decision-making process.
Salespeople must be able to work and communicate with people in a variety of positions and be prepared to tailor their selling approaches to satisfy individual needs, e.g. specifiers will need to be convinced of the technical merits of the product, production people will want to be assured of guaranteed deliveries and buyers will be looking for value for money.
For technically complicated products, selling is sometimes performed by a sales team, with each member of the team working with his or her opposite number in the buying team, e.g. a sales engineer works with engineers in the buying company.
6.4.4 LONG-TERM RELATIONSHIPS
A life policy insurance or encyclopaedia salesperson makes a sale, and probably never meets the customer again.
However the nature of selling in industrial, commercial and public authority settings is that long-term relationships are established and both parties become dependent upon each other, one for reliable supplies and the other for regular custom.
There is thus a tendency to build up a strong personal relationship over a long time, and slick high-pressure selling techniques are unlikely to be of much help.
A more considered approach which involves the salesperson identifying the needs of his or her individual customers and then selling the benefits of the product in order to satisfy those needs is more likely to be successful.
The ability of salespeople to deal with complaints and provide a reliable after-sales service IS very Important.
6.4.5 RECIPROCAL TRADING
This is an arrangement whereby company A purchases certain commodities manufactured by company B and vice versa.
Such arrangements tend to be made at board or director level and are usually entered into when there is a financial link between the companies, such as companies within the same group of companies (sometimes referred to as intergroup trading) or between companies whose directors simply want to formalise an arrangement to purchase as much of each other 's products as possible.
Such arrangements can be frustrating for salespeople and buyers alike, because they deter free competition; the buyer does not like to be told from where he or she must purchase, just the same as the salesperson does not relish the thought of having a large part of his or her potential market permanently excluded because of a reciprocal trading arrangement.
6.4.6 TYPES OF PRODUCTION
This relates mainly to industrial sales.
The type of production operated by the firm to whom the salesperson is selling can often determine the type of selling approach to be used.
Basically, types of production can be as follows.
(i)
JOB (OR UNIT OR SPECIFICATION) PRODUCTION.
An item is produced to an individual customer's requirements.
It is difficult to forecast demand in industries with this type of production.
Product examples are ships, tailor-made suits and hospital construction.
(ii)
BATCH PRODUCTION.
A number of products or components are made at the same time, but not on a continuous basis.
Like job production, batches are normally made to individual customer requirements, but sometimes batches are produced in anticipation of orders.
Product examples are books, furniture and clothes.
(iii)
FLOW (OR MASS OR LINE) PRODUCTION.
There is continuous production of identical or similar products that are made in anticipation of sales.
Product examples are motor cars, video recorders and washing machines.
(iv)
PROCESS (OR CONTINUOUS) PRODUCTION.
The production unit has raw  materials coming into the manufacturing process and a finished product emerging at the end of the process.
Examples are chemicals, brewing and plastic processes.
Clearly, a salesperson selling in a combination of these settings will have to adopt a different approach for each.
With flow production he or she will have to anticipate model changes in order to ensure that the firm is invited to quote at the outset, and then follow up this quotation in the expectation of securing an order which will be fulfilled over the life of the product.
If the salesperson is unsuccessful at this stage, then he or she may not have the opportunity of selling to the firm again until the next model change (and even then it is difficult trying to dislodge established suppliers).
It is also important to realise that a number of flow production producers are moving towards a ‘just-in-time’(JIT) system of production.
Here, reliability of quality and delivery is of prime importance because the producer works on minimal stock-holding of raw materials.
Long-term relationships with suppliers are prevalent in these situations.
‘Zero defects’ are the goal that suppliers must strive to achieve in terms of quality.
With job production, losing an order is not quite so critical because, providing the firm is being correctly represented, it should be invited to quote for the next order and perhaps be successful then.
Naturally, losing an order is a serious matter, but with job production it normally means waiting a short period before being asked to quote again for a different job, whereas with flow production it might be two years before the model is changed and the opportunity is provided to quote again (by which time the buyer might have forgotten the existence of the salesperson!).
6.5 SELLING FOR RESALE
Selling for resale includes selling to retailers (some of whom own their own retail establishments and many of whom belong to groups) and selling to wholesalers.
Much buying in this type of trade is centralised, and in many cases the potential buyer visits the seller (unlike industrial selling when the seller normally visits the buyer).
A look at the changing patterns of retailing since the end of the World War Two will illustrate how selling methods have been revolutionised.
Before examining these changing patterns of retailing, we must first categorise the different types of selling outlet.
(i)
MULTIPLES.
These are classed as belonging to a retail organisation with ten or more branches, each selling a similar range of merchandise.
Examples are book/newspaper chains, clothing chains and meat chains.
(ii)
VARIETY CHAINS (sometimes called VARIETY MULTIPLES).
These are similar to multiples except that the qualifying number of stores is five and they sell a wider range of merchandise.
Examples are mainly to be found in the grocery field.
(iii)
COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES.
These are owned and controlled by the people who shop there and each society is governed by a board of directors elected from its own members.
Anybody can be a member by purchasing one share.
The movement can be traced back to 1844 when it started in Rochdale.
Its principles are:
open membership;
democratic control (one man one vote);
payment of limited interest on capital;
surplus arising out of the operation to be distributed to members in proportion to their purchases; this was originally distributed through dividends, later it was paid through trading stamps but is now being increasingly abandoned in favour of lower prices;
provision of education;
cooperation amongst societies, both nationally and internationally.
(iv)
DEPARTMENT STORES.
These are stores that have five or more departments under one roof and at least twenty-five employees.
Stores sell a wide range of commodities, including significant amounts of household goods and clothing.
(v)
INDEPENDENTS.
As the term implies, these traders own their own retail outlets.
There are however slight variations, the first being where the independent belongs to a retail buying association.
This is an informal grouping whereby retailers (usually within a specific geographical area) group together to make bulk purchases.
A more publicised arrangement  is when a wholesaler or group of wholesalers invite retailers to affiliate to them and agree to take the bulk of their purchases from them.
Such arrangements are termed voluntary groups (individual wholesaler sponsored) or voluntary chains (group wholesaler sponsored).
Participating independent retailers have an identifying symbol, in addition to their customary title.
Such retailers voluntarily agree to abide by the rules of the group or chain, which includes such matters as accounting procedures, standard facilities and group marketing/promotional schemes.
(vi)
MAIL ORDER.
Mail order has expanded significantly in recent years; the most popular type of trader in this section is the mail order warehouse, which carries a large range of goods.
Such business is conducted through the medium of glossy catalogues held by appointed commission agents who sell to their families and friends.
Mail order is also carried out by commodity specialists dealing in such items as gardening produce, military surplus and hi-fi.
They tend to advertise in the appropriate specialist hobbies press and through the medium of direct mail.
This type of business has expanded a lot in recent years, largely as a result of the expansion of the Sunday colour supplements.
Many companies have been established that deal in more general ranges of goods and who use mainly such colour supplements to advertise their commodities.
Some department stores also offer postal services and sometimes provide catalogues.
Shares of grocery market held by different types of retailer (selected years).
All figures are percentages and were obtained from A. C. Nielsen Co.
The success of the variety multiples has meant that manufacturers have had to reappraise their sales channels as it has meant a concentration of purchasing power into fewer hands.
In the fast-moving consumer goods field, manufacturers have become increasingly involved in controlling the distribution of their products and have become involved in merchandising activities to support their ‘pull’ marketing strategies.
This has meant heavy advertising expenditures, and the concurrent merchandising activities at point-of-sale have been necessary to ensure that the goods are promoted in-store to back up advertising.
As a result of this, large manufacturers operating a ‘pull’ strategy have been able to exercise control over their distributive intermediaries; such intermediaries could only dismiss demand created through advertising and branding at the risk of losing custom.
This control has meant lower margins for retailers, and manufacturers being able to dictate the in-store location of their particular products.
The weight of advertising put behind major brands has given these manufacturers influence over their distributive outlets.
Although there was initially some resistance on the part of manufacturers to the development of the variety multiples, they eventually found it to their advantage to deal directly with them.
This was because they purchased in bulk, often for delivery to a central depot and placed large orders well in advance of the delivery date, thus enabling the manufacturer to organise production more efficiently.
The implications for selling as a result of these developments have been that salespeople of fast-moving consumer goods are no longer compelled to sell the  products in the old-fashioned ‘salesmanship’ sense, as advertising has already pre-sold the goods for them.
Selling to the variety multiples is more a matter of negotiation at higher levels whereby the buyer and the sales manager negotiate price and delivery and the salespeople merely provide an after-sales service at individual outlets.
Sometimes the salespeople carry out merchandising activities like building up shelf displays, providing window stickers and in-store advertising, although sometimes these duties are carried out by a separate merchandiser or team of merchandisers, particularly when some form of demonstration or product promotion is required.
Wholesalers of course have suffered during the post-war period, and many have gone out of business because their traditional outlet (the independent) has also suffered.
In fact this is why wholesalers established voluntary groups or chains, in order to meet the challenge of the variety multiples and offer a similar type of image to the public.
However, this seems to have largely failed, perhaps because of inferior purchasing power and because wholesalers must try to make their independent retailing members behave like variety multiples, using voluntary means.
The wholesaler's only sanction against non-cooperating members is to expel them from the group, whereas in the case of the variety multiples a recalcitrant manager can be quickly removed.
The post-war years have witnessed the growth of large-scale retailing, including a growth in the size of retailing establishments, first to supermarkets, then to superstores and eventually to hypermarkets.
The pattern of shopping has also changed in that the shopper has, for most goods, been prepared to dispense with the personal service of the shopkeeper, and self-service and self-selection have been readily accepted in the interests of lower overheads and more competitive prices.
There has been a growth in mass marketing because increased standards of living have meant that products which were once luxury goods are now utility goods and required by the bulk of the population, e.g. cars, foreign holidays, televisions and telephones.
Because supply normally exceeds demand for the bulk of consumer goods, there has been a massive increase in advertising and other forms of promotion in an attempt to induce brand loyalty; the faster-moving forms of consumer goods are pre-sold to the consumer by means of‘pull’ promotional strategies.
Thus the retailing scene has been one of dynamic change which has affected ways in which salespeople now operate.
6.6 EXHIBITIONS
Exhibitions are not strictly speaking sales settings because the prime objective is not to sell from display stands.
Their main function is to build up goodwill and pave the way for future sales.
They do, however, cover all branches of selling and cover most types of goods, and thus merit separate attention.
Exhibitions are often regarded as a luxury item in a company's marketing budget, and exhibition stand personnel often look upon manning an exhibition  stand as an easy option to their normal duties.
A study was undertaken by one of the authors in 1977 to investigate how trade exhibitions could be used more effectively as part of a communications programme, and the summary of the results of this study forms the remainder of this section (Lancaster and Baron, 1977).
Characteristics of a good exhibition were deemed to be:
(i)
a wide range of products;
(ii)
a large number of competitors;
(iii)
a good amount of information on the products shown should be available beforehand  (emphasising the importance of pre-exhibition mailing);
(iv)
a large number of  nre products;
(v)
nearness to the buyer's home base; and
(vi)
good exhibition hall facilities.
Characteristics of a good exhibitor were deemed to be:
(i)
exhibiting a full range of products, particularly large items that cannot be demonstrated by a travelling representative;
(ii)
stand always manned;
(iii)
well-informed staff stand;
(iv)
informative literature available;
(v)
seating area or an office provided on the stand; and
(vi)
refreshments provided.
Use of trade exhibitions is on the increase and firms increasingly need to establish a more scientific method of managing this function as it requires an understanding of how an exhibition stand communicates itself to the public.
Setting exhibition objectives and measuring results are therefore important, as is the identification and comprehension of the elements within the exhibition effort.
There is a need for the establishment of a managerial system to plan, coordinate and control the exhibition mix.
Before a function can be managed, one must understand how it works and Fig. 17 suggests how the exhibition communication process works.
Different communication problems exist for different types of product, including materials, services and small or large, simple or complex machinery.
With materials the selling feature or unique selling proposition (USP) may be communicated quite simply or through a low-communication medium, e.g. the written word.
The USP of a large piece of complex machinery can possibly only be communicated by the potential customer viewing the machinery working.
The different methods of communicating the USP of different types of product are termed communication strata; a product with a simple USP can be communicated through a low communication stratum, whereas a product with a complex USP can best be communicated through a high communication stratum.
Having selected the stratum needed to put across the USP, the other methods of communication used must be organised to complement the selected stratum.
For example, if trade exhibitions are selected as the ultimate communication medium, all other marketing inputs, e.g. sales force and media advertising, must be coordinated with the programmed trade exhibition.
If strata 5 or 6 (see Fig. 17) are needed, there are three communication media that can be used, i.e. trade exhibitions, demonstration centres or the salesperson taking the product into the firm.
A model of the exhibition communication process.
In the management of any function, the setting of objectives is vital; without this, there is no basis for planning, coordination, control or measurement of results.
Such objectives can be enumerated as follows.
(i)
Define the market with which it is intended to communicate by region, by product or by any other segmentation method.
(ii)
Define the value of potential purchases.
Is the exhibition effort to be aimed at potentially small or large users?
(iii)
Define the status of contact at which to aim, e.g. purchasing manager, managing director, etc.
High status contacts cannot normally be attracted to small exhibitions — they may wish to speak to top management or require personal invitation plus entertainment.
(iv)
Define the preference toward company products.
Is the exhibition effort to be aimed at present customers?
The danger here is that stand personnel's time can be taken up talking to the converted, whereas the objective should be to seek to interest potential customers.
(v)
Define the communication level at which to aim:
the ultimate (to sell the product from the stand);
to obtain permission to quote;
to obtain permission to telephone for a follow-up sales interview;
to obtain permission to send further information.
Methods used to attract visitors to a particular stand include:
(i)
direct mail;
(ii)
telephoning;
(iii)
a personal sales call before the event;
(iv)
an advertisement in the technical or trade press.
Once there, attractions can include:
(i)
a buffet;
(ii)
give-aways;
(iii)
advertising material;
(iv)
films and seminars at the exhibition;
(v)
attention-gaining exhibits on the stand.
The exhibition stand itself should have a number of elements.
(i)
Products on show will depend upon the target market.
The more products, the higher number of prospects will be interested, although a balance has to be struck so as not to provide so wide a range as to make it confusing.
(ii)
Literature should not be on a self-service display.
When a prospect comes to the stand looking for literature, this should be an ideal opportunity for the salesperson to establish contact and obtain details of the prospect.
(iii)
Graphics should include at least a display board featuring the product literature.
Such aids make the stand look more attractive.
Models of the item being marketed are useful when the product being sold is too large or bulky to be physically displayed.
(iv)
An office or interview room can take up a lot of expensive display space.
An alternative is to demonstrate the product and then ask the visitor to a nearby seating area to conduct the interview.
(v)
Refreshment facilities on the stand are good attractors, and from the results of the study this was deemed to be a major drawing force.
(vi)
An area should be designated for storage of coats, briefcases, literature, materials, etc., to avoid clutter and distractions from the main aim of the exhibition.
(vii)
An expensive, eye-catching stand can be a double-edged weapon.
It might attract visitors, but the study indicated that visitors' attitudes towards such ostentation were that it would be reflected in the price of the products.
The stand should be planned as early as possible by drawing up a checklist of everything required, checking limitations on stand design, drawing up a checklist of stand services required and a progress chart for the preparation of all products and exhibits, including their manufacture, transportation to the exhibition, assembly and dismantling.
Exhibition stand personnel must be able to communicate the USP of the products and have a sound commercial and technical knowledge.
They may come from a variety of backgrounds such as sales, marketing and technical and should be briefed upon a number of areas beforehand:
(i)
Objectives of the exhibition and set procedures to be used in achieving these objectives.
(ii)
Features of the stand, who else is on the stand and the geography of the stand in the exhibition complex.
Who is the exhibition stand manager?
(iii)
How to approach stand visitors and how to interview them and how to deal with irrelevant visitors.
(iv)
Tips on physical appearance before manning the exhibition stand.
Thus it has been shown that with professional pre-planning and management, exhibitions can be a powerful sales tool and not the expensive luxury that many companies regard them to be.
6.7 TELEPHONE SELLING
This sales technique is under-developed in the United Kingdom and telephone sales solicitation is largely confined to the non-consumer sectors.
However, over recent years there has been a growth in such activity, largely through the medium of television.
What originally began as ‘ordering by telephone’ has evolved into what is termed telemarketing.
This is a concept which can be described as any measurable activity that creates and exploits a direct relationship between supplier and customer through the interactive use of the telephone.
Direct marketing is also an extension of telephone selling and this involves selling direct to the purchaser through mail order, television, radio, newspaper or magazine advertisements.
An illustration of such activity is where record collections are promoted (usually around Christmas time) through a series of single simple advertisements.
Such records are usually a ‘collection’ and feature a particular theme (e.g. country & western or easy listening) and the advertisement states that the collection is not available in the shops.
Simple methods of ordering are mentioned at the time of the advertisement with special emphasis on a local or freephone facility which asks the respondent to telephone and quote his or her credit card number, name and address.
Other forms of ordering and payment are, of course, also quoted (e.g. letter and cheque) but the emphasis is upon ‘instant’(i.e. do it now) response through the medium of the telephone.
In North America, sales prospects are solicited through the medium of the telephone for relatively expensive products like cars, freezers and home improvements.
Telephonists work from prepared scripts designed to give different selling approaches according to the circumstances of the prospect, these  circumstances being established before the sales talk.
The idea is to ‘smooth the way’ for a salesperson's call following the telephone call.
Success rates are low, but it is a very cost effective method and eliminates a lot of ‘cold canvassing’ by salespeople.
It is a psychologically unrewarding task for the person soliciting over the telephone, and this is reflected in the vernacular term applied to the location from which such solicitation takes place —‘the boiler room’.
Insofar as the UK is concerned, very little of this activity takes place at end consumer levels, but its use has increased in industrial markets in support of sales, especially in relation to the following:
(i)
 Initial contacts with potential customers with a view to a follow-up sales call.
Such contacts can be obtained from trade directories, visitors to an exhibition stand, members of a particular group (e.g. professional body or attendees at a conference);
(ii)
Stock replenishment for established  customers when an enquiry can be made about a re-ordering possibility.
In such cases, buyers might be often quite indifferent as to where the order goes (especially where there is no particular price advantage and the products are similar) and quite often a telephone call can obtain an order.
When one thinks that it is so easy to simply discard direct mail, it is more difficult to ignore a telephone call, especially if the message is ‘personalised’.
Thus the medium of the telephone as an ancillary to selling is invaluable.
The Bell Telephone System of American has published a seven step guide to telephone selling, with the objective of encouraging telephone users to utilise this method of contact.
The guidelines are:
1
Identify yourself and your company.
2
Establish rapport.
This should come naturally, since you should have already researched your potential client and his or her business.
3
Make an interesting comment (to do with cost savings, a special offer or something similar).
4
Deliver your sales message.
Emphasise benefits over features and use a sales vocabulary (e.g. your production people will like it because it helps to overcome ‘down time’ through waiting for the material to set).
5
Overcome objections.
They are never outright rejections, but rather excuses for not purchasing now.
6
Close the sale.
(e.g. Can I send you a sample now, or would you like to place an order straight away?)
7
Summarise the order — arrange for a sales call or the next telephone call.
Express your thanks.
As has been mentioned, this system of sales solicitation is used very rarely for end customers and only sparingly in industrial markets, but in North America it has reached a position where there are many complaints about such telephone calls being classed as an ‘invasion of privacy’.
They are called ‘junk telephone  calls’(akin to ‘junk mail’) and the problem has become exacerbated through machines that play pre-recorded taped messages to recipients.
Such messages are relayed through automatic dialling machines to random or pre-selected telephone numbers and deliver a sales message without human intervention.
Whether or not such machines will eventually appear in the UK is open to conjecture, but clearly, if taken to extremes, such methods of communication will become counter-productive.
6.8 SELLING SERVICES
Just like a tangible product, a service must satisfy the needs of buyers.
However, their benefits are much less tangible than a physical product in that they cannot be stored or displayed and satisfaction is achieved through activities (e.g. transportation from one place to another rather than say a seat on a train).
Services can come in many forms and some of the more obvious examples include:
1
Transportation — air, sea, rail and road.
2
Power — electricity, gas and coal.
3
Hotels and accommodation.
4
Restaurants (although here the product is more tangible).
5
Communications — telephone and fax.
6
Television and radio services.
7
Banking.
8
Insurance.
9
Clubs — social, keep fit, sporting and special interests.
10
Repair and maintenance.
11
Travel agencies.
12
Accounting services.
13
Business consultancy — advertising, marketing research and strategic planning.
14
Architectural.
15
Cleaning.
16
Library.
17
Public (local) authority services and undertakings — disposal of refuse and repair of roads.
18
Computing services.
19
Stock-broking services.
There are, of course, many more and they can be applied to both consumer and industrial users.
The selling approach to each category will tend to differ, depending upon customer needs, just as selling approaches differ when considering physical products.
In the UK, the service sector has grown tremendously over the past decade or so, largely because manufacturers have attempted to reduce labour intensive tasks.
In addition, more women work full-time, and the division of responsibilities between men and women is breaking down into more equitable shares.
This has put pressure on the service sector to provide services that can perform tasks that have hitherto been seen as the province of being provided in the home (e.g. more eating out in restaurants and more holidays — often two per year — because of increased disposable income).
Better technology, too, has assisted in the development and provision of a more comprehensive range of services (e.g. banks offer credit cards, ‘instant’ statements, quicker decisions on loans and longer term services like mortgages).
Building Societies also provide a broader range of services and have moved into areas traditionally viewed as the province of the banks, more so after the recent ‘liberalisation’ of their activities through the Financial Services Act (1987).
In addition to an expansion of existing services in the financial sector, many more services are now available (e.g. professional drain clearing through the franchise operation ‘Dynorod’).
Public services have become more marketing orientated and have to be seen to be more accountable to their ‘publics’(e.g. the police service which is now more public relations conscious than in the past).
Local authorities, too, spend the money that is raised through poll tax.
The public is beginning to question more closely how this money that they have contributed is being spent.
Thus, local authority departments have to be seen to be spending money wisely as they are more publicly accountable.
They have to communicate to their public and explain how the services they provide are of value.
Special characteristics of services include:
(i)
Intangibility.
(ii)
Difficulty of separating production from consumption in that many services are consumed as they are produced.
(iii)
They are not as ‘standard’ as products and are thus more difficult to assess (in terms of value).
(iv)
It is not possible to ‘stock’ services, unlike products.
With the above background in mind, the task of selling services is perhaps more difficult than that of selling products because of their more abstract nature.
A distinguishing feature is that those who provide the service are often the ones who sell that service.
Thus, providers of services must be more highly trained in sales technique and sales negotiation forms an important part of such interaction.
It is important, too, that close attention is paid to image building (e.g. banks and insurance companies must be seen to be stable, reliable institutions, but with a friendly, non-intimidating attitude — an image which banks in particular have spent a lot of money fostering over the past decade).
6.9 PUBLIC RELATIONS
6.9.1 NATURE AND ROLE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS
Public relations covers a wider field than selling or, indeed, marketing.
Its application is much wider and encompassing the entire organisation and its various external and internal ‘publics’.
Its role, however, is increasingly important as an ancillary to selling both in the receiving and giving senses.
Selling needs public relations to assist it in its everyday operation and selling is often called upon to disseminate a public relations message.
Since the first edition of this book was written, there has been a general recognition of the strategic role of public relations; no longer is it viewed as a means of ‘covering up’ when something has gone wrong.
It has a positive role to play in an organisation, and that role is particularly emphasised in this chapter.
The public relations practitioner has to conduct activities which concern every public with which the organisation has contact.
The specific nature of such groups will vary according to circumstances.
Jefkins (1989) identifies seven basic publics:
(i)
The community.
(ii)
Employees.
(iii)
Government.
(iv)
The financial community.
(v)
Distributors.
(vi)
Consumers.
(vii)
Opinion leaders.
Definition
The task of defining the exact nature of PR is difficult.
Many definitions exist, each one emphasising a slightly different approach and each one attempting to arrive at a simple, yet brief and accurate, form of words.
The difficulty in developing a single acceptable definition reflects the complexity and diversity of the subject.
We will look at two definitions:
‘PR practice is the deliberate, planned and sustained effort to establish and maintain mutual understanding between an organisation and its public.‘
(Institute of Public Relations [IPR]) The essential features of this definition are firstly that PR practice should be deliberate, planned and sustained — not haphazard (like responding to say accidental pollution of a river).
Second, mutual understanding is necessary in order to ensure that the communication between the organisation and its ‘publics’ is clear (i.e. the receiver perceives the same meaning as the sender intended).
An alternative definition is given by Frank Jefkins, an acknowledged UK authority on the subject:
‘PR consists of all forms of planned communication, outwards and inwards, between an organisation and its publics for the purpose of achieving specific objectives concerning mutual understanding.’
This modified version of the IPR definition adds two dimensions:
(i)
‘Public’ becomes ‘publics’, since PR addresses a number of audiences.
(ii)
The inclusion of ‘specific objectives’ makes PR a tangible activity.
Communication is central to PR.
The purpose of PR is to establish a two-way communication process to resolve conflicts by seeking common ground or areas of mutual interest.
This is, of course, best achieved by word of mouth and is why the role of selling as the communication medium is so potentially important for PR to be successful.
If we accept the Jefkins definition, then we must also accept its further implication —‘that PR exists whether an organisation likes it or not’.
Simply by carrying out its day-to-day operations, an organisation necessarily communicates certain messages to those who interact with it.
Everyday opinions are formed about the organisation and its activities.
It is thus necessary that PR orchestrates these messages in order to help develop a corporate identity or personality.
Corporate identity
The concept of corporate identity or personality is inextricably linked to PR.
All PR activities must be carried out within the framework of an agreed and understood corporate personality.
This personality must develop to reflect the style of the top management, since they control the organisation's policy and activities.
A corporate personality can become a tangible asset if it is managed properly and consistently.
However, it cannot be assumed that all managers will consider the role of personality when they make decisions.
A PR executive thus needs to be placed so that he or she is aware of all issues, policies, attitudes and opinions that exist in the organisation that have a bearing upon how it is perceived by the organisation's publics.
The use of the word ‘personality’, rather than‘image’, is deliberate.
An image is a reflection or an impression which may be a little too polished or perfect.
True PR is deeper than this.
To use a common denigrating quote of a ‘PR job’, this implies that somehow the truth is being hidden behind a glossy or false facade.
Properly conducted, PR emphasises the need for truth and full information.
The public relations executive, as a manager of the corporate personality, can only sustain in the long term, an identity that is based upon reality.
What public relations is not
Misunderstanding and ignorance as to the nature of PR has led to confusion about its role.
Certain distinctions are now clarified:
PR is not free advertising
(i)
Advertising complements selling.
PR is informative, educational and creates understanding through knowledge.
(ii)
PR is not free.
It is time consuming and costs money in terms of management expertise.
(iii)
Editorial space and broadcasting time are unbiased and have more credibility than advertisements.
(iv)
Every organisation, consciously or unconsciously, has PR.
(v)
PR involves communications with many groups and audiences, not just potential customers.
PR is not propaganda.
Propaganda is designed to indoctrinate in order to attract followers.
It does not necessarily call for an ethical content, so facts are often distorted or falsified for self-interest.
PR seeks to persuade by securing the willing acceptance of attitudes and ideas.
PR is not publicity.
Publicity is a result of information being made known.
The result may be uncontrollable and either good or bad.
PR is concerned with the behaviour of an organisation, product or individual that leads to publicity.
It will clearly seek to control behaviour in such a way as to attempt to ensure that the publicity is good.
6.9.2 OBJECTIVES OF PUBLIC RELATIONS
PR is used in order to create a better environment for the organisation and its activities.
Some of the objectives may be to:
attract sales enquiries,
reinforce customer loyalty,
attract investors,
attract merger partners or smooth the way for acquisition,
attract better employees,
dissolve or block union problems,
minimise competitor advantage whilst you catch up,
open a new market,
launch a new product,
reward key people with recognition,
bring about favourable legislation.
In order to achieve such objectives, PR is viewed as part of the total marketing communications strategy, the principal part of which is the selling function.
At any point in a marketing exercise there can be PR activity, for the simple reason that PR is concerned with human relations and is a two-way process.
There is a PR element in every facet of marketing (e.g. a salesperson who exaggerates, cheats or lets down customers is a PR liability).
Manufacturers have to get ‘closer’ to people.
In order to reach the different groups, each with separate interests, they must employ the techniques of press relations, house journals, seminars, works visits, private demonstrations, exhibitions, videos and other aids.
Moreover, they have to consider those who influence opinion, sales channels and all communication media that express ideas and news.
6.9.3 CORPORATE PUBLIC RELATIONS
This is concerned with group image and is based on a long-term, carefully planned programme designed to achieve maximum recognition and understanding of the organisation's objectives and performance which is in keeping with realistic expectations.
The main medium for corporate PR is prestige advertising (e.g. ICI's ‘pathfinders’ which presents to the public a progressive image of the huge conglomerate).
Another medium is house-style (e.g. a specific ‘logo’ like the woolmark sign devised by the International Wool Secretariat and displayed on hats and uniforms worn by the people they sponsor).
Sponsorship is important for such sporting activities as: golf, football, cricket and motor racing.
Sponsorship can also include partial funding for, and the resultant publicity of, such events as concerts and community projects.
6.9.4 EFFECTIVE PUBLIC RELATIONS
Effective PR depends on:
(i)
Setting specific objectives that are capable of evaluation.
(ii)
Fully integrating the PR function into the organisation.
(iii)
Selecting the right personnel to carry out the PR function.
We shall now examine each in more detail.
Objective setting.
This is an essential requirement of PR practice.
Bowman and Ellis (1982) state:
‘If a PR programme is to be effective, then it is vital that its objectives be defined; that means of achieving them shall then be determined…and that progress, success and failure be reviewed.’
Although it is sometimes difficult to decide how an objective can be measured, an obvious objective can be cited in terms of increased sales, although it is sometimes difficult to determine whether such an increase in sales was due to PR activity or to some other marketing activity.
Crisis PR tends to dictate its own objectives.
If information is to be prevented from reaching the press, then the yardstick that determines success or failure  is whether that information reaches the press or not!
If the objective is to maintain the company's reputation, then some attempt must be made to define ‘reputation’ in useful terms such that it can be measured and evaluated.
A traditional method of measuring PR activity is in terms of column centimetres gained from press coverage.
This method does not, however, account for the quality of such coverage.
Furthermore, the value of editorial cannot be quantified against equivalent advertising cost because of the greater credibility of editorial.
As PR matures, the call for more objectivity is likely to become greater.
As Worcester and English (1985) state:
‘Just as it is now difficult to conceive of marketing without measurement, a PR agency seeking to change the perception of its clients…will begin by quantifying the scale of the problem…and the effect of its activities over time.’
Integration.
The integration of the PR function into the organisation is important.
It should be decided whether PR should act in a ‘technician’ or ‘policy-making’role, the implication being that a technician simply carries out top management orders whereas the policy-maker inputs into corporate strategic plans.
Modern thinking favours the latter role because every decision has PR implications.
If PR is not involved in policy formation, then top management is implicitly assuming the PR mantle.
The role that is suggested for PR is a far-reaching one, involving communication with large numbers of people.
This requires cooperation with other organisational functions.
PR must then be a reasonable autonomous unit so that it can serve all departments equally.
A staff function should be positioned so that it can funnel its services to the organisational levels who may be the public face of the organisation to outside groups.
The importance of PR at lower hierarchical levels cannot be over-stated,(e.g. from the way the secretary answers the telephone to the attitude of the company's delivery person).
The extent of PR responsibility has to be established initially by senior management and this can be achieved by objective-setting and well-defined job analyses.
PR as a staff function exists to serve and facilitate line functions.
Such lack of PR authority is desirable since it minimises conflict and ensures that the emphasis is upon cooperation and consultation between line and staff.
It also recognises that day-to-day business and executive authority is vested in line management.
It does, however, mean that it is essential that PR has direct access to the board in order that PR programmes can be sanctioned and executed with full backing from top management.
Selection.
The selection of the ‘right’ personnel is especially important for potential PR practitioners.
The practice of PR covers such a wide diversity of tasks that flexibility is very important.
The Institute of Public Relations (IPR) recognises:
‘There is no single set of ideal qualifications and no formal path into the profession.‘
The IPR even states that formal qualifications are not necessary for PR personnel.
It may be that PR as a profession has ‘come of age’ because Stirling University introduced a Master's degree in Public Relations in 1988 and Dorset Institute of Higher Education introduced a  Bachelor's degree in 1989.
Practitioners have identified a number of skills and attributes necessary to be successful including:
(i)
Sound judgment.
(ii)
Personal integrity.
(iii)
Communications skills.
(iv)
Organisational ability.
(v)
Strong personality.
(vi)
Team player.
The traditional importance of media relations has resulted in a strong journalist contingent in the PR profession.
However, some find it hard to adapt as the required writing style is different as are planning horizons and work routines.
As the wide range of qualities and skills quoted above illustrate, relevant experience can be obtained from almost any background; personality is really of far more importance, together with a sense of empathy and the ability to be adaptable.
It goes without saying that an ability to write and speak fluently is vital.
6.9.5 THE USE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONSULTANCIES
In some situations, it is more cost effective to use a PR consultancy, especially in areas where the organisation is inexperienced (e.g. the City or Parliament).
Quite often larger companies find that a better interaction comes from an in-house PR department and an external specialist.
Consultancies are an integral part of the PR industry and they do possess certain advantages of experience, independence and specialist skills that may not be evident internally.
External PR activities can be grouped as follows:
(i)
Freelance writers/consultants — who are generally technical authors able to produce PR feature articles.
(ii)
PR departments of advertising agencies, which can vary from a small press office handling product publicity to augment an advertising campaign, to a large comprehensive PR department not unlike the agency setup itself.
(iii)
PR subsidiary of an advertising agency, where there is a desire to permit a fuller development of PR activity on the part of the advertising agency and indeed whose clients will provide a useful source of potential business.
Its association with an advertising agency can have benefits through shared services such as art studios and production.
(iv)
Independent PR consultants usually specialise in a particular class of  business, and clients can take advantage of this for ad hoc, or short-term assignments.
Such consultants specialise in charities and appeals, the theatre, finance, agriculture, building, shipping, travel, fashion, etc.
(v)
PR counsellors are people who advise, but do not carry out the PR work.
6.10 CONCLUSIONS
This has been a relatively lengthy chapter of necessity and it has placed sales settings in their respective contexts.
It has been shown that different selling approaches must be adopted, depending upon the situation in which one is selling.
Segmentation has been discussed and its importance illustrated; once effective segmentation has been achieved, a company can concentrate its promotional effort on a particular target market.
Sales promotions relate to all types of sales setting, and their growth and importance have been shown in respect of consumer markets, trade markets and as an aid to sales personnel motivation.
Two relatively modern areas have been investigated — those of telephone selling as a technique and the selling of services because of societal changes that have taken place over recent years.
Finally, public relations has been looked at in some detail, because this area has expanded most over recent years and its relationship to the selling function is a very direct one as the sales force is increasingly being called upon to carry out PR activity.
Unlike other chapters, two practical exercises follow — one deals with a sales setting problem (Argent Distributors Ltd) and the other deals more specifically with public relations (Quality Chilled Foods Ltd).
The next chapter is concerned with international selling.
Although this is perhaps another example of a sales setting, it is treated separately because of its diversity and ever-increasing importance, especially in view of 1992 European Community legislation and changes as they will affect the selling function.
PRACTICAL EXERCISE — ARGENT DISTRIBUTORS LTD
The company markets washing machines and dryers which it imports from a medium-sized Italian manufacturer.
The selling franchise arrangement has operated quite successfully for the past eight years, and Argent Distributors have grown at a steady pace during this period, as can be seen from the sales turnover figures.
The Italian manufacturer seems to be happy with the arrangement because, being a medium-sized manufacturer, it is considered that it would be too expensive to set up their own distribution facilities in the United Kingdom, and Argent Distributors seem to have performed a reasonable selling job on their behalf.
Argent Distributors Ltd sales (£000)
The selling operation within the United Kingdom is essentially direct to the end user, and the machines undercut equivalent popular makes of machine by 10 to 15 per cent.
Householders are thus tempted to purchase this less well-known brand more upon the basis of price than comparative performance.
Advertisements are placed in the press, and potential purchasers are invited to telephone or fill in a coupon for further details.
All such potential customer inquiries are followed up with a visit from a sales representative.
Sales representatives are employed on a low level of basic salary plus commission, and they are given the sales leads from the head office on a weekly basis.
These sales leads are closely monitored from the head office and, if the salesperson consistently falls below the average success rate of converting leads into orders, then he or she is dismissed.
Such leads are usually obtained through responses from advertisements placed in the press.
The selling process essentially follows a set pattern that the salesperson learns from a manual.
It is designed to suit every type of circumstance and to overcome every type of objection the potential customer might place in the way of the salesperson.
Before a salesperson is allowed in the field, he or she must pass a test in the presence of the field sales manager.
Basically, the test is designed to cover every selling circumstance and is set to ensure that the knowledge has been successfully acquired.
Upon successful completion, the salesperson is then entrusted to sell the washing machines and dryers unaided.
Sales representatives are engaged on a self-employed basis.
They are supplied with a demonstration kit of a washer and dryer plus a small van painted with the company logo.
The van is maintained by the company, but the representative pays for the petrol (on the premise that it can be offset against tax and it is also a bigger inducement to make a sale).
The basic salary in 1989 was £5,500 per annum, rising by £500 per annum for every year of service to a maximum of £8,500.
Commission boosted these earnings, and during 1989 the lowest earning salesman achieved £5,500 basic plus £6,700 commission.
He was subsequently dismissed for not turning sufficient enquiries into sales.
The highest earning salesman had been with the company for seven years and his earnings were £8,500 basic plus £26,850 commission in 1989.
The average basic plus commission in 1989 was £16,925.
Out of this, petrol and subsistence expenses had to be met.
The company believed in survival of the fittest and during 1988/9 turnover in salespersons was just under two years on average; four years previously the turnover period had been nearly three years.
For the first time in the company's history, sales had actually fallen from those of the previous year.
It was felt that this had been actuated by some bad (and in the company's opinion, unfair) publicity.
One of the company's washing machines had been featured on a well-known consumer affairs television programme, and some of the selling tactics used by Argent Distributors' salespersons were deemed to be rather suspect.
In addition, it was concluded that once the sale had been made, the company no longer retained an interest by way of an adequate after-sales service.
In some instances, parts were not available for more than four weeks after the machine had broken down.
The company viewed this fall in sales seriously, and was also aware of a growing disaffection amongst the sales staff.
It had been content to leave the service arrangements to a network of service engineers who serviced other makes of machine as well as those provided by Argent Distributors (on the premise that one machine is very much like another) and Argent Distributors carried and provided the stock of spare parts that were unique to their machines.
They also used this network of service engineers to provide the backup for the warranty work during the first year of the machine's use.
It was expected that these service engineers would have sufficient parts from their own stocks to do simple repairs, and the theory was that major parts could be provided from Argent Distributors' warehouse within 48 hours.
However, on some of the older machines, stocks of major component parts were not kept and had to be ordered from Italy; hence the instances of four-weeks-plus deliveries of certain components that was highlighted on the television programme.
The sales force had found that many potential customers were using the sales objection of ‘Is this the machine that you cannot provide parts for?’
Although they had been told to counter this objection with the fact that this was a single instance or two of older machines and new machines could be serviced almost immediately, this did not altogether convince a potential customer and it was felt that many sales had been lost.
Discussion questions
1
What advice would you proffer to Argent Distributors Ltd to:
(i)
counter their fall in sales;
(ii)
offer a better spares/after-sales service;
(iii)
remotivate their sales force.
2
What are the dangers of such a distribution arrangement to:
(i)
the Italian manufacturer;
(ii)
Argent Distributors Ltd.
3
What is the implication to a company using such a non-traditional distribution channel as this for the sale of its goods?
4
What are the advantages and disadvantages of employing salespersons on such a ‘high risk’, low salary plus commission basis?
5
In which areas of operation and marketing is it more costly, and in which is it less costly, when adopting this direct type of distribution arrangement?
6
Are the sales figures put forward in the case study really as good as implied?
In what other form(s) could the sales statistics have been more meaningfully presented?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
1
How important is the concept of segmentation in the area of selling?
2
How has the changing face of retailing since the late 1960s affected the role of selling for fast-moving consumer goods?
PRACTICAL EXERCISE — QUALITY CHILLED FOODS LIMITED
The company manufactures a range of up-market chilled foods in a market that covers the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, parts of Cambridgeshire and parts of North East London.
The region consists of more than 10 million people.
The company's customers are quality delicatessens and some of the smaller ‘non-chain' supermarkets.
The following report has been published in the East Anglian Times, a newspaper that more or less covers the area in which the company's products are sold.
This paper is an evening paper and has a very high readership.
Listeria bacteria has been found in a high percentage of chilled foods throughout East Anglia.
This information comes from a report published by Essex County Council and it is confirmed by Norfolk and Cambridgeshire County Councils.
The report says that the virulent bacteria — which is particularly dangerous to children, elderly people and pregnant women — has been found in food such as cooked chickens, cooked meats and pates in supermarkets and stores.
The report is to be studied in more detail later in the month by Essex authority's environmental health sub-committee.
It has been drawn up following a widespread survey in the towns of Chelmsford, Southend and Colchester.
At the same time similar surveys have been conducted in Ipswich and Cambridge, and although these results are not fully confirmed, their respective county councils state that their findings are likely to be similar to the findings from Essex.
It concludes: ‘The  relatively high percentage of commercial chilled foods which were positive gives cause for concern — not least because the large majority of these foods were ready to eat without further cooking or reheating.’
The Chief Environmental Health Officer for Essex said: ‘The report is hardly a shock — it confirms a similar Government finding of last year.’
Quality Chilled Foods have asked you, a public relations consultant, to advise them what to do in relation to their retail customers in particular and the public in general.
The company has absolute proof that none of their products fall into this category, because their chilling process is unique and has in-built safety checks to ensure against this kind of eventuality.
Prepare your advice in the form of a report, with special reference to the role which could be played by the sales force.
EXAMINATION QUESTION
Using appropriate illustrations explain how PR assists the sales function.
International Selling
7.1 INTRODUCTION
The key objective of this chapter is to summarise the most important facets of international selling.
In a chapter of this length it is not possible to produce a comprehensive guide to the practice of international selling and exporting and indeed this is not the objective.
It is, however, appropriate to explore some of the key steps in international selling and to examine some of the issues and problems which stem from these.
A number of the key areas outlined in the chapter, for example the selection and use of agents and product policy, are sufficiently involved and complex, not to say important, to warrant separate treatment.
Companies contemplating entering overseas markets will need, and are advised to seek or develop, specialist knowledge and expertise in these areas.
It should not be felt that selling overseas is such a specialist and complex area that the uninitiated must for ever be excluded, or that membership can only be purchased at the expense of having very costly specialist services.
Some sales managers feel that selling abroad is impossibly difficult, but those who try it feel that it is no more difficult than selling to the home market.
One thing for certain is that selling abroad is ‘different’.
Whether it is more difficult than selling only to the domestic market is a debatable point, but success depends to a large extent on the attitude and approach of the firm and the personal qualities of the salespeople — not every salesperson is suited to such a task from the point of view of understanding and empathy with the foreign market concerned.
Whilst it is hoped that this text as a whole will contribute to the development of the personal qualities necessary for successful salesmanship, this chapter concentrates specifically on those aspects of international selling with which a firm either exporting or contemplating the same should be familiar.
Every year companies that have never been involved in selling abroad join  the important, and often highly profitable, league of exporters or licensors and some even establish joint ventures or subsidiary companies in overseas countries.
As will be seen, one of the problems for the United Kingdom economy is that, despite government exhortations for companies to become involved in selling overseas, many executives remain apprehensive because of the mystique with which the subject often surrounds itself.
We shall now attempt to dispel some of this mystique by examining some of the more important economic aspects of international selling.
7.2 ECONOMIC ASPECTS
Many goods that we purchase are imported, and everywhere we read that industrialists are striving to increase exports.
Successive governments have in their turn exhorted, threatened and promised in order to persuade the business community to become involved in foreign markets and export more.
As far as the United Kingdom is concerned there is one major and very simple reason for this — exporting is necessary for our economic survival.
It is perhaps unfortunate, but true, that the United Kingdom is not self-supporting.
Much of our raw materials and our food must be purchased in world markets and imported.
In turn, if we are to be able to pay for these commodities, we must export.
The ledger for these transactions is represented by the balance of trade accounts which show the difference between our overseas earnings and overseas expenditure.
In fact the difference between our export earnings and our import expenditure (including ‘invisibles’, dealt with later) is often referred to as the ‘balance of payments’.
We shall now take a more detailed look at what is meant by this term.
7.2.1 THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Goods passing from one country to another have to be paid for; trading between countries thus involves the creation of debts between countries.
Over a period of, say, one year a country will add up how much it has paid or still owes for goods imported from foreign countries.
In the same way, the country will add up how much has been paid or is still owed from overseas countries for goods exported to them.
When the amount exported exceeds the amount imported the country is said to have a favourable balance of trade or a trade surplus.
If the import of goods exceeds exports then the country is said to have an adverse balance of trade or a trading deficit.
Payments for actual physical goods are not the only items involved in international trade.
Debts also arise between countries because of services performed by one country for another.
Because one cannot actually see such services they are referred to as ‘invisible’ exports or imports.
For example, the UK performs insurance services for other countries and the premiums are  payments due from those countries to the UK.
Payment for shipping services, income from tourism, banking services and interest payments from international loans are other examples of invisibles.
To find how a country stands in respect of international trade, i.e. its balance of payments, we must compare the country's total exports (visible and invisible) with its total imports (visible and invisible).
In the long term, a country's payments for imports and receipts for exports must balance.
If a country finds itself in deficit it can really only do one of two things to put matters right.
(i)
Reduce expenditure on imported foreign goods, reduce expenditure overseas on such items as defence and foreign aid and attempt to discourage its citizens from travelling overseas to stop money being spent abroad.
(ii)
The country can sell more goods and services overseas to increase foreign revenue.
It can encourage foreign tourists to spend their money or it can encourage foreign investment which will provide income.
Whilst the first alternative can be effective to some extent, there is a limit to which expenditure of this kind can be reduced.
It is therefore to the second alternative — selling goods and services overseas — that countries must look if they are to maintain and improve their living standards and avoid a balance of payments crisis.
We shall look briefly at the issues involved to fully understand these points.
A country that has a balance of payments surplus may receive payment from the debtor's foreign exchange reserves, receive the balance in gold, leave the money in the debtor country and use it to purchase goods and services in the future, or lend the debtor country the money to pay off the debt and receive interest on the loan in the meantime.
In the same way, a country that has a deficit on its balance of payments will either have to run down its foreign exchange reserves, pay over gold, borrow the money to pay off the debt from other countries or hold money, in terms of credit, that the creditor country can use to purchase goods and services in the future.
A more technical explanation is that in essence the balance of payments is an accounting record, with information from various sources being entered on the basis of double entry book-keeping.
If there is a deficit on the current account, i.e. if we import more goods and services than we export, this deficit must be matched by a surplus on the capital account to make the account balance.
The capital account records purchases and sales of assets such as stocks, bonds, land, etc.
There is a capital account surplus, or a net capital inflow, if our receipts from the sale of stocks, bonds, land, bank deposits and other assets exceed our payments for our own purchase of foreign assets.
If the government is to achieve a balance in the accounts in a current account deficit, it means either borrowing from abroad or reducing the government's stocks of gold and/or foreign exchange reserves.
These borrowings and/or reductions are entered in the capital accounts as a positive figure and hence counteract the negative entry represented by a current account deficit, and hence the books balance.
As the reader will appreciate, a country can fund a continuing current account deficit only if it has limitless reserves of gold and foreign exchange or unlimited foreign borrowing power.
In the long run, persistent current account deficits are difficult and costly to sustain and are damaging to an economy.
Total exports must pay for total imports, and if a country's exports fall then imports will also fall unless the deficiency in exports can be made good in the ways specified.
We can now understand the importance to a country of keeping up the volume of exports.
7.2.2 UNITED KINGDOM SHARE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
The United Kingdom's share of exports by the main manufacturing nations has declined dramatically in recent years.
On the other hand some of our major competitors such as Japan and Western Germany have increased their share.
The problems this has given rise to are compounded when one examines our import record.
On the import side there has been a disturbing trend comprising two related factors:
(i)
the tendency for real imports per unit of real gross domestic product to increase;
(ii)
the rising share of manufactured goods accounted for by imports.
The effect of such trends on British manufacturing industry has been very serious.
In the later 1960s and 1970s the UK experienced an imbalance in the balance of payments.
In fact the cost of physical imports has exceeded the value of exported products for over a century.
This has been undesirable, but not of critical importance because our income from invisible exports has made good the difference.
However, for a variety of reasons, income from invisible exports has failed to keep pace with expenditure on physical imports, resulting in an overall deficit throughout this period.
It is only relatively recently that the imbalance has been corrected and this has been mainly due to oil from the North Sea, resulting in import savings and export earning.
Over the past two years, however, we have even seen this ‘bonus’ eroded and the UK monthly balance of payments is again in constant deficit.
Matters have not been helped by the disastrous fire in the Piper-Alpha field which put a lot of potential production out of commission for a number of months.
Measures to correct this imbalance largely consisted of a manipulation of interest rates upwards in order to take the steam out of the economy and stem consumer spending (largely on imported consumer durables).
However this resource cannot last for ever, and when the oil runs out the UK could well be faced with similar problems again.
Whatever the reasons for the current state of affairs, selling overseas has been, and always will remain, one of the keystones of our national prosperity.
Not only is it in the national interest but it is in the interest of every industry, company, employer and employee.
7.2.3 FURTHER ECONOMIC FACTORS
It is appropriate to consider briefly some of the more important developments in world trade over the past fifteen years or so.
It is difficult to comment on the general effect of these developments as different industries and individual companies have been affected in different ways.
Some companies feel that they have had a beneficial effect on their trading situation, while others feel that their competitive position has been seriously undermined.
The European Community (EC)
The Common Market, or more accurately the European Economic Community (EEC)— later called the European Community (EC)— was legally established on 25 March 1957 with the signing of a treaty between the governments of France, Western Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxemburg.
Since then, the ranks of ‘Europeans’ have been swelled by the accession of Ireland, Denmark, Greece, Spain, Portugal and, of course, the United Kingdom.
Currently, Austria and Turkey have applied to join.
The initial objective of the treaty was to remove within 12 years (i.e. by 1969) all restrictions on the free movement of goods and services and individuals by removing taxation differentials, frontier controls and other forms of restriction.
Since those early days, the movement towards this goal has been very slow for economic and political reasons.
In fact, it was this political aspect that kept the United Kingdom out of the EC for many years.
The UK was not seen to be a true ‘European’— a contention which many would say holds true today — and it tends to view the EC as an economic, rather than as a political union.
By 1982 (the EC's 25th birthday) the momentum for a Single European Market had come to a virtual standstill.
Many non-tariff barriers remained.
The free movement of goods was hindered by varying taxation systems, public procurement restrictions (to only include tenders from domestic providers) and different technical and consumer protection standards.
For example, at the time of writing rates of value-added tax differ widely between individual countries (Belgium has rates of 6 per cent to 17 per cent to 19 per cent to 25 per cent to 33 per cent ; the UK has a single rate of 15 per cent ; Greece has rates of 6 per cent , 18 per cent and 36 per cent and Denmark's single rate is 22 per cent ).
Much controversy is caused by Luxemburg's low rates of 6 per cent and 10 per cent, because Belgians simply shop ‘over the border’ and fill up their cars with cheap petrol.
A turning point came in 1984 when Jacques Delors (former French finance minister) assumed the presidency of the EC.
He developed the concept of an open market within the Community to create the largest single market in the Western world.
Although there was essentially nothing ‘new’ in what he said, his statement came at the end of the economic recession of the late 1970s and early 1980s, during which time member states had turned economically ‘inwards’, defending their national markets against European competition.
A programme for removing all remaining obstacles to trade by 31 December 1992 was drawn up by Lord Cockfield, EC Commissioner in charge of the internal market portfolio.
The programme was presented to the Heads of Government at a summit meeting in Milan in June 1985 and eventually the Single European Act came into force in July 1987.
This Act listed 300 measures which would have to be completed if the single market philosophy was to proceed to schedule.
In order to hasten the decision making process, the power of veto was removed and these resolutions could be passed by a ‘qualified majority’.
These 300 initial proposals have subsequently been reduced to 279 by the withdrawal of certain proposals and the grouping of others into single proposals.
The main features of the Single European Act (SEA) were:
the establishment of a Single European Market by the end of 1992;
products approved in any one EC country can be freely marketed within the EC;
progressive opening up of government and public body contracts to all EC contractors on an equal basis;
more competitive and efficient Europe-wide services in telecommunications and information technology;
removal of ‘red tape’ on road haulage and shipping services between member countries should be provided on equal terms, and more competition on air routes with lower overall fares;
banks should be free to provide banking and investment services anywhere within the EC; insurers will have greater freedom to cover risks in member countries;
restrictions on the movement of capital will be abolished;
there will be a harmonisation of national laws on patents and trade marks;
professional qualifications in one country will be acceptable throughout the EC.
There are, of course, many other features, but for our purposes these are the most significant ones.
A pamphlet produced by the Department of Trade and Industry (The Single Market — an action checklists for business, May 1989, HMSO) perhaps best sums up how companies can take advantage of the single market in terms of protecting their existing markets and developing new markets.
This is quite poignant, because other members of the EC have more of a European ‘mentality’.
They tend to regard each others' markets as their own ‘home’ markets, whereas UK companies still tend to regard selling to EC countries as exporting.
This is perhaps borne out by the fact that since the UK joined the EC with its current population of 320 million people, it has always operated with a net deficit on its balance of trade with its European partners.
The pamphlet recommends that companies should ask a number of key questions in relation to their businesses.
How has the market changed our business?
Should we become a European business, looking upon Europe as our primary market rather than just the UK?
Would becoming a European business alter the scale of the targets in our plans?
In what ways will we be vulnerable to more competition in our present markets?
Should we form links, merge or acquire business to strengthen our market presence, broaden our range of products and services and spread our financial risk?
Is our management and structure appropriate to exploit new opportunities or defend our position?
What training, in languages and other skills, do we need to be ready for the single market?
Who in our firm is going to be responsible for deciding how to make the most of the Single Market?
To a certain extent the pamphlet states the obvious, but it does at least focus thinking in a formal manner to the issue of 1992.
More specifically, it recommends that in the field of selling the company asks five key questions.
The solution to each of these key questions is proffered through a list of suggestions:
1
How do you reach the customers?
Investigate the trade structure such as wholesalers and retailers;
identify buying points;
find out about buying procedures, terms and practices, such as the preferred currency of invoicing;
consider how far you need to know the local language;
examine different selling approaches, including brokers and agents;
find out how your competitors are using advertising, promotion and trade discounts.
2
How can you sell into this market?
Consider regional test marketing;
establish your sales targets;
decide on your total sales and promotion budget;
decide on your selling organisation.
3
What sales literature is necessary?
Assess suitability of existing material for European markets;
consider the need to redesign to appeal to new customers;
arrange translation where necessary.
4
How should you advertise?
Examine your existing advertising;
assess differences in national media availability and costs;
decide on your advertising budget.
5
How will you provide after-sales service?
Consider relative merits and costs of direct provision or subcontracting.
At a more general level, by the terms of the Treaty of Rome that first initiated the EC in 1957, member countries are independent of their national governments and are not able to accept instructions from them.
Their proposals are subject to the official sanctions of the (European) Council of Ministers and the democratically elected members of the European Parliament.
This means that many of the decisions which ultimately affect UK industry are outside the direct control of the UK government and in many areas of trade, negotiations are carried out on our behalf by the EC as a whole.
Much of this rankles with the present Conservative UK government and the Prime Minister openly criticises the ‘nightmare’ of a socialist European superstate run from Brussels.
At the Conservative Party conference in October 1988 Mrs Thatcher stated: ‘We haven't worked all these years to free Britain from the paralysis of socialism only to see it creep in through the back door of central control and bureaucracy from Brussels’.
Whether one agrees or disagrees with this contention is immaterial.
The point being made is that although it is ultimately envisaged that the EC will be similar to the USA with each member country being akin to a state and it even being billed as the ‘United States of Europe’, is it a reality when one considers differences in attitude, culture, language and even religion?
It will indeed be difficult to envisage an homogeneous pan-European marketing programme not unlike that of the USA.
Clearly, 1992 will pose many opportunities (and threats) to companies within the EC, but it is felt that things will not change overnight; it will be more of a slow transitionary period and it could well take decades before we see an integration similar to that in the USA today.
Finally, it has been postulated by Charles Betz of the European consultancy organisation Carré Orban and Paul Ray International that each European country will adopt a particular expertise as follows:
West Germany will specialise in high technology engineering;
The Netherlands will concentrate on service industries (e.g. storage and distribution of petrochemicals);
Belgium will form the hub of the community through Brussels and theirs will be a bureaucratic role;
France will become more technical;
Switzerland will remain outside the EC and will be the financial centre and act as the neutral protector of money;
Austria has much potential and could play a major role as the bridge between the EC and Eastern European countries;
Greece and Turkey will become cheap manufacturing bases producing goods for the Middle East and North Africa;
Italy and Spain will be the ‘winners’ as they have reasonable levels of readily available, cost-effective labour;
Portugal has low labour costs and is basically an agrarian economy, making it a natural country from which to sell winter-grown vegetables to the more affluent Northern countries;
Denmark has traded its Scandinavian independence for an ability to trade within the EC and should do well for innovative designs;
Ireland will hopefully solve its political problems with the North and its low labour costs will put it in a good position to compete in manufacturing and assembly;
United Kingdom will show leadership in financing the consolidation of industries across national boundaries.
This is, however, one expert's conjecture, but clearly there will be some movement towards specialisation by individual member countries of the EC.
OPEC
Another far-reaching economic factor that has affected world trade was the decision in November 1973 by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to increase the price of oil.
This has had such far reaching implications for the Western world that it deserves mention here.
The main effects of increases in the price of oil have been twofold.
The first is that the increases have caused an unprecedented imbalance in the international monetary system, resulting in an immense payments surplus for oil producers and an ensuing loss of world liquidity.
One of the more important consequences of this action — a consequence, incidentally, that we are still feeling the effects of — has been that demand for UK goods has been reduced not only in the UK but also in the other major industrialised oil importing nations.
In short, the unprecedented growth in world trade referred to earlier has been all but curtailed.
Secondly, the increase in world oil prices has been responsible, if only in part, for the increase in prices of many of the products of Western economies.
The consequences of these price increases are of course varied and complex; there is no doubt, however, that they have not made the job of existing and would-be future UK exporters any easier.
One positive feature of this transfer of world liquidity to the oil exporting countries has been the corresponding increase in demand for the world's products by these countries.
To some extent this rate of growth has slowed slightly due to political developments in the Middle East.
Non-oil countries have responded to this problem by producing more energy-efficient machinery (especially cars).
In addition, the ending of the Iran/Iraq conflict has meant that there is now more oil on world markets and the price of oil has tended to fall over the last few months.
There is thus now an excess of supply over demand which augurs badly for the UK as its North Sea oil is  relatively expensive to produce and this has put certain marginal oil fields out of production.
GATT
Perhaps one of the most important developments of the last few years has been a steady but widespread trend towards protectionism.
The greater part of world trade is subject to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Basically GATT is a complex agreement, but its most important features can be summarised in four fundamental principles.
(i)
NON-DISCRIMINATION.
Each member country agrees that any tariff concession or trade advantage granted to one country, whether or not a member of GATT, shall be granted to all member countries.
(ii)
CONSULTATION.
Member countries are required to meet under GATT auspices to discuss any trade problems that may arise.
(iii)
TARIFF NEGOTIATION.
That tariffs should be open to negotiation is the idea that originally inspired GATT.
The hope was that these negotiations would be aimed at reducing and eventually removing customs duties.
(iv)
TRADE LIBERALISATION.
The overriding aim of GATT, and from which the principles described above derive, is the continuing liberalisation of world trade.
With this aim in mind, import quotas and licensing requirements, restrictions which nations have traditionally used to limit the volume and types of imports entering their countries, are prohibited.
The idea is that temporary protection shall be afforded to each nation's domestic industry exclusively through the customs tariff.
There is no doubt that the effect of GATT over most of the postwar years has been to remove some of the protection afforded to national markets.
As a result the GATT agreements have been responsible — at least in part— for the considerable growth in world trade referred to earlier.
Recently this liberalisation of trade has been checked, or at least slowed, by a whole series of actions.
It is well known that there has been widespread acceptance of restrictive trade measures falling outside the formal GATT rules, e.g. voluntary export restraints and anti-dumping legislation.
The Director-General of GATT has suggested that, excluding agricultural products, the volume of international trade so affected now represents more than 5 per cent of the total volume of world trade and is expanding steadily.
The continuing need to export
There is little doubt that the world economy is experiencing basic changes in the composition and direction of international trade, the terms of trade and in the size, direction and character of capital movements.
In recent years the UK has moved from being heavily reliant on oil imports to self sufficiency.
Related to this, our balance of payments accounts showed a surplus until the 1980s when they fell back into deficit again.
Despite this, the imperative need to export our manufactures remains as strong as ever.
Whilst these changes pose a formidable challenge to exporters, it can only be hoped that the response they evoke will be conducive to the well-being and prosperity of all.
Although increased exports of goods and services is in the national interest, individual firms have more selfish objectives, and the most positive inducement to them to sell overseas is the existence of potential profitable opportunities.
However there are other factors that an individual firm must consider and these are discussed in the next section.
7.3 INTERNATIONAL SELLING AND THE INDIVIDUAL COMPANY
Whilst the fact that our national economic prosperity depends upon selling overseas is not without relevance to individual companies, there are a number of more pressing reasons why companies benefit from selling overseas.
Broadly, there are three reasons.
(i)
TRADE DUE TO NON-AVAILABILITY OF A PARTICULAR PRODUCT.
Such trade is clearly beneficial when a country is able to import a commodity it could not possibly produce itself.
For example, some countries need to import coal because there are no indigenous supplies.
The UK has to import rubber because it cannot be grown here.
It may be that a product or process is protected by a patent and can only be produced if a firm purchases the patent right or enters a licensing agreement.
(ii)
TRADE DUE TO INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN COMPETITIVE COSTS.
The basis for international trade between countries can be explained in terms of the economist David Ricardo's theory of comparative costs.
Quite simply, this theory states that countries will gain if each country exports a product in which costs of production are, comparatively, lower and imports a product in which its costs of production are, comparatively, higher.
Although this principle of comparative costs is applied mainly in connection with international trade, one can see it in operation in all forms of production.
It is a similar concept to the benefit of the division of labour, in that benefits are to be gained, not by persons doing what they can do best, but by persons doing what they can do relatively better than other people.
The more productive country would still benefit from specialisation in those goods it produces best, and should then import those goods it is comparatively worse at producing.
(iii)
TRADE DUE TO PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION.
In a number of industries each firm's product has some point of difference that differentiates it in some way from the products manufactured by other firms; differentiation may be in terms of quality, design or even an intangible difference such as customers' perceived image of the product.
This latter factor is very much in evidence in relation to cars; this explains why the UK both imports cars from, and exports cars to, other countries.
It is important to note that the decision to export and import in a free market economy is not made by the country as a collective unit.
It is made by individual firms who hope to benefit through foreign trade.
We have looked at three broad  economic reasons why individual firms may become involved in selling overseas, but there are other reasons that are more situation specific.
(i)
To become less vulnerable to the effects of economic recession, particularly in the home market and/or market fluctuations.
(ii)
Loss of domestic market share due to increased competition.
(iii)
To take advantage of faster rates of growth in demand in other markets.
(iv)
To dispose of surplus or to take up excess capacity in production.
(v)
Loss of domestic market share due to product obsolescence.
Products that become technically obsolete in the more developed economies may still be ‘appropriate technology’ in less advanced economies.
For example, the old type of fly paper has been replaced by aerosol fly killers, but fly paper is relatively inexpensive and is still very much in demand in developing countries.
(vi)
To achieve the benefits of long production runs and to gain economies of scale.
If the firm can expand its production it will lead to a reduction in average cost and hence a reduction in price, not only in the overseas market but also in the home market, which may lead to further domestic market expansion.
(vii)
The firm has special expertise or knowledge of producing a product that is not available in a foreign market.
(viii)
Finally, simply the existence of potential demand backed by purchasing power.
This is probably the strongest incentive of all.
So far we have looked at some of the main economic factors concerned with selling overseas.
The coverage does not claim to be exhaustive and, indeed, entire texts have been written upon the economics of international trade.
However it is hoped that this has given the reader an appreciation of some of the issues involved.
At the beginning of the chapter it was stated that selling overseas was ‘different’ to selling in the home market.
Whilst economic factors are important, only non-economic factors can explain the different patterns of consumption of two different countries with similar per capita incomes.
Selling overseas is a cultural as well as an economic phenomenon, and it is to the important area of cultural influences in overseas markets that we now turn.
7.4 CULTURAL FACTORS IN INTERNATIONAL SELLING
In essence, culture is a distinctive way of life of a people, not biologically transmitted but learned behaviour that is passed on from one generation to the next, evolving and changing over time.
A society organises itself in such a way that people adhering to cultural norms are rewarded whilst those that deviate are ‘punished’, to a greater or lesser degree depending upon the culture.
As a  society's needs change and evolve, so will the cultural norms change and certain old patterns of behaviour will no longer be rewarded whereas new patterns will.
In this way, society sustains itself and produces the type of behaviour and responses it needs to survive.
This reward and punishment principle of culture is important for selling overseas.
The culture in which a person lives affects his or her consumption patterns and affects perceptions of specific products and the meaning attached to them.
Because of this, only certain types of products and selling practices that the individual perceives as normal and acceptable to his particular culture will be acceptable.
It follows that overseas salespeople need to understand how culture functions in individual overseas markets in order that the selling approach can be tailored accordingly.
In order to be able to offer value to the market, a salesperson must understand the value system of the foreign market and this means a knowledge of the influence of cultural factors.
Culture includes both abstract and material elements.
Abstract elements include values, attitudes, ideas and religion.
These are learned patterns of behaviour that are transmitted from one generation to another.
Material elements of the culture are levels and type of technology and the consumption patterns within that society.
An understanding of the way a society organises its economic activities and the type of technology used is important for selling overseas.
It stands to reason that a firm would find difficulty selling advanced microelectronic machinery to a culture with a primitive agriculturally-based economy.
In such a case ‘appropriate’ technology will have a greater chance of being accepted.
We shall now explore some of these abstract and material elements within cultures in the knowledge that in some countries factors like religion have inhibited the acceptance of Western materialism and industrialisation.
7.4.1 AESTHETICS
A non-material cultural factor which may have an influence on the development of overseas markets is aesthetics.
This refers to a culture's ideas concerning beauty and good taste, together with an appreciation of colour and form.
The exporter must be aware of the positive and negative aspects of its designs, its packaging, advertising, etc.
The company needs to be sensitive to local preferences and tastes, and such things as company logos should incorporate local preferences.
Colour is important, the most quoted example being that black represents mourning in the West, whereas in Eastern countries the colour of mourning is white.
This has obvious implications for pack design.
Music is also important, particularly when used in advertising and promotion.
Many non-Western cultures use a type of music, not used in the West, which has symbolic meaning to the members of the culture; an attempt should be made to understand this symbolism and turn it to positive selling advantage.
7.4.2 RELIGION
Material culture and aesthetics are outwards manifestations of a culture, and these give an indication of how consumers in a particular culture behave.
However, the firm selling overseas needs an understanding of why they behave in that way.
The religion of a culture can give insights into its members' behaviour.
There is not space here to give a detailed account of all religions, nor is it the purpose of this text to do this.
Clearly such matters are a specialist business and one should take detailed local advice before making any decisions.
For illustrative purposes, two of the largest religions — Hinduism and Islam — are now discussed.
Hinduism is followed by 85 per cent of India's population and is more a way of life than a religion.
An understanding of the tenets of Hinduism is thus necessary for an understanding of the Indian culture.
Important doctrines of Hinduism include the caste system, the joint family, the veneration of the cow and the restriction of women.
Any product or selling activity which offends the tenets of Hinduism would have small chance of success because such views are deep rooted in the Indian culture.
Islam takes the Koran as its ultimate guide, and anything not mentioned in the Koran is likely to be rejected by the faithful.
An important element in Islamic belief is that anything that happens proceeds from the divine will.
This belief restricts any attempt to bring about change because to attempt to change may be a rejection of, or contrary to, what Allah has ordained.
Thus, firms entering overseas markets must bear this in mind when introducing new products or services.
A company must, therefore be aware of religious differences in its foreign markets and be prepared to make adaptations where necessary, both in selling operations and in the products themselves.
7.4.3 EDUCATION
Analysing educational information for relevant markets gives the firm an insight into the nature and sophistication of consumers in different countries.
It must be remembered that in some countries many of the population are not formally educated in the three Rs, although they may be very educated in the ways of their culture.
In attempting to market a new product in a foreign country, the firm is itself trying to educate consumers as to the uses and benefits of the product.
The success of this sales communication will be constrained by the general level of education within the culture.
If consumers are largely illiterate, then the firm's advertising, packaging and labelling will need to be adapted.
Complex products that need written instructions may need to be modified to meet the educational level and skills of the particular culture.
7.4.4 LANGUAGE
The language of a particular culture is also an important factor.
For example, a literal translation by someone not familiar with its deeper cultural meaning may result in serious mistakes.
If the brand name is standardised worldwide in English it may be found to have an unfavourable meaning in some countries, or it may not be pronounceable in other countries that lack certain letters of the alphabet.
A good example of the latter is Signal toothpaste which was called Shield toothpaste.
A now famed example of the former (and we understand that it is now denied by Rolls Royce) is that the Rolls Royce Silver Shadow was nearly called the Silver Mist which would have been most unfortunate when selling to the German market.
7.4.5 SOCIAL ORGANISATION
Social organisation also differs between cultures.
The primary kind of social organisation is based on kinship, and in many less-developed nations this takes the form of a very large extended family.
A company operating in such a society must realise that the extended family means that the decisions on consumption are taken in a larger unit and in different ways.
A firm selling overseas may find difficulty determining the relevant consuming unit (e.g. is it the family, the household or an individual?).
In many Asian and African countries, social organisation is in tribal groupings which may be a clue to effective market segmentation.
Social class is more important and more rigid in many foreign countries, e.g. the Indian caste system.
The selling firm must be aware of the cultural variations in social organisation when targeting sales efforts on to a particular social segment of the population.
7.4.6 POLITICAL
Culture includes all activities which characterise the behaviour of particular communities of people, including legal, political and economic factors.
Nationalism and dealings with governments are often considered to be the major problems facing a firm trying to sell overseas.
Most governments play either participating or regulatory roles in their economies.
In India, for example, certain sectors of the economy are reserved exclusively for government enterprise.
In Communist countries, firms can only deal with state trading organisations and the only customer is the government.
Government legislation and economic policy may affect a firm's pricing and credit policy and often there are regulations concerning products, promotions, etc.
Factors such as nationalism, international relations, political stability and the level of capitalism and democracy in the foreign country will all have an impact on the overseas sales strategy (see Chapter 3).
7.4.7 GENERAL ATTITUDES AND VALUES OF A CULTURE
In some cultures selling and trade in general have low social approval; a company selling overseas may thus have difficulty in recruiting appropriate sales personnel and difficulty selling the products through the channel of distribution.
Many Eastern cultures put spiritual values before material values.
Different cultures also have different ‘time values’.
A much quoted example is in Latin American cultures, where sales representatives are often kept waiting a long time for a business appointment; in our culture this would be unorthodox, and at best it would be seen as being very bad mannered.
A delay in answering correspondence in the UK usually indicates that the matter has low priority.
A similar delay in Spain could mean something altogether different because there close family relatives take absolute priority and, no matter how important other business is, all non-relatives are kept waiting.
In the West we are used to business deadlines, but in many Middle Eastern cultures a deadline is taken as an insult, and such business behaviour may well lose the overseas salesperson business.
The concept of space has a different meaning to different cultures.
In the West the size of an executive's office is often an indication of his status.
In the Arab world this is not so; the managing director may use the same office as the general clerks, so the salesperson must be careful how he speaks to people!
In the West, business agreements are carried out at a distance, say six feet or more.
In the Middle East and Latin American countries, business discussions are carried out in very close proximity, involving physical contact, which many Western salespeople find strange.
In the West, business is discussed over lunch or at dinner in the businessman's home.
In India, to discuss business at home or at any social occasion is a violation of hospitality rules.
In the West we rely on the law of contract for all business agreements, but in a Moslem culture a man's word is just as binding.
In fact a written contract often violates a Moslem's sensitivities because it challenges his honour.
Subcultural influences must not be overlooked, because these are sometimes the dominant force in the country.
Examples are:
(i)
nationality groups, e.g. French and English speaking Canadians;
(ii)
religious groups, e.g. Protestant and Catholic groupings in Northern Ireland;
(iii)
geographical areas, e.g. the North and South of England may be thought of as separate markets for many products;
(iv)
racial groups, e.g. South Africa, where government policy still means strict delineation at the time of writing;
(v)
social stratification, e.g. the caste system in India.
7.4.8 CULTURAL CHANGE
A company following the marketing concept overseas, i.e. trying to satisfy the needs and wants of target markets at a profit, must keep abreast of changes in the cultural environment which affect people's attitudes and values, and hence, indirectly, their needs and wants of products and services.
In our own society, for example, our cultural values towards debt have changed.
Debt has lost its stigma and is now a part of everyday life, with the universal acceptance and use of credit cards.
Our society's moral values have also changed and we are more liberal and tolerant of such matters as entertainment.
Thus the products and services demanded have reflected this change in cultural values.
A firm must, therefore, be aware that its products may face obsolescence in overseas markets, not necessarily because of any technical advance, but because of cultural change.
Not only are a firm's existing products vulnerable to cultural change, but it may miss new, lucrative opportunities by not being informed of changes in culture.
The impact of culture is particularly important if the company is dealing with a foreign culture seeking rapid industrialisation.
It is, therefore, necessary for a company operating in this type of environment to monitor trends and adapt as necessary.
Not only must the firm contemplating selling overseas be versed in the economics, law and politics of a foreign country, but it will also have to understand the more subtle, less tangible, meanings, values and languages of the culture itself.
7.5 ORGANISATION FOR INTERNATIONAL SELLING
The organisation required to implement international sales operations can be complex.
Decisions have to be made on how to arrange the interface between manufacturing and sales, and in the area of delegating responsibility for international operations.
Each of these problems can have alternative solutions and an optimal decision must be tailored for each individual firm.
Whatever the form of organisation for overseas selling, it is important that there should be a senior manager charged, if only in part, with the responsibility for exporting.
This manager should be able, through his or her position, to advice and influence colleagues at the highest level.
In choosing how to organise for international selling there is a broad division into indirect and direct methods.
Some of the more common forms of overseas sales organisation are described in this chapter.
The choice of organisation will depend upon a number of factors; the proportion of total turnover accounted for by overseas business, the nature of the product, the relative advantages and disadvantages of each form of organisation.
What is important is that there is no single rigid uniform approach to the task.
The keynote should always be flexibility and adaptability.
We shall first consider the indirect approaches to international selling.
7.5.1 TYPES OF INTERMEDIARY AND THEIR SELECTION
It has been estimated that agents and distributors alone, acting on behalf of overseas companies, handle over half of the world's overseas trade.
The term ‘intermediary’ is used to describe all those persons and organisations providing the service of representation between sellers and buyers.
Few manufacturers are able to cover a market adequately and satisfactorily without the service of some form of intermediary.
The decision faced by firms as to which intermediary to use, and the policies to be adopted at this point, are critical to the firm's future in the market.
Agents
An agent is a firm or individual acting on behalf of another.
This is one of the main forms of overseas representation.
The most common form of agency is where the agents, acting as independent operators, obtain orders on behalf of the exporter on a commission basis and the exporter acts as principal.
Agents also work on behalf of purchasers and some specialise in certain tasks, e.g. transport and distribution, advertising and market research.
Care should be exercised in appointing the right agent, and any company entering overseas markets should satisfy itself as to the agent's reputation and financial position.
The agent may have other interests, and the firm should ensure that these interests do not conflict with its own.
Agents are often key figures in a firm's overseas operations and success overseas will depend on the ability and commitment of the agent.
Care therefore needs to be exercised in the choice of an agent and such organisations as the British Overseas Trade Board and banks will advise and assist in their selection.
In assessing the suitability of an agent, the principal will need clear answers to the following.
(i)
When was the agency founded?
(ii)
What other interests does the agency have, i.e. what other agencies are held?
(iii)
Does the agent provide the required coverage for your market?
(iv)
What is the agent's standing in the business community of the market in terms of professional integrity and reputation, reliability, etc.?
(v)
Is the agent the type of person or company that will fit in with the way your company carries out its business?
Will you be able to work with the agency?
(vi)
Does the agent possess the resources necessary to carry out the task adequately, i.e. financial resources, transport, offices, warehouses and human resources?
(vii)
Is the agent able to provide technical support or after-sales service arrangements if this is necessary?
This list is not exhaustive and more specific details may be necessary depending on the market, the industry and the type of product.
Once a suitable agent has been found, progress should be carefully monitored.
Agents are usually appointed for a trial period at first, with extensions to the contract after that.
The training of agents is important to indirect selling in overseas markets, particularly if the products are technically complex.
Without proper product  knowledge and technical appreciation of the product range, the agent will be ill-equipped to conduct negotiations with professional buyers who may be experts in their field.
Training may have to take place at the principal's manufacturing plant and such training should form a compulsory part of any agreement.
Training may need to be a continuous activity, with periodic updating sessions and refresher courses, especially if the firm is involved in new product development or if technology is changing rapidly.
Sales meetings and conferences in the principal's own country can be used for training purposes and these can be used as a forum for tackling specific problems and for discussing future promotional strategies.
Such meetings will also have a social function, bringing agents together for a few days to exchange ideas, discuss common problems and be made to feel part of the company.
Once the correct agent has been found, the right kind of working relationship must be nurtured.
Many companies feel that the appointment of a good overseas agent is an alternative to involvement in the market themselves.
This is not so and the principal has to be actively involved; if the relationship is to be successful then it must be based upon partnership and cooperation.
The principal should also visit the agent in the market as this will give the agent a sense of value, importance, belonging and encouragement.
It also keeps the agent well informed of developments in the principal's country and of the principal's products.
The principal will gain valuable market information on competitive actions, the overseas business environment and feedback on promotions and new products.
All of this will lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of the overseas market and an improvement in the overall sales strategy.
The principal can also give assistance to the agent by helping in the commercial negotiations between the agent and important customers, helping with special discounts or credit arrangements in order to secure business.
Frequency of visiting abroad by the principal will depend on the importance of the particular market, the competence of the agent and the distance from the home base.
Important markets should be visited more frequently, particularly if technical assistance or after-sales service is required.
In many cases, agents feel insecure because companies often regard them as being a temporary method of servicing overseas markets.
Once the market expands and matures, many companies dismiss their agents and enter direct selling or open a subsidiary company.
Therefore the very success of an agent can sometimes mean his downfall.
In anticipation of this eventuality, agents sometimes collect a large number of agencies, resulting in a diffusion of effort and possible conflict of interests.
This problem can be overcome by negotiating a long-term arrangement once the agent has proved himself, or by inserting a gradual run-down clause into the agency agreement.
In the latter case, the agent can often make a valuable contribution to, say, the setting up of a new overseas subsidiary company, or even become managing director of the subsidiary.
Thus, fair treatment of agents and ex-agents cultivates a reputation as a good and fair employer and this, in turn, will probably be reflected in future dealings in that country.
Distributors
The distributor acts in a different capacity to that of an agent because he is the actual buyer and seller of the goods, whereas the agent works principally on commission.
Like an agent, a distributor will usually be a local firm or individual and a specialist in the requirements of the local market.
He should be familiar with the business practices of the area, the structure of the market, local customs and be aware of the various sociocultural factors pertaining to the market.
A distributor differs from an agent in the following ways.
(i)
He will be able to finance his own stockholding of goods.
(ii)
He will usually be able to purchase in larger quantities, thus saving on delivery costs.
(iii)
Acting as principal, he will be commercially and legally responsible for all business transactions in the market.
(iv)
He is an entrepreneur, and accepts risks involved in the purchase and reselling of goods such as local falls in demand and currency fluctuations.
(v)
In some cases he may provide an after-sales service.
A frequent complaint from companies using distributors is that, because they are independent businesses acting independently, they can decide the final selling price to the customer.
If price is thought to be a significant factor in the product's success, then the manufacturer should only deal with distributors who are willing to agree a mark-up and selling price with the manufacturer.
As with agents, it is important for the manufacturer to develop a good working relationship with the overseas distributor as commitment to the commercial relationship is needed from both sides.
Although the distributor actually purchases goods from the manufacturer to resell on his own account, he is much more than just another customer.
The manufacturer is relying on the distributor to achieve their objectives, but the manufacturer must remember that the distributor has objectives and interests of his own.
It is, therefore, in the firm's own interest to give the distributor as much technical and sales assistance as possible.
Similar to agents, distributors can be used in an information gathering capacity to report on trends and developments in the market place.
A decision will also have to be made whether to use a number of smaller local distributors or a small number of large national distributors.
Using a number of small distributors has the advantage of good coverage, and is advantageous where there are regional differences in culture or business practices.
However, large national distributors give economies of scale as goods can be shipped in bulk.
In some cases it may be desirable to have an exclusive agreement with the distributor, otherwise he might offer competitors' products to customers if they offer a higher margin.
If such an exclusive arrangement is agreed, then it should also ensure that the distributor does not sell competing goods.
Licensing
Licensing is another alternative open to a firm that is contemplating an indirect venture into overseas markets.
It does, of course, assume that the company has some unique product or process (preferably protected by patent) that an overseas company will want to manufacture.
This is a particularly good way of entering and remaining in more distant markets, or in any market where it is difficult or impossible to export finished goods.
In such markets, direct selling or control of agents or distributors might be impractical, or it may be the case that import duties or other non-tariff barriers might present obstacles to exporters.
The costs of setting up a manufacturing subsidiary might be prohibitive or the foreign country might be politically unstable.
Licensing avoids the danger of the firm's overseas assets being expropriated and, in some situations, repatriation of profits is sometimes difficult for a manufacturing subsidiary.
Where the product is bulky and expensive to transport relative to its value, licensing might be the only way to produce that good at a competitive price.
If a firm has a good product idea, but is short of capital to expand and exploit the commercial opportunity itself, licensing allows the earning of at least some profit, or more precisely, royalty, without having to commit scarce financial resources.
The main problem is that if one has a licensing arrangement with a company in a politically sensitive area then, for one reason or another, royalties due might not be paid.
This is one of the dangers of licensing and obviously the licensee will have to be chosen with great care.
There are two possible suggestions to try to overcome this type of situation.
One is to ensure that the licensing arrangement means the acceptance of certain component parts from the licensor and if there are problems in payment then components can be withheld.
The other suggestion is that where the product under licence is technically advanced it is likely that it will be continually improved through innovation; the sanction here is that if there are royalty payment problems then the latest innovation can be withheld.
However, these suggestions indicate a negative aspect of licensing and the vast majority of such arrangements are successful.
The obvious answer is to choose a licensee of undoubted integrity in a politically stable country (the only problem is that in such a situation there there are probably more lucrative export arrangements than licensing!).
Assuming that a licensing arrangement is agreed, then regular checks must be made as to the quality of the licensee's finished products and defined quality standards should be part of the licensing agreement.
Export houses
The use of export houses is an alternative to the manufacturer having his own export department.
Export houses are usually home-based organisations which carry out some or all of the overseas activities in place of the manufacturer, often using their own agents, distributors or other intermediary.
They are a  useful alternative for small companies whose overseas operations are limited, not warranting the expense of direct involvement.
They are also used by larger firms who are only marginally involved in smaller markets, or use export houses until such markets have expanded sufficiently to warrant their own overseas operation.
A manufacturer can delegate some or all of his overseas operations to an export house or he may delegate parts of the actual selling task to the export house.
Thus, export houses offer flexibility, and they offer a range of services, including the following.
(i)
Export factoring — handling finance and credit arrangements on behalf of the manufacturer.
(ii)
Factory representation — a sales supervisor supervising the sales activities of distributors or dealers on behalf of the manufacturer.
(iii)
Market intelligence gathering in overseas markets.
(iv)
Handling export procedures and documentation.
(v)
Help in selecting agents, distributors and dealers.
(vi)
Confirming orders — paying the manufacturer on confirmation of an order from an overseas buyer and receiving commission, although here the export house is not actually paying the manufacturer but merely confirming liability for payment.
Having looked at the services export houses have to offer, we shall now look at a number of reasons why a manufacturer might want to use one.
(i)
Lack of resources to carry out overseas operations by the  manufacturer .
(ii)
When overseas selling operations are only small scale and it would not make economic sense to carry out such operations oneself.
(iii)
Where the export house has particular expertise in a country or an industry.
(iv)
Where the manufacturing company is predominantly production orientated and lacks the marketing expertise.
There are, however, a number of disadvantages, the main one being lack of direct contact with the market.
The manufacturer may also experience difficulty in monitoring developments and changes in the overseas market and adapting to these changes in good time.
Having examined the indirect approaches to selling, we shall now look at the more direct methods.
7.5.2 DIRECT METHODS OF OVERSEAS SELLING
Subsidiary companies
The subsidiary may be a selling or manufacturing organisation or both.
The selling subsidiary usually replaces agents and distributors with the company's own permanent staff.
In certain cases it is possible for a firm to start its own  sales organisation with little investment.
The usual way, however, is to start by using an agent, then opening its own sales office with a limited number of staff and, once profits start to show, allow the unit to become self-sufficient and expand ultimately into manufacturing.
The above is, however, a generalisation and sales subsidiaries may require a larger investment than many companies can afford, especially where an after-sales service has to be offered and where the stocking of a large volume of spare parts is necessary.
Manufacturing subsidiaries range from simple assembly plants to complete production units.
A simple assembly plant subsidiary is particularly useful where the product is bulky and freight costs are high.
By using local assembly, the final cost of transport may be reduced as it is often more economical to ship containers of parts for assembly than to ship the finished bulky manufactured product.
In addition, local employment is created and this promotes goodwill towards the company, which in itself assists in developing markets further.
Reasons for establishing overseas manufacturing subsidiaries differ from company to company, but the following factors are important.
(i)
PRODUCTION CAPACITY.
Where overseas markets are expanding, a firm may find problems in serving the market from the home base.
(ii)
NON-TARIFF RESTRICTIONS.
Where such restrictions exist, the setting up of a subsidiary may be the only way around them.
Many foreign governments give grants and incentives to firms to set up manufacturing bases in their country and their purchasing strategy favours goods made at home.
In some cases restrictions placed against imports may take the form of complex (and unnecessarily prohibitive) safety or packaging regulations.
(iii)
COSTS.
Where labour and manufacturing facilities are often quite economical in overseas countries and setting up a manufacturing base saves transportation costs.
(iv)
EXPLICIT IMPORT RESTRICTIONS.
Where these exist, the setting up of a manufacturing subsidiary may be the only way to enter or stay in the market.
When establishing a subsidiary, local legal and taxation regulations must make it possible to set up a profitable subsidiary and allow the parent company to extract profits from the country.
It may be prudent for a firm to gain experience in the market through agents and distributors before venturing directly into setting up a manufacturing subsidiary.
Many firms employ the staff of a previous agent or distributor to form the basis of the new company.
Although it may seem that the establishment of a foreign subsidiary exposes a firm to many of the risks which licensing minimises, a venture of this kind may offer the greatest potential.
Not only may local employment and production be beneficial for the reasons mentioned, but the parent company can offer the subsidiary the wealth of its business experience and resources.
Other advantages  are that employees working direct for a company are often better motivated than those of an intermediary and it is easier to control a subsidiary because it is under the parent company's direct control.
The main disadvantage is that political or economic instability within the country may cause problems outside the control of the parent company.
Joint ventures
A joint venture is where usually two, but sometimes more, firms manufacture and sell products on a joint basis.
As such it can be an indirect as well as direct method of exporting, depending upon the arrangement.
It is quite common in the transport, construction and high technology sectors of business.
Such agreements have financial benefits as the cost of development is shared, but friction and disagreement can sometimes arise between members of the agreement.
Direct selling
Despite the strengths already outlined of using intermediaries, some companies find that selling direct from the home country to overseas markets offers more advantages.
Direct selling requires the firm to take full responsibility for establishing contact with potential customers.
Direct selling provides a degree of control that is impossible to achieve through intermediaries over such matters as price, credit, after-sales service, etc.
The chief disadvantage is that more frequent travel is involved, and a lack of a permanent presence in the market can cause problems.
The firm may find difficulty keeping abreast of developments in the market and will have to rely on customers to provide market information.
Customers may also view this lack of permanent presence as a lack of definite commitment to the market.
Firms supplying technically complex products that require technical service and advice often place a sales engineer in the market on a semi-permanent basis, which does tend to obviate the lack of commitment criticism somewhat.
The following are guidelines as to where direct selling is most appropriate.
(i)
BUYER SPECIFIED WORK.
Where individual orders are large and custom made it may be necessary for the manufacturer and purchaser to get together to discuss each job as a unique contract.
(ii)
CONTINUOUS SUPPLY.
Once set in motion this requires only the periodic visit to negotiate such matters as price changes.
Such contracts are normally able to run smoothly without a permanent overseas presence.
(iii)
PRODUCTS ARE TECHNICALLY COMPLEX WITH A CLEARLY DEFINED MARKET.
Here problems can be discussed directly between the supplier and user.
(iv)
GEOGRAPHICAL PROXIMITY.
Countries in Western Europe can sometimes be serviced direct from the UK because of good communication facilities.
(v)
FEW CUSTOMERS BUT LARGE OR HIGH VALUE ORDERS.
In such situations time and expense involved travelling abroad is sometimes small compared with the size and value of the potential order.
In selling direct to a customer overseas, there is the opportunity to build up close relationships with individual customers, based upon trust, commitment and understanding.
A close interactive commercial relationship is beneficial, particularly if the exporting company is unfamiliar with the market.
Speaking the language of the country is more important in direct selling than if the firm is dealing through an intermediary.
If the salesperson is to build up a close personal relationship with his or her customers, he must understand the cultural, religious and business practices of the country.
There may be many mental barriers to a foreign buyer placing an order with an overseas salesperson, and patience will be required to break down these barriers.
Thus, emphasis must be placed upon gradual acceptance rather than the expectation of instant success.
This involves careful planning in building up contacts and nurturing them and not taking the first ‘no’ for an answer.
7.6 A SPECIFIC STUDY IN INTERNATIONAL SELLING — JAPAN
It was stated at the beginning of this chapter that the objective was not to provide a comprehensive guide to international selling and exporting.
The general case for exporting for the good of the economy and for the good of individual companies has been covered, together with an overview of organisational and cultural issues.
The specific type of information that is of direct use to a potential exporter is that which follows in respect of exporting to Japan.
This information has been taken from an article (Saunders and Hon-Chung, 1984) in the Journal of Sales Management for which the first author was editor.
Successful selling to Japan requires patience and a sensitivity to customs and business practices not altogether appreciated by Westerners.
Business in Japan is still conducted in a traditional Confucian manner where civility, politeness and the search for constructive relationships are of the essence, and successful business follows the establishment of such relationships.
In many ways the Japanese do not respond in the same way as Westerners.
For the most part, the Japanese keep their emotions under control, and culture demands that a person of virtue will not show a negative emotion when shocked or upset by sudden bad news.
This ideal of an expressionless face in situations of great anxiety was strongly emphasised in the bushido (way of the warrior) which was the guideline for samurai and the ideal for many others.
Furthermore, not only are negative emotions suppressed, but the control of an outward show of pleasant emotions in public is also rarely relaxed in Japan.
Women tend to cover their mouths while laughing, and males show true merriment (and true  anger) mainly after hours when their culture allows them greater freedom of behaviour while drinking alcohol.
Thus the poker-faced ideal is very common in public settings in Japan.
The moral of these observations is that one must develop a sensitivity to the reactions of the Japanese because of the difficulty of telling how they are reacting.
Another noteworthy aspect is that shame is intolerable in Japan.
This means that one should never put one's Japanese counterpart in a position that will force him to accept blame for a project going wrong, being delayed, etc.
This characteristic has important implications for two elements of the sales process: handling objections and the close.
The Japanese may avoid explicit objections because politeness demands that the seller does not lose face.
Similarly, an attempted close may put the Japanese in a position where they are concerned for the seller's loss of face if the answer is to be negative.
The deft footwork associated with the persuasion approach to selling clashes with the Japanese character and is completely opposed to the spirit of Japanese negotiations.
In some countries it is considered socially acceptable to compliment someone directly on his business accomplishments or the accomplishment of his company, but in Japan anything in the way of a compliment is made indirectly.
Instead, say, of complimenting someone directly on his taste and sophistication, the Japanese practice is often to approach this particular problem indirectly, and pick out some aspect of the room which reflects the other person's taste and sophistication and comment on that.
With regard to business correspondence, Japanese companies may fail to answer written enquiries concerning possible business relationships.
This does not necessarily mean a lack of interest.
There can be a number of reasons for a slow response.
Decision-making tends to be much slower and this is often the reason for such slowness.
Most Japanese companies are also accustomed to being able to talk face to face with suppliers and it is the usual way of conducting business in Japan.
Personal introductions are commonly executed by a third party rather than through say the medium of a telephone call requesting a meeting.
The person making the introduction will explain to the person one wishes to meet approximately what subjects are to be discussed, what company one comes from and one's position within that company.
Because there will usually be a common understanding between the two Japanese, the Japanese businessman whom one wishes to meet will generally be more favourably disposed to hearing one's opinion than if one walks in without an introduction.
The key to a successful business relationship in Japan is a successful personal relationship and nowhere in the world are business and personal relationships so intertwined.
However, such friendship only opens the door; thereafter the hard reality of the benefits to be gained and the risks to be run will take over.
Friendships in Japan take more time to form, are deeper and last longer than those in the West and often these obligations extend to business relationships.
For example, during a recession, a large firm will commit itself to its suppliers and subcontractors for continued orders to tide them over.
The lesson of these  observations is that one must be prepared to operate within this two tier business structure; establish friendship first and then move to the second stage of actual business negotiations.
To Westerners, Japanese business seems formal and ritualistic.
To a degree this is true, but business relationships do no more than reflect the formality of relationships generally.
As in all societies, ritual is particularly important when meeting someone for the first time.
It is used to establish and signal that one has identified initial relationships.
The first meeting is also a time when transgressions are most likely to cause lasting damage.
One of the most powerful forms of non-verbal communication is dress.
The usual dress for Japanese businessmen is a dark suit, a white shirt and dark tie.
However, most Japanese businessmen acquainted with foreigners have come to expect a certain variety within reasonable limits in the dress of foreign businessmen.
It is not, therefore, expected that one should imitate the Japanese mode of dress.
However, one should avoid extremes in dress which may cause uneasiness.
For example, loud clothing will create the disturbing feeling among the Japanese businessmen that the foreigner has perhaps failed to take them as seriously as he might have, by failing to observe that the common practice in dress in Japan is some degree of formality.
At the beginning and end of every meeting, the Japanese businessman will bow very formally to the members of the other side in the negotiations.
This is generally observed at the first meeting and to a somewhat lesser extent at subsequent meetings.
Most Japanese with experience in dealing with Westerners will be expecting to use a handshake rather than a bow.
The appropriate strategy is perhaps to wait to determine whether the Japanese businessman is prepared to offer his hand for a handshake or whether he is going to bow.
The question of whether the non-Japanese should imitate the bow of the Japanese is controversial within Japan itself.
Generally, a nod of the head or a slight bow is considered acceptable for the non-Japanese.
One should be aware that reciprocal bowing behaviour is dependent on the status relationship of participants; the inferior must begin the bow, and his bow is deeper, while the superior determines when the bow is complete.
When participants are of equal status, they must both bow the same way and begin and end the bow at the same time.
One of the most obvious differences between Japanese and Western business practices is the use of business calling cards or meishi.
These are exchanged on every occasion where one businessman meets another.
The prime purpose is to enable the recipients of the cards to know the other's status so that not only do they bow correctly, but also use the proper form of language.
Japan is a hierarchical society and the Japanese are very status conscious in that they use different forms of language and bow in different manners according to the status relationship with another individual.
Business cards also serve the function of not having to memorise instantaneously the names and positions of one's business counterparts and they provide a record for future reference.
Such cards are a standard pattern and size, so that they will fit in the Japanese  filing systems.
They must have square corners for males and round corners for females.
The typical business card that the non-Japanese businessman should have will have the Japanese translation of the individual's name on one side, along with his company, its address and the person's title.
The other side will have the same information in English (which is the most common foreign language used in Japanese business).
The exchange of business cards is a very important part of the process of introduction in Japan.
For this reason, cards should be exchanged one at a time and with some care.
The courteous method is to present it, Japanese side up, with the printing facing the receiver.
One of the peculiarities of these business cards is that there is no single standard set of English translations for the ranks and positions in Japanese companies.
As mentioned earlier, Japan is a very hierarchical and status-conscious society, so an understanding of the ranks in business is very important.
Table 3 (Japanese External Trade Organisation, 1976) translates some of the more common Japanese business titles.
Translations of common Japanese business titles
The basic titles in a Japanese firm are usually very clear, and the level of the position within a company, as indicated by the title, is usually closely related to the age of the individual.
This system of ranking and responsibility, corresponding closely with age and years of service in the company, is one unique characteristic of Japanese organisations.
While the details of negotiations may be left to a representative in Japan, the managing director of the foreign firm (or some other high official in the company) should establish an initial contact with his equal in the Japanese firm.
This is  termed the aisatsu or the greeting.
The purpose of this aisatsu is to establish a presence.
The Japanese term hai is literally translated as ‘yes’, although it can also mean ‘I see’ or ‘I understand’and does not necessarily mean agreement.
Furthermore, the Japanese are very reluctant to give a direct ‘no’ answer, because Japanese culture emphasises harmony rather than confrontation.
Instead of the answer ‘no’, one is more likely to hear something non-committal such as‘Let me think.’
One must, therefore, learn to read the negative response signs such as hesitancy or an unwillingness to be more specific.
Postponements of negotiations are common in Japan, largely because decision-making follows a prescribed process called the ringi system.
This means that a proposal must be circulated among various sections and departments that will be affected by the proposal, with much discussion and correction ensuing.
The ringisho (request for a decision) goes back and forth and eventually a consensus is achieved among the interested parties, with the president giving his final approval.
During negotiations long periods of total silence are common.
This is because the Japanese like time to think over what has been said and what alternatives are open to them when they next speak.
Silence is also part of the Japanese communication procedure and they tend to rely heavily upon non-verbal communication.
Westerners often find such silences embarrassing and feel obliged to say something unnecessary to relieve the supposed tension.
The best way to handle such silences is to exercise restrain and outwait the silence.
Japanese businessmen have little confidence in detailed contracts which attempt to provide for all possible contingencies.
Their preference is for broad agreements and mutual understanding.
Contracts are drawn up with an eye to flexibility and a contract is often considered an agreement to enter into a general course of conduct rather than something fixing precise terms.
The Japanese like to negotiate each issue as it arises and there is an assumption that each party is prepared to make substantial accommodations to the other.
This should not be interpreted as an attempt to violate the contract, but rather the desire of the Japanese to allow both sides the ability to adjust to unforeseen circumstances.
One should not expect to obtain a detailed contract, but once a commitment is made it is for the long term.
Japanese firms prefer long-term reliable and exclusive business relationships and they tend to turn to established channels to develop new business initiatives.
Because of the consciousness of using the correct level of language in a conversation or discussion, any interpreter one engages may unconsciously modify statements going from English to Japanese and back to English again, according to the rank of the people involved.
For example, if a senior official of a Western company is speaking with a high-level Japanese manager, the interpreter will feel in an inferior position to both of them.
The statement that the senior official intends to have translated verbatim for his Japanese counterpart may end up as being something quite different.
Entertainment in Japan plays a major role in establishing personal and business relationships.
Unlike the West, business luncheons are a rarity and evening entertainment almost never takes place in the home.
The typical pattern is for the Japanese businessman to eat at a restaurant in the evening and thereafter go to a bar or cabaret.
Such evenings are for cementing business relationships rather than for discussing specific aspects of business.
The personal skills necessary to conclude negotiations successfully in Japan do not come naturally to the Westerner.
What is perhaps even more disturbing  is the inappropriateness of much sales training to the Japanese situation.
Many skills such as reading body language are culture bound.
The persuasion approach to selling seems diametrically opposed to the Japanese character and perception of the role of negotiations.
7.7 CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has examined international selling.
The broad economic aspects were first discussed, including balance of payments and the United Kingdom's share of international trade.
Britain's entry into the European Community was examined, together with the effects of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The advantages to the individual company entering international selling were discussed and this was followed by aspects of how different cultures affect the sales approach.
More specifically, this included aesthetics, religion, education, language, social organisation and political factors.
Different types of organisation for international selling were considered, including agents, distributors, licensing and export houses under indirect methods.
Direct methods included subsidiary companies, joint ventures and direct selling.
This was concluded by a specific description of the problems involved in selling to Japan.
The next chapter considers the legal and social aspects of selling which then concludes the section on the sales environment.
PRACTICAL EXERCISE — QUALITY KRAFT CARPETS LTD
This company was founded in 1981 by William Jackson and John Turner in Kidderminster, a town in the UK with a tradition of carpet-making going back hundreds of years.
Carpet manufacture and related activities had been the major provider of employment in the area up until the late 1960s.
However, since that date, the carpet industry, like many other areas of British textiles, faced problems and decline.
Paradoxically, it was this decline that brought Quality Kraft Carpets into existence.
William Jackson had been production manager with one of the largest carpet manufacturing firms in the area, with a worldwide reputation for quality carpets.
John Turner had been a loom tuner (a maintenance engineer) responsible for maintaining over one hundred carpet looms for another large company.
Jackson had been made redundant as a result of a drastic decline in orders and Turner's company had gone into liquidation.
Both of them were very good friends, and since their respective demises had come together they decided to start their own small company, specialising in the product they knew best — traditional, woven, good quality, Axminster carpets.
Because so many firms in the area were either closing down or cutting back production, there was a steady supply of textile machinery being sold very cheaply by local auctioneers.
By pooling their respective resources, plus help from the bank, they were able to acquire a 15-year lease on a small factory and purchase enough equipment to enable them to commence production.
Their policy was to weave best-quality carpets made of 80 per cent wool and 20 per cent nylon.
The market was good-quality carpet shops and the contract market, especially hotels, restaurants, offices and large stores.
They made a conscious decision not to deal with the new carpet superstores, largely because profit margins would be so low in that their bulk purchasing power made them able to demand low margins.
In addition, these carpet superstores predominantly sold cheaper carpets, mainly tufted synthetic carpets purchased from North America.
It was contended that purchasers looking for a good-quality carpet would go to a conventional carpet shop and not to a carpet superstore which they considered was more applicable to the lower end of the market.
At the time of setting up the main problems facing UK carpet manufacturers were the depressed state of the economy and the fact that imports of carpets were taking an increasing share of a diminishing market.
Thus, the recession made carpet purchasing a lower priority matter for those who already had carpets and the attitude was to make them last longer.
Nowadays, imports account for over 20 per cent of the UK carpet market and this percentage is increasing.
The main imports are synthetic tufted carpets, mainly from North America but increasingly from EC countries — Belgium followed by Western Germany and Holland.
Nylon carpet is basically oil based, which gave the Americans a significant advantage until 1980 because of the cheapness of their oil.
However, since then their oil prices have increased and the strength of the US dollar has made their exports to the UK less competitive.
Despite the apparently depressing picture for UK manufacturers, the UK carpet industry Is still the largest in the world, particularly the high-quality woven carpet sector.
The UK has always been a net exporter of carpets and its reputation for quality has worldwide acclaim.
Since Quality Kraft Carpets commenced, its total sales have been as follows: These sales are to two distinct markets:
(i)
direct to quality retailers;
(ii)
the contract market.
Quality Kraft Carpets Ltd sales (£000)
The percentage of sales accounted for by each of these market segments is given below: At the 1986 level of demand the company was operating at full capacity, but today it has an excess of manufacturing capacity.
The company has not laid off any employees, but overtime has been cut out and some work that was given to outside contractors, e.g. final ‘shearing’ up of carpets, is now done in the company.
An interesting facet of contract sales is that much of it is for customised carpet, often incorporating the customer's company logo in the design.
Percentage of sales to each segment
The company now feels that the industry is likely to remain depressed and foreign competition in the UK market is likely to increase further.
The company has not attempted to sell its products abroad, but feels that if it is ever to expand again, then overseas markets are the only feasible method.
William Jackson and John Turner had a long discussion about exporting, as they were both inexperienced in such matters, and they listed the strengths and weaknesses of Quality Kraft Carpets in order to arrive at a decision as to which would be the most appropriate overseas market to enter.
Their conclusions were as follows.
(i)
WEAKNESSES.
Small and relatively new without the reputation of a long-established firm.
Management has no knowledge of selling overseas and, although educated by experience, has little knowledge of finance, economics, languages, etc., which are of help when selling overseas.
The more popular types of tufted carpets are not manufactured.
The company cannot compete on price in the volume markets because of outdated equipment and small purchasing power.
Although products are first class, they are expensive.
The company does not directly employ such specialists as designers, but operates on a freelance/contractual basis.
(ii)
STRENGTHS.
Expertise in the manufacture of good-quality conventionally-woven Axminster carpets.
The company is small and flexible and can easily cope with new trends in designs.
Proficiency is increasing in contract work and staff have specialist knowledge of such one off tasks.
Much repeat business is coming from satisfied contract customers.
There is a loyal work force who have flexible working arrangements in that the workers can each carry out a number of different jobs without demarcation disputes.
The company is reasonably profitable and it has very little long-term debt.
The retail part of the business contains loyal customers with much repeat business.
After discussions with the bank and advice from the British Overseas Trade Board, it was decided that the USA offered most potential for the immediate future.
The Middle East and Japan also showed promise in the medium term.
It was also decided that they should concentrate on the contract market.
These decisions were based upon the following criteria.
(i)
The USA is a growing market for best quality Axminster carpet.
(ii)
Although the USA does manufacture some conventionally woven Wilton carpet, it does not manufacture much good-quality Axminster carpet.
(iii)
In the contract market, quality seems to be more important than price and it would seem to be good for the company to concentrate on contract carpet sales.
(iv)
Import tariffs into the USA from the UK are 9 ½%; ad valorem(on top of the imported cost) for Axminster and 19 ½%; for Wilton (the latter being higher to protect the USA producers).
This gives an undoubted advantage for the export of Axminster carpets.
(v)
A market research survey conducted in the USA had indicated that their interior designers liked Axminster because of the fact that any pattern or logo could be woven into the design.
Most contract carpet in the USA is tufted and printed which only makes mass production runs feasible.
This printing process, although much cheaper, is inferior to the design being actually woven into the carpet as is the case with Axminster.
(vi)
The pound is still at a relatively low value against the United States dollar, and this would make the product better value in the USA.
(vii)
Advice from the British Overseas Trade Board has indicated that the UK has a high reputation in the USA for quality carpets, that they appreciate personal service and good delivery and that British carpet might be seen as a status symbol.
Quality Kraft Carpets Ltd decided that they would immediately enter the North American market, but did not want to commit too much money to the venture in case it failed.
On the other hand, if it was successful, they were prepared to commit more resources.
Discussion questions
1
Draw up a short-, medium- and long-term sales strategy upon how Quality Kraft Carpets can enter, develop and remain in the United States market.
2
What form of representation would you recommend for this new market — or would you consider setting up a manufacturing subsidiary?
Give reasons for your decision.
3
How might your various strategies change and what further considerations  would need to be made if, after initial success in the United States market, the Middle East and Japan offered good export opportunities?
4
What would be your marketing communications and sales promotional strategies for the company in the USA?
More specifically, outline your sales ‘message’ and the type of media you would use to communicate this message.
5
What, if any, further research needs to be undertaken before attempting to export to the USA?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
1
Discuss the contention that there is no such thing as ‘overseas selling’; it is merely an extension of selling to the home market.
2
How does the role of an export agent differ from the role of an export salesperson?