

FRONTLINE
Turning over new pages
We're bigger, bolder, brighter and, we hope you'll decide, better.
Our new size Journal represents the first format change since 1976 when the former tabloid paper became an A4 magazine.
This change came about not because we were getting too big for our binding, rather we felt we could do better justice to the rich pageant of life at Sainsbury's with more elbow room.
Thank you to all those people who took part in our surveys; we hope you and your colleagues approve of the outcome.
Our newly expanded page area came in handy for the Financial Results Special — there are some big results to report.
These important pages are in the centre of the magazine.
The Results pages complement the Year End Video which is available for all members of staff to view.
Do make sure you see it.
If you have anything to say about the Journal, or indeed about any aspect of the company, do write to us.
We can obtain top management replies to your queries.
The Magazine has makings of major success
April 28 saw the spectacular arrival of Sainsbury's the Magazine.
Customers are snapping up the top quality magazine with its wonderful photography and editorial.
As we went to press more than 200,000 copies had already been sold.
APPOINTMENTS
BARRY HENDERSON, formerly regional development manager in property group west, is appointed senior manager in charge of a new company, JS Development Ltd [see page 4].
DAVID PENNISTON, development surveyor, is promoted to senior manager in charge of property group west, succeeding Barry Henderson.
CHARLES HART, district manager on South Eastern area, is to become the area's senior operations manager.
DAVID MELLOWS-FACER, branch manager on secondment at Blackfriars, will succeed Charles Hart as district manager designate from June 21.
HEADLINES
recipe ads recruit new celebrities
Dennis Healey [Lord Healey of Riddlestone, CH, MBE]will join the growing Sainsbury's ‘hall of fame’ on May 23 when he stars in a new celebrity recipe ad.
Recent stars of the latest run of television commercials are Philip Schofield and Sue Lawley who show how to make simple mouthwatering dishes Beef Stir Fry and Pepper Crusted Fish.
This brings the number of ads to 12 since the series started in May 1991. the campaign has won several awards and featured stars such as Catherine Zeta Jones and Ian McShane.
Record number of veterans reunite
Retired Sainsbury employees came together in grand style in March and April to reminisce and share afternoon tea in the sumptuous surroundings of the Royal Lancaster Hotel.
Over 2400 JS pensioners gathered together for the 45th JS Veterans Reunions on March 29, April 5 and 26 — the event being organised on three days for the second time due to the large number of participants from all corners of the country.
Veterans also chatted with top management including chairman David Sainsbury and joint president Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover.
Money will improve facilities for under fives
The country's youngest citizens will benefit from a £100,000 gift from Sainsbury's this year.
each Sainsbury's, Savacentre and Homebase store will be offering a gift of £250 to under fives groups as part of the Good Neighbour Scheme.
Branches invited local groups to apply for the donations in order to be considered.
The presentations will be made between June 1 and July 16.
The scheme has been running for 11 years.
During this time it has donated more than £600,000 to over 2500 local groups, helping the disabled, under fives, elderly and youth groups with a wide range of special projects, or improving their facilities.
JS sets seal on degree partnership
The BA Honours Degree in Retail Marketing, formulated by JS and Manchester Metropolitan University, has been running for three years and the two parties have now formally signed a contract securing the future of the programme.
Currently there are 129 members of management on the five year course.
the degree gives a broad insight into retail operations, concentrating on all aspects of marketing, particularly in JS.
Anyone interested in joining the course must have completed the retail management training scheme.
For further details contact Amanda Wootton on extension .
News in brief Haverhill Meat Products, a subsidiary company of Sainsbury's changed its name to NewMarket Foods Limited at the end of March.
The change will reinforce the subsidiary's growing independence from Sainsbury's as the renamed company broadens its range of products and customers.
This year's Health and Safety Week commenced on May 17.
It introduces a number of major changes to health and safety routines affecting all staff in the branches.
These include a new manual and information video.
There are also various important points associated with the EC health and safety directives [outlined in the previous two issues of the Journal].
New sponsorship brings art to young people
Sainsbury's major new sponsorship will bring great works of art to around 750 secondary schools across Britain.
The Sainsbury's Pictures for Schools scheme, launched by Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover, KG, on April 20, will give a set of eight framed reproductions of specially selected paintings to each school for them to display for all the pupils to see.
Lord Sainsbury, joint president of JS and chairman of Sainsbury's Arts Sponsorship Panel, explained at the launch: ‘Not many schools have the resources to buy pictures.
For most young people this is the first opportunity to see a painting from one of the country's national collections.
We hope they will stimulate an interest in visual arts as a whole among young people.’
In the first year of the scheme, up to 750 secondary schools have been chosen because of their proximity to Sainsbury's stores.
Many of them are Link Schools, and a number of special schools are also included in the scheme.
Neil MacGregor, director of the National Gallery, was invited by Sainsbury's to select the eight paintings.
His choice includes paintings from galleries in London, Liverpool and Edinburgh.
Talking about his selection he said: ‘I think that most of us look at paintings not so much to find out about them, but to find out about ourselves, for like a great novel or play, a great painting offers us a unique opportunity of investigating our own experiences.’
To accompany the framed prints, schools will also receive a video of a series of five BBC 2 programmes about these pictures and many more, presented by Neil MacGregor, as well as an information pack which includes fact sheets and slides of each work.
Sainsbury's Pictures for Schools complements other major arts sponsorships such as the Choir of the Year Competition [recently shown on BBC 2]and the Arts Education Awards.
It is intended that this new sponsorship will become an annual event.
Next year, up to 750 primary schools will receive a different set of prints.
Talking shop with farmers
Sainsbury's brought together around 50 Midlands farmers on April 16 for a seminar aimed at fostering better understanding between supermarkets and agricultural suppliers.
Representatives from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food — which sponsored the day near Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire — joined the delegates and Sainsbury managers and directors for a series of discussions and presentations.
Topics discussed included the importance to JS of food safety, why JS has to sometimes look abroad for suppliers, and the controversial issue of the difference in prices between the farmgate and the store.
Delegates agreed afterwards that they found more ground for agreement than conflict and appreciated the frank and open discussions.
JS sets up new development company.
Sainsbury's has established a new company, JS Developments Ltd, to develop surplus land owned by JS for non food retail use.
JS owns around 30 sites across the country, purchased as part of supermarket developments.
The new company assumes responsibility for the profitable development of these sites and any future surplus land.
JS Developments will also provide the link with Marks and Spencer for any future joint developments and will also redevelop or refurbish closing JS stores where appropriate.
Barry Henderson, senior manager in charge of the new company, explains: ‘These sites would normally have been sold to developers or owner/occupiers by JS but the new company will keep their profits in-house.
It will develop the land for primarily non-food retailing space but other opportunities, such as housing and offices will also be considered.
One of its first tasks is developing ten acres of land, adjoining the new Enfield Sainsbury's site, for Roys R Us plus 100,000 sq ft of other non-food retail space.
Our winning ways
High flying promoters
The plaudits have been pouring in over the past weeks, as the following reports show.
Last year's Sainsbury's/British Airways promotion has won a Gold Award from the Institute of Sales Promotion for the best consumer promotion run by a multiple retailer.
David Noble, senior manager, marketing, received the award on behalf of the company at the Queen Elizabeth 11 Conference Centre on April 14.
He commented: ‘The promotion was a tremendous success thanks to the wholehearted manner in which the branches promoted it to the public.’
Pizza prize
Sainsbury's was voted Most Innovative Pizza Store in the 1993 Pizza and Pasta Awards.
The awards are run by the Pizza and Pasta Association whose members come from all corners of the industry, from fast food chains to equipment manufacturers.
The judges made the award to JS for its ‘overall performance in promoting quality retail, fresh, frozen and chilled pizza.’
Masters of Marketing
Two prestigious awards were bestowed upon Sainsbury's at the ITV's Awards for Marketing ceremony held at London's Royal Lancaster Hotel on April 1: Brand of the Year [Services]and Marketer of the Year.
We were also short-listed in the Advertising Campaign of the Year category for the Celebrity Recipe Campaign.
Brand of the Year was awarded for our long term policy of providing modern stores and innovative products while retaining traditional values.
Robin Whitbread, marketing director, was voted Marketer of the Year.
He commented: ‘We were very honoured to be nominated in three categories of the ITV Awards for Marketing, and delighted that we should have won two.
We believe that Sainsbury's traditional values and brand strength are effectively demonstrated by our ad campaign which epitomises the company maxim ‘Good Food Costs Less at Sainsbury's’.
Rewards for recruitment advertising
Sainsbury's went to the IPA/IPM Recruitment Industry Awards in London on April 22 to present an award and came away having received two.
The annual ceremony recognises quality and achievement in all aspects of personnel advertising and is judged by representatives from the advertising industry.
Sainsbury's sponsored one of the nine categories — Press Advertising — and found that it also received a certificate in this category for its graduate recruitment campaign.
The recruitment poster, designed by Riley Advertising, also came away with a certificate in the full colour press ad category.
Award for serving up Future Cooks
Anna Best and Peta Brown, creators of Sainsbury's FutureCooks Competition, were presented with a special award at the 1993 Glenfiddich Awards ceremony, in recognition of the enthusiasm generated for good cooking and good eating among youngsters.
The awards recognise excellence in writing, publishing and broadcasting in relation to food and drink.
Anna and Peta were presented with their award at the Savoy Hotel on April 14.
Sainsbury's FutureCooks was launched in 1990 and is now in its fourth year.
Last year alone over 30,000 children entered the competition.
Personnel director  signs the contract with  deputy vice chancellor Manchester Metropolitan University.
Chairman David Sainsbury talks about old times with JS veterans on March 29.
Lord Sainsbury with  of Archbishop Tenison's School, London.
Lord Sainsbury, Neil MacGregor and the Rt Hon John Pattern MP and Secretary of State for Education, discuss the selected pictures.
Sue Farr of The Marketing Society presents Robin Whitbread with his award for Marketer of the Year.
The promotion was supported by advertising including in-store posters.
Senior manager retail personnel  presents a commendation in the Press Ad class to  representing the RAF's advertising agency.
departmental director responsible for pizza buying, receives the pizza award from  of USA's Pizza Today Magazine
were interviewed by Sue McGregor of BBC Radio 4's Today Programme.
WRITELINES
INCENTIVES AND CHOICES
Southport staff
Having just received our annual pay rise, it brought to our attention yet again the anomalies in the present pay structure.
When we have achieved the higher rate two in our relevant grades, there are no further pay awards possible, other than the annual rise.
There are also no bonuses to be had for long service to JS when you are non-management.
Many of us have already served JS for ten years, with many more, we hope, to come.
Why can we not have achievement rises as management teams do.
There are so few positions available to us above grade C it seems unfair that we are being penalised for taking more responsibility for less remuneration.
John Adshead, personnel director, replies:.
Our current pay structure, designed as a result of the 1990 job evaluation exercise, carefully reflects the skills and responsibilities of each job holder and, in addition, offers opportunities for staff to earn further rewards through the two higher rates which you mention.
We review our package each year to ensure that it remains in line with the best in the industry.
Our profit sharing and SAYE Share Schemes, our pension benefit and our terms and conditions generally are second to none.
Now, through the ‘Choices’ programme which is operating in three districts and is to be extended considerably this year, we are offering more and more staff the chance for career counselling and support from JS in improving skills and gaining qualifications.
This will equip those who are interested in developing themselves with the tools to reach greater responsibility and promotion, and of course greater rewards.
Overall, our clear aim is to encourage and reward those who are willing to learn and grow, and, in the process, increase their contribution to our success.
It is very encouraging to hear the staff at Southport share these objectives.
ROSES AMID THE DAFFODILS
Paul Cox, branch manager, Swansea
The report on page 13 of the April Journal erroneously stated that steve Hansen was the only english rugby supporter in Swansea.
My telephone has not stopped ringing with colleagues accusing me of changing my allegiance and forsaking my birthright.
May I, through the pages of your fine Journal, categorically state that I remain a fervent supporter of English rugby and am particularly proud of the superb performance by the Stevens Team, who have just become World champions.
MOUSE SITTER
Daphne Hills, Guildford.
I thought you might like to see the cheeky lodger I have.
IT'S SERVICE THAT COUNTS
John Griffiths, checkout assistant, Bolton
Please could you tell me why we have an ‘Express Basket Only’ till.
Many of our competitors have an ‘under ten items’ till, and many of our customers are confused when they have a shopping trolley.
We would be better with under ten items instead of basket only, to stop all the confusion.
Eddie Ricketts, director of branch merchandising and store planning, replies:.
This subject has been debated many times over many years and, after much deliberation, it was felt less confusing to say ‘Basket Only’ rather than stipulate a specific number of items [at least for the majority of our stores]as this tended to cause confrontations between some cashiers and customers as to the quantity of items in the basket.
The number of queries related to this matter has dropped dramatically since moving to ‘Basket Only’.
we also feel that the majority of people know the difference between a basket and a trolley.
One final point.
We have 57 branches where trade is predominantly hand-basket therefore we are producing a new sign stating a ‘Maximum of 8 Items’.
A CLOSER LOOK AT RECYCLING
Howard winn, food technology, Blackfriars
The extension of recycling facilities to JS car parks is most useful.
I must, however, comment on two of the pictures shown in the Journal.
The mobile ALCAN unit would seem to be most mobile — looking at the background it would appear to be parked outside either Safeway or Gateway as there is a ‘Y’ and what appears to be part of an ‘A’visible on the store front!
Todd from Neighbours also highlights another problem often seen; he would have difficulty depositing his cans in the ‘Save-A-Can’ skip as it is clearly full to the top.
Editor: Well spotted!
The only photograph of an ALCAN unit available at short notice was of a Safeway car park.
But then, after all, environmental concerns cut across the competition.
Mike Samuel, environment affairs manager, replies:
The Save-A-Can picture was taken on January 7 this year, just after the New Year's festivities and therefore all of the recycling facilities for glass and cans were very well used.
In fact the Save-A-Can skip was emptied later the same day so the service to customers was maintained.
DEPOTS AND DISCOUNT
Paul Johnson, perishables warehousekeeper, Buntingford depot.
I would like to add my voice to the call for a ‘discount card’ instead of the present voucher scheme.
The various pros and cons have been discussed and highlighted in the Journal over the last couple of years so I will not repeat them, although printing costs of the vouchers must be very high compared with a ‘one off card’.
As I work in a distribution depot I cannot use the vouchers at my ‘place of work’.
Living about 12 miles from our nearest store my discount is largely, if not completely, used up by fuel costs and this is made worse by the fact that I live within two miles of two competitor stores.
As my vouchers are used up in about four months each year this means that for eight months  I'm out of pocket using our stores for the weekly shop.
While on the subject of working at a depot we only find out about ‘offers’ either through the Journal, press or during shopping time so savings are also possibly lost when staff who work in the stores can take advantage of multi-buys etc on a regular basis.
Judith Evans, departmental director personnel, replies:
The current system of vouchers offers the same benefit to all staff, regardless of personal circumstances.
However, a discount card would be easier to handle and the company is considering a number of alternatives to vouchers.
If a card is introduced [which will depend on developments in technology not yet available]the rules will remain the same and the total amount of discount available will be limited.
As regards offers, at any one time we would have over 1000 offers available in-store; these change on a weekly basis and it would be almost impossible to give advance notice to all staff; we do of course highlight them in-store to customers and many are advertised in the national press or on TV so that customers [and potential customers]may be attracted to shop in JS branches.
ROLL CALL FOR OXFORD REUNION
Hazel Partlett, former employee at Oxford
I am an ex-employee of Sainsbury's Westgate, Oxford, and I am organising a reunion for former employees.
It will be about October time and probably be held in Abingdon.
The local radio and newspaper have announced it and the papers will be covering the event when it takes place.
I may be remembered as Hazel Dabrowski, ex British Ladies Pool champion and silver and bronze medallist in the European Championships.
In the 1980s I raised quite a bit of money for Sainsbury's charities.
Anyone interested should get in touch with me on .
STAFF ARE CUSTOMERS TOO
Keith Coffey, food safety officer, Crystal Palace
I was so disappointed to find out that, because I work for the company, I could not send off for three free tea towels and a £1 gift voucher being offered as part of a Hovis and JS combined promotion.
The promotion is now coming to an end, but to qualify you just needed to produce till receipts for any eight loaves of Hovis 800g.
It is not as if there was a competition involved, or any tie-breaker, but rather just a sales promotion.
Does this tell us that either JS or Hovis don't want to promote their bread to us?
I can understand that with competitions it is correct for employees of all companies involved to be excluded from entry, but surely there is not a problem in selling Hovis to your employees, or any other product for that matter?
David Noble, senior manager marketing, replies:
Staff have previously been excluded from all tailormade leaflets due to reasons of security and ethics.
It would be potentially embarrassing if a JS competition was won by a JS employee.
Further to your letter however, we have reviewed our policy with regard to mail-in-offers.
Staff will now be able to participate in future free mail-in offers the same as other customers.
Only those directly involved with the promotion will be excluded.
RIGHT AND PROPER
Sue Lenihan, food safety officer, Heaton Park
As a food and store safety officer, I felt dismayed and frustrated to see in the Journal, members of staff wearing inappropriate jewellery and, in high risk areas, all hair not kept within hats.
As staff at our branch do not wear jewellery, there were lots of angry comments regarding the member of staff on the front of the March issue wearing a necklace.
Also on page eight, deli staff are shown with fringes out of hats.
The Employees Handbook says: ‘Jewellery must be kept to a minimum.
The company discourages staff from wearing earrings, however, either a solid stud or small sleeper variety with no stones or attachments may be worn, and only one in each ear.
* If you work in open food areas you are only permitted to wear wedding rings without stones, sleeper earrings and identity bracelets/necklaces worn for medical purposes.’
Please can you clarify the following:
1
Does * mean necklaces may be worn if a member of staff does not work in high risk areas.
Or:
2
No necklaces or bracelets may be worn at all, which includes all JS employees whether they work in high risk areas or in the office.
Nigel Broome, senior retail personnel manager, replies:
Firstly, on the subject of jewellery, as you quite rightly state, jewellery should be kept to a minimum.
This varies depending on whether you work in a high or low risk area.
Staff in high risk areas are limited to small sleeper earrings, an identity bracelet or necklace worn for medical purposes only, and a wedding ring.
Rings with stones may not be worn.
With the exception of earrings, the limits on jewellery in a low risk area are at the discretion of the personnel manager, providing it is in keeping with the company image.
As for hats, your observation was correct that hair should be covered at all times.
Thank you for pointing this out to us.
WITH THANKS
All staff and management of Lee Green
We would like to wish Steve Harding all the best for the future.
We would also like to thank him for all the hard work he put into Lee Green.
We will all miss him very much.
Thanks for all the years.
Les Parker, corporate data control, Blackfriars
May I through the Journal, say thank you to all my friends and colleagues who contributed to my retirement present [camcorder]— a gift that's much appreciated and will always remind me of my 32+ years at JS.
William Yu of Islington
would like to thank managers and staff at the branch for the support they gave him during his recent illness.
LETTERS ARE WELCOMED AND SHOULD BE SENT THROUGH THE INTERNAL POST TO THE EDITOR, JS JOURNAL, 20TH FLOOR, DRURY HOUSE, OR BY ROYAL MAIL TO THE ADDRESS ON PAGE TWO.
hd 2 CONCEPT BARGAIN BUY MIXED VEGETABLES in Salted Water
STRANGE CONCEPT
Jenny Peskett, Crayford
Dictionary entry: Concept — abstract idea.
How about this for an abstract idea!
Take the contents: Rhubarb, water, colour E124.
Open the tin — mixed vegetables!
Very abstract wouldn't you say?
RAINBOW'S END
Colchester Avenue
Now Dorothy works on the checkouts And the Tin Man, he cuts all the Meat.
The scarecrow, he sweeps up the shop floor, And the Lion helps everyone he meets.
SUPERMARKET OPENING
EAST GRINSTEAD
East Grinstead is the first store to be built with a fully self service staff restaurant, which will be the model for all future branches.
Four machines dispense a wide range of drinks and snacks and staff choose from a ready prepared selection of main and side dishes.
The whole system is cashless.
Staff pay at the ‘till’ using a Girovend plastic card which they charge with credit at separate machines.
From the most modern catering to an obsolete form of transport.
The Bluebell Steam Railway is to be extended in five years from New Combe Bridge to East Grinstead BR station which is adjacent to the store.
Chairman David Sainsbury welcomes one of the customers who had been a regular at Queen's Walk — the store this new Sainsbury's has replaced.
Richard Hathaway, produce assistant, stocks up on potatoes.
Sue Seels, checkout assistant, tries out one of the new snack vending machines.
Checkout/replenishment assistants  make a final tour of the store before the doors swing open to the public.
HOMEBASE OPENING
WANDSWORTH
The first Homebase opening of 1993 took place on St George's day and the first customers received an appropriate welcome with gifts of English red roses and St George's flags.
New customers to the store will also be able to take advantage of a unique promotion introduced at Wandsworth.
Homebase has organised reciprocal promotions with the nearby McDonalds restaurant and Mobil petrol station whereby they will issue discount vouchers valid at Homebase during the store's first five weeks.
Homebase, in turn, will issue special offer vouchers for free burgers and car washes.
Another new feature at Wandsworth Homebase is an updated uniform.
the store is the sixth to trial the new style, but the first opening where staff have swapped dungarees and ties for polo shirts, sweat shirts, culottes and skirts.
We will have a full report on the new Homebase uniform trials in the June Journal.
Jo Ward, Extra Choice supervisor, is at the end of the line to discuss customers' orders at the Special Order and Service Point.
Store manager Tim Stanger has a warm welcome as well as a rose and a flag for his first customer.
As a bonus to celebrate the English saint's day the younger Homebase shoppers received a St George's flag, though some lucky ones managed to get two.
Carol Mitchell from the area training department helps out Mark Oyelowo on his first day at the checkout
Clare Murphy, garden centre department manager, comes inside from the damp outdoors to check out a feature new to Homebase.
The pine bedroom furniture display was such a success at trial stores it has been introduced as a permanent fixture at Wandsworth.
Gold Finger
Yellow looks like being this year's colour — the banana does not seem to be able to stay out of the headlines.
Names after the Arabic for finger, ‘banan’, this slightly curved tropical fruit has developed from a luxury treat into today's trendy, healthy convenience food.
In a few weeks we can expect to see the likes of Boris Becker chomping away on a banana between sets at Wimbledon, and the saga of the Euro-banana versus the Dollar banana is likely to keep the fruit in the news.
The popularity of the banana rests on its health benefits — it satisfies a sweet tooth without being fattening.
A ripe banana contains no fat yet comprises one quarter sugar — ounce for ounce, bananas contain the same amount of calories as cottage cheese.
Athletes such as Boris Becker are fans of the fruit because it is easily digested to provide an instant energy high.
It is a better provider of energy than chocolate because of the lack of fat, plus it comprises a balance of three different natural sugars; glucose, fructose and sucrose.
These provide a sustained steam of energy during the prolonged physical exertion required for professional cycling or tennis.
There is a wide range of vitamins and minerals in bananas, and dieticians tell us that man can live on bananas and water alone, though the monotony may send yu over the edge!
One of the minerals — potassium — will also help reduce the risk of cramp during sport.
The banana grows in massive upward pointing bunches from the tall stem of the Musa paradisiaca sapientum plant which, despite looking like a tree, is the world's largest herb.
They are picked when still green then transported from the West Indies, Central and South America and Africa to Britain in more manageable ‘hands’ for ripening.
At this stage the fruit is hard and one quarter starch.
As the flesh ripens, the difficult-to-digest starch turns into sugar.
When the skin is yellow with green patches half the starch has become sugar, when brown flecks appear on the skin it has all been converted.
Wait a little longer and the brown turns to black; this means the flesh has become bruised or mouldy.
If you buy green bananas a handy tip for speeding up their ripening is to put them in a bag together with some apples or kiwi fruit.
These give off ethylene gas which reacts with the starch to speed up its conversion to sugar.
This is the same principle employed by ripeners in large warehouses where the bananas are subjected to ethylene, pressure and warmth to compress the normally five week process to around five days.
Another major advantage of bananas over other sweet foods is that they come in their own hermetically sealed biodegradable packaging — the ideal food for when you are on the move.
Two explorers passing through the Chilean desert in 1974 discovered the banana could help keep them on the move when they became stranded because their car had drained of oil.
In a flash of inspiration, they replaced the oil with mashed bananas, which lubricated the engine just long enough to get them to civilisation.
The other option, of course, would have been to survive on a diet of the same bananas until help arrived.
The Big Banana Split
In December last year British Customs officers detained a 53 tonne haul in Felixstowe as part of a £1.6m fraud.
No, not the latest drugs haul, but banana ‘laundering’.
These ‘bent’ Latin American bananas were being smuggled into Britain under the pretence they were from the Caribbean.
they would thus avoid tariffs normally charged on cheaper ‘dollar’ bananas.
This protectionism is based upon part of a 20 year old agreement called the Lomé Convention.
It protects the livelihoods of several former french, British, Spanish and Portuguese colonies who depend upon their banana exports but, due to natural factors, are unable to produce the fruit as cheaply as the Latin Americans.
Europe's most voracious banana-eaters, Germany, as well as Belgium and Denmark, do not have such colonial commitments and did not sign the Lomé Convention.
They argue the Lomé Convention is not in the spirit of EC free trade.
A compromise was reached recently after much wrangling between those for and against duties on dollar bananas.
This compromise incorporates two tiers of tariffs which are likely to reduce marginally the price of British bananas but push them up for the Germans.
The talks are continuing….
NVQ UP FOR ‘LADDER OF OPPORTUNITY’
NVQs [National Vocational Qualifications]have for three years been an important part of the retail training Scheme RTS]for youngsters entering JS.
Now the scheme is to be extended.
RTS has provided hundreds of school leavers with full time, paid training leading to a position of responsibility.
In addition, they receive a nationally recognised vocational qualification — the retail Certificate, which is an NVQ Level Two.
Now the scheme is to be extended across the company.
By the end of 1994 thousands more retail staff will have had the opportunity to earn this important award.
In July, 200 supermarket staff will begin the trial scheme to enable them to gain a qualification for their day to day retailing abilities.
Working towards this NVQ will help them to expand their skills and pick up new ones while learning how the branch works.
The award will be based on continual assessments of skills and competence so staff will not have to sit any written exams.
Both RTS trainees and recruits to the new NVQ scheme complete a workbook, are assessed by a store instructor as they go along and receive the Retail Certificate.
This is where the similarity ends.
At six months' duration, the new scheme will be half as long as RTS, reflecting the greater maturity and experience of the staff taking part.
the 16 and 17 year old RTS trainees receive an additional 24 days' off-the-job training to help with essential day to day skills such as handling their finances and working in a team.
This is not necessary for the new more mature NVQ students.
They will, however, benefit from advice from their store instructor, or department manager as they need it.
This new NVQ scheme is only a taste of things to come.
In September, NVQs at Level Three will be introduced for trainee managers, providing them with a recognised qualification at the end of their JS training, and plans for extension of the scheme to other staff are in hand.
As Nick Daniel of retail training explains, ‘Our intention is that the NVQ scheme will form a ‘ladder of opportunity’ for most JS staff.
It will provide them with qualifications recognising their skills, and encouragement with their JS careers.’
HEADLINES
Team changes in development
The development division has witnessed the end of an era with the disbanding of the team of clerks of works.
The JS clerks of works were for many years mainly responsible for quality control of building and engineering, which is a role normally undertaken by the architect on construction projects.
Due to the scale of the JS building and engineering programme, the company had its own in-house team.
In the modern construction industry, however, quality control has become a more integral part of the building process, and our clerks of works were spending more of their time acting as assistant project managers.
As a result, and following a working party review, it was decided that the clerk of works role was no longer required.
A new role was, however, identified, that of technical auditor.
the technical auditor checks new developments to ensure that standards and specifications set by the company are met, and that lessons learned from current developments are incorporated into future specifications.
There are eight technical auditors headed by Henry Lilburn; all eight were previously clerks of works.
Of the 17 other clerks of works, several were close to retirement age and took the opportunity to retire early; others were given severance terms.
Commented development director Ian Coull: ‘The clerks of works have provided a very valuable role to the JS development programme over the years, and within the team there was a number of very long serving JS staff, whose knowledge and wise counsel will be hard to replace.’
Logistical conclusion
David Ashwood, non perishables senior supervisor at Hoddesdon depot, is the first person in JS to pass the supervisory course foundations in logistics management run by the Institute of Logistics Distribution Management.
The course is designed to give a grounding in the management side of all aspects of distribution.
Depot manager Bernard Cullen presented David with his certificate.
District manager Dennis O'Sullivan with some of the trainees from his district in South Western area who received their NVQ certificates in January as part of their RTS training.
SAINSBURY'S Report of the Financial Year 1992–93
A MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIRMAN
In my first year as chairman I am delighted to report that we have again achieved outstanding results, and we have increased the gap between ourselves and our nearest competitors.
Group sales exceeded £10 billion for the first time as the Group served over ten million customers each week.
It is our commitment to providing customers with outstanding value for money, and our emphasis on quality, innovation and service, which allows the Group to grow and prosper in varying market conditions and in extremely competitive retail sectors.
There are now 104,000 employees in the UK.
My thanks go to each and every one of you for your contribution to our success.
It is your enthusiasm, dedication and sheer hard work which has placed us at the forefront of our industry.
During the year we invested a total of £787 million.
Of this, £643 million was spent on supermarket development and we opened 23 new and replacement supermarkets.
We see many opportunities for development, and our extensive opening programme will help us compete more effectively with our main supermarket competitors and the discounters.
An increasing proportion of our investment has gone into our retail subsidiaries.
In the past year Homebase, Savacentre and Shaw's invested £99 million and opened 14 stores.
I hope you find the following pages of interest, and do make sure you see the Year End video which is available in every location.
Congratulations on all your achievements.
David Sainsbury, chairman.
The Sainsbury Group Results
These pages present highlights of the financial results and look particularly at those areas which affect all staff and the future growth of the company.
If you have any questions related to these pages do ask your management.
A much more detailed review of the results will be available in the Annual Report and Accounts published in June.
A copy will be sent to all staff shareholders, and staff who do not hold shares will be able to obtain a copy from the public relations department.
What do the results mean for staff?
The increase in Group profit this year to £735 million further strengthens Sainsbury's financial position.
Members of staff benefit directly from the Group's success through profit sharing.
Over a third of the Group's 104,000 UK employees hold shares through the Staff Profit Sharing Scheme and have seen the value of the shares grow significantly over the last five years as a result of the company's continued success.
Our excellent results also benefit staff indirectly — the company is able to reinvest some of the profits and expand, building new stores, creating more jobs and increasing career opportunities.
What do the results mean for the company?
Last year the Sainsbury Group earned profit before taxation of £733 million.
Of this total the taxman will take £229 million and £177 million will be paid to shareholders in dividends.
the remaining £327 million will be retained for investment in the business.
We also obtained funds for investment in the business from the sale of supermarket property, borrowing and other creditors.
At the end of the year the Group had total borrowings of £570 million, a low figure for a Group of our size and profitability.
Technology for efficiency
The first phase of the new SABRE — SALes Based REplenishment — system introduced new handsets to all stores last year.
Staff use the handsets to code-check all lines by scanning bar codes.
This is a state of the art system, much faster than the old manual methods and produces far more concise and accurate reports.
During the next few months further SABRE phases will bring valuable advantages to the company and our customers by increasing the freshness and availability of products.
Store openings
A total of £643 million was invested in store development.
We opened 23 new supermarkets and at the end of the financial year we had 328.
Our opening programme generated almost 5,500 new full and part time jobs.
The skills of our project managers have shortened construction time by 12 weeks compared with five years ago.
In 1992/93 we planted more than half a million trees and shrubs in landscaping our stores and at Watchmoor Park in Camberley a 20 acre nature reserve was developed as part of the store development.
Food safety training
Last year more than 50,000 members of staff completed the training designed for staff handling perishable foods.
Our food safety course set the standard for the industry and the Department of employment gave Sainsbury's a National Training Award.
All 50,000 who passed the course, and a further 20,000 members of staff who are involved in the cold chain, then embarked upon a second training module to emphasise the importance of maintaining chilled and frozen foods at the correct temperature.
New products
Our supermarkets carried out more than 400 million transactions last year.
Buyers worked closely with suppliers, both new and established, to identify opportunities and develop exciting new Sainsbury brand products.
Over 1,400 new lines, including flavour and size varieties, were introduced.
Using our new sampling kitchens and the findings of consumer panels across the country, we successfully reformulated and redesigned over 1,000 existing lines to satisfy the ever-changing and increasing demanding tastes of our customers.
Careers and opportunities
The number of people employed by JS supermarkets increased last year by almost 5,500 to 90,700, and the company invested £30 million in staff training.
Recognising the quality of our career development programmes, the Department of employment chose Sainsbury's to be the only employer in the country to pilot the new career guidance vouchers through the Choices programme.
Leadership Through Teamwork, introduced last summer, is giving all branch staff an opportunity to influence the way their stores are managed.
Opinions are sought at all levels and team-work training enhances management skills and customer service.
Last year we recruited almost 300 school leavers onto our Retail Training Scheme [RTS], through which they have studied for a National Vocational Qualification [NVQ]certificate.
Having completed the 18 month trainee manager scheme, 129 people are now studying, through distance learning, for the degree in Retail Marketing sponsored by Sainsbury's at Manchester Metropolitan University.
Action for the environment
Last year we continued to seek new ways of putting into action our concern for the environment.
The Penny Back Scheme and using recycled plastic in our carrier bags saved five million gallons of oil.
There are now almost 600 recycling banks at JS stores.
We are committed to replacing CFCs in refrigeration by the end of 1996 and, when Basildon opened in August, we were the first supermarket retailer in Europe to introduce an ozone benign refrigerant.
A new in-store energy saving system is now on trial.
If successful, it will be introduced into all stores to reduce energy consumption by up to 10%.
Last year saw the launch of a packaging review designed to minimise necessary packaging.
It has already identified savings worth £2.1 million.
Women at work
Two thirds of all JS employees are women, and last year the number of women managers increased by 300 to more than 5,600, representing more than 40% of the total management.
As a founder member of Opportunity 2000 — The Business in the Community initiative to encourage women in their careers — we have made further progress.
Last year an award and sponsorship programme was introduced to help women in traditionally male areas of study, and new booklets on maternity and work, and the Career Bridge Scheme, were published.
Our local commitment
We seek to be an active and responsible member of the communities in which we trade, and a number of initiatives are made possible by our charities and sponsorship budget of £1.8 million.
Last year we launched a plan to devote much of our charitable budget to supporting four specified areas.
These are: women and work; health, nutrition and diet; urban and inner city regeneration, and youth training and employment.
Last year we received an award for Long term Commitment to Arts and Sponsorship.
warehouse assistant at Fosse Park, Leicester, uses the new SABRE scanning handset.
Harrogate store opening in February.
Characters Chill and Freeze help detective Dick Rosco get across the message of handling chilled and frozen food safely in the training video The Big Chill.
Just a few of the 1400 plus new Sainsbury brand products introduced last year.
RTS trainees from Eastern area practise their team building and raft building skills during their Outward Bound course at Llanberis in North Wales
of Manchester Metropolitan University with some of the Sainsbury's first year Retail Marketing BA students at Fanhams Hall in April.
Senior refrigeration engineer  operates the new CFC leak detection system in Basildon's plant room.
SAVACENTRE THE SAINSBURY'S HYPERMARKET
Savacentre had an excellent year despite the tough trading climate.
Sales increased by 12% and profit was up by 28%.
I would like to thank staff at all levels for their tremendous efforts which contributed to this success.
We are investing heavily for the future growth of the company, and this year we look forward to the opening of the tenth Savacentre — our first new hypermarket since our Sheffield store opened in 1990.
New stores…
London Docklands will have its own Savacentre at Beckton.
The store, due to open in November, with 65,000 sq ft of sales area and parking for 1,300 cars, will include a coffee shop, Post Office and petrol filling station.
The company's eleventh Savacentre, and its second in Scotland, will be the key food retailer in a major shopping and leisure development at Braehead, near Glasgow Airport.
The store is expected to open in 1996.
Developing people
There are currently more than 7,000 people working for Savacentre and, with the opening of two new stores, this will increase to more than 8,500.
Over 750 staff and managers received the new Savacentre Ten Year Award introduced last year.
There were training initiatives covering many areas, from food safety training to footwear training or specialist textiles staff.
And in terms of development opportunities, the Trainee Assistant Manager scheme continues to provide store staff with their first step into management, while the new Trainee Buyer and Trainee Merchandiser programmes offer head office development opportunities.
As part of the company's Quality of Operation exercise, a management development initiative — Improvement Through Teamwork — was launched with a two day training course for more than 120 senior and middle management.
…
New looks
Washington, Hempstead and Basildon, the three longest established Savacentres, were extensively refurbished.
A Post Office and news shop were introduced at Hempstead, and Washington acquired a new store entrance and florist.
All three stores looked lighter and brighter after the dark blues and browns of their old decor gave way to pastel colours.
Aisles were widened and the fresh food areas expanded.
Products and promotions
The Sainsbury's Lifestyle range of textiles went from strength to strength as the new team of specialist buyers and technologists introduced more quality items such as children's footwear and men's knitwear.
Menswear at Savacentre is now 100 per cent own label, and own label accounts for 60 per cent of ladieswear.
A hot chicken take away counter offering freshly cooked drumsticks, thighs and whole cooked chickens was introduced at Merton.
Fine fragrances at low prices were launched in all stores for Christmas.
Aggressive price promotions, such as Star Buys and Multisavas were joined by Link Savas, offering substantial savings when two complementary products are purchased together.
The new managing director of Savacentre Mike Broomfield with  at the hot chicken counter in Merton.
clothing assistant, with  assistant clothing manager, in Washington's footwear department.
HOMEBASE
There were two distinct halves for Homebase in 1992/93.
Heavy price discounting by our competitors continued until the Summer which also saw the start of our enhanced special offer programme.
This, together with the continuing success of our Spend and Save card, resulted in improved sales in the second half.
For the year as a whole, our sales increase of 10%, coupled with continuing tight control of costs, and exceptional commitment from our management and staff, has enabled us to improve our profitability by 16%.
Our market share continues to grow and we are in a strong position to make further progress in 1993/94 and as the economy recovers.
Marketing moves
Homebase avoided joining last year's discount war initiated by Texas and B & Q. Instead we responded with a strong special offer programme supported by more regular national newspaper advertising and more aggressive point of sale material.
As a result there has been a substantial growth in customer visits and a significant increase in our market share.
We doubled the number of Spend & Save cardholders to over one million by the year end.
Scanning progress
All new stores from Portsmouth onwards have opened with scanning, and a further ten existing stores have been converted in addition to the original pilot at Chichester.
In total, 16 stores are currently scanning, representing over 30% of total company sales.
The remainder of our stores will be converted over the next two years.
Brackmills depot
The transfer of our central distribution operation to Brackmills, Northampton was completed successfully in October 1992 and it now handles almost 11,000 commodities.
Since operations commenced the service level has remained high, depot working stock has reduced and costs have been held well below budget.
People and training
There are now more than 4,500 people working within Homebase.
Seven stores are planned for this year which will create around 420 jobs.
Ten Year Award badges have been issued to over 100 people.
Five regionally based personnel manager posts were created to enhance the personnel service offered to the retail division.
The successful Management Training Scheme continues to provide the main source of management recruitment.
However, an additional 18 month management training scheme leading to the Homebase Management Certificate in Garden Retailing has been introduced.
Product knowledge training using workbooks was introduced to increase staff knowledge and improve customer service.
New products
Last year we launched more than 600 new own brand lines including major ranges within hand tools, bathroom accessories and paint.
Over 500 further own brand lines are planned for the current year.
general assistant at the new Wandsworth store, which features the new in-store advertising
shaw's
Last year was one of continued recession in New England, and dollar sales increased by just 2%.
However, we were very competitive in price, quality and service, and our market share in New England increased strongly as a result.
The current year has started well.
Two new stores have opened already and we are expecting to achieve stronger results in all area.
Store development
The store development programme was stepped up last year with seven new store openings, compared with only three the previous year, bringing the total at year end to 79.
There were also two extensions.
As a result, sales area increased by over 10%.
Nine new stores and two major enlargements are planned for the current year.
Sharing experience
Shaw's and Sainsbury's have continued to pool their skills, talent and know-how through transatlantic visits and extended secondments.
With the retirement of David Jenkins in February, David Sainsbury became chairman of Shaw's.
Dino Adriano, chairman of Homebase, became the Sainsbury's executive director in charge of Shaw's as deputy chairman.
Towards the end of the year, Shaw's began a Senior Management Development Programme designed along similar lines to the one at JS.
Better systems
Shaw's made a considerable investment in the future in terms of systems development and enhancement, with about 80 projects being completed during the year.
Among these were a new perishables re-ordering system and enhancements to the non-perishables re-ordering system.
These contributed to a significant reduction in stock losses.
Shaw's brand
Own label development continued at a rapid rate.
The year began with 1,400 own label items and finished with nearly 1,900 — all selling well.
Particularly popular with customers were the canned nuts, home remedies, pizzas, pasta, cereals and canned pet foods range.
In the past, US own label has meant low quality but Shaw's own brand follows the Sainsbury's quality and value approach with great success.
The new store which opened at Keene, New Hampshire, is the prototype for a new style store, both inside and out.
There are now 15,900 shaw's employees, known as associates.
These associates from Keene are pictured at the store's deli counter.
GREEN SCENE
JS WILL LET CUSTOMERS DECIDE OVER WHALE CULLS PROTEST
The pilot whale — a small cetacean, closer to a dolphin than a whale — made the news last month following publicity by the Environmental Investigation Agency [EIA].
They condemned the traditional slaughter of thousands of pilot whales by locals of the Faroes, a cluster of islands between Scotland and Iceland.
They also brought to the public's attention the fact that JS sells 16 frozen fish lines from a Faroes registered company based in Hull.
Although the company has no connection with the killings, JS has made available to customers a list of the products involved.
As , environment affairs manager, explains: ‘Sainsbury's has been co-operating with the EIA in this matter.
We have been asked to boycott 16 frozen fish lines but we believe customers have the right to make their own decisions about the products they buy.
If certain products are rejected by our customers we would certainly reconsider carrying them.’
SAVINGS IN THE BAG
Sixty million carry-out bags were saved by JS customers last year through the Penny Back Scheme.
Few people could possibly realise that their actions are not only benefiting local charities but saving millions of gallons of precious oil.
Our picture shows retail director  standing in front of a fraction of the number of lorries at Buntingford depot that the Penny Back Scheme has kept off the road.
All 60 million bags represent 60 full trailer loads, which would have been fuelled by the equivalent of one million gallons of non-renewable oil.
Oil is also the raw material for the plastic used in manufacturing new bags so this saves in excess of another four million gallons of oil that would otherwise be used in their production.
SIGNS OF THE TIMES
A range of symbols indicating the recyclability of packaging on JS own-brand products is currently being introduced.
A large number of products already incorporates the marks, and all new products, or those with redesigned packaging, will now display them.
One symbol, unique to JS lines, shows the proportion of recycled material used in the packaging.
The remainder are industry recognised symbols encouraging the recycling of glass, steel and aluminium.
There are also seven special symbols identifying with a code number the type of plastic used in the packaging.
These are intended to help customers determine what to recycle in any future plastic recycling schemes.
CHECK THIS OUT
JS stacks library shelves in schools
Each year JS donates over £30,000 worth of books to over 600 schools countrywide through the book donation scheme.
Branches are each given £100 to donate to two schools of their choice.
Kidderminster, Redditch, Blackpole and Worcester joined together to make their book donations and presented 32 books to eight local schools, all loaded up in a JS trolley.
Pupils and teachers from the schools joined the store managers for a buffet after the presentation.
Bedford made a book donation to Marlborough Lower School, where  provisions section manager, is a school governor.
Marathon efforts
Congratulations to all those who ran in the London Marathon.
and , both from Blackfriars, combined their energy and ran the race three-legged for charity, in a very ‘staggering’ time of only five hours and 21 minutes.
Staff from all over the country took part and here are just a few that we know of:.
Heyford Hill's double donation
Heyford Hill will now be doubly popular with the local community, as two members of staff have received Community Service Awards.
bakery assistant, received her £500 for the work she does with the West Oxfordshire branch of Volunteer Reading Help.
This charity sends volunteers like Joyce to local schools to help children with reading problems.
fish counter assistant, was also awarded £500 for her help with the community.
She has run a Beavers Club for boys aged six and seven since she founded it 27 years ago.
She also runs a playgroup for able bodied and handicapped children.
£500 was split between the two groups.
Tom goes fishing for Tommy
section manager bakery at Bletchley, spent March 7 sitting on the edge of the Grand Union Canal in Milton Keynes fishing for Tommy.
No, Tommy is not a new exotic fish; Tommy's Campaign supports research into helping premature babies.
Tom organised the day to raise funds for the charity and the final catch was almost £500.
Over 100 rods turned out or the day, including some famous names from the fishing world.
In the ladies section was  from Bletchley, who was joint first ladies winner.
Tommy's Campaign, which has been running for a year, has raised over £2,160,000.
presenting the cheque to  from Tommy's Campaign and Tom's granddaughter Catherine who was born three months premature weighing just 1lb 3oz.
Ailiss' industrious efforts rewarded
BPM at Arnold, is a well known face in Nottingham.
She combines working at the branch with being a school governor and a member of the North Notts Training and Enterprise Council [TEC]Education Business Partnership.
The branch is involved in the Greater Notts TEC and  contributes to this involvement considerably.
Arnold regularly takes work experience students from local schools and colleges, and also arranges teacher placements, as well as many other activities.
was also on television recently when the BBC East Midlands Today team came to the branch to film  who is profoundly deaf.
is working in the branch as an RTS admin trainee.
In recognition of all her hard work, was invited to the Greater Nottingham Awards to Industry dinner and, much to her surprise, was presented with an award for her outstanding personal contribution to local education business initiatives.
Holly and Ivy get in training
The generosity of staff and customers at Middlesbrough enabled manager  to present a cheque for £824 to the Middlesbrough Guide Dogs for the Blind.
The money, raised through the Penny Back Scheme and collections in the foyer prior to Christmas, was used to buy two guide dogs who were appropriately named Holly and Ivy.
Veronica fills her trophy cupboard
bakery student, Pound Lane has proved herself to be an outstanding baker.
who is studying for a Craft Catering Diploma at City College in Norwich, was recently awarded a trophy and named Student of the Year.
is in her second year at college and, between studying and working at Sainsbury's she likes to enter cookery competitions.
She won a gold medal for her cold dessert at a competition held in Ipswich, which covered all of Eastern England.
She also entered the British Gas Culinary Arts Competition and was awarded a silver medal in the regional final held in Bishop's Stortford.
A well bread bride
When , customer service section manager at Pepper Hill, was married on March 6, little did she expect such a ‘well bread’ reception.
As  and her husband  emerged after the ceremony, they had to make their way under an archway of ‘Crisp’ baguettes, formed by  's colleagues.
The baguettes were aged for a week to ensure they stood to attention.
It was decided that perhaps they had outlived their use and they weren't served at the reception.
was one of two winners presented with a beautiful cut-glass bowl by TV personality Anna Souby.
is presented with the Student of the Year trophy by Mike Thornham, general manager of the Post House Hotel, Norwich, where the awards ceremony was held.
and  start married life with plenty of dough.
And your reporter today…
Fans of the Good Morning programme who saw a holiday report on Amsterdam, presented by  on May 5, may be surprised to know they were in fact watching a colleague.
is a section manager at Upton, Wirral.
She won a competition run by the BBC programme offering a free trip abroad and the chance to appear on national television.
Says  ‘I wrote a letter at the lunch table at Upton entering my friend  and me. the letter then joined 30,000 others on the producer's desk and we thought no more about it.
‘In February I received a phonecall.
We had been chosen to present one of ten travel reports and our destination was to be Amsterdam.
There was a point when I wondered if someone was having me on, but few people even knew I had written in.
‘On March 19  and I set off for Birmingham and a hotel close to the airport.
We were met by the director  and, over several late night drinks, we discussed the big day ahead.
‘The holiday we were featuring was a Sovereign Cities ‘Away-Day’ to Amsterdam and, as we had a lot to see and do in one day, we had to set out early.
‘We began filming at 7.00am at the Bryman Airways check in.  was shouting directions and the cameraman and soundman were fretting over which positions were best — we drew quite a crowd.
and I laughed about the onlookers asking each other‘Who are they?’ and trying to place us.
So this was what fame is like!
Finally, we boarded the plane — Business Class of course.
‘We had never realised what hard work is actually involved in producing a programme of this kind and, with the added pressure of only five and a half hours in the city, we had our work cut out.
We got about Amsterdam on bicycles — I hadn't ridden one since I was seven years old — and that had stabilisers — so I had a little trouble.
‘We visited the famous red light district, cycled around most of Amsterdam's 160 canals and visited a local market but, with the constraints of time, there was plenty we had planned but did not manage to do.
‘On April 1  and I met up with  once again to do the voice-over for our film at the BBC studios in Manchester.
We were really mixing with the stars then as Chris Tarrant came into the canteen!’
Farmyard fun at Langney
Langney branch manager  and name;, senior deputy manager, made a wish at Easter and turned into a rabbit and a chicken.
Staff sponsored them to wear the furry animal costumes to raise funds for the ‘Make A Wish Appeal’ which makes dreams come true for sick children.
Staff also ran a tombola and guess the name of the rabbit competition raising £1,675.
St John Ambulance breathes life into Hoddesdon depot
Hoddesdon depot opened its doors to the St John Ambulance in March when they offered their conference room for a training course as part of the organisation's ‘Breath of Life Week’.
Over three evenings 70 people took part in the course, including some JS staff, and were taught life saving and resuscitation techniques.
Mrs Wingate, divisional superintendent for the St John Ambulance said: ‘We were made very welcome and the facilities offered were marvellous.’
outside Forte Post House, Birmingham, and being filmed hiring cycles in Amsterdam.
rehearsing a scene at Birmingham airport.
blended in perfectly in the poultry and game department.
the St John Ambulance tutor with course members.
MORE COMIC CUTS
Well, we know the tomato splats have already gone mouldy on Comic Relief, but we had so many pictures and stories sent in we just had to squeeze out another page.
KILBURN
The valiant efforts of  at Kilburn brought the total amount raised by the store to over £850.  dressed as a clown to sell door knockers and held a collection.
PUTNEY
From Andy Pandy to ‘Lord knows what he's supposed to be,’ staff at Putney spent the day collecting around the store in a variety of fancy dress costumes and raised £870.
CHERTSEY
Dressed as a jester and a beefeater respectively, and  sold balloons with teddy bears inside.
With the sale of these and the door knockers, Chertsey raised £886.
SOUTH WOODFORD
This young customer at South Woodford was fascinated by the new member of staff.
The penguin — alias  — sold door noses in the foyer raising a total of £688.
WALSALL
Walsall's Tomato'ettes, proved what a ‘squash’ the foyer was, as they sold door knockers.
FELTHAM
, section manager produce at Feltham, lived up to his reputation as being ‘fruity’ when he dressed as a tomato and collected around the store.
He raised £300 which brought the total raised by the store to £695.
CHICHESTER raised £115 by male staff dressing in female uniforms to sell door noses.
BEXHILL'S manager dressed up as Captain Hook and, with his band of pirates, raised over £2,300.
YORK raised £650 through a raffle.
Staff at BURTON UPON TRENT collected money dressed as tomatoes and raised £616.
Two CWMBRAN staff took part in a 24 hour sponsored famine which helped raise a total of £324.
The final tally was £465,000 raised by Sainsbury's staff everywhere.
Congratulations to everyone and, in particular, to South Eastern area.
They raised the largest amount — £125,632.
Archives
HOW PACKAGING BECAME PART OF THE SERVICE
Most of us take for granted food packaging and the convenience it offers to modern life.
Packaging technology has come a long way since the founder opened his first shop in 1869, and the requirements of today's customer are very different from those of the Victorian housewife.
Very little packaging was required for a counter service style of shopping, and the simplicity of packaging technology combined with the need for economy kept packaging to a minimum.
In the early days, Sainsbury's was essentially a provisions merchant, trading primarily in fresh foods such as dairy products, poultry and game, fresh meats, bacon and hams.
Some of the earliest shops were situated in London's busy market streets such as Queen's Crescent and Chapel Street, with stalls set up on the pavement.
As was typical of nineteenth and early twentieth century food retailing, foods were on open display on shop counters, in open windows and on the stalls outside, where food was exposed to the dirt and dust thrown up from the street.
Provisions were weighed and packaged to the customer's specifications.
Very little was pre-packaged, and packed groceries formed only a small part of trade until the Second World War.
Packaging materials consisted mainly of greaseproof paper and brown paper bags.
Even eggs were taken home loose in paper bags.
Packaging was kept to a minimum for counter-service shopping for two main reasons.
Firstly the package did not have to sell itself as it does in self service shopping, since the salesman himself acted to promote the products.
Labels were often simple devices for identification, rather than marketing tools.
Secondly, most packaging served only to contain and protect the food on its journey from the shop counter to the home, either in the customer's basket, or in the shop's delivery vehicle.
The Victorian customer would shop with great regularity, often on a daily basis, buying only a small number of products on each trip.
‘It should be the aim of the progressive retailer to present his wares in the most attractive dress and, if he sells food, in the most hygienic manner.’
Alan sainsbury, 1947.
One early example of a pre-packaged product was JS own-brand bloater fish paste which was made to a special recipe in the firm's Blackfriars factory from 1891 until the Second World War.
The paste was packed in glazed earthenware pots.
First the paste was levelled, a wax circle put on top of the fish, and then the jar was corked.
Over all this went a soft metal lid, similar to a modern milk bottle top.
Similarly, ox tongues were cooked in ‘the kitchens’ at Blackfriars, glazed hot, packed into glass jars with jelly, vacuum sealed with a rubber ring and a lid with a metal clip, and then placed in a cold store to set.
Also made in the firm's London factory and sold from an early date were pies such as veal and ham, and piekins [small, traditional pies].
These were displayed unwrapped on the shop's cool counter-tops for customers to make their  selection.
The pies would then be served in presentation boxes much as bakers now use cake boxes.
Another important early pre-packaged product was tea, which was first sold by JS in 1903.
Early tea packets were constructed of grey or brown greaseproof paper around a waxy paper lining, with different coloured seals denoting the different blends, one of which was Red Label [Sainsbury's longest established own brand product].
Although by the turn of the century most of the food adulteration that had characterised the nineteenth century grocery trade had disappeared, customers were still cheated by unscrupulous retailers who gave short weight by including an excessive amount of packaging around products such as tea.
JS advertisements made it clear to customers they could expect higher standards from Sainsbury's.
Canned fruits, meat and fish were available at Sainsbury's by the 1890s.
A price list for 1903 features canned oxtail soup, apples in gallon tins, and Sainsbury's own brand sardines and tomatoes.
In 1920 the decision was made to increase the number of grocery lines available and to introduce groceries as a separate department in the shops.
Previously, items such as tea, coffee, cocoa, sugar, jam, canned fruit, salmon and sardines had been sold from the same counters as their perishable equivalents.
The firm also began to pack bulk grocery supplies centrally at Blackfriars, using factory methods.
Shortages in the supply of wrapping materials during the Second World War meant that extremes of economy were necessary.
Restrictions on the use of paper and printing ink resulted in canned goods carrying only half-labels.
Even cards and tickets used for advertising purposes were under tight control and under the Paper Control Order it was not permissable to display cards directly related to furthering the sale of goods.
Before the war, foods such as butter and cheese were given two layers of wrappers by the counter hand, but this was reduced to one under the restrictions.
In a wartime bulletin of 1942, staff were advised to urge customers to bring their own receptacles for food shopping, as they had done during the Great War.
‘It may be suggested to customers that flour bags which can be washed and used again are better for this purpose than odd bits of paper, although an actual container is best of all.
We are sure that the public will take it, if it is put in the proper way.
In any case, there will be no alternative before long…and the gradual process is much better than waiting for the axe to fall.’
By the late 1940s there was a wider range of prepackaged grocery lines available, and improvements had been made in the quality of packaging.
In 1947, Mr Alan [now Lord Sainsbury of Drury Lane]reported in the JS Journal: ‘It should be the aim of the progressive retailer to present his wares in the most attractive dress and, if he sells food, in the most hygienic manner.’
The success of JS in this area was recognised at the ‘Britain Can Make It’ exhibition when, in the Printing and Packaging Section, our coffee berries and semolina packs were selected as outstanding examples.
Next month we will look at the packaging revolution brought about by the advent of self service, and the requirements of extensive pre-packaging of food for this style of shopping.
BRIDGE TO EUROPE
peers inscrutably at the neatly fanned playing cards he is clutching close to his chest.
‘Two hearts’, he bids confidently across the green baize of the card table.
He is playing a relaxing game of bridge with friends in the cosy surrounds of his lounge and winning commandingly.
But so he should, for  project coordinator at Blackfriars, with partner  travelled to Germany to represent Great Britain in the European Bridge Championships a few days later in March.
The competition hall in Bielefeld, near Hanover, was a far cry from the social game in Joe's South London home.
Players from around the world, both famous professionals like Omar Sharif and amateurs like  compete for major cash prizes around scattered tables.
Each player is separated from his or her partner by a tall screen placed diagonally across the table to restrict their communication.
The social side of bridge may be what attracts  to the game but here he can neither talk to nor see  He bids with specially marked chips and passes his cards through a slot at the bottom of the screen.
This is a high pressure environment but  relishes the opportunity to play the best players in the world, including previous world champions: ‘The main thing is to just stay cool — you can't afford to make any mistakes.
If you do get flustered after a mistake then you're likely to make another one.
You have to just get on with the next board.
They punish you for any mistakes and give you no gifts at this level.
You can be one of the best players in Britain but over here you are just a small fish.’
The competition was not just humbling for Joe but also exhausting: ‘We were playing non stop bridge for 11 hours per day over four days.
It is mentally and physically tiring — you don't realise how much until you stop playing.’
was pleasantly surprised even to have been selected for one of the 12 British pairs that went to Germany, and pleased to have come 80th from around 1000 pairs.
‘It was really tough but very enjoyable and I learnt a lot.
But I admit, I am glad it's all over — I don't want to see another pack of cards for a couple of weeks!’
NEW LINES
FRUIT PUREES FOR A PURER INDULGENCE
The shelves of JS have many tempting desserts, but not many as healthy as Fruit Purée, exclusive to JS.
The fruit is cooked to bring out the flavour, then sweetened and thickened.
They contain no fat and have approximately 75 calories per pot.
The uses are limited only by your imagination: swirl it in ice-cream or yogurt, use as a topping for cheesecakes, or simply eat on its own.
The product retails at 35p and is available in most larger stores.
PREHISTORIC PARTY GUEST
JS has introduced a Stegosaurus onto its shelves.
Unlike other dinosaurs this one is a real softy.
Made of sponge cake with buttercream and jam filling, it is part of the Jane Asher Party Cake range.
It retails at £9.45 and is available in 60 branches.
BABY BOBOLI
Following on from the success of Boboli pizzas, JS has introduced new Bobolini.
Bobolini are small pizza bases made with olive oil, parmesan and mozzarella cheeses, then topped with garlic and cheese butter.
Bobolini take only six minutes to bake and are available in larger branches at £1.45 for a box of 6.
COOKING UP SOME FUN
JS has discovered through its FutureCooks competition that many children are keen cooks at an early age.
Following the successful launch of the FutureCooks Recipe book, JS has produced a new cookery book aimed at children between eight and 12.
The Sainsbury Book of Children's Cookery [in most branches at £3.45]is written by Roz Denny and Caroline Waldegrave and teaches children basic cookery skills, while showing that cooking can be fun.
It contains 20 recipes, such as Chinese vegetable stir fry and creamy rich chocolate cake, with bold drawings and photographs.
GREAT RANGE FOR A SMALL MARKET
JS has launched an exciting new range of foods for children aged one to four.
It contains three products: flavoured milks, fruit juices and biscuits.
Mosat flavoured milks are made with skimmed milk but these banana, strawberry and chocolate milks are made with full fat milk, recommended for toddlers because it is a good source of calcium.
The juices are sold in packs of three and come in a choice of apple and banana, grape and orange, and apple and blackcurrant flavours.
These are made with concentrated fruit juices, and contain added vitamin C, with no added sugar.
The teddy bear shaped biscuits, available in chocolate and orange or honey and oats varieties, contain added iron for growing children.
THE COMING OF THE WEED KILLERS
Homebase's first ever range of lawncare products offers customers top quality products and is excellent value for money in comparison with leading brands.
It is available in easy to use mini granules which can be applied by hand or lawn spreader.
The range is made up of three products in various pack sizes: Lawn Feed and Weed; Lawn Feed and Mosskiller, and Lawn feed, Weed and Mosskiller, all of which are suitable to use from late March through to September.
Experience the THRILLS AND CHILLS at Alton Towers
Two special fun days have been arranged to allow all Journal readers the chance to enjoy the delights of Britain's number one theme park, Alton Towers, at a discount rate.
On July 31 and August 1 you can enjoy all the spectacular rides at Alton Towers for just £7.99 for adults, £7.50 for children [under 14]and £5.00 for veterans — children under four are free.
For every ticket bought, £1 will be donated to the children's charity elected by you.
Will you dare to venture into the hair raising Haunted House dark ride?
This scary abode set in Gloomy Wood is the size of a football stadium and combines Ghostbusters style humour with spine chilling rooms.
Those of you looking for adventure can shoot the rapids, Indiana Jones style, on the thrilling Congo River Rapids.
Follow this with a journey across the dusty terrain on the wild runaway Mine Train.
If, after all this excitement, you think you can cope with more, lurking in the depths of Thunder Valley in the Thunder Looper.
This roller coaster catapults you over 75ft into the air, then plummets you back to earth at 60mph.
Even the most energetic will need a rest after all the fun and there is a more relaxing side to Alton Towers, be it enjoying a breather on the terraces of The Explorer's Club restaurant, taking a leisurely stroll through the 19th century gardens or visiting the Alton Towers Farm.
The stars will be coming out during the day to celebrate Sainsbury's Fundays — this is your chance not only to meet a celebrity, but to get their autograph and even a photograph!