

PROGRESS 92
Chairman's message
I am pleased to report that in 1992, ICI continued to improve the environmental performance of its operations worldwide and to make good progress towards meeting its environmental objectives.
When I established our environmental objectives in 1990, I recognised that we had set ourselves some very demanding targets which could only be met through the continuous commitment and effort of everyone involved.
We knew that there were no instant or easy solutions to overcome the problems that we faced.
In this, the second annual report on our environmental activities, a range of examples are given to demonstrate how ICI has responded to the environmental challenge opposite each of our objectives.
They cover the construction of new plants, waste reduction, energy and resource conservation and recycling.
Of particular note has been a further reduction in the amount of total wastes produced and the maintaining of energy efficiency across the Group.
We also highlight the design and development of new products which offer environmental advantages to our customers and the general public, and the way we are managing the use of water across ICI.
The achievements made to date are impressive and are a credit to the individual skills, determination and enthusiasm of everyone in the Group.
Full compliance with environmental legislation remains a key, yet elusive, target and I regret that in 1992 ICI was prosecuted or fined on a number of occasions for accidental environmental infringements.
Although the number is lower than in previous years, there is still clearly much more to be done to reach our goal.
One significant development in 1992 has been the establishment of further community liaison between our sites and our neighbours.
We recognise that those who live and work in the vicinity of our plants have the right to know about our activities and we are doing our very best to provide them with the information they require.
I hope this report gives you an insight into the Group's commitment to the environment.
I do not pretend that we have yet accomplished our ambitions, but through the improvements already made, I am confident that we have established a sound platform on which ICI and Zeneca will be able to build further improvement.
Sir Denys Henderson Chairman March 1993.
Policy and objectives
It is ICI's policy to manage all of its activities so as to give benefit to society, ensuring that they meet relevant laws and regulations; that they are acceptable to the community at large; and that their environmental impact is reduced to a practicable minimum.
Under its Environmental Policy, ICI will:
Encourage and facilitate the interchange of environmental technology throughout ICI and its subsidiary and related companies, so as to promote best practice and sustain continuous improvement in environmental performance.
Provide information and assistance to ensure that ICI's products may be used, stored and disposed of in an environmentally responsible manner.
Promote the open exchange of environmental information with customers and suppliers, as well as within ICI and the communities where ICI operates.
Provide information to enable ICI's processes, when used under licence, to be operated with acceptable environmental impacts.
Provide appropriate environmental training for employees.
Support and encourage the further worldwide development of the principles of the chemical industry's ‘Responsible Care’ programme and the International Chamber of Commerce's ‘Charter for Sustainable Development’.
Require subsidiary and related companies to establish and implement environmental policies which accord with the Group's policy and principles.
Environmental Objectives
Compliance with regulatory legislation and standards wherever ICI operates in the minimum basis of the Group's four environmental objectives.
These objectives are:
To require all its new plants to be built to standards that will meet the regulations it can reasonably anticipate in the most environmentally demanding country in which it operates that process.
This will normally require the use of the best environmental practice within the industry.
To reduce wastes by 50 per cent by 1995, using 1990 as the baseline year.
It will pay special attention to those which are hazardous.
In addition, ICI will try to eliminate all off-site disposal of environmentally harmful wastes.
To establish a revitalised and more ambitious energy and resource conservation programme, with special emphasis on reducing environmental effects so as to make further substantial progress by 1995.
To establish a clear policy and practice on waste recycling.
Expenditure and prosecutions
Expenditure
Even in a year of rigorous cost-cutting, the sums devoted to environmental improvement are substantial.
Not all environmental improvement, however, requires large expenditure and much can be done by careful design and painstaking attention to the detail of operations.
Much too may be achieved by ensuring that people are educated and trained to operate in an environmentally sensitive way.
Prosecutions
The trend is one of fewer prosecutions in spite of the fact that environmental regulation is becoming stricter across the world.
ICI is not complacent and is determined to improve its record still further.
It recognises that 100 per cent compliance is the goal and will continue to strive to make this the minimum requirement wherever it operates.
Monitoring Progress
All manufacturing sites are required to record any incident, such as spillages or leaks, and follow up complaints from neighbours as a means of measuring and tracking progress in environmental improvement.
OBJECTIVE 1
New plant
Major projects undertaken by ICI are assessed for their impact on the environment.
The aim is to identify and evaluate the environmental effects of a project in its design, construction and operation.
ICI's assessment procedure is an integral part of ‘Hazard Studies for Safety, Health and environmental Protection.’
Hazard Studies cover six stages from exploratory concept, through process definition, design, construction, commissioning to full commercial operation.
The early stages are the most critical in achieving high environmental standards and safe operation.
The assessment concentrates on minimising potential releases of chemicals to air, water and land, and also covers a wide range of factors such as noise, traffic, visual impact and other possible effects on the local community and landscape.
This procedure is not limited to totally new projects and is applied to significant modifications to existing plants.
The new plants mentioned in last year's report have all progressed satisfactorily.
The ‘Klea’ 134a plant in Louisiana, USA, came on stream in December 1992, four months ahead of schedule and in compliance with tough US environmental standards.
In Taiwan, the pure terephthalic acid [PTA]plant, opened in November 1992, operates advanced waste-treatment methods using ICI's ‘Deep Shaft’ technology.
This is used to treat waste water, while technologies such as catalytic conversion will keep carbon monoxide levels well within the strict Taiwanese limit.
In the UK, operation of the new sulphuric acid recovery plant on Teesside has put an end to ICI's last licensed programme of waste disposal at sea.
Tioxide Malaysia started up its new 50,000 tonne titanium dioxide plant at Teluk Kalung in 1992.
In an area of considerable environmental sensitivity — it is a major breeding ground for the leather backed turtle — the Company was praised for its environmental impact study, waste treatment and land reclamation programmes.
Safety, health and environmental protection are considered at each stage.
other capital projects under construction in 1992 also incorporate high standards:
A new plant has been built at Billingham in the UK to increase the production capacity of ICI Specialties' biodegradable resin, ‘Biopol’, to 300 tonnes per year.
All the liquid effluent from this plant will be treated by a new ‘Deep Shaft’ facility being built for the site.
At Yalding, UK, a new ICI Agrochemicals plant, sanctioned in 1991 at a cost of £16.9 million, will produce insecticides in water-soluble granules to replace older formulations containing solvents.
The plant will set new standards in the working conditions for staff and will strictly limit emissions, noise and smells.
Environmental and hygiene considerations will account for nearly a quarter of the total cost.
One innovative feature is the complete recycling of all process materials: this will be a plant with no chemical effluent drains.
ICI Surfactants recently commissioned a new plant at Wilton in the UK at a cost of £7 million.
The plant is fully automated with all processes operated by a control computer.
Special systems protect the staff and automatically contain any spillage that may occur.
Within the first four months of operation, 14 different products were manufactured successfully.
At ICI's Huddersfield Works, UK, the new boiler plant, although standard in most respects, uses novel technology for capturing sulphur dioxide.
The result has been a halving of sulphur dioxide emissions in the flue gases..
The Tioxide plant at Teluk Kalung in Malaysia
FEATURE 92
The challenge of replacing CFCs
ICI has invested over £200 million in the research, development and production of ozone-benign alternatives to CFCs, HCFCs and related products.
ICI strongly supports the Montreal Protocol, an international agreement to phase out the dispersive use of ozone-depleting chemicals.
The latest update to the Protocol demands that the production of CFCs for dispersive used be phased out completely by the year 1996.
The European Community has since set an even tighter deadline of phase-out by 1995.
ICI's closure programme is already well under way and its major CFC plant and last halon plant will close in 1993.
The European Community deadline will be met.
Successful phase-out has depended on the development of safe and effective replacements.
More and more users are able to switch now that the alternatives have become increasingly available.
The need for user industries to take the lead in actually making this change-over is more urgent than ever and ICI is working closely with its customers and governments to help in this process.
ICI's programme has centred on alternatives which include the ‘Klea’ family of HFC refrigerants, which are ozone-benign and have an insignificant effect on global warming, as well as a range of non-fluorocarbon alternatives.
ICI has chosen not to invest in new HCFCs which have a small ozone depletion potential even though these represent a useful interim measure for speeding up CFC phase-out, preferring to concentrate on more lasting solutions.
In 1990, ICI was the world's first company to produce commercial quantities of HFC 134a [‘Klea’ 134a]for use in the industrial refrigeration and automotive air-conditioning sectors.
In 1992, ICI recorded another world first when it opened a new plant to produce HFC 32 [‘Klea’ 32].
This product will form the basis of a range of ozone-benign ‘Klea’ Blends which should replace both CFCs and HCFCs across the range of refrigeration and air-conditioning applications.
In Japan, ICI's ‘Klea’ 134a plant is under construction in a joint venture with the Japanese chemicals company, Teijin.
On completion, later this year, ICI will be the first manufacturer to produce this CFC alternative in all the three main markets of Europe, North America and Asia Pacific.
ICI also offers non-fluorocarbon alternatives such as‘Triklone’, ‘Perklone’, ‘Methoklone’ and ‘Evolve’for use in a wide range of important industrial cleaning applications.
These products, together with a variety of aqueous cleaning solutions, provide customers with alternatives to the regulated CFCs and methyl chloroform.
ICI has also developed specialised equipment, such as‘Cleanseal’ and ‘Cleanzone’, which can reduce solvent losses by up to 90 per cent , so minimising emissions to the environment.
OBJECTIVE 92
Waste reduction
In 1992, ICI's waste emissions were 14 per cent lower than in 1990, the baseline year.
Considerable progress in reducing the emissions of hazardous wastes has been made.
Here, the fall is 48 per cent since the objective was introduced.
Although only six per cent of ICI's total waste is designated as hazardous, this has become the priority of the waste-reduction effort.
It is here that any given expenditure will produce the greatest environmental benefit.
Nevertheless, work continues around the Group to reduce wastes of every kind.
The following are just a few examples from around the world of ICIs activities in reducing its wastes:
Tioxide's major waste reduction programme is well under way at sites throughout Europe to meet the new EC Titanium Dioxide Harmonization Directive.
A waste acid recycling plant was completed in Huelva, Spain, in 1992 and a similar project is near completion in Calais, France.
At Scarlino, Italy, waste acid is already treated with limestone and lime to produce gypsum and a similar process is near completion at Grimsby, UK.
Here, and in Spain, the production process generates ferrous and ferric sulphate for use in water treatment.
ICI Paints has been systematically measuring all the waste generated by its factories worldwide.
the project has covered every type of paint-related waste, from emissions of volatile organic compounds, to solvents used for cleaning, to sludge going to landfill and even used drums, bags and packaging.
By the end of 1992, the amount of waste produced was 30 per cent down on 1990.
Since 1989, the ICI resins plant at Wilmington, USA, has been working to reduce its waste by applying the principles of Total Quality Management.
The result has been a 51 per cent reduction in waste with the added benefits of lower energy and water consumption, a drop in carbon dioxide emissions and a saving of US$1 million a year in operational costs.
At the ICI Polyurethanes' plant at Geismar, USA, most of the processes now recycle part or all of the waste they produce.
Waste tars, for example, are burnt in the steam-raising boilers for the production processes.
Through a combination of capital projects and employee involvement in looking for improvements, the waste [as defined under SARA title 111]produced by the site is now 40 per cent down on 1988.
The production of flame retardant chemicals at Billingham produces a mixed water and phenol waste which previously was discharged into the River Tees.
Now the waste is ‘washed’ with oil to separate the phenol from the water.
The resulting phenol-oil mixture is burnt to provide energy in the plant.
The amount of phenol discharged with the water has consequently dropped 50 fold from one third of a tonne each day to less than six kilograms per day.
At Fayetteville, USA, ICI Films has found a new use for the 1,000 tonnes per year of ethylene glycol residue from its process vessels.
The waste is now converted into polyester polyols which are used in the production of insulating board.
Selling this material, rather than paying to dispose of it, should realise an overall improvement of US$O.5 million per year.
This project won a regional Pollution Prevention Award from the US Environmental Protection Agency.
ICI Agricultural products in Cold Creek, USA, reduced the amount of liquid hazardous waste produced by the annual clean-out of one of its reactors by 87 per cent since 1991.
The amount of solid hazardous waste produced by the same operation fell by 79 per cent.
As a result, the cost of disposing of hazardous waste fell from over US$77,000 to just under US$15,000.
ICI Australia recorded several significant successes in its drive to reduce emissions.
At its Botany site, for example, mercury emissions have been cut from 60 parts per billion to around 25 parts per billion [equivalent to 25 seconds in 32 years].
The concentration of chlorinated hydrocarbons in the site effluent has been cut to an average of two parts per million from 22 in December 1988.
At Deer Park, ammonia in effluent has been reduced, since 1990, by 50 per cent to less than 14 kilograms per day.
At ICI's Rozenburg Works in Holland, improvements at the water treatment plant have increased the oxidation of biodegradable chemicals by enhancing the aeration of the waste stream.
At the Barry site, Wales, operated by ICI for EVC [a joint venture with EniChem]methanol discharge has been reduced by 95 per cent by substituting a methanol-based additive in a reaction with a water-based alternative.
C & p 's Merseyside Operations, UK, achieved further reductions of liquid waste of up to 40 per cent on 1991.
Included in this category were mercury, alkalinity, suspended solids and halocarbons.
ICI worldwide emissions data 1990-1992
The data presented in this section are the actual annual totals in thousands of tonnes.
They have not been corrected for production volume or business acquisitions and divestments.
Wastes considered hazardous
a
To land: are conventionally defined by national regulations as requiring special treatments or disposal procedures.
b
To air: are predominantly the volatile organic compounds [ie, those which evaporate in air at normal temperatures].
c
To water: those chemicals defined by national and international lists [eg, EC black list, UK Red list].
Non-hazardous wastes
d
To land: Large tonnage wastes such as gypsum and power station ash are disposed to land both on-site and off-site.
Non-process waste includes waste spoil from building work, etc.
e
To air: Inorganic gases include oxides of nitrogen and sulphur which are not classed as hazardous in national lists but do have environmental impact.
Particulates to air are comprised principally of smoke and dust particles.
f
To water: Dissolved solids are comprised predominately of salts such as sodium chloride, calcium chloride and sulphates.
Total organic carbon is made up of non-hazardous materials.
Suspended solids are waterborne particles.
Energy and resource conservation
In 1992, energy consumption was 12 per cent lower than in 1990.
The corresponding carbon dioxide emissions were down by a similar amount.
Despite the adverse effect of lower output, energy efficiency has been maintained at the 1990 level.
ICI is committed increasingly to saving other resources such as raw materials and water.
Over the last two decades ICI has made significant progress in improving energy efficiency [see graph].
Recent energy and resource-saving initiatives in ICI include the following:
The new sulphuric acid recovery plant at Birmingham has an important innovation in the use of oxygen rather than air in its combustion process, which was jointly developed by ICI and Air Liquide.
Thought to be a world first, this gives significant energy advantages, as well as 25 per cent reductions in both carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide emissions.
The EC has supported this development with an energy conservation grant from its Thermie Programme, which seeks to encourage energy-saving technology.
ICI's Grangemouth Works started work on the objective with the appointment of a full-time Resource Conservation Manager.
Using the detailed knowledge of employees at all levels, dramatic results were obtained.
In the year to August 1992, the works used 22 per cent less water, 18 per cent less nitrogen, 11 per cent less steam and nine per cent less electricity.
The ICI Pharma plant at Caponago in Italy switched steam generation from fuel oil to natural gas.
This achieved a 12 per cent reduction in emissions of carbon dioxide and completely eliminated emissions of sulphur dioxide, in site of a 23 per cent increase in energy consumption due to production expansion.
In Sydney, Australia, the Pharmaceuticals and Crop Care divisions of ICI Australia reassessed their energy needs and as a result, Pharmaceuticals installed a small boiler.
The result has been a saving on energy of Aus$90,000 a year and a sharp reduction in emissions of carbon dioxide..
ICI's Grangemouth site, Scotland, was a finalist in the UK National Energy Award for energy conservation
FEATURE 92
Managing water
Water is essential to the chemical industry, it is used as a raw material; for cooling; for steam, power and heat; and for washing products and plant.
ICI is conscious of the need to conserve supplies and is introducing water management techniques to its production sites.
The first focus of the strategy is on simple housekeeping measures — stopping leaks, minimising unnecessary use and better monitoring.
It has been estimated that this could reduce consumption by 20 to 30 per cent.
The Ardeer site in Scotland managed to cut £6,000 from its annual water bill when an employee pointed out an unnecessarily wasteful use of water.
The fitting of a few extra valves solved the problem.
Second, existing plants can be made more water-efficient through better management and control systems and the reuse of water wherever possible.
Reductions by better control may offer a further 20 to 30 per cent improvement in consumption.
Third, the design of new plant and equipment can reduce, or even eliminate, the need for water.
New technology, for example the use of membranes, can also make it possible to clean water so that it can be recycled.
Using these techniques may enable an additional reduction of 20 per cent in water use.
By applying water management techniques to three of its production plants, ICI Australia has achieved a 40 per cent saving in water use at its Botany site over the last two years.
Apart from the economic case for using less water, there are three additional benefits:
A reduction in the volume of aqueous effluent for discharge to the environment;
Reduced capital costs for effluent treatment plants;
Opportunities to achieve better or more cost-effective removal of contaminants from the aqueous waste due to the higher initial concentrations.
These benefits will all greatly assist in meeting present and future discharge consent limits.
OBJECTIVE 4
recycling
Recycling is now recognised as an important part of the conservation of resources.
An increasing number of ICI's products are reused, recovered and recycled.
Reuse and recycling of materials requires a plant-by-plant, product-by-product approach.
It also needs the co-operation of many parties — other industries, local and national governments and the consumer.
This degree of co-operation, unfortunately, is not always easy to achieve.
In attempting to create a sound methodology for examining options for new products, processes and recycling issues, ICI is developing the use of Life Cycle Assessment [LCA].
The aim of LCA is to draw up an environmental balance sheet for a product or process by identifying its effects on the environment, from the winning of raw materials through to final disposal.
This will help to focus design and development on processes and products with lower environmental impact.
At the same time, ICI is actively engaged in the recovery and recycling of products already in the market.
For example, ICI has set up schemes around the world to recover and recycle CFCs, with the aim of being able to reduce their production.
No recycling scheme will work unless people are willing to use it.
However, there are success stories and the following are a few examples of ICI's recent initiatives on recycling:
EVC, an ICI/EniChem joint-venture PVC manufacturing company, recycles PET and PVC bottles by turning them into powder or granules and selling these on.
EVC also processes old power cables by separating the core from the PVC sheathing, removing the copper wire for reuse and recycling the insulating material.
ICI's ‘Melinar’ business has developed a new grade of PET that now allows plastic bottles to be refilled and reused.
‘Melinar’ B100 is supplied to Wellstar who make bottles for soft drink franchises across Europe.
The bottles are designed to be reused up to 20 times over a period of five years before being recycled into filling for toys, anoraks and duvets.
In December 1991, the German government introduced new measures for the recovery and disposal of packaging materials.
The first phase, which deals with packaging used in transport, such as strapping and shrink-wrap film, obliges all suppliers to take back these materials for recycling at the customer's request.
The Group's businesses are now co-operating with Deutsche ICI to offer a joint recovery system for German customers.
Items recovered are either reused or passed on to recyclers.
The programme is managed by ‘Pro-log’, an ICI subsidiary based in Wilhelmshaven.
One success with the general public has been the paint exchange scheme in Leeds, which developed out of the WasteWagon trial scheme, mentioned in last year's report, as a way of disposing of unwanted household paints, oil and garden chemicals.
A large amount of the unwanted paint was reused by donating it to local community groups in Leeds.
The paint exchange scheme will shortly be expanded to take in paint waste from the trade sector in the city.
New products
Environmental considerations are an integral part of the design and development of new ICI products.
Household paints to date have included solvents.
These substances, known as volatile organic compounds [VOCs], evaporate into the atmosphere as the paint dries.
In sunlight, VOCs can react in the lower atmosphere with nitrogen oxides to generate photochemical smog.
In response, ICI Paints aims to reduce or eliminate VOCs from its products wherever possible.
Thanks to new technology, ICI was able to launch the first solvent-free emulsions in the USA and UK in March 1992.
Following the launch, the US Environmental Protection Agency wrote to Glidden, the US arm of ICI Paints, to say: ‘Your company's work to reduce air emissions sends a positive message to other businesses and sets an example of innovation that we would like to see adopted throughout corporate America’.
Another new technology has enabled ICI Paints to bring out a completely new low-solvent automotive refinish product called ‘Aquabase.’
Many of the techniques developed by ICI to clean up its own processes have commercial value and are being made available to other companies.
One such is ‘Guardsman,’ a new system designed to treat the aqueous effluent from industries such as pharmaceuticals, paper, food, adhesives, paints, textiles and printing.
Some of the programmes developed have succeeded in removing up to 98 per cent of the solids content of waste water.
ICI has developed ‘EMKARATE RL’ a group of lubricants for use with its ‘Klea’family of CFC alternatives, for refrigeration and air-conditioning systems.
A new £6 million plant has been built at Baleycourt, France, to increase capacity from 2,000 to 10,000 tonnes, to help user industries in their conversion away from CFCs.
ICI Polyurethanes has developed a new technique for making polyurethane comfort cushioning.
Known as ‘Waterlily’ this innovative method uses water, therefore eliminating the use of CFCs or other organic blowing agents in the foam-blowing process.
It also offers options for improvement in the areas of fire performance and recycling.
PROGRESS 92
ICI and the community
ICI believes in good liaison with local communities, so that people living nearby know what is happening inside the company's plants; and ICI itself better appreciates the concerns of the community.
This coincides with the aims of the world chemical industry's ‘Responsible Care’ programme, to which ICI fully subscribes.
Manufacturing sites now provide information about their environmental performance to their local communities.
In 1992, they issued brochures giving details of their emissions, in many cases going well beyond their own countries' disclosure requirements.
‘Open days’ for the local communities have become regular and popular events.
These are a few examples of community initiatives that have taken place:
C & p Merseyside Operations linked up with its local community to discuss a proposed environmental improvement project which will incorporate new technology to treat chlorinated hydrocarbon waste.
ICI; s St Gabriel site in Louisiana, USA, together with the project team working on ‘Klea’ 134a, developed an outreach programme to introduce and explain the new ‘Klea’plant to local people.
At Duperial's San Lorenzo site, Argentina, close links have been formed with the local neighbourhood to discuss the works' operations and emissions.
Also, at the Palmira Works, free training has been given to local fire brigades on how to manage emergencies involving hazardous materials.
When Professor Supasinee Tantistisuk was troubled by an acrid smell hanging over her village in Thailand, her first thought was that it must come from nearby industry — specifically the ICI Paints plant.
After putting up with it for several weeks, she telephoned the plant.
Her subsequent letter to the Managing Director of ICI Paints [Thailand]takes up the story:
‘To my surprise, several ICI officers came to our house to investigate what could be the cause of the smell.
They explained that in no way could it have come from the plant because it had the best preventive system for any smell, dust or poisonous substances that might otherwise destroy the environment.
This really assured me that the plant was one of the safest.
The officers came several other times to check and finally found out that the smell came from two local garbage mountains.
‘We really appreciate your responsibility and concern and would like to thank you for the clear and reasonable explanation given.’
.
Site brochures provide environmental information to local communities
Education and nature conservation
Education
The Company-wide employee programmes described in last year's report have continued during 1992.
For example, nearly 1,500 managers have attended the ‘Environmental Focus’ event, which helps them to understand the chemical industry's environmental impact and how they, personally, can help achieve ICI's environmental objectives.
Among the participants this year were many of ICI's managers from Eastern Europe.
ICI also recognises its responsibilities for helping in community education.
1992 has seen a number of developments on this front.
ICI Agrochemicals in the UK has developed a national curriculum science teaching pack for UK eight to ten-year-olds called ‘Farming Tales.’
The kit looks at basic scientific principles as applied to farming.
Experts from ICI and the Worldwide Fund for Nature have worked together to help shape the ‘Environment’ module and the overall approach to environmental issues in the Nuffield Modular Sciences project for GCSE science teaching in the UK.
ICI Australia has set up an imaginative scheme to improve industry/teacher links, whereby one of its employees and one teacher are paired in a scientific expedition alongside a distinguished researcher.
Projects to date include a study of rainforest insects in North Queensland, the effects of soil erosion and the impact of the nutrient load of tropical estuaries on the Great Barrier Reef.
nature Link
The thousands of acres that surround ICI's manufacturing sites are home to a great variety of wildlife.
Following an ecology audit of ICI land, 21 sites in Europe, North America, India, Brazil and South Africa have been singled out to receive funds and expert assistance from ICI's ‘Nature Link’ scheme to help them conserve their wildlife.
Numerous projects are now under way.
At ICI's Grangemouth site, the new ‘Jupiter’ wildlife garden has been opened, in conjunction with the Scottish Wildlife Trust, on previously derelict land.
A bird-watching hide with special features for disabled visitors was recently created on land adjoining ICI's Hillhouse site in the UK.
At St Gabriel, Louisiana, USA, ICI is helping to create new wetlands on the banks of the Mississippi.
In time, these will become a habitat for alligators.
In South Africa, a new reservoir on AECI's 9,000 acre site at Mankwe provides a home for wildfowl and animals.
Giraffe, zebra and, for the first time ever on an industrial site, white rhinoceros have been introduced.
At ICI's Gomia plant near Calcutta in India, a no-felling policy has preserved more than 1,000 acres of dense forest.
Both here and at Thane, near Bombay, ‘Nature Link’ grants will help protect natural habitats.
Message from Chris Hampson
The reporting of environmental performance is, I believe, an absolutely key factor in the future development of the chemical industry.
Without the trust of the public we face a difficult future.
However, by gaining that trust we can look forward with confidence.
The chemical industry's ‘Responsible Care’ programme has a major role to play in demonstrating that the industry is serious in its intent to perform better.
Under this scheme ICI is committed to a continuous and voluntary process of communications on health, safety and environmental matters with interested parties and the general public.
This report gives only a broad outline of ICI's environmental performance.
It is not intended to provide the detail that is rightly expected by the local communities who live and work in close proximity to our operations, and which we provide through locally published reports.
In 1992, many sites established better communication links with their local communities.
This included the publication of specific information relating to environmental performance and emissions data.
This programme will be taken up by more of our sites this year, to include details of emissions on a chemical by chemical basis.
In many cases this reporting will go well beyond local regulatory requirements.
Although public attention is often focused on our pollution abatement performance, we are fully aware of our responsibilities to develop new products which have reduced environmental impact, both in their use and their disposal.
The Company has numerous examples of such products which bring enhanced safety and environmental benefit to our customers and the public.
Examples include water-based paints, resins and biocides, biodegradable and reusable plastics, and alternatives to CFCs in a wide variety of uses.
I hope that readers of this report gain a sense of ICI's real commitment to improved environmental performance across all our activities.
The ability to measure results and monitor our performance, as demonstrated in this and other more detailed reports, is crucial to our programme.
It is only by these means that we can apply technical innovation and effective management to the modification of our processes and procedures, in order to meet our objectives.
Whilst we still have a lot to do, the determination and resolve of everyone in the Group to continued improvement is encouraging, and gives me confidence that we will meet our goals.
C Hampson Executive Director March 1993.
HIGHLIGHTS
March Brocato International, the US haircare company, launches a shampoo in bottles made from ICI's ‘Biopol’.
April ICI films, Fayetteville, USA, wins US Environmental Protection Agency Regional Pollution Prevention Award.
ICI Katalco wins Queen's Award for Export Achievement for ‘Puraspec’ used to purify liquids and gases.
May Newly refurbished laboratories opened at ICI's Group Environmental Laboratory, Brixham, UK, to expand capability.
July ICI opens world's first HFC 32 [‘Klea’ 32]plant, an ozone-benign alternative to CFCs and HCFCs.
ICI Malaysia selected as a winner of the Malaysian International Chamber of Commerce and Industry environment competition for its work in NOx abatement, solvent and paint recovery and support for schools.
September ICI wins Us Environmental Protection Agency Stratospheric Ozone Protection Award for the commercial introduction of ‘Klea’ 32.
October ICI Paints launches ‘Aquabase’ the world's first water-based metallic paint for automotive refinish.
November ICI Grangemouth reaches final of the UK National Energy Award for energy conservation.
December ICI Paints wins London/South East PA Golden Leaf Award for its waste minimisation programme.