

Quality message hits the mark
Bob Rae (right) and quality development team members  with the quality manuals that are so effective
Pamela Davidson, Tommy Harrison and Mary Sweeney, a quality improvement team at head office
CCG'S RELENTLESS pursuit of quality has been a vital factor in winning valuable contracts since the quality programme was launched 18 months ago.
According to Bob Rae, general manager quality developments: ‘The strength of the company's approach to potential clients has been our clear plan to implement both a quality assurance system and a total quality management (TQM) culture.’
The TQM system meets the needs of both external and internal customers in the quality chain, with four main areas:
Producing and implementing quality manuals;
Measurement of quality;
Quality improvements;
Communicating the quality message.
Quality manuals, including ones for operations, procedures and quality assurance, detail how each task should be tackled, who is responsible for completing the tasks, and the quality responsibilities of those involved.
This ensures a clear picture of the quality chain.
Quality manuals have already been introduced in the Aberdeen and Offshore Division, Scotrail Trolleys, and School Meals, with the most recent being developed for staff restaurants by Southern Division.
A typical reaction came from Alison Wood, general manager of Aberdeen and Offshore Division, who introduced her division's quality manual this summer.
She said: ‘It has set the standard throughout all the installations.
Of course, our experienced managers know procedures cover to cover, but having a manual benefits a new platform starting up and is particularly useful to a new manager, or promoted staff, as a point of reference.
Once established, procedures must be followed and the job done right first time to the satisfaction of everyone in the quality chain.
The second stage is the introduction of quality measurement tools, pioneered by Contracting Division and Provinces Division, and now being adopted throughout the group.
These rate CCG's level of service, allowing the company to identify areas where it can make improvements.
Measurement is often done with clients, allowing both sides to resolve any areas of concern amicably and quickly.
Third, measurement identifies the need to improve quality by ensuring better working practices, more efficient use of resources and better working conditions.
Recognising that the people who do the job are the best qualified to suggest improvements, many divisions have set up quality improvement teams.
Finally, the quality chain depends on effective communication between customers and suppliers, both internal and external.
Communication helps spread the quality message and create the right attitude towards teamwork.
Bob said: ‘Training is vital so everyone in the organisation knows what is expected of them, and understands that quality is the essential ingredient in making their jobs more successful and enjoyable.’
He has overseen the introduction of training courses in quality improvement, and the Training Department is currently preparing more quality related courses.
Publication such as the quarterly TQM newsletter, Quest, are also made available to all units for staff information.
Bob summed up: ‘Bringing quality into the way we work doesn't mean working harder, but rather working smarter.
It means preventing problems arising, reducing irritations, minimising inefficiency and wasted time.
‘Everyone must be involved in quality, and quality must be applied in every aspect of our business.’
OFFSHORE GAIN
CCG HAS won its first offshore contract with BP Exploration, a multi-million pound contract to provide quality hotel standard service for personnel involved in the hook-up of two platforms in the North Sea's Bruce Field.
Lasting over 15 months, the contract began in August to cater for up to 800 personnel on the accommodation vessel Polyconfidence, and a further 180 on the production platform during the start-up phase.
Around 100 CCG personnel will provide all catering, housekeeping, reception, welfare, and entertainment services to the highest professional standards.
This follows our recent similar win for a contract on the Shell UK Exploration Gannet platform.
Lindsay Tocher, Aberdeen and Offshore director, said: ‘Although the company has been involved with BP on major offshore contracts for many years, this is our first offshore contract.
The CCG philosophy of creating precise packages in line with client needs, reinforced by our demonstrable quality policy and offshore track record, has been instrumental in our winning this highly coveted contract.
‘BP, like other offshore operators, demand the very best lifestyle possible for those who live and work in the North Sea.
CCG have the experience and knowledge to deliver just such a package,’ he concluded.
TOP OF THE CLASS!
Company wins new contracts in schools
CCG HAS started a new contract to provide school meals for the London Borough of Wandesworth over the next four years.
Every day the company will serve up around 12,000 meals in 88 primary and secondary schools in the borough.
Mike Queen, CCG director, said: ‘As a company, we have a proven track record in providing a quality school meals service for local authorities across the UK.
We now serve 70,000 school meals daily, making us one of the largest providers of educational catering in the country.
‘We are obviously delighted to be starting this contract which enables us to offer our high standard of service in Wandesworth.’
Other local authorities that enjoy CCG school meals include the London Boroughs of Ealing and Hillingdon, the City of Westminster, North Yorkshire County Council and the City of Sunderland.
Breaking Ground
Meanwhile, CCG has won a contract at Glenalmond College in Perthshire, and this success could be a breakthrough into a new market for the company in Scotland.
Regional director Wyn Roberts said: ‘It is very important as this is our first venture into the private schools sector in Scotland.
Doing well at Glenalmond will give us the opportunity to expand into other private schools.’
The catering team have been busy providing breakfast, lunch and dinner seven days a week for the 280 boarders and staff since they returned after the summer break.
The manager said: ‘We also provide meals for visiting ports teams and lay on functions for the board of governors.
With our high standard of food and a quality presentation, we are on to a winner and the school has been very impressed so far.’
New Northern MD
ERIC McNALLY has been appointed managing director of CCG's Northern Division, a new senior post that underlines the company's commitment to quality and expansion.
Eric, who joined CCG in 1980, has over 20 years experience of the hotel and catering industry, particularly in the field of personnel and training.
Prior to accepting his new position he was CCG's personnel director.
In his new role, he will be responsible for all CCG's operations and business development across Scotland, both on and offshore.
He will be based at the new Glasgow office.
Eric commented: ‘Naturally I am excited by this new challenge.
The creation of this position reflects the continued growth of our business and our commitment to providing a quality service in Scotland.
For the past few years, I have been heavily involved in the development of quality initiatives, and I am now looking forward to continuing this work with our teams in Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow.’
Spotlight on PROVINCES
SINCE ITS inception, CCG's Provinces Division has grown to over two dozen contracts in just 18 months, reaching from Bournemouth to Folkestone on the south coast up to Birmingham and the South Midlands.
However, according to Robin Hay, the divisional managing director, the story does not end there: ‘Our market place in the provinces of England is huge, with many blue chip companies demonstrating that they are keen to do business with us.’
He is clear why this is: ‘Our business philosophy encompasses the use of local regional teams, supported from our offices in Northampton and Winchester.
We carefully control the account span of each team member, ensuring that each of our clients receives a high quality input that adds value to their business.’
In addition, the Provinces Division launched this year a quality audit initiative, involving every operation in a monthly audit to measure CCG's contract performance in over 40 different ways.
Robin commented: ‘The operation of the monthly audit has drawn the regional operations closer and assisted us in meeting even higher customer service standards.
With some clients, such as Nissan, Nuclear Electric, Volkswagon Audi and Flight Refuelling, we are auditing our performance in the catering and facilities operations directly with our clients, resulting in true contract partnership.’
Robin has been with CCG for over ten years, initially in personnel and training in Scotland, and since 1985 in operational management.
He was appointed a director in 1987 and took on his current role in January last year.
The Provinces Division operates with a management structure consisting of two regional teams.
In Winchester the regional manager is Eugene Kertzman, born in Holland, who moved to the UK ten years ago and prior to joining CCG last summer gained excellent experience with other major British catering organisations.
Northern region is headed up by Ronnie Noble based at the Northampton office.
He has been with the company for 17 years and like Robin started his career with the company in Scotland before moving South in 1989.
Staff at Northampton (from left)
The Winchester team (from left)
Driving ahead in style
THERE IS an excellent catering environment at VW Audi's headquarters at Blakelands in Milton Keynes, and the nearby training facility Wymbush, according to manager Graham Sparkes.
‘It is very plush in all areas’, he said, ‘as it was refurbished three years ago.
We do lots of function work, especially for new car launches, but the catering covers everything down to snacks and salads.
We also have 27 vending machines over the two sites.’
The larger restaurant is at Blakelands, catering for 450 staff, while there are a regular 150 catered for at Wymbush training centre with perhaps as many again depending on events and courses.
‘VW Audi have a progressive healthy eating policy,’ Graham said, ‘and each menu has a colour coded chart so people can choose meals to suit their diet.
We hold special events every month, with an Indian day next month, and whenever possible we like to dress up for the occasion.’
His key staff include Carol Redgrift, manager at Wymbush, Chis Hatherall, kitchen manager at Blakelands, and John McIntyre, head chef at Wymbush.
Their top class operation was recognised recently with first place in northern region's quarterly audit checks.
This measured performance in every aspect of their catering, including hygiene, safety, personnel and menu planning.
For their success the staff were given a framed certificate, together with £100 to donate to the charity of their choice.
Ronnie Noble, with CCG client Michael Fairlamb, presents the quality audit prize to Graham Sparkes and his team
IN THE PICTURE
CCG's catering team at TV South is the tops — and that's official.
Manager Sue Surrey is seen here being presented with the southern regional quarterly audit prize by Eugene Kertzman and CCG client Ewart Wooldridge, and she has no doubt about the reason: ‘CCG has been here for 12 years, myself for the last seven, and you can put our success down to working together as a team.
We all did our best to succeed, and we have been very lucky with the people working for us.’
With assistant manager Jenny Baker and head cook Sylvia Devey, the staff are very flexible as they cover evenings and weekend shifts as well as normal office hours, not to mention a licensed bar, silver service restaurant and function room.
TAKING OFF
TRICIA CURLEY had to show real skill as a manager right from the start at Flight Refuelling Group in Bournemouth, a contract won by CCG this summer.
‘I arrived at work one Monday to find the roof had collapsed following some heavy rain,’ she explained.
‘The restaurant was closed for a week, with a total loss of power, but we improvised to keep the show on the road.’
FRG make parts for refuelling aircraft on an extensive spread-out manufacturing site that employs about 1,200 people.
Because of the distance between workplace and restaurant, Tricia and her team have had to work hard to entice them in.
Since day one they have made changes in the restaurant, and the customers have responded by eating there more often.
‘Now we are looking to carry changes into the rest of the factory’, Tricia said.
Tricia and her assistant manager Julie Ford keep the restaurant open daily for breakfast, lunch and an early evening meal, from 7.30am to 6pm, while they also do buffets for visitors and boardroom catering.
It's great — so long as it doesn't rain too hard!
The CCG team at Flight Refuelling
ON SONG AT SONY
JUST TO show their close working relationship with Sony Music, CCG's entire catering staff were taken to Wembley recently for Michael Jackson concert.
But then excitement is never far away at a place where radio link-ups are common, and an episode with of Challenge Anneka was based.
CCG has been at Sony Music's Aylesbury site since winning the main contract in 1984, although the company has associations going back over 15 years.
This is a major manufacturing facility for cassette tapes and videos, and the last two years' Christmas number ones were produced on the site.
It is also the main European warehouse for Sony's stocks, and their national telesales base.
Gerry Hill, manager, said: ‘We cater for about 500 staff, from factory workers to the managing director.
There is a breakfast and lunch service, Monday to Friday, with full English breakfast and salad bar.
But the catering is also heavily dependent on vending machines, which operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
The team recently collected a silver trophy in Aylesbury Vale District Council's environmental health competition.
Their standards of excellence won them the award for best staff restaurant, and they finished in joint second place overall out of all the shops, cafes, hotels, restaurants and canteens in the district.
Gerry, at Sony for three years, puts down the success to the close-knit staff which has hardly changed since then, including .
A major part of their work is functions, and not just in the boardroom, as many up-and-coming groups visit the site.
Gerry casually reels off recent visitors the Pasadenas, Beverly Craven and Martin Joseph.
Prize winners (from left)
HIGH HOPES IN LONDON
CCG HAS soared to new heights by securing the catering contract for the tallest building in the City of London, the National Westminster Tower.
At the 52-storey building, the 1,000 staff are served light lunches and snacks by manager Tony Gatland and his staff.
There are three restaurants, each on a different floor, all supplied by a central in-house production unit.
National Westminster plans to recommission restaurant facilities on other floors as the full complement of 2,500 staff move to the tower.
Meanwhile despite the uncertainty surrounding the future of London's Docklands, the team is waiting optimistically in the wings to cater for staff at the new Texaco headquarters in Canary Wharf.
Annette Boyle has been promoted to catering manager to spearhead this exciting venture and she is already working closely with the Texaco facilities management team to ensure the move, currently scheduled for January, is as smooth as possible.
SALES TEAM EXPANDS
Penny Fuchs has joined the London Team as sales consultant responsible for the area between the North and South Circular Roads and the M25.
Penny has a wealth of catering industry experience in both operations and sales and the team is reaping the benefits of her expertise.
NEW GLASGOW OFFICE
With the opening of a new regional office in Glasgow, CCG is to target the west of Scotland more closely, and continue the company's steady expansion in catering management.
The premises in Park Circus Place will be the base for further business development in the area where key clients already include Glasgow Development Agency, The Herald, Strathclyde University and Scottish Power.
Eric McNally, managing director of the Scottish Division, said: ‘Our new Glasgow facility will allow us to expand our customer base while maintaining our recognised high standard of service.’
Stretching the Executives
TWO CCG staff were put through their paces recently on a testing weekend with the 52nd Lowland Volunteers of the Territorial Army.
Mairi Campbell of BOC at Cumbernauld and Jean Buchan of Playtex at Port Glasgow took part in Exercise Executive Stretch, 48 hours of physical and mental challenges that are designed to have some feedback into management skills.
Mairi said: ‘We had tasks like night surveillance and night map reading.
Saturday was jam packed: we were flown around in helicopters, transported in army trucks and taught abseiling.
It was all teamwork and I would say there was a great deal that can be brought into your work from the weekend.’
Jean added: ‘I was doing things I never dreamed I would have done.
The weekend would be good for people who would never consider going — it bring out the best in you.’
CCG sponsored the weekend and Bob Rae of the training department is keen to see more staff take part in Executive Stretch.
He said: ‘It benefits the participants and the company.
When Mairi and Jean came back, they were bubbling with excitement.’
Jean (left) and Mairi with their weekend souvenirs
AIMING HIGH: These staff at King Fahad Academy, London, recently gained their CCG food hygiene certificates after two in-house courses that stressed the need for good practice in the kitchen.
Catering manager Safwan Taji (far left) said: ‘This will help us in our aim to maintain our high standard of hygiene and presentation in the school.’
New status at Thames
CCG CHAIRMAN Frank Bell this summer presented a silver salver to the directors of the new University of Greenwich, formerly Thames Polytechnic, marking its incorporation to university status.
On behalf of the University of Greenwich, Dr Norbit Singer, director, thanked the chairman for his generous gift and praised area manager David Philip and all the CCG staff who work tirelessly to ensure the academic staff and students receive the very best ‘food for thought’.
CCG supply a wide range of services including catering, housekeeping, security and care of the grounds.
Also at the presentation were .
Frank Bell presents the salver to Dr Norbit Singer
INVESTING IN OUR PEOPLE
CCG SCOTTISH DIVISION recently signed the Investors in People statement of intent, committing the company to developing its employees as part of its business plan.
Bob Rae (right), general manager quality developments, was congratulated by Robbie Tyler, chairman of Forth Valley Enterprise, who presented a certificate to recognise CCG's commitment.
Bob said: ‘CCG recognises the benefits that will be gained in assuring customers, suppliers and staff of this commitment to professionalism.’
TAKING SAFETY SERIOUSLY
ESTHER QUERNS, CCG stewardess on the Shell Kittiwake platform, received a first-aid kit as reward for her pro-active safety suggestion.
Her idea was to have a first-aid kit in the catering department as an essential safety precaution.
Platform services supervisor Bob Tryanor made the presentation before a small audience of platform staff.
Milestone for Margaret
Margaret Attwood, catering manager at Douglas, Reyburn and Company in Kilmarnock, reached a rare milestone recently when she chalked up her 25th year with CCG.
Margaret, seen here with Catherine McCutheon, Matt Dysart and Isobel McLuckie, started work with the company in 1967 at Hyster in Irvine, and moved to Douglas, Reyburn in September 1972.
Company chairman Frank Bell made a formal presentation to Margaret recently in recognition of her contribution to CCG, while area manager Gordon Hume gave her a crystal vase.
Margaret added: ‘My colleagues, the local managers on the west coast, gave me a beautiful basket of flowers.’
CELEBRATION DAY
Liz Watt, cashier clerkess at Grampian TV in Aberdeen, was recently presented with gifts from CCG and Grampian in recognition of 20 years service at the television station.
Liz started as an assistant cook just a few months after CCG had won the Grampian contract, but later moved into the office and now bring her experience to bear on a range of tasks.
She said: ‘The presentation came as a complete surprise.
They asked me to set up a buffet for a press launch, then they said it was for me!’
Company chairman Frank Bell was on hand to present a gold watch and a basket of flowers while Liz received a bottle of champagne from Grampian's Graham Good.
BARBECUE CHALLENGE
AMERICAN Independence Day at Bytes Restaurant, Honeywell, was a tremendous success thanks to three CCG youth trainees who were challenged by senior members of staff to organise a barbecue.
Over seven weeks leading up to the big day, Jim Nash, Lorna Powell and Agnes Ramsay had to find out about marquees, promotional material, advertising and food.
CCG staff on site helped out with a weekly briefing.
Assistant catering manager Ronnie McLay said: ‘A short time before the hungry crowds descended, catering manager Sid Ashford and I gave Jim, Lorna and Agnes a big surprise: they were to deal with the barbecue while we acted as runners.
To say they were shocked is an understatement, but staff and customers enjoyed the day so much they are asking for another.’
AFRICA IN DOCKLANDS
MENUS TOOK an exotic turn at Reuters in London's Docklands when head chef Ian Heddow prepared food on a genuine African theme, including Kuku (chicken in tomato sauce), Isu (boiled and buttered yam) and Kokodia (banana and coconut sponge), Ian, seen here with Janette Gustave and Ellie Botchway, together with manager Maurice Stancombe and his assistant Katherine Lind continue to keep the atmosphere buzzing with their programme of special events and theme days.
GRAND RUNNING
A CCG team has raised well over £1,000 for Glasgow's Beaston Oncology Centre, by completing the Glasgow half marathon in August.
The team comprised Frank Bell, Damian Bell, Myfanwy Taylor, Sarah Wallace, Matt Hughes and George Williamson.
As a gesture to regional manager Barbara Cumming's 17-year-old daughter Claire, who had been receiving treatment at the Centre, the runners decided to put their sponsorship money towards new equipment, and had a magnificent response with generous help from staff, friends and suppliers.
Regards to Broadway
CCG'S THREE Citibanks units in London held an innovative theme day this summer to celebrate New York's Broadway musicals.
It was held in conjunction with Virgin Airways, who donated two return flights to New York as a competition prize.
At the Cottons Centre, the menu included New York salt beef and Grandma's butter pecan ice cream, while customers were greeted by commis chef Azize Coskunsu dressed as Liza Minelli, and waiters dressed in sparkling Broadway style.
To complete the big time atmosphere, music from famous shows was played in the restaurant.
A Broadway welcome in Cottons
Skaters on the run
THIS TEAM of CCG staff and families from the KG Ethylene Plant in Grangemouth raised thousands of pounds for Telethon this summer with a sponsored half marathon — on roller skates!
Their 13 1/2 mile route took the 14 participants through the streets of Grangemouth, Falkirk and Polmont, although only organiser Neil Redding and Brian Grozier completed the full route on skates.
Donations taken along the way boosted their previous on-site collection efforts to £1150 — which was promptly doubled by clients BP — and Avril Morrison appeared on the Telethon programme in July to present the money.
Petanque winners
A team led by CCG's Alison Harvey won the annual petanque challenge match with Glasgow-based catering suppliers Autobar Scotland recently at the Birds and Bees pub in Bridge of Allan.
Alison, with Elaine Speed and John Hocking, are seen here with supporters Jan Smearton, Bill Yeaman and Matt Highes, and their prizes of a bottle of wine and a set of glasses each.
BOWLED OVER
FOR THE first time in nine years, CCG's Souther Division won their annual match against David Randall's Citibank eleven.
After the opposition were out for 171, the CCG team reached the required total with two overs to spare, largely thanks to an opening stand of 95 by Jeremy Hook and Philip McKenna.
Other players were .