

Dear Parent
OPEN DAY — SATURDAY 14TH NOVEMBER 1992 — 10.00 TO 12.30 p.m.
It is a pleasure to welcome you to our Open Day.
We hope that this booklet will be of interest to you both during your tour of the School and for perusal later at home.
On arrival, please come to the School Hall, where pupils and Staff will be waiting to greet you.
, the Head of the Junior School, and I will be speaking to all prospective parents and children at 10.00 a.m., after which pupil guides will be available to escort you.
If you arrive after the introductory talk, please feel free to join an escorted group or to tour the School unaccompanied.
Pupils and Staff will be pleased to direct you or to answer questions at any time.
Page 3 of this booklet indicates where you will find members of Staff responsible for specific matters such as admissions, careers or fee remission.
The departmental information sheets indicate the approximate location of the Departments.
Refreshments will be available in the Refectory from 10.45 till 12.00 noon.
May I take this opportunity to thank you for your interest in the School and to wish you a pleasant morning with us.
If, as a result of this morning, you would like more information, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Yours sincerely     
Fee Remission
The Trust Accountant,, will be available in the Trust Office to discuss Entrance Bursaries, the Foundation and the Government's Assisted Places Scheme with individual parents.
The following notes cover the questions most often asked.
1
There is only one examination for entry to S1, be it for entry as a Bursar, Foundationer, Assisted Place Holder or as a fee-paying pupil.
2
Applicants for Entrance Bursaries who are not offered a Bursary but who achieve the standard necessary for entry will be offered a place in the School.
If the original Application Form indicates that the parents are also interested in an Assisted Place the appropriate forms will be issued at this time.
Entrance Bursaries are not normally available to applicants whose family income exceeds the Assisted Place ceiling.
3
For the Government's Assisted Place Scheme the Gross Income of the family is used i.e. before any superannuation contributions and including any investment income.
An allowance is given for each dependent child other than the applicant and the resultant net income is then compared with a scale which shows the parental contribution to school fees, the balance being met by the Scottish Education Department.
The administration of the Scheme is handled, confidentially, by the Trust Office.
Examples of current parental contributions are:
4
All Assisted Place Holders have their books paid for and those on a low income may receive an assistance with uniform, meals and travel.
5
There is no limit to the number of children in a family who may hold an Assisted Place and parental contributions are reduced when there is more than one holder in a family.
6
A drop in income in excess of 15% during the Session can be countered by reassessment on a current year basis.
7
There is no guarantee of the availability of an Assisted Place even if all requirements are met.
The level of Government funding in any year determines the number of places which can be offered.
JUNIOR SCHOOL
The Junior School which is an integral part of Heriot's and constitutes over one third of the School's roll, comprises the Nursery, the lower Primary and the Upper primary.
Not only does the Junior School influence the children at their most receptive, and indeed their most vulnerable age, but, within the time spent in the Junior School, the child lays down the basis of all future learning.
The child's knowledge and understanding, skills, attitudes and self-esteem should be well in place by the time secondary education begins.
Our new purpose-built Nursery, opened in August 1992, is staffed by a fully qualified team of Teachers and Nursery Nurses led by the Head of Nursery,.
The Lower Primary Department, under the guidance of the Lower Primary Assistant Headteacher, comprises the Nursery and Primaries 1, 2 and 3.
All Nursery and Primary 1–4 children enjoy the pleasant surroundings of modern purpose-built accommodation where, in a safe, controlled environment, with separate play areas, the children can lay down the basis of their future educational development.
Primary 5 sees a transition into the more formal setting of the Old Building with its historic traditions and architecture.
Throughout the Upper Primary the pupils develop an increasing sense of belonging to the wider community of Heriot's and can take even fuller advantage of the specialist teaching and facilities offered to them.
This is a process which, of course, begins from first term in Nursery when the young children are befriended by Senior Pupils who each year elect to assist the Staff and children at Nursery level and indeed throughout the Junior School.
At Heriot's we offer a secure, happy and stimulating environment within which your child will develop all areas of his or her personality.
We are evolving constantly, keeping that which is best in traditional education and incorporating the best of modern methodology and curricular development.
The 5–14 proposals, which are designed to prepare children for the Standard Grade and Revised Highers syllabi currently in place throughout mainstream Scottish Education, will form the basis of Scottish Primary Education for the rest of this century and beyond.
In the Junior School we are determined to keep pace with current thought and practice identified in the recent national initiatives while maintaining the traditional standards of excellence which parents rightly expect of George Heriot's.
Each curricular area has a carefully planned programme of work designed to enable pupils to develop at a pace and at a level suited to their age and ability as we feel it is imperative that children experience success in whatever they do.
All pupils are encouraged to give of their best to achieve that goal.
Continuous assessment, using a wide range of criteria, ensures a careful monitoring of progress and development.
Children are also formally screened in the basic subjects each year.
Written reports are issued regularly.
From an early stage regular homework is given and channels of communication are established through the child's daily use of a homework diary, enabling parents and teachers to communicate informally on a daily basis.
More formal opportunities for parent-staff contact are provided in the form of Parents' Evenings, Parent Workshops and at a number of events throughout the year.
This of course, does not preclude parents contacting the School whenever necessary.
We welcome and value the very close relationship we have with parents.
As your child grows he or she will pass from the totally secure, almost self-contained, world of the Lower Primary Department where we lay the basic foundations of the entire curriculum, good work habits, and mutual respect, into a carefully planned and ever widening educational experience.
Through their attendance at specialist classes children learn to cope outside their own classrooms and to adjust to different teachers with differing expectations.
Specialist Physical Education and Art and Craft are offered from Primary 1 onwards, and Music from Primary 3.
Swimming is introduced at Primary 3 and from Primary 5 two ‘Games’ periods are added to the weekly Physical Education timetable.
In the winter terms P5 girls enjoy Dance classes and Netball and the P6 and P7 girls have Hockey, while the P5, P6 and P7 boys play Rugby.
The summer term options include Cricket, Athletic and minor field games.
These timetabled games take place at Goldenacre — the School's playing fields and at the Pleasance Gym.
Inter-school matches are played on Saturday mornings.
In preparing your child for his or her future we are aware of the need for sound academic knowledge and understanding alongside courtesy, good manners and concern for others.
The secure order of our classrooms provides one setting for the fulfilment of these needs, but daily Assemblies reinforce the moral, behavioural and spiritual values of the School.
Assemblies are led by the School Chaplain, the Headmaster, Head, Deputy Head and staff of the Junior School and by class groups.
Our worship is predominantly Christian but both in Assembly and class we encompass the needs of children of different faiths wherever possible.
Closely allied to our aims and ethos are the School's pastoral system and support network.
Matters of educational concern are dealt with at all stages in the School by Learning Support in close conjunction with Class Teachers' recommendations and parental wishes.
Enrichment Staff are timetabled to assist children throughout the Junior School.
The services of the Matron and Chaplain are also available to all pupils.
Foundationers have a special place in the life of Heriot's and are looked after by a senior member of Staff with responsibility for pastoral care.
As the child grows we aim to educate him or her in the constructive use of leisure time and so a range of extra-curricular activities is offered.
This widening of opportunity is one of the corner-stones of education at Heriot's and offers success outside the classroom — often to those who do relatively less well academically.
Choir, Orchestra, and Drama groups meet regularly to prepare for their main public performances.
Other activities include Badminton, Brownies, Chess, Community Awareness, Craft, Computing, Cross-Country Running, Cub Scouts, Dancing, Debating, Drama, Drumming, Fencing, Girl Guides, Horse Riding, Junior School Journal, Ornithology, Piping, Recorder, Scripture Union, Sewing and Young Librarians.
Weekend expeditions and excursions form an integral part of many of these activities.
Participation in the numerous Saturday morning inter-school team games is encouraged.
The older pupils have the opportunity of taking part in skiing holidays and the P6 and P7 children attend residential educational weeks in Aberfeldy and the Lake District.
George Heriot's generosity founded the School some 350 years ago and this spirit of giving and caring is still nurtured in our pupils, so an important feature of the Junior School calendar is the charity support programme.
True to their school motto —‘I DISTRIBUTE CHEARFULLIE’— pupils take part in and organise a wide range of events to raise funds for a number of charities.
The highlight of the Junior School charities programme is the Summer Charities Fair held on the lawns in June.
A special effort was made last year to support the appeal on behalf of the Royal Hospital for Sick Children and a Readathon in support of the Malcolm Sergeant Cancer Fund has become an annual event.
Within an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect George Heriot's Junior School strives to enable each child to reach his or her own maximum potential — not only academically and physically, but also socially, spiritually, emotionally and morally.
THE NURSERY
The New Nursery was opened on 26th August this year and has been designed to offer children opportunities to enjoy and develop all types of play and decision-making, and to gain increased independence within a safe and secure environment.
Children will find a full range of activities which will help them to make sense of the world in which they live.
These experiences will lay the foundation for the more formal learning which will develop in the next stage of their school career.
, an experienced Lower Primary Teacher with specialist Nursery qualifications, is in charge of our Nursery and leads a fully trained and committed team which consists of two Teachers and two Nursery Nurses.
The Morning Class starts at 8.45 am and finishes at 11.45 am.
The Afternoon Class starts at 1.00 pm and finishes at 3.00 pm.
Nursery parents are able to bring their cars on to the School Terrace to deliver and collect their children.
We discuss and enjoy celebrating the seasonal festivals such at Christmas, Easter and Harvest, when we join with the rest of the Junior School in bringing our gifts for the sick, and those in need in the neighbourhood of the School.
We are always invited to attend concerts and plays performed by older members of the Junior School.
In the Nursery the children can act out their fantasies or fears in the privacy of the house corner.
They can explore the world of Science while playing in sand or water.
Their Technical and Mathematical concepts begin as they wrestle with the problem of size and shape at the woodwork and glueing tables.
By listening to and making Music with their voices or instruments they begin to learn about rhythm and the importance of listening.
Pre-reading skills are catered for through the enjoyment of games, jigsaws and computer programmes.
At certain times of the day, the children work as individuals or in small groups, helping them to learn how to socialise and to share with their peers.
At other times during the day they are brought together as a whole group to talk and discuss, to make music and to listen to stories.
Although the Nursery is only a small unit, it is very much a part of the whole School and can therefore give to those pupils in the upper Senior School, who intend to pursue a child-orientated career, the opportunity of contact with young children by assisting in the nursery on a regular timetabled basis, while the Nursery children can benefit from their contact with their older ‘brothers and sisters’ within the Heriot's Community.
Girls and boys who have reached their third birthday are eligible for the Nursery and applications for a Nursery place may be made at any time.
You and your child will be invited to visit the Nursery to meet the Nursery Staff sometime after your child's second birthday.
Although most of our Nursery pupils do go on to the Junior and subsequently to the Senior School at Heriot's, transfer is not automatic.
THE LOWER PRIMARY
The Lower Primary consists of the Nursery and Primaries 1–3 and is headed by an Assistant Headteacher who is responsible for all four years.
Primaries 1–3 are located in the bright, south-westerly facing Greyfriars Building, where the children have their own classrooms, library and secluded outdoor play area.
There  are two classes at each stage in Primaries 1–3.
The boys and girls are cared for by their own Class Teacher, with specialist teaching in Physical Education and Music.
For children who encounter educational difficulties we have the services of our Learning Support Department and for all children we have Enrichment Staff who can extend their learning.
In the Lower Primary we welcome and introduce the children to school life in a relaxed, happy and yet well-disciplined environment.
Each boy or girl is treated as an individual and will encounter a rich and varied curriculum encompassing academic, emotional, cultural, social and physical experiences.
We give children the opportunity to develop to the best of their potential.
Our curriculum is based on the 5–14 programme and we place great emphasis on the teaching of Language, Mathematics and Science, within a wide and varied curriculum.
We also place great importance on developing a child's self-confidence, respect, co- operation and communication skills.
During these early years children form attitudes and perceptions which will be with them for life and so we must nurture in the children those attitudes and values which will be with them for life and so we must nurture in the children those attitudes and values which will serve them in years to come.
None is more important than the seeing of themselves as valued and important people, each with a separate and positive sense of identity.
The Lower Primary pupils are well integrated into the life of the School.
The pupils participate in Junior School Assemblies twice a week and play an important part in the annual festivals and events.
We greatly value the close contact we have with the Junior School prefects and the Sixth Year pupils, as well as the assistance we receive from parents in a variety of situations.
All parents are made to feel welcome as we fully appreciate the value of close cooperation between home and School.
THE UPPER PRIMARY
The curriculum, based on the 5–14 Programme, follows on from the experiences the children have had in earlier years.
Investigative skills and pupil responsibility play an increasingly important role at the Upper Primary level and prepare the children for the work and approaches they will encounter in secondary education.
The children are encouraged to take increasing responsibility for their own work and to become more aware of the importance of self-evaluation.
In the classroom traditional mathematical skills continue to be taught, but as the children progress from P4–P7 they are increasingly encouraged to use their Maths to solve problems.
During English lessons the children are helped to express themselves competently both orally and in writing.
Much emphasis is also placed on reading and comprehension.
A comprehensive Environmental Studies Programme ensures that the children can extend their knowledge, understanding and skills in a wide range of scientific, historical and geographical topics.
The daily Assembly and class lessons develop the children's thinking in the areas of religious and moral education, In P6 and P7 the children are introduced to either French, German or Spanish by a teacher from the Senior School Modern Languages Department.
Pupils also have the opportunity to experience specialist teaching in Art, Music, Physical Education and Technology.
As the children are now more mature, learning can take place outside the classroom on a more regular basis with an increasingly varied programme of educational outings.
Residential educational activity weeks in the Summer term of P6 and P7 are an important part of the children's education.
These weeks are our perception of ‘the curriculum in action’ in an outdoor setting where children and Staff relate in different ways and Heriot's values are further reinforced.
These weeks are looked back on affectionately by pupils as they remember the camaraderie they have developed with Staff, parent and senior pupils.
A wide variety of valuable lessons is learned at such times when the pupils strengthen their ties with the School Community.
Games opportunities at Goldenacre both during the week and on Saturdays also increase markedly at this stage.
As the children complete their Primary School education it is important for us to look to the continuity of their education into the Senior School, particularly in relation to the 5–14 Programme and to their personal adjustment.
Head of the Junior School, also has Assistant Head Teacher responsibilities in the Senior School.
She oversees the transition to the Senior School in conjunction with the Primary 7 teachers and the relevant Class Teachers.
The successful transition from Primary to Secondary Education is regarded as essential to the continuing success of Heriot's.
As members of the Junior School, children from Nursery to Primary 7 are an integral part of the wider Heriot Community.
P6 ABERFELDY TRIP — 1993
Primary 6 Educational Activity Weeks in May are centred in the town of Aberfeldy in Perthshire.
Groups travel north by coach and stay at Dunolly House, an outdoor centre at the western end of town on the road to Loch Tay.
The centre is ideally located within easy reach of many historical sites and venues for practical and outdoor activities.
Qualified staff at the centre, plus out own Staff from Heriot's enable us to work with groups of five or six pupils on fieldwork and practical activities which tie in with the year's curriculum.
These activities include a village study, mapwork and orienteering, conservation studies, a visit to a Scottish town house and a working watermill.
The pupils can enjoy the surrounding countryside on horseback and can experience the excitement of a rafting expedition on a stretch of the River Tay.
These weeks provide a very enjoyable rounding up of the year's work, a chance to sample some new outdoor pursuits and a valuable lesson in community living.
LAKES TOUR — 1993
Two groups of Heriot pupils from P7 participate, during May, in an Educational Activity Week in the Lake District.
The tour is centred around Patterdale Youth Hostel which is ideally located in its proximity to Lake Ullswater where many of the activities take place.
The main party is subdivided into smaller groups which, under the direction of fully qualified instructors, take part in canoeing, rock climbing, abseiling, pony trekking and fell walking.
Intersparsed with these activities are steamer trip on Lake Ullswater and visits to the Keswick Pencil Factory, The Steamboat Museum, Dove Cottage, The ‘Ratty’ Railway, a local farm, the swimming pool at Troutbeck and the Brockhole Centre where pupils enjoy an afternoon of Environmental Studies.
The tour is designed to give pupils an opportunity to experience a variety of activities, some of which they may wish to develop in the future.
ART
As our pupils develop an individual awareness of the world around them they are encouraged to use Art as a form of creativity and communication in demonstrating responses to their environment.
The Art Department leads pupils to an understanding of the language of the artist and designer through practical work.
We are also interested in extending their manual skills in the form of craft work related to aesthetic experiences.
Pupils are encouraged to be creative, imaginative and critical in practical terms, and in the researching of original material.
We are looking for individual responses to problem-solving and personality development.
The pupils are invited to visit galleries and exhibitions and may be asked to produce projects and/or appraisals of the work they have seen.
The first two years provide the groundwork for the pupils to make a realistic choice of Art as a special subject in S3 if they are so minded.
Pupils should be able to take Standard Grade in S4, with the more able pupils presented at Higher Grade in S5 or S6.
The Department runs a crash course for S6 pupils which may also lead to the opportunity of attempting a certificate.
The course consists of the study of composition, drawing, painting, design and craft work.
Pupils are encouraged to develop individual perceptions through the exploration of a wide variety of materials and the study of the basic elements of Art and Design.
BIOLOGY
Biology is taught throughout the Senior School.
The pupils are prepared far the SCE exams at Standard Grade, Higher Grade and Certificate of Sixth Year Studies.
S1 and S2 pupils follow a common course which is intended to introduce the subject and the skills required for further study.
Standard Grade is a two year course finishing in S4.
Higher Grade is normally taken at the end of S5.
We do, however, offer a two year option which can be taken by those pupils with a poor Standard Grade or pupils picking up the subject.
This course is based on Scotvec modules for the first year.
In S6 we offer:
1
CSYS to pupils who have a pass at Higher Grade.
2
A post Higher pre-medical course — Histology, Anatomy (Dissection), Microbiology, Biochemistry, Parasitology, Embryology etc..
3
A Higher course — continuation of the S5 module course.
4
A Resit Higher for those who wish to upgrade.
BUSINESS STUDIES
In the Department we teach Economics, Accounting and Finance, Office and Information Studies, Keyboarding and Word Processing, as well as the more traditional secretarial subjects, Shorthand and Typing.
The subjects are on offer from S3 with pupils  proceeding where appropriate to Higher in S5 and CSYS in S6.
As a follow-on from Office and Information Studies, Scotvec modules will be taken in S5.
The School has responded positively to the technological demands of the new Standard Grade courses and has installed in the Department ten ‘Applemac’ computers adding to the not inconsiderable quantity of equipment already there.
Some notes about the subjects:
Economics
The course is designed ‘to equip pupils with the knowledge and skills to help them understand the economic aspects of their own lives and the world in which they live’.
To this end we study the UK economy and topics such as production, expenditure, markets, government, trade, firms, money and the banking system all feature prominently.
At Standard Grade pupils carry out an investigation in a topic which interests them and by the Sixth Year each will be capable of using the Heriot-Watt University computer model of the economy.
Accounting and Finance
The subject provides an insight into the financial workings of businesses, their sources and use of finance, the recording of financial transactions and the preparation of final accounts and balance sheets.
Partnerships, as well as clubs and societies, feature prominently in this course, which pupils should find useful not only in terms of their own personal finances, but in a broader sense as citizens.
The computer features prominently in both the Standard Grade and Higher courses, particularly in terms of spreadsheet applications.
Office and Information Studies
This subject introduces pupils to the functions and work of the office as well as to many aspect of information technology.
Keyboarding skills are taught and word processing is a central component of the course.
Pupils will also be introduced to spreadsheets, databases, electronic mail and electronic banking.
Management Information Studies
The Department may be able to offer this relatively new subject to Sixth Year pupils in Session 1993–94.
The subject is about the management of resource and decision-making within different types of organisations and endeavours to develop decision-making skills in pupils by highlighting the contribution made by Information Technology.
It provides a foundation on which future academic study and vocational training can be built.
Some pupils come to the Department for the first time in their Sixth Year.
For these pupils we run successful crash courses in Economics, Accounting, Keyboarding and Word Processing.
Several schools' conferences are attended and success has been gained in national competitions.
CHEMISTRY
All pupils in S1 and S2 have Chemistry for one double period per week.
The course aims to foster pupils' interest in the chemical nature of their environment through practical investigation of topics such as separation of mixtures, acids and alkalis, elements and compounds, air and water, carbon, CO2 and carbonates and reactions of metals.
This introduction to the subject enables pupils to make a more informed choice to continue studying Chemistry or not at the end of S2.
About ninety pupils per year choose to study Chemistry in S3 and S4.
The Standard Grade course places considerable emphasis on the relevance of Chemistry to everyday life through consideration of social, economic and industrial aspects.
The content of the course includes the follow topics:
S3:
Chemical reactions — slow, fast and explosive!
Periodic law and order — it's elementary!
Inside the atom — nuclear chemistry and the electron.
Bonding — atomic superglue?
Fossil fuels, hydrocarbons and environmental issues.
Acids, alkalis and salts — uses, abuses and hazards.
S4:
Reactivity of metals and combating corrosion.
Making and using electricity — a salt and battery!
New materials for modem society — plastics and synthetic fibres.
Fertilisers — feast or famine?
Carbohydrates — from starch to glucose to alcohol.
Some of these topics have been touched on in S1 and S2 but receive a fuller treatment in the Standard Grade course.
As well as knowing and understanding the work covered, pupils are required to develop skills in problem-solving and practical techniques and will be assessed in all three aspects.
About seventy pupils continue with Chemistry into S5 .
Those currently in S5 will be our second group for presentation at Revised Higher Grade.
This course not only develops topics encountered at Standard Grade such as rates of reaction, the mole, bonding and structure but also introduces Thermochemistry, equilibrium and radioisotopes.
Carbon chemistry follows two main themes namely (i) simple compounds and their use as feedstocks or fuels and (ii) the more complex nature of biomolecules such as fats, oils and proteins.
As in Standard Grade, socio-economic, industrial and environmental aspects are emphasised.
In S6 , the options are:
A:
CSYS for pupils who have passed Higher, preferably with an A or B.
B:
Higher for pupils who have not passed or who wish to upgrade their result.
The CSYS Chemistry class usually numbers about twenty.
Pupils carry out and report on set practical work and a project, during which the teacher acts an adviser.
The theory is put over in lectures thus giving pupils a foretaste of ‘university-style’ teaching.
The course includes following topics — thermodynamics, kinetics, solution chemistry, organic chemistry, transition metals and metal extraction.
The SY course gives pupils the opportunity to broaden their experience of the subject both with regard to chemical theory and practical expertise.
In 1977 the Royal Institute of Chemistry organised a project competition in Scotland as part of its centenary celebrations.
One of our CSYS pupils was awarded first prize.
In 1986 and again in 1989 a Heriot's pupil gained the distinction of coming first in Scotland in the Higher Grade examination.
Last Session a team of four pupils from Heriot's represented Edinburgh and South East of Scotland at the national final held in London of the ‘Top of the Bench’ quiz organised by the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Two of our team won their section of one of the competitions which involved data research in the Science Museum.
Our team was narrowly defeated in this year's area final.
CLASSICS
LATIN
Pupils may begin Latin in S3.
The course leads to the possibility of presentation at Standard Grade in S4.
A pupil may by-pass ‘S’ Grade if he/she intends to go on to study the subject to Higher Grade.
A principal aim is, of course, to present the pupils successfully for external exams.
Equally important for the pupils however is to develop a competence in the language so that they can read and enjoy the rich literary resources of Latin.
Another important aim for the pupil is to acquire knowledge and understanding of the civilisation which produced the literature to be studied.
The Standard Grade course consists of the three elements TRANSLATION, INTERPRETATION and INVESTIGATION and is well designed to cater for the aims mentioned above.
Pupils continuing Latin take Higher in S5 and may go on to CSYS in S6.
It is at this stage that they begin to appreciate the fruits of their labours.
In S5 they study Vergil's Aeneid.
They read a prose author as well, currently Cicero, and undertake study of an aspect of Roman History or Civilisation.
In S6, pupils are at the stage of being able to read Latin authors on their own though, or course, we continue to study in class a range of literature such as Horace, Catullus, Tacitus and Juvenal.
S6 pupils also undertake a dissertation on a subject of their own choice such as Roman Law, philosophy, etc.
GREEK
Greek is usually begun outside the timetable.
Classes are held before school begins, from 8.25 am–9.00 am.
Pupils who start in this way may go on to take Greek within the timetable in S6.
They are prepared for presentation at all levels up to CSYS.
The aims and contents of these courses are similar to those of the Latin courses though obviously in a Greek context.
The rewards for those who pursue such an undertaking are immense since Greek Literature and Civilisation are, it could be said, even richer fields than their Roman counterparts.
GENERAL
A few pupils have gone on in recent years to study Classics at universities including Oxbridge.
A pupil need not, however, progress beyond ‘S’ Grade to gain educational benefit from studying Classics.
As well as the points mentioned there are the usual claims for Latin that it improves competence in English, facilitates the learning of other languages and so on.
It would be fair to claim that the exam results in Classics are very good.
Certainly owing to curriculum changes and other factors the numbers are small.
This, of course, can be to the advantage of those who do take the subject.
The Department is a small but happy one!
COMPUTING
The new Computing Suite contains a network of 35 Apple Macintosh computers linked to laser, dot matrix and bubblejet printers.
Campus 2000 is available through the modem and the Grolier Encyclopedia, Neris, Europe in the Round and Beethoven's Ninth are available on CD ROM.
Two BBC machines are available for transferring text files to the Macintoshes and for use in interfacing and control work.
The suite is available on request to other Departments and individual pupils who require desktop publishing, word processing, graph plotting etc.
S1 and S2
All pupils in these years follow a general familiarisation course in computer applications timetabled for one period each week.
In this course they acquire some understanding of computing ‘jargon’, and experience using packages such as wordprocessors, spreadsheets, databases and graphics.
They also study simulations of the use of computers in applications such as shops, libraries, airlines, police records, etc.
They are not taught programming as such, but learn to connect pre-constructed modules in such a way as to design effective programs.
S3 and S4
Pupils may opt to study for the SCE Standard Grade examination in computing.
This course continues and extends the S1 and S2 courses with the addition of computer systems theory and programming.
S5 and S6
Pupils who have done well at Standard Grade and wish to specialise in computing may study for Higher Computing Studies or even Certificate of Sixth Year Studies Computing.
In S6 it is also often possible to accommodate beginners or people mastering specialist skills.
Club
There is a thriving Computer Club open to all secondary pupils provided they apply while there are still places vacant.
ENGLISH
Our aim as a Department is to produce young people who leave us having become a literate and articulate as is consistent with their age and ability.
We try to establish a love of reading in its broadest sense that will develop the students' knowledge of and response to the world around them, and which will continue beyond their school years.
The emphasis in the first two years in the English classroom is on consolidating basic linguistic competence and ensuring that the pupils can read, comprehend and write effectively for a variety of purposes, including imaginative, argumentative and reflective writing.
The development of oral skills is also encouraged through formal talking tasks, classroom drama and class discussion.
All of this is designed to lead naturally into the Standard Grade course undertaken in S1 and S4, in which we anticipate most pupils gaining a Credit level award.
In S5, candidates are presented for Revised Higher English; pupils may then opt to study English at CSYS level in their final year.
The study of English in S1 and S2 is presented in as flexible and varied a way as possible, in order to encourage and challenge the pupils as they explore the exciting world of language and literature.
The reading material chosen is selected to offer a wide range of works that is relevant to the pupils' age and interest, including the study of more formal literature, with Shakespeare introduced in S2.
It is our aim to make English a rewarding and enjoyable experience throughout the School but particularly so in the earlier stages.
The Department makes good use of the technology of video and computer.
Drama is actively encouraged through classroom drama, frequent theatre visits and the involvement of the Department in both the annual School production and the Inter-House Drama Festival.
There is a Drama and Debating Society for pupils in S1 and S2; the Senior Debating Society both organizes internal school debating and takes part in competitive inter-school debating and public speaking competitions.
The Department occupies four rooms, 413, 415, 416 and 417, on the first floor of the Lauriston Building on the west side of the School.
It has been refurbished throughout with new desks and chairs and is well equipped with radio, television, filmstrip, overhead projector, microcomputer, automatic weather station, video and tracing facilities.
It is particularly accessible to the Central and National Libraries and the Museum and has a good liaison with the University of Edinburgh and Edinburgh Planning Department.
It runs a flourishing Geography and Geology Club with an interesting programme of visits, films and speakers.
Among our recent former pupils are the best Scottish Geography Graduate in the past fifteen years and a young geologist who is now a millionaire with his own oil company in Canada.
The Department's aims are as follows:
1
To develop a strong interest in a pupil's own surroundings as the home of Man.
2
To help pupils appreciate the variety of physics and human conditions on Earth.
3
To allow pupils to recognise the important geographical relationships and patterns in our landscapes and activities.
4
To help pupils care about the environment and understand other peoples' beliefs and attitudes, giving them a perspective into which to place information and their own ideas.
5
To develop a range of skills (eg: through fieldwork) and competencies (eg: mapreading) with which to appreciate the importance of geographical location and processes.
GEOGRAPHY is taught to Standard Grade, Higher Grade and Certificate of Sixth Year Studies levels and we are one of only a few schools to offer GEOLOGY Higher Grade.
We have, like most schools, introduced Standard Grade, the new Revised Higher and CSYS courses, and SEB short courses in Geology.
HISTORY AND MODERN STUDIES
History is studied by all pupils in S1 and S2 for three periods per week.
The approach is conceptual and skills-based, with extensive use of audio-visual resources, fieldwork and written texts.
The emphasis is on historical empathy and understanding, cultivating the appreciation and enjoyment of History as a relevant and meaningful learning experience.
The intrinsic discipline of the subject is conveyed through the course-work and teaching approach, while being monitored through continuous assessment.
The rationale and aims of the S1 course illustrate the emphasis and priorities:
RATIONALE
The first year History course provides pupils with an introduction to the knowledge and skills necessary for a balanced understanding of the emergence of early modern societies, a knowledge of continuity and change in Medieval Europe and an awareness of the heritage which has contributed to the world in which pupils grow up.
In the first term pupils are introduced to the skill of reconstructing the past by looking at the work of the archaeologist and the historian.
They then undertake a detailed study of Europe in the Early and Late Middle Ages, followed by an in-depth look at the Italian Renaissance and its impact on the development of European culture and society.
In the third term they embark on a general survey of the History of Medicine and Science which allows them to put other subjects which the study into their historical context.
AIMS
During the first year, it is the aim of the History Department:
1)
To increase pupil knowledge and understanding of the Middle Ages, as a distinct period.
2)
To develop conceptual understanding, important to all subsequent studying of History.
Throughout the year, core concepts such as‘civilisation’, ‘government’, ‘power’, ‘religion’, and ‘Empire’ are used as the key to pupils' learning and understanding.
3)
To enable pupils to identify with situations, beliefs and experiences of people in the past and to increase their awareness of the influences which have shaped attitudes in the past.
4)
To develop in pupils skills essential to the historian's craft.
5)
To train pupils in the evaluation of evidence and to encourage awareness of the difference between prejudice and valid argument.
6)
To provide a firm basis for further historical development either for further study and examination purposes or for personal enrichment as a lifelong leisure pursuit.
7)
Finally, and above all, to develop an enthusiasm and interest in the subject both inside and outside the classroom.
First Year History should be an enjoyable, as well as a valuable, experience!
THE CONTEXTS IN S1 AND S2 ARE AS FOLLOWS:
S1 Terms 1 + 2 Archaeology — the skills of the archaeologist and the work of the historian.
The Middle Ages and the Renaissance — a wider ranging historical examination of a formative period, which preceded the beginnings of our ‘Modern World’, yet possessed a very distinctive character and ethos of its own.
The emphasis is on interpretation and evaluation of a variety of primary and secondary source material.
Term 3 A History of Science and Medicine — this long term survey course helps the pupils to understand the various factors which have promoted and inhibited human progress.
They are also encouraged to make connections between medical and scientific advances and changes in human society.
S2 USA — the study of the evolution and development of one society, a contemporary Super Power.
This takes place during Terms 1 and 2 and dovetails with work carried out in P7 at Heriot's.
Term 3
Back Home!
A contemporaneous look at the key influences and events which have shaped ‘Scotland's Story’ up to the present day.
STANDARD GRADE HISTORY — S3–S4
Characteristics of the Course
The course is designed to stimulate an interest in History through a study of the recent past in a variety of contexts.
Pupils should develop an understanding of heritage, change and continuity, and cause and effect.
Active enquiry is a feature of the course which places a heavy emphasis on the use of primary and secondary sources.
Pupils are asked to use evidence to make hypotheses and draw conclusions about the past and to use their imagination to reconstruct past situations.
The Course is divided into four units covering the period from the second half of the eighteenth century to the present day.
The options taken at Heriot's are:
Unit 1:
Changing life in Scotland and Britain: 1830s–1920s
Unit 2:
International Co-operation and Conflict: 1890s–1920s.
Unit 3:
People and Power: Russia 1914–1941
Unit 4:
Investigation — pupil choice.
Key ideas, concepts and content are defined for all Units except the Historical Investigation.
The approach to course design emphasises the development of understanding of key ideas rather than extensive memorisation of detailed factual information.
The assessable elements, in common with the other social subjects are: Knowledge and Understanding; Evaluating; and Investigating.
The first two will be assessed for certification by external examination while Investigating is assessed internally.
EXAMINATION COURSES — S5–S6
The Department aims to create a disciplined and enjoyable working environment, where the study of History is a stimulating and rewarding learning experience.
MODERN STUDIES
Modern Studies is taught in S3, 4, 5 and 6.
Standard Grade and Revised Higher Grade are currently studied within the Department.
Standard Grade (S3–S4)
The aim of Standard Modern Grade Studies is to help young people to understand the society in which they live and to prepare them to participate fully as members of that society.
The two year course makes use of a wide range of different approaches to teaching and learning and pupils carry out their own investigations of topical issues, using resources both inside and outside the classroom.
They learn to use a variety of different methods of gathering information for themselves and then to interpret that information.
Pupils are encouraged to use the Departmental computer to access information from databases, and as part of simulation exercises.
The two year course covers four areas of relevance to modern society: Living in Democracy, Changing Society, Alternative Ideologies and International Relations.
Within these four ‘Syllabus Areas’, seven concepts are identified as forming the basis on which pupils' knowledge is built up.
All pupils are assessed in their knowledge and understanding of the contexts specified by the Scottish Examination Board, and in their ability to evaluate different types of relevant information.
Investigating leads to the completion of an Individual Study in S4, which forms a third assessment.
REVISED HIGHER SYLLABUS
For the purposes of the examination, full coverage of Study Theme 1 (Politics in a Democratic Society) is required of all candidates.
At least two of the eleven Issue Areas specified in Part 2 of the syllabus (International Issues) are also covered.
The themes studied within the Department are as follows:
An essential part of the Revised Higher is a decision-making exercise, which is linked to Part 1 of the syllabus.
The Department attempts to provide a positive and co-operative learning environment in which these aims can be realised by the individual pupil.
HOME ECONOMICS
The Home Economics Department was opened at George Heriot's in September 1984.
Recently additional facilities were completed so that the Department now comprises a purpose-built Food Studies/Cookery Room and a separate Textile Studies/Fabric Work Area.
The Department provides courses for pupils at all stages throughout the Senior School from S1–S6.
The subject, Home Economics, has changed considerably in recent years and is constantly evolving to take account of social change and developments in technology.
Courses offered in schools reflect these changes.
In recent years emphasis has moved away from the teaching of ‘craft’ skills such as cookery and sewing towards the development of a range of practical and organisational skills which will enable young people to cope with the demands of living in constantly changing social and economic conditions.
Pupils are encouraged to develop an ability to work independently, to use a wide range of modern equipment, to use resources, to make decisions and exercise judgement and to become aware of the complexities of living in a consumer society.
Courses have an emphasis on technology and a problem-solving approach to many of the tasks undertaken.
Courses are designed to suit both boys and girls, and creative and aesthetic talents and are also encouraged.
It is most important, particularly with younger pupils, that Home Economics should be an enjoyable subject, in which learning is combined with a sense of achievement in a pleasant but industrious atmosphere.
COURSES OFFERED BY THE DEPARTMENT
MATHEMATICS
Standard Grade increases the emphasis on making Mathematics more relevant.
Pupils are expected to use their Maths to solve problems.
These problems or investigations are expected to be diverse.
Some will involve drawing instruments, some real life calculations, and some simple mathematical model making — which is another term for algebra.
Arithmetic is no longer tested separately.
S1 and S2 The courses in S1 and S2 are designed, not only to stimulate an interest in and an enjoyment of the subject, but also to provide the pupils with a basic ‘tool-kit’, necessary for  further development.
Algebra is given a special emphasis as well as the application of Mathematics in the form of problem-solving and investigative work.
S3 This is a critical year where decisions about which pupils are likely to prove to be good Higher Candidates and which need more consolidation and a slower pace are taken.
S4 Many sit Standard Grade on the way to Higher and the ablest by-pass, getting on with the Higher Course.
Two sets sit General/Foundation Mathematics ie: they are on a General Course but sit Foundation as a safety net.
Similarly the Credit level candidates can sit the General Papers.
S5 At the moment very few pupils elect not to try Higher.
Most will sit Higher in S5.
The alternatives are designed to cater for a wide variety of abilities in S5.
Scotvec Modules have been developed for those pupils who have a pass at General level and not wish to do Higher.
It is possible for a student who copes comfortably with the modules to go on to Higher in S6.
There is also a two year Higher group who take modules A1 and C1 as part of their course.
S6 There are currently two sets sitting or resitting Higher and a large number of pupils sitting Sixth Year Studies in Papers 1, 2, 3 and 5.
We offer four papers in Mathematics:
A detailed booklet of advice is given to each S5 pupil and they are also individually counselled on which papers and how many they should attempt at CSYS.
Investigating
Standard Grade
Pupils attempt at least three from an approved list sent by the Scottish Examination Board.
These are sat under examination conditions and then marked internally.
This mark constitutes 20% of the final grade.
Higher Grade
The Exam Board sends an annual list of investigations.
The candidate is issued with the selected investigation several days prior to the write-up session.
Within that time, candidates are encouraged to seek help and discuss the work with other pupils or teachers.
The actual report is completed in one and a half hours under examination conditions.
It is then sent to the Examination Board to be externally marked.
This mark constitutes 10% of the final grade.
New CSYS Papers 2, 3 and 5
The arrangements are similar to those in Higher but there are time limits, e.g. some two and half hour investigations and one twelve hour investigation.
These count as 20% of the assessment, half of which is externally marked.
Computing
The Maths Department assists in an S1 and S2 Computer Familiarisation course which is allocated one period per week.
MODERN LANGUAGES
LANGUAGES FOR EUROPE — FRENCH, GERMAN, SPANISH
More than ever before, there is broad agreement that our pupils should learn the languages of our European partners.
In Heriot's we take this very seriously, and we have embarked on a major enhancement of our language provision, to give all our pupils a grounding in two languages — either French and German, or French and Spanish, depending on the year of entry.
To allow pupils to start at an earlier age, teaching will start in P6, though our system is designed to cope with entrants at P7 and S1 as well.
All pupils in our Junior School start one foreign language in P6.
They will continue with this, and add a second foreign language in S1.
Pupils joining Heriot's in P7 in August 1993 will be given additional language teaching to ensure that they can join the others in S1.
Pupils entering S1 in August 1994 will be able to join the pupils from our own Junior School if they have already studied one of our own two languages to approximately the same level.
Otherwise, they will do only French in S1, adding another language in S2.
In S3 and S4, all pupils will continue with at least one of the languages they have been learning (they may choose either).
We expect that a significant number will choose to continue with both, at least until Standard Grade in S4.
As an interim measure, our P7 are currently learning German, before joining our present system in S1.
This system is outlined overleaf.
OUR PRESENT SYSTEM — applying to pupils entering S1 in August 1993
All pupils start French in S1, and continue to Standard Grade in S4.
Many pupils choose Higher Grade French as one of their S5 subjects.
In S6 they may choose to study for the Certificate of Sixth Year Studies, or simply work to ‘keep up’ their language.
Our Satellite Television facility, offering many live channels in French (as well as German, Spanish and Italian), is particularly useful at this senior level.
Organisation:
The organisation of our course recognizes the fact that our school population is of above average ability, and that our pupils and their parents wish to see real progress being made.
To allow pupils to progress at a pace suited to their own particular aptitudes, they are taught French in sets based on their ability in the subject.
This has the great advantage that, from S1, able pupils can be moved into a more challenging group, while those who find the pace too fast can be given the chance to catch up before they become discouraged.
Course Material:
To allow maximum flexibility, all pupils follow the same basic course, though at different rates.
As we feel it is most important that our pupils should benefit from the best teaching materials available, it is our policy to ensure that teachers have at their disposal a wide range of supplementary materials from which they can select what is appropriate for each set.
Course Content:
We welcome the emphasis on Communication as the main aim of language teaching, but we believe that real communication can only be achieved when there is a sound knowledge of linguistic structure.
Our pupils will, therefore, learn basic grammar as well as developing their communicative skills.
Likewise, all pupils will be taught the ‘optional’ skill of Writing, in addition to the compulsory skills of Listening, Speaking and Reading.
As well as being a very useful skill in itself, Writing allows us to set pupils regular homework, which we see as a valuable extension of learning time, and as essential training in self-discipline for later life.
France:
At all stages, pupils learn about France and about French customs, and we encourage them to see their study of French as the key to real communication with real French people.
To this end, there are regular conversation classes, in small groups, with our French Assistant.
We have an exchange link with a school in France, and encourage other links as well— individual exchanges, pen-pals, etc.
GERMAN AND SPANISH
Pupils have the opportunity to start German or Spanish in S3, with a view to sitting Standard Grade in S4, Higher Grade in S5 or S6, and CSYS in S6.
The teaching method combines the traditional grammar-based approach with the communicative approach and as much background information about the people and the country as time allows.
Extensive conversation with a native teacher forms an integral part of all courses.
Short intensive courses in the above languages are available in S6.
GAELIC AND ITALIAN
These languages are also on offer to pupils in the Senior School on an extra-curricular basis, i.e. before or after normal school hours or during lunch break.
INTERNATIONAL CLUB
The International Club organises a wide range of activities, including speakers, videos, visits, etc.
It is not limited to any one country or language.
The Club is organising a repeat of last Session's most successful visit to Paris for senior pupils.
MUSIC
Primary pupils from P3 to P7 come to class music lessons twice a week.
As well as placing a strong emphasis on singing throughout this time, the Music Department also offers all pupils structured tuition on percussion and recorder, as well as an introduction to keyboard and guitar, and encourages the development of their creative abilities through practical group projects using material related to classroom topics.
Each pupil in S1 and S2 receives one period of class music per week.
All classes are based on practical activities with a maximum of fifteen pupils in each group.
Short blocks of study covering all classroom instruments, ensemble playing and inventing (including experience of computers) provide something to suit all tastes, and lay the foundations for S.C.E. courses later on.
From S3 onwards, music is an optional subject; Standard Grade courses are offered in S3 and S4, and Higher Grade in S5 and S6.
EXTRA-CURRICULAR MUSIC
Music plays a very important part in the life of the School.
Whether pupils play an instrument (or wish to do so) or sing or merely want to listen, there is no shortage of opportunities to take part at their own level.
Instrumental Tuition Lessons are available on all orchestral instruments and on guitar, saxophone and clarsach.
Individual singing lessons are also available, and a limited number of pupils can receive piano lessons at School.
As a rule ten lessons are given each term at a minimum cost of £70.00 per term.
Most instruction is given during school hours on a rota system so that the same class is not missed every week.
Where there are objections to this, it may be possible to arrange lessons at other times and/or outside school.
(This option is usually available only to senior pupils.)
The School has a stock of musical instruments available for hire.
Instrumental Work (Orchestras)
The First Orchestra consists of pupils, usually from the Senior School, who have reached an advanced standard of performance.
The Second Orchestra (strings only) consists of pupils of medium standard chosen from P6 and P7 and Secondary 1, 2 and 3.
The Third Orchestra (strings only) is made up of pupils with a basic ability from Primary 4 to 6.
It is usual for a pupil to play in each orchestra for at least two years before being promoted.
Most new pupils in the First Year can usually expect to join the Second Orchestra or Wind Band, provided they are of a reasonable standard.
The First Orchestra has recently appeared in venues as far apart as Worcester Cathedral, Dunkeld Cathedral, Huntly Parish Church and the Usher Hall, and also enjoys a number of foreign links which have taken them to Denmark, Bavaria and Italy within the last few years.
Their most recent tour, in June of last year, involved them in joint performances of music by Haydn, Elgar, Dvorak and Beethoven in Munich.
Instrumental Work (Bands)
The Concert Band is now well established, and caters for a large number of wind, brass and percussion players.
Membership is at present open to all pupils with a basic ability.
If numbers continue to increase it is hoped to institute a training Wind Band for younger players.
There is also a Swing Band as well as smaller groups of saxophone players.
The Swing Band recently played in the presence of H R H the Duchess of Kent, and has had considerable success in the Edinburgh Jazz Festival.
Singing
There are two mixed choirs in the Primary School (P4/5 and P6/7) which perform both within School and at the Usher Hall.
Pupils in the Lower Primary (P1–3) also have regular opportunities for musical performance, often allied to stage work.
All pupils in the Senior School are welcome to join the Senior Choir.
There are no auditions, but once pupils have committed themselves to membership regular attendance is expected.
Recent repertoire has ranged from Beatles' songs and American folksongs to John Rutter's Gloria and Mozart's Requiem.
The choir is occasionally augmented by former pupils, parents, Staff and extra pupils to become the Community Choir, performing every Christmas in the Usher Hall, and often in Greyfriars Kirk at Easter.
There is also a Girls' Choir and a Primary Boys' Choir.
House Music Competitions The Senior House Music Competition in the Second Term is entirely in the hands of the pupils.
There is a Junior Competitive Festival in January, specifically for primary and younger secondary pupils.
Detail are available from .
Music Club The Music Club meets every Friday lunchtime throughout the Session.
The programme consists of live and recorded music of all kinds, and lectures by pupils, Staff and guests.
Any pupil in the Senior School may attend.
The Club is run entirely by a committee of pupils, under the supervision of .
Other Groups Other smaller groups, such as the Brass Ensemble, Saxophone Quartet and the Madrigal Group, are joined by invitation only, but there are many ad hoc informal groups formed by pupils themselves, and any such initiative is welcomed and encouraged by the Music Department.
The Pipe Band The Pipe Band is organised by .
Interested beginners (pipes and drums) are always welcome, and instruction is provided.
PERSONAL AND SOCIAL DEPARTMENT
Personal and Social Development,(PSD), is a non-examinable subject which pupils study for one period a week in S1 and S2.
From S3, no actual periods are formally allocated at the moment.
However, at various times throughout the Session, selected topics are studied by each year group which involves the use of many ‘outside’ speakers.
For example, on October 14th of this year, S3 attended a very successful ‘Drugs Symposium’ in the School Hall.
The units studied are carefully structured so that individual work, pair work and group work can easily lead into, or be developed out of, whole class discussions.
The approach is active — learning by doing and discussing — and the activities are designed
a)
so that pupils can learn how to deal with the challenges of our School, and later on, society;
b)
so that pupils can lead lives and make decisions, both in and out of school, that are personally satisfying and socially constructive;
c)
to promote, amongst other things, self discipline, respect for others, compassion, responsibility, and positive and healthy decisions with regard to drug use.
The course covers areas which are not the province of any one Department and is taught by Staff from many different academic backgrounds, thereby bringing to it a range of experience.
The following is a brief outline of some of the subjects covered:
S1
Know the School
Introductory units about Heriot's — the place, the people, the rules and the expected code of behaviour.
A familiarisation tour of the School is also undertaken.
Also included here is a section which encourages pupils to do Homework to the best of their abilities.
Study Skills
To help pupils study more effectively and encourage self discipline.
Much use is made of School Library in this unit which enables pupils to practice and improve their research skills.
Leisure
Pupils' attention is drawn to the various clubs/societies available both in the School itself and in the Edinburgh area.
Health
The School Matron deals with such topics as ‘Adolescence’ and ‘Personal Hygiene’.
Moral Dilemmas
Pupils face up to real school life ‘situations’ e.g, bullying in school, cheating in exams and teenage gambling.
This unit encourages pupils to have the confidence to ‘talk through’ any problems with people.
Police
Illustrated talks from our Community Police Officer include Crime Prevention and Road Safety.
Handicaps
This is a general look at handicaps with particular reference to the wheelchair bound and is aimed at helping pupils think about the needs of others in society.
Social Vices
The three units in this section are Drugs, Drinking and Smoking.
The Drugs unit aims to expand pupils' knowledge of drugs so that they appreciate that only some drugs are socially acceptable.
The Drinking unit is to make our younger pupils more aware of alcohol-related problems before most of them are actively involved in its consumption.
The Smoking units hopes to discourage pupils from taking up the habit, with the obvious obverse of encouraging our smokers to consider seriously giving it up.
S2
First Aid
Both theoretical and practical, this unit is designed to help pupils administer basic First Aid.
Hazards in the Home
This topic is meant to improve pupils' awareness of ‘danger’ areas in houses and to inform them of basic safety measures and precautions which should be taken at home.
Police
More illustrated talks from our Community Police Officer include ‘Shoplifting’ and ‘Vandalism’.
Drugs
An expansion of the S1 course, this unit develops critical thinking and vital decision making skills regarding the taking of drugs.
Self Discipline
This unit is designed to enable pupils to improve and practise their self discipline, the latter through an extension of the teenage drinking topic in S1.
Relationships
Here it is hoped that pupils will learn to realise that there are difficulties involved in growing up and taking responsibilities for their own decisions.
Faulty Goods
This unit's main aims are to inform pupils of their rights when they buy an item and what they can do should that item be defective in any way.
For obvious reasons, this topic is studied around Christmastime.
Handicaps
This is a continuation from the S1 course, and is mainly concerned with an appreciation of the everyday problems experienced by the deaf and blind.
Study Skills
Here pupils are encouraged to analyse why they may perform disappointingly in exams as well as to discover ways of improving their preparation for tests.
Included in this unit is another period of time spent in the School Library expanding their research techniques.
Friendships
‘Making Friends’ and ‘Problems with Friends’are just two of the topics discussed in this unit.
Careers
The Careers Guidance Staff take the class, usually just before subject choices for S3 are made, so that professional help and encouragement can be given to the pupils at this critical time.
Contraception
The School Matron deals with this very important topic.
PHYSICAL EDUCATION & games 
FACILITIES
The Department has facilities available at the School and at the playing fields at Goldenacre.
In the School:—
Goldenacre Playing Fields:—
Goldenacre is serviced by changing rooms, toilets and showers and an excellent pavilion facility.
Outside the School: The School also makes use of several facilities within the Edinburgh area for activities such as rowing, curling, golf, skiing, squash, fencing, badminton, tennis and netball.
THE P.E.
PROGRAMME
Every pupil follows a specialist-taught programme of Physical Education from Primary 1 to S6.
Pupils are taught on a block system, which means that they concentrate on one particular activity for a certain number of weeks, then move on to a different activity.
The programme aims to give the pupils experience in each of the different categories of PE and is devised to try and provide a progressive experience for every child entering the School.
From Primary 1 to S2, two periods of PE are allocated on the timetable, whilst S3 to S6 receive one period per week.
Basic details are given below:—
GAMES PROGRAMME
The School has a long and successful tradition in team games and competitions.
Pupils are strongly encouraged to participate in major team games or competitions at all age levels.
It is expected therefore that pupils involved will be available for matches on a regular basis.
Two periods a week are allocated to Games to Primary 7 and one period from S1 to S6.
THE AIMS OF THE DEPARTMENT
1
To help each pupil to acquire the skills, knowledge and attitudes which encourage the adoption of a physically active lifestyle and the maintenance of physical fitness throughout life.
To develop a concern for the right use of physical activity in the promotion of health and fitness.
2
To contribute to the personal development of the pupil (intellectual, emotional and social development) through physical activity.
3
To develop an awareness of the value of Physical Education, an appreciation of the various aspects of Physical Education and the benefits of regular participation in physical activity.
4
To develop positive attitudes to personal health and to a fundamental social area — concern for others.
5
To develop an awareness of the human body in relation to movement.
6
To prepare the pupils to make worthwhile use of leisure time both during school days and later in adult life.
7
To develop positive attitudes to physical recreation.
8
To develop correct attitudes and behaviour in inter-action in physical activities.
9
To develop a desirable social attitude through the participation in the various categories of Physical Education.
GENERAL OBJECTIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT
1
To learn and improve technical skills.
2
To have a basic knowledge of rules and how to apply them.
3
To encourage good gamemanship, fair play and co-operation.
4
To identify interests, aptitudes and abilities.
5
To offer structured movement experiences which provide the pupil with the opportunity to express, develop and control a range of emotional, moral and personal challenges.
6
To develop body movement and control in a variety of situations and encourage creativity.
7
To assist pupils to set appropriate levels of aspiration and to teach them how to cope with failure and success.
PHYSICS
ACCOMMODATION
The Physics Department has five laboratories, one staff room, one storeroom and one workshop.
Two of our laboratories have been completely refurbished recently as part of an ongoing programme of modernisation.
EQUIPMENT
The Department is well supplied with the full range of equipment required for all the courses offered, from introductory courses in S1 to CSYS courses in S6.
With the recent introduction of Standard Grade and Revised Higher Grade, special budgets have been made available for the purchase of all the additional apparatus needed for the very attractive, modern courses.
OUTLINE OF COURSES
S1:
Here we introduce the simpler basic concepts of physics, using a predominantly experiment-based approach, where the relevance of our subject to everyday situations is always stressed.
S2:
Some of the course material is selected to prepare the way for Standard Grade Physics and the approach continues to place emphasis on the value of good practical techniques.
All the basic properties of Wave Motion are considered and some time is spent on Ray Optics and Simple Electricity.
In the Third Term, we cover the Health Unit of the Standard Grade Course so that all pupils will gain some knowledge of this important topic, even if they decide to go no further with our subject.
S3 & s4 : Standard Grade Physics
All pupils opting to do physics follow this modern course, which consists of seven units, covering the following topics: Telecommunications, Using Electricity, Health Physics (in S2); Electronics; Transport; Energy Matters and Space Physics.
The course also includes assessment of practical work and investigation.
We find that the vast majority of our pupils can cope with the Credit Paper.
Some additional material is injected into S3 and S4 which will help to take the rush out of the new Revised Higher Grade in S5 and S6.
S4 & s5 : Revised Higher Grade Physics
All pupils opting to continue with physics are now following this new Higher course, which is designed to articulate with the Standard Grade.
The work naturally becomes more analytical and mathematically challenging at this stage.
The principal areas of study are as follows: Mechanics and Properties of Matter; Electricity and Electronics; Radiation and Matter.
An after-school revision class will be offered once a week throughout the second term.
Most of our pupils will be ready to sit the external examination in May of S5.
Some might prefer to delay their presentation until S6.
Such decisions can be made after the results of the internal preliminary exams in January become known.
S6: Revised CSYS Physics
This interesting course of pre-university physics adopts a tighter approach to practical work, project work and theory.
The highlight of the course for many pupils is definitely the extended project which they carry out over the first two terms, tapping the wide network of apparatus available in the Department for work at this level.
Pupils often volunteer to continue after school with their project and practical work or they take advantage of links which the Department has built up with local industry and further education establishments.
S6: Short Courses in Physics
Three short courses are on offer to our S6 pupils.
Each course requires one double period per week and leads to a SCOTVEC qualification.
At present, the topics which we have selected are:
a)
Experimental procedures
b)
Optics and Optical instruments
c)
Radioactivity measurement
PHYSICS CLUB
runs a very popular Physics Club during school lunch-breaks.
Enthusiasts build simple (and some not-so-simple) electronics circuits using equipment provided by the Department.
The Committee organises an interesting programme which includes visits to science exhibitions and talks by guest speakers.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES
General Approach
Religion plays an important part in the lives of thousands of millions of people.
The pupils should recognise that religion is an interesting and useful area to study, without feeling that they are being forced to believe in any particular religion or faith.
We live in a community in which there are people who believe in a variety of faiths or no faith at all.
The pupils should grow in an understanding of, and sensitivity towards, the beliefs and thoughts of other people in order to contribute to a more harmonious and tolerant society.
Religious education contributes to the development of pupils' attitudes, values and moral perception.
Course Outline
It is not possible to explore any world faith in depth on one period a week.
It is to be hoped that pupils will acquire a sensitivity towards those who have differing beliefs and develop an understanding of those beliefs, while at the same time becoming more aware of their own value and place within society.
TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Technical Education in Scotland is presently undergoing a dramatic transformation and the Technical Department in Heriot's is no exception.
In 1989 our two practical rooms were completely refurbished and equipped with the result that we have perhaps one of the most modern and best equipped practical facilities in Scotland.
Phase two of the development of the Department was completed this summer.
Two Technical Drawing rooms were transformed into Design for Graphic Communication.
Graphic Communication is a new subject in Scottish schools and it replaces Technical Drawing.
In S1 the emphasis is on learning through discovery.
Our pupils are exposed to many different materials, tools and processes and from the beginning they are taught the importance of the design process.
Their year is split up equally between Woodwork, Metalwork and Log Book production and great stress is placed on the mastery of learning.
During S2 the same topics are studied but in more detail and greater emphasis is placed on accuracy and presentation.
Although the S1 and S2 courses are courses in their own right, it is hoped that they will provide a springboard for those pupils electing to study a technical subject to Standard, Higher and CSYS Grade.
This year we have two S3 and S4 classes studying Standard Grade Craft and Design with one S5 Higher Grade class.
The subject is open to both girls and boys — many of whom you will see displaying their talents today.
In the short time we have been presenting Craft and Design in Heriot's we have already established a reputation for outstanding work and last Session one of our pupils won first prize in the Edinburgh and District Rotary Club Design Competition.
Demand for the new course in Graphic Communication has been high in the School and with the latest in Computer Aided Graphics and Design forming an integral part of the course it is already proving very popular with our pupils.
During this period of transition it is inevitable that we will be teaching the old with the new.
Therefore we are still teaching Ordinary Grade and Higher Grade Engineering as well as Ordinary and Higher Grade Technical Drawing.
In S5 and S6 there is ample opportunity for pupils who did not choose a technical subject in S3 to return to one and many senior pupils opt to do this.
We believe that it is educationally wrong to teach a subject in isolation without linking it to the outside world.
We try as far as possible to relate the work we do in the Technical Department to what goes on in industry and commerce.
Consequently we utilise as much as possible the  connections we have developed through industrial visits and the National Neighbourhood Engineering Scheme.
These are exciting times in the world of Technological Education and we in Heriot's are confident that we can equip our pupils to meet the challenge that lies ahead.
LEARNING SUPPORT
Learning Support is available to all children in the School from Primary 1 to the Sixth Year whatever their individual needs are.
Children may be referred by teachers or parents or may even ask for help themselves.
We offer help to pupils with varying needs — general learning problems, specific learning difficulties, the filling of gaps caused by changing schools and, recently, the provision of extra teaching for a few children whose educational attainment is far in excess of that of their peers.
There is a professionally qualified Staff of three in the Learning Support Department,, who has had many years of experience here at Heriot's, both in the Junior School and in Learning Support;; who has more recently joined us after several years experience in Learning Support in other schools; and  who, as Head of Department and an experienced educational psychologist, is responsible for the assessment of our pupils and for the planning of their programmes within the Department.
The Department is housed in two classrooms and a small study, all of which are pleasantly furnished and help to portray the welcoming, friendly attitude we have towards the pupils.
Much of the work of the Department, of course, goes on outwith the physical confines of these rooms.
Support is given in three ways:
a)
Advice to subject teachers to carry out within their own teaching programme.
b)
Learning support for a specific child/children within the classroom.
c)
Withdrawal of the child for one or more periods in the week into the Department.
There is regular formal and informal communication between the Department and the rest of the School.
Liaison with parents and other professionals dealing with a child is also considered very important.
Parents are made most welcome at all times and are encouraged to look at their child's problems realistically and positively.
Some parents are actively involved in the child's learning support programme.
Where necessary pupils with severe specific learning problems are prepared for external examinations under specialised circumstances arranged with the Scottish Examination Board or Scotvec.
This enables these pupils to gain full recognition of their academic attainments, and they can then proceed to the college, university or career of their choice.
The pupils who come to Learning Support are encouraged to look openly and realistically at their problems and to use departmental resources, staff, accommodation and equipment to help them resolve these problems.
At all times they are encouraged to take responsibility for their own learning.
The Staff in the Department play a full part in the extra-curricular life of the School, as it is important that the children do not see Learning Support as in any way different or apart from the mainstream of school life.
The Department is run informally and relationships with the pupils are good.
THE SENIOR LIBRARY
The Senior Library, which opened in 1988, is situated below the School Hall.
The generous gift of a group of Former Pupils, ‘The Class of ‘38’, has enabled us to provide excellent furnishings and equipment in a pleasant environment.
The central area of the Library offers facilities for private study; around the perimeter several carrels provide even greater privacy.
The stock of books is now in excess of 9,500 and will increase each year.
There is a good reference section, some excellent resource material and a fine selection of fiction.
The Library is used extensively by S6 pupils and is available to all pupils and Staff for reference and borrowing.
It is also used for the teaching of study skills to S1 and S2 classes and as a resource base for many subjects.
In addition there is a careers section where pupils can make use of the information on computer or in documents relating to all branches of future employment and to university and college entrance.
CAREERS GUIDANCE
Careers Guidance is undertaken by , Principal Teacher, and , Assistant Headteacher.
Our first involvement with pupils comes at the end of the second year when we give advice with choice of subject for the pupils' curriculum for S3 to S5.
Although there are no formal Careers classes, pupils in S4 and S5 come in small groups to the Careers Office several times each Session.
They are introduced to the sources of Careers and Course Information; to the options facing them on leaving School; to applications procedures; to interviews etc.
In addition, in S5, the School's Work Experience Scheme is outlined whereby all pupils after the SCE examinations in June undertake a week of Work Experience: pupils may go to offices, hospitals, shops, factories, schools, country parks….
Their first choice is not always available but the week should achieve the aim of broadening their horizons and their experience.
A few pupils will leave in S4 and more in S5.
Some of these will go into Further or Higher education and help and advice are given.
The vast majority will, however, stay on to S6.
Most of S6 apply to University, Polytechnics and Colleges and each pupil is seen individually so that the details of the applications can be discussed together with careers considerations and timetabling for S6.
Some of S6 will be seeking immediate employment and some will be taking a ‘year out’.
We have a well-stocked careers section in the School Library which is readily accessible to all pupils, together with further material in the Careers Office.
We have courses and careers information such as prospectuses, careers folders, videos, reference books, computer discs etc..
Pupils are also encouraged to attend many Open Days now available.
Once a year we hold a Careers Convention in School to which all pupils and parents are invited.
Here they can get information from representatives of Higher and Further Education, from employers, from the Armed Forces, etc..
The Careers Convention is held in the evening and is informal.
We also have links with Lothian Region Careers Service who come to the Careers Convention and who also interview pupils who are considering going straight into employment when they leave school.
The School is a member of the Independent Schools Career Organisation (ISCO).
Pupils may enrol in S4: the fee entitles them to a comprehensive set of aptitudes and interest tests which is followed by a detailed personal report and interview with careers suggestions; attendance at careers courses; a careers magazine several times a year, etc..
The services of ISCO can be called upon by those who enrol for several years after the pupil have left school.
EXAMINATION RESULTS
Overleaf you will find Statistics about our Standard Grade, S5 and S6 Higher and CSYS results over the last four years.
Please note that we have been able to incorporate our successful appeals into these figures but we are still awaiting the national post-appeal figures.
The information below is as accurate a comparison we can provide at the moment, therefore.
It is always necessary to urge caution in the interpretation of examination results and to remind ourselves that they are only one measure of a school's success.
Nevertheless, it is fair to report that, once more, we have pleased with our pupils' performance.
We believe that their results will bear comparison with any in Scotland.
As S4 Standard Grade and S5 Higher results are the ones usually referred to in national comparisons, the following facts may be of interest.
As the entrance requirements for universities, colleges and the professions have become more demanding in recent years, so increasing numbers have stayed on for a Sixth Year to study for Certificate of Sixth Year Studies examinations, to take ‘crash’ courses or modules in new subjects or to upgrade their existing results.
We have an extremely flexible timetable in S6 and we are always pleased to welcome pupils from other schools who join the 130 or more Heriot pupils who stay on to Sixth Year.
Around 110 pupils each year proceed to university or other degree courses.