

OPEN MORNING SATURDAY 13TH NOVEMBER 10.00 AM TO 12.30 PM
The Headmaster will be addressing prospective parents in the School Hall at 10.00 am.
The School's main entrance is opposite the Royal Infirmary.
 If you are coming by car, please enter by Greyfriars Kirk and park in the playground.
We hope that you will be bale to come and we look forward to meeting you then.
SCHOOL UNIFORM REGULATIONS — SENIOR SCHOOL (S1 TO S6)
1.
Standards relating to dress and appearance are determined by the Headmaster.
2.
Pupils must wear the full, correct school uniform.
They must always be neat and tidy in appearance.
Pupils must remember that they represent the School when travelling to and from the School and at all times when wearing our uniform.
3.
All item of clothing, books and personal belongings should be clearly marked with the owner's name and class.
4.
Items marked with an asterisk * MUST be obtained from Aitken and Niven or Clan House.
Items marked with a cross + must be purchased from Sports Warehouse.
Their addresses are:
STATEMENT OF VALUES
We believe that parents have the most important influence on their children and that the basis of a sound school education is the partnership between the home and the school.
Before your children come to Heriot's we would like you to discuss with them the aims of this School and the values on which we lay emphasis.
We ask you to acknowledge your understanding and acceptance of these by signing and returning the accompanying form.
We believe that our School is a community and that our care and concern for our pupils' education and welfare are fundamental.
We encourage all our pupils not only to develop their individual potential but also to contribute to the well—being of others.
Whilst gaining the confidence to know their own worth and express themselves freely, they should also learn to respect the opinions and beliefs of others.
We want our pupils' time here to be an exciting period of hard work and play, and of discovery about ideas and feelings.
To that end we encourage them to enjoy their education and to participate in the multitude of academic, sporting, social and extra—curricular activities available throughout the year.
It is important that all parents and pupils appreciate the ethos of their School and that they share in it and support it.
We continue to demand high standards of behaviour and appearance and to stress the importance of the more traditional values such as firm discipline.
The accompanying Code of Conduct and Procedure explains some of these expectations.
We look forward to the close co-operation of everyone in maintaining them.
CODE OF CONDUCT AND PROCEDURE
Polite, considerate behaviour is expected from the pupils at all times, both in and out of the School.
Respect for others and concern for those in need are central to the ethos of the School.
1.
Safety of Pupils and Property.
a)
Pupils must not leave a class or go out of school during school hours without permission.
Only pupils in S4, S5 and S6 are allowed out of school at lunchtime and no pupils are allowed out of school at the morning interval.
Greyfriars is out of bounds to all pupils at all times.
b)
Smoking and alcohol are not allowed in school, on school trips or while wearing school uniform.
c)
The possession or the use of drugs is illegal and is forbidden.
All prescribed drugs should be in the care of the School Matron.
d)
Pupils are not allowed to bring cars or motor cycles into the School.
Parents must comply with the stringent rules for vehicular access, which are explained in a Headmaster's letter.
Cycling within the grounds or at Goldenacre is also forbidden.
e)
All damage to school property must be reported immediately to a teacher or to the Deputy Headmaster.
Pupils will be required to make good any damage or loss for which they are responsible.
f)
Any item which is likely to cause injury to any person should not be brought to school.
g)
Money, and other valuables, must not be left lying around in classrooms or changing rooms.
Personal stereos, electronic games, etc. should not be brought to school.
Loss of property should be notified to the appropriate Year Teacher, the Depute Headmaster or the Head of the Junior School.
As the School cannot accept responsibility for loss,parents are advised to have the appropriate insurance .
2 The Environment
a)
Everyone shares the responsibility for keeping the School clean and tidy.
Litter should not be thrown down but put in the bins provided.
b)
Pupils may eat and drink in the Refectory, or in the classrooms by arrangement with members of staff.
.
Absence
a)
Parents must write to the Headmaster, or the Head of the Junior School, in advance, in order to seek permission for a pupil to be absent.
Requests for prolonged absence during term time are strongly discouraged.
b)
Pupils may be excused regularly from Games or PE only on the production of a medical certificate.
c)
When a pupil's absence through illness is likely to be longer than three days, the parents must inform the School.
Dear Parent,
NOTES ON APPLICATION TO THE SCHOOL
In response to your enquiry, I am happy to send you a prospectus and application form(s).
Also enclosed are a strip of adhesive labels, a list of this session's dates and information about fees and fee remission.
Separate information about Nursery is enclosed for those who have requested it or is available from the Admissions Secretary.
All applications are acknowledged on receipt.
Should you wish to apply for assistance with fees, please complete Section D on the reverse of the application form.
A pupil's suitability is usually determined by an interview and/or entrance examination, though this may not be necessary in the case of senior pupils holding Standard Grade, GCSE or other examination qualifications.
Should you wish any further information, please do not hesitate to contact the School.
Yours sincerely 
NURSERY FEES
SCHOOL FEES
1.
Fees for the Junior and Senior School are payable either by lump sum on or before 5th September 1992, for which an advance payment allowance of 4 ½%; will be granted, or by ten monthly instalments on the fifth day of each month from September to June inclusive under Direct Debit Mandate.
2.
A reduction is made in respect of the third and successive pupils of the same family.
Dear Parent/Guardian,
This February the Junior Drama Club will present ‘Joseph and the Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat’ by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice.
Pupils from P5 to P7 with helpers from S1 to S6 are involved.
There are three performances on  at 7.30 pm in the Castle Hall.
We do hope that you will be able to join us on one of these evenings.
Admission will be by programme available from  — Room 137 — during the week beginning  from 8.00 am to 8.30 am.
Programme/Tickets including refreshments will cost £4 for adults and £2 for children.
There will be no postal bookings and cheques should be crossed and made payable to GHS Junior Drama Club.
We hope to make a large donation to Cancer Research.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Parent,
Prizegiving — 10.30 am on  — McEwan Hall
The Prizegiving will be held again this year in the McEwan Hall.
This means that there will be no restriction on the number of places available and I am hoping that as many parents as possible will come and so help to make a real occasion of it.
It is not necessary to book seats in advance but we would ask you to be in the McEwan Hall not later than 10.20 am.
Parents will be seated in the Gallery but we will be happy to make arrangements in advance for anyone unable to go upstairs.
Do please all join us if you can.
After the ceremony Sixth Year Pupils and their parents are cordially invited to join the Governors and Staff for a brief reception on the School Lawns.
Yours sincerely,
Pupils who do not manage to buy their books at the School Book Sales should place their order with the booksellers before the end of the Session.
Orders placed during August are unlikely to be supplied in time for the start of the Session on .
The current fees include the cost of the following items:
A loose leaf Ringbinder for A4 paper and a supply of paper are require.
Ringbinders with ‘George Heriot's School’ printed on the cover and A4 pads of paper are on sale in the School at advantageous prices.
A free issue of a Ringbinder and paper will be made to Foundationers and Bursars.
All books and possessions, should be clearly marked with the owner's name and class.
Dear Parent/Guardian,
Subject Choices
I am writing to invite you to attend a meeting starting in the School Hall on  at 7.30 pm, after which you will be able to speak to Heads of Department in their rooms.
The main topic of the evening will be the choice of subjects from S3 to S6, about which you will also find information in the accompanying booklet.
Early next term, we will issue your child's report, so that you will have all the relevant information available before the meeting.
Arrangements for the return of their option sheet will be announced at that time.
If you are coming to the meeting by car, please park in the playground, having entered via the Vennel Gate.
My colleagues and I look forward to seeing you at the meeting.
Yours sincerely,
EDINBURGH SCHOOLS SMALL-BORE RIFLE CHAMPIONSHIPS 1993
DATE 
PLACE George Watson's College, Colinton Road.
The range has eight firing points on two levels.
Nearby classrooms will be used for waiting details.
Refreshments for sale
TIME The First Detail starts at 1.45 pm : Please arrive in good time, 1.15 pm at the latest.
The prize giving will be about 5.30 pm: all are requested to attend
TEAMS Teams will consist of eight members with the best of six scores to count
TARGETS 25 yard NSRA 10—Bull.
Each team member will fire two targets
AMMUNITION Please bring your own
DETAILS 10 minutes per detail, with 5 minutes change-over time.
You will probably have two firers shooting in every other detail
SIGHTERS Up to 5 sighters are allowed
SPOTTING Spotters may advise shooters of sight corrections but may touch the shooter or his equipment after he or she has started shooting
TIES In the event of a team tie, the best scores of the 6 counting shooters on the second targets shot by each team will count; if still tied, the first targets will apply.
For the individual prizes, a count—back, failing which a re—gauge, will apply
NSRA Rules will apply except as above.
PRIZES The winning team will receive the Hawthordenden Cup.
Medals will be awarded to the winning team and individual and to the runners up.
HAWTHORNDEN CUP
Last year's winners are requested to bring along the Cup on .
Please make arrangements for SS1 Bain to collect it if not entering
DRAW The draw will take place after all entrants have been received
BULLETIN —
1.
FIRST YEAR RUGBY
Would all the S1 boys involved with D3 and D4 XV Rugby attend a meeting with Mr Moffat in Room 536 at 11.00 am today.
[DRM]
2.
CHANTER LESSONS
A reminder that the new timetable of lessons starts today.
[GMD]
3.
ANGLING CLUB
The Angling Club will have its first meeting of the new session at 3.15 pm in room 422 tomorrow.
will give an illustrated talk on stillwater fishing for rainbow trout.
New members are most welcome to come along.
[GS]
4.
S6 — PRESENTATION ON INTERVIEW TECHNIQUE
Advance notice that the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce will give a presentation to the whole of S6 in the School Hall on  from 9 am–12.30 pm about interview technique and self-presentation.
[AMMC]
5.
ISCO CAREERS COURSE
Anyone in S5 or S6 interested in an ISCO Careers Course at Christmas should consult the booklet in the Library or the Careers Office and give his/her name to  if interested in attending a course.
Pupils do not need to be registered with ISCO although those who are will be given priority.
[AMMC]
6.
DRAMA
All members of the cast of the school play will meet in  room 531 at 11.00 am today.
It is essential that all attend.
[IMC]
7.
DEBATING SOCIETY
A reminder of today's meeting of the Debating Society, which will take place in Room 155 at 3.15 pm.
[CDW]
8.
GOLF CLUB
All boys who have a handicap of 9 or less are asked to see  in his room at 8.50 this morning.
[JSB]
9.
PERSONAL BELONGINGS
Pupils are reminded that they should have all books, calculators, kit etc named and that they should not leave their bags near the Vennel Gate.
[EMRH]
10.
CHARITY INFORMATION
Much information comes to the School from a large variety of charities.
All this material is kept from year to year.
Any pupil doing a project on any aspect of a charity's work or some particular issue should feel free to use any of this material.
It is available in  room 424.
[AGM]
11.
INTERNATIONAL CLUB
Tomorrow's meeting of the International Club will take place in R144 at 12.35 pm.
The speakers will be , who are spending a year at Heriot's from Australia and New Zealand.
All are welcome, especially new members.
[MNW]
12.
CROSS COUNTRY
There will be a brief meeting for all Junior Girls in Room 147 at 8.50 am today.
[FF]