

Craft & Design Credit Paper:
1a) You can't patch up or inlay veneer without the repair being obvious.
You would have to strip off the old veneer and put a whole new one on.
b) French polished solid wood.
2a) Copper and zinc.
b) It doesn't corrode easily.
3a) P.T.F.E.
b) Very hard wearing.
c) P.V.C.
d) Good heat insulator.
4a) Corner of a picture frame.
b) Gives a neat  symmetrical joint and any decorative ridges in the frame will be matched at the joint.
c) Step the mitre so that tongues of wood overlapped there would be a larger glued surface.
5a) They can be  programmed to put the spot weld in exactly the same place.
b) They are more efficient than humans.
6a) They come flat packed so can be transported from the shop to the home easily in a car.
b) Shorter production time because  furniture does not need to be assembled.
c) You might not be able to assemble the  furniture correctly so it will not be as strong as it should be.
7a) De-greasing.
b) The applied finish might not take properly to the surface and flake off.
8a) 1) Very high rotational speed.
2) Good sharp unchipped cutter.
b) 1) The smoothness of the mould.
2) Rounded, easy corners (not sharp corner's).
9) Polyurethane varnish would be suitable because it is hard wearing, easy to apply and won't cover up the grain of the wood.
10) a) Lateral adjustment lever.
b) This permits the blade to be moved from side to side so that it can be made parallel with the sole.
11) b) The ratchet drive enables the brace to be used in a confined space where a full sweep is not possible.
c) Auger bits are used with a ratchet brace.
These have parallel sides and an auger along which the excess wood escapes.
The tip has a spiral point which draws the bit into the wood and spurs which sever the wood fibres.
12) Clamp the sheet of plastic across the top of the box and heat it until it is soft & flexible.
Suck all the air out from under the plastic so it is forced down over the wooden former.
13) Remove the chuck from the pillar drill and insert the drill straight into the spindle.
The tange on the end of the drill will fit the key at the end of the morse taper in the spindle.
To remove the drill, insert a drill drift into the slot in the spindle and tap it in using a hammer or piece of wood.
This will loosen the drill.
14a) You cannot guarantee that the work in the chuck runs true because certain areas of the scroll can be worn through continuous use.
b) You can true up the work in the chuck and ensure that it runs true.
15a)
Use — Prevents vibration loosening the joint.
b)
16) a) Butt hinges
b) Tee hinges.
c) Piano hinges.
17) a) Two speeds.
b) Hammer action.
18a) To show how a joint goes together.
b) To show the finished product in use.
c) Allows sizes to be measured.
19) The design specifications so you can evaluate whether your project actually does the job it was intended to do.
20a) You have to get up from your chair every time you want to change the station or alter the volume, brightness etc.
b) If you put a small child on a normal chair he/she falls off because there is no restraining bars and he/she can't reach the table.
c) It can be difficult to find files or papers if they are just piled in a drawer in no particular order.
21) a) So if the person has to let go of the trolley, it will stop automatically so doesn't run away.
The person doesn't have to think about putting the brake on, it comes on whenever he/she lets go of the lever.
b) People like the trolleys to keep moving slowly when they reach out to take something off the shelf.
If there was a brake, this would not happen and the person would have to stop and start all the time rather than moving smoothly around the supermarket.
Supermarket trolleys have to be fairly cheap and brakes would make them less economical to produce.
22) Reduce the space between the two uprights so there is only 400 mm between them.
This will improve the safety of the shelving as it is less likely to collapse.
23) a) This has been done to prevent bill posters being stuck to the boarding as the multicoloured posters will not be aesthetically pleasing.
The painting of the boarding will improve its appearance and will waterproof it and protect it against the elements.
b) The nails used to join the triangular section to the boarding will go into the boarding at an angle because of the angles of the faces of the triangular section.
This will be  awkward to achieve ergonomically because it is more easy for a person to  hammer nails straight in.
Geography — North — South 
1/ The author is making the point that there is no benefit for people in spending huge amounts of money creating something which has no practical use, and that this money would be far better allocated to essentials ie housing, food, water etc rather than luxuries like T.V.s, videos etc.
2/ With small projects housing can be improved along with providing more food and better infrastructure and health care.
Then industry and farming can be benefitted by providing grants and machinery etc.
This will all help far more people in a wider range of ways.
It will improve their lives by providing the essentials.
A large project like the power station will not benefit these people, but richer people can afford the appliances and electricity.
DIRECT as opposed to INDIRECT.
3/ III World countries may have been aid purely for building a dam etc, rather than other projects.
Decision making people may decide to build the dam or HEP station for personal benefit or popularity among the richer members of society if the government or other authority was corrupt.
The dams etc may also have been designed to attract industry and so benefit the country in the long term.
Mismanagement of aid and poor planning may lead to this.
4/ The developing countries mostly need to be able to compete in the developed world market, which needs increased co-operation.
The developed world must provide aid for this to happen, and so people need to realise the depth of the problem and pull together so that a large aid programme can be put into practice.
These countries need aid and support to help sort out their main problems ie family planning, health, starvation etc.
The developed countries must share their experience, education, solutions and money with the under developed countries in order for them to make an advance.
5/ i) help with water & soil management, education, health, agricultural research, industrial development.
ii) stop — mass starvation & malnutrition money being spent on arms, but rather on aid, overdependence on non-renewable energy.
6/ End mass hunger and malnutrition — this is done by aid from UN, E.C., World Bank, expert help etc. and through developing the countries own agricultural production they hope to be able to make the country self sufficient for food.
They aid by agricultural research, thus improving irrigation, fertilisers etc.
They also intend to increase yields by providing tractors, pumps and other machinery with their project aid.
Role of UN in a Famine 
The UN acts in two ways.
These are to provide short term relief to those suffering from the effects of the famine and to try to prevent the famine continuing by getting to the root of the problem, and so having more lasting long term effects.
Immediate action will be taken by organisations such as U.N.D.R.O. and possibly U.N.I.C.E.F., working in conjunction with other organisations such as I.A.T.A. in order to get food, medication, clothing etc. to difficult areas.
The W.H.O. may also become involved in the short term because of the widespread malnourishment and disease.
This aid would also have to be continued in the longer term in order to totally  eradicate certain diseases.
The F.A.O.
would be  majorly responsible for getting long term results, as they would have to ensure that the area can survive independently again by building up their own food supplies through improving farming eg. better irrigation etc.
This would help prevent such a disaster occurring again.
In cases where an area was suffering from both drought and civil war eg: Ethiopia then organisations like I.A.T.A. would be very important in order to get supplies past hostile areas to those in need.
In this case long term aid would also have to include ending the civil war by some form of intervention if necessary.
History 
The Availability of Sources in Edinburgh.
In the city of Edinburgh there is a large variety of places to visit to gain information on nearly any subject.
One of the best places to go is the Edinburgh Room not only because of its wide variety of subjects but also because of the choice of sources, as there is not only books but slides, photos, maps and much more.
But the main disadvantage of the Edinburgh Room is that you can borrow slides only and not everything can be photocopied.
The Scottish United Service Museum is very useful for those investigation a military subject but that is all and so it limited and those who are interested have to make an advanced appointment which means that when they arrive all books will be ready for them.
For those doing other subjects an excellent place to visit would be the Scottish record office who have all sorts of sources from town minutes to agricultural statistics and they are eager to help.
The C.U.S.C. is a museum aimed at students and you do not even need to go along to see what they have as there is a catalogue at school.
But you do have to arrange a time with them but the  benefit of this is that there will be a tutor to assist you.
In each of the above libraries there will be a catalogue of some kind, and the easiest to use is the card catalogue.
In some places like the Scottish library the subject and authors are listed in alphabetical system but places like the Edinburgh Room there is a class catalogue but all are easy to use and if there is any problems the library staff are always close at hand.
There is also a microfiche catalogue which is like a miniature card catalogue which you may need some help with and the computer catalogue which you will definitely need some help with.
Once a book has been selected then all that needs to be done is a simple form to be filled in and the library staff will fetch it for you or at least show you where to look.
Other sources may be from books at home or interviews with older friends and relatives, and don't forget the school library and video library as well as the history department information packs.
From this it is clear to me that almost every possible subject and source is covered in Edinburgh libraries and everything is reasonably easy to find and the library staff are happy to assist.
The only problem that I can see is that fact that many books cannot be taken home and that many sources cannot be photocopied.
NOTES FOR INVESTIGATION — MINING 
1) WHAT WERE THE CONDITIONS WOMEN & CHILDREN WORKED IN THE MINES?
Women & children got up very early in the morning, sometimes as early as 1 o'clock.
Leaves any babies with minder — can't take time off to bring them up.
Older girls go with mother: older boys & father go down about 11 o'clock at night.
Women take baskets which are filled up with coals according to their strength, & sometimes 2 men had to lift it onto their backs.
Carried candles with their teeth.
Weeping from fatigue when bringing coals up, singing for joy then going back with empty baskets.
Some stronger women carry at least 170 pounds about 24 times a day, meaning 4080 pounds per day, & sometimes as much as 2 tons!
Six—year—old child carried about 56 lbs of coal about ten to 14 times per day.
Air bad & pit can be ‘gly drippie’.
When children do not do as asked they are strapped.
Many are killed, & this is regarded as fairly commonplace.
‘Bad roads, up to their knees in water, in a posture nearly bent double.’
Women found in worst mines, arduous toil, foul atmosphere.
begin at about 5–8 years old as ‘trappers’, & girls earlier than boys, as they were thought to mature earlier.
As trappers, entire safety of mine depended on the young children & although not physically demanding, they had longest hrs & sat all day in darkness.
At 8–10 yrs they ‘proceeded to other occupations about the mine.’
Trapper job very hot.
Another job was a drawer, pulling carts of coal.
Inhaling of coal dust caused many men to die before the age of 40.
About 12 hr. day with an half hour for lunch, where only bread and butter was given, no drink.
One drawer's story:
Belt around waist, chain between legs, road very steep, sometimes rope to hold, sometimes nothing, clothes wet through all time, belt & chain rub skin off.
People wound down by rope, wound by person — rope could break, person could let go.
Houses very poor, damp, bare, dirty, people crude & uneducated.
People died frequently from falling roofs, falling coal from baskets above, other falling implements.
They also often fall themselves, or the lift rope breaks.
Also coal trucks caused injuries.
Another job for children was ‘PUTTING’ or hauling hutches of coal to shaft bottom before they were wound up.
Sometimes no wind, then females carried coal (look back).
2 WHAT WAS THE WAGE GIVEN TO THEM & WAS THIS SUFFICIENT?
For coal bearing women, one report states, about 8 pence a day was the wage.
Av. wage of mines in 1858 was 3 shillings (15p), but about 3 pence (1.2p) was deducted each day for light, sharpening tools etc.
NOTES ON MINING VIDEO 
1914:— ⅕ of the population at one point were miners.
People belonged to owners, until acts of 1775 & 1799, breaking slavery.
Many children were actually sold by masters into slavery in pits — Parents actually had to sell their children into a life of misery.
This actually was stopped in 1766, but they still went down as a job — emancipation.
People were killed, but others were apathetic to this.
Women were only married for their strength, but when that went, they were worthless, & their children went down instead.
The ‘bad’ air tended to lead to premature death, rather than explosions.
There were anti—emancipation organisations, mainly mine owners.
ANOTHER SUB-HEADING.
3) WHAT LAWS DID THE GOVT.
PASS CONCERNING WOMEN & CHILDREN'S ROLE IN THE MINES?
WERE THESE ENFORCED?
Laws had to be enforced, as mine were regularly inspected.
People began to take notice of the miner's conditions & inspectors from the govt. came & eventually the reports reached Parliament, where Acts were passed:
1842: a) Women, girls & boys under 10 not to work underground.
b) boys under 15 not to control engines.
1847: Women & children not to work over 10 hrs, either under or overground.
1850: Govt. inspectors appointed (but no limit to hrs of work).
1860: Children under 12 and not to work in mines without certificate of educational achievement.
1891: Home secretary enabled to issue safety regulations for dangerous trades.
1908: Law regulating working hrs. for men.
WHAT WERE THE EFFECTS ON THE FACTORY OWNERS?
Factory owners tried to stop govt. from going ahead & passing Acts but could not stop them seeing.
Acts passed, owners clearly not pleased, but had to comply.
They would probably lose some money, power.
But also they would probably have the men working harder than before & they may be more popular.
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
They would be free from slavery, from work they were unsuited to do, but they lost a way of life, they had to look after their children for longer, they had to find other work to keep the family fed, clothed, rent paid etc.
They may be largely unemployed, & the children would be more likely to cause ‘mischief’ running around with nothing to do.
ANOTHER POS: Children had more time to be educated.
HISTORY — LOCAL GOVT.
POWERS 
Sydney Wood
P16-17
P38-39 (especially p38)
P39-49 (especially p47)
This house believes that the British Govt. was solely responsible for the improvements in the quality of life of the British working class in the 19th Century.
Farming
When govt. adopted free trade in the middle of the 19th Century, the people got cheaper grain to buy, & larger choices, & also relations with other countries were improved, so that the risk of wars were reduced, & this meant less taxes for the people, because the country was spending less.
The farm owners weren't working class, so the ways this put them at a disadvantage is irrelevant.
The farm workers who became unemployed by this could move to towns & get jobs in factories & mines, which are also being improved, as are the living conditions in the towns, as Lucy described in her speech.
In the mines, the conditions were appalling (as many of you know) in the early 19th, but after an enquiry, the govt. passed laws preventing women & children from working.
The people themselves also made efforts to improve conditions — quote Sidney Wood, P38.
‘Some workers tried to stop the spread of machines but this was a hopeless cause.
Workers also tried to protect & improve their working conditions by their own actions.
However, it was very difficult for local groups of workers to succeed.
They did not have the money to stay out on strike or take other sorts of actions that their employers opposed….
The Trade Union Act of 1834 allowed them simply to bargain peacefully.’
So, people tried to set up unions to improve living & working conditions, but this failed, because the workers hadn't the money, knowledge or power.
After Govt.
Acts, life improved & inspectors were appointed to ensure that the laws were adhered to.
Women & children were set free from slavery & the men unemployed from farming could move to mines & take up jobs which the women & children had previously filled.
So the people when in need, tried to help themselves and failed.
They then turned to the govt. & only when the govt. took action did situations improve at all.
NOTES AT DEBATE.
Organisations didn't work until backed up by the govt.
Hospitals etc. improved couldn't work without govt. acts.
Himalayas.
Upper parts — throughout year covered in snow.
The people and animals cannot live there & the air is too thin — there is not enough oxygen to breathe.
Jobs — Farming — the lower slopes of the Himalayas have a pleasant climate — the soil is fertile and well drained.
Crops are — tea, potatoes/apple, apricot and almond trees.
Mountains cut into terraces with wheat, maize and rice.
Sherpas — farm, raise animals and trade.
Some act as guide and porters for mountaineering expeditions.
One sherpa — Tensing Norgay accompanied Sir Edward Hillary and became one of the first men to climb Mt.
Everest.
He had performed so brilliantly on other expeditions he became fully fledged climber.
Changing Himalayas — The mountains are covered in snow and ice which melts and feeds many large rivers.
These rivers are a source of water for people and crops in India and Pakistan.
New developments — In the last 20 or 30 years Nepal's population has near doubled.
There is not enough food or firewood.
Trees on the slopes have been used for firewood to provide space to make new fields.
Before this the tree roots held the soil in place by soaking up the heavy rain and letting it go slowly.
Now, when there is heavy rainfall on the Himalayas the soil on the slopes just wash away and cause rivers to overflow.
Floods occur in the valleys and plains below and right across India, washing away terraces and villages.
New trees are being planted but it will take a very long time to repair the damage.
Tourism — Three decades ago maybe only a several dozen foreigners visited Everest and the Himalayas.
Now, nearly a quarter of a million foreigners visit Nepal each year.
People like treckers, climbers and sightseers.
Nepalese authorities hope to quadruple that figure to a million within the next decade.
Yet tourism isn't desperately helping the mountainside.
Litter is left on the slope, much of which is plastic which will never breakdown, but will blow around the mountainside for many years.
PICTURE.
(Life in the Mountains).
Australia 
Relief: the height of the ground affects the population as many of the large settlements e.g. Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne are situated in valleys and along the coast near such mountains as the Australian Alps and the Blue Mounts.
These mountains near the settlements provide sheep and cattle farming as well as zinc, lead, coalfields and hydroelectric power.
The mountains also prove to be a tourist attraction as some of the mountains experience alpine conditions which leads to ski resorts.
The sea coast provides fishing and in some of the larger settlements, main harbours.
In central Australia there are few mountain ranges but a large proportion of land is perfect for sheep farming with the ground being 0–1000m.
These open barren areas in central Australia are mainly populated by farmers (who can own large expanses of land) therefore the population density is low whereas in the coastal cities the population is much higher due to job opportunities.
Climate: the majority of the towns and cities are situated in the south and east of Australia, generally the cooler areas of the country.
In July it will reach an average of 20–25°C whereas in the NW, January temps are as high as 35°C and in July 20–25°C.
These temperatures would be unbearable and this is why most of the population like the cooler climate of the South (which is further away from the equator and the overhead sun).
Vegetation: Much of Australia is savannah or grassland, inhabited by sheep farmers and small oil, gas or mineral mining colonies.
These grasslands are in the centre of Australia and have a very low population density.
At the North of Australia are tropical rain forests which are very difficult for large communities to live in due to the heat, humidity and being unable to expand without the destruction of trees.
Some of Australia is desert or semi-desert which very few people live in due to the infertility and temperature of the land.
The deserts are situated in the centre/West of Australia.
Much of Australia's population live in the temperate rain forest conditions of South of the evergreen conditions of the South West because the lands vegetation is able to live with.
Australia covers an area of 761.8 million hectares.
Of this 45.2 million is used for arable farming and permanent crops (%), 137.7 million is forest and woodland (%), 455.5 million is permanent pasture (%) and 123.4 million is other land (towns, mountains etc.).
These figures show that much of Australia has no population and overall low population density.
ANDES
FOOD : The main crop of the Andes is the potato.
It was first domesticated on Andean slopes.
Some of their potatoes have adapted to cold so they can still grow when their leaves are white with frost.
This makes it an ideal choice of food.
Another crop which has adapted to the altitude and climate is corn.
It grows up to 12.000 ft.
The Andean persons main diet is of beans, potatoes, quinoa (they make porridge with the seed) and, rarely, a little mutton.
The Indians suffer many deficiency diseases due their unbalance diet.
 Dysentery and whooping cough kill their children and due to the lack of fat, the Indians soles of his feet, lips and around their eyes start to ache appearing gnarled.
Llamas and alpacas (related to camel) provide the Andeans with warm clothing that is need at such heights are as well as dung which is used as fuel and burnt.
Llamas are too precious to be killed and provide the essential meat the Indians diet.
HIMALAYAS.
1)JOBS — The upper parts of the Himalayas are covered with snow throughout the year making it impossible for animals and people to live there.
The altitude also hinders people because the air is so thin there is not enough oxygen to breathe.
The lower slopes of the Himalayas have a pleasant climate which keeps the soil fertile and well drained.
Farmers have cut the mountain side into traces (to avoid soil moving downhill).
On these terraces farmers grow tea, potatoes, apricot and almond trees as well as wheat, maize and rice.
Large rivers are fed by the melting snow and ice from the mount and the rivers are a source of water for people and crops in India and Pakistan.
Sherpas are mountain dwellers in the Nepal.
They farm, raise animals and trade at markets in the Sherpa Capital of Namche.
Some Sherpas act as guide and porters for mountaineering expeditions.
One sherpa, Tensing Norgay, accompanied Sir Edmund Hillary and became one the first men to climb Mount Everest.
He had performed so brilliantly on other expeditions that he became a fully—fledged climber.
In the last 20 or 30 years Nepal's population has near doubled.
There is a shortage of food and of firewood.
Trees on the slopes have been used for
ALPS — Mountain range.
1) HOW PEOPLE TRADITIONALLY MANAGED TO LIVE IN THAT AREA & HOW THEY GOT FOOD, BUILDING MATERIAL, JOBS.
Largest mountain range in Europe.
Food —Farming:Farmers grow their crops in the valleys.
Orchards and vineyards are on the lower slopes.
Cattle are kept for meat and milk.
Alpine milk is used to make cheese and chocolate.
In winter — cattle kept in sheds in the valley.
In summer — high grassland to feed.
Some farmers live in small houses up in the mountains (during the summer) so as they can look after their cows.
This is called TRANSHUMANCE farming.
Until middle 19th century a self-sufficient economic system based on agriculture.
Plains produced — cereal grains higher up — rye, vegetables, hemp and flax.
Slopes good for — cattle, sheep and goats.
SKIING RESORTS: Switzerland — rich, Mountains part of wealth.
Millions of tourists visit it every year.
Go to mountains for sport and relaxation.
Some climb or ski.
Rugged country often has very nice scenery.
ECONOMIC SURVIVAL — Two complimentary activities were necessary; industry of a handicraft nature and the seasonal migration of natives to find work elsewhere.
The industry used local resources; charcoal and other articles were made from wood; iron and silver ores were processed and fashioned; and flax, hemp and wool were spun and woven into clothing, the Italian Chimney sweeps came to symbolize the migration at its most miserable, but other persons repaired watches or became itinerant vendors of fabric, haberdashery, and other items.
Most returned home for the summer tasks but some left forever.
Modern TRANSPORT — workers built the first railways through the ALPS in the 1800's tourism increased due to the rapid improvement in transport.
Travellers today can cross the Alps in less than a day due to the excellent highways and railroads.
Types of trees found to build small wooden shacks are — pine, beech, oak.
Farming (con) Farmers in Austrian Tyrol have to cultivate all available land.
Even steep angled slopes which prove inhumanly difficult to till.
Ploughs must be operated by 2 men, one to guide the horses and the other to hold the plough in the furrow so that it will not roll down the hill.
All reaping must be done by hand using sickle and scythe due to the difficulty in using modern machinery.
Poor soil and short growing seasons add to the farmer's problems.
Grass and clover grow well — good for dairymen.
TRANSPORT the greatest aid to travel in Switzerland is the all-electric railway network.
Densest of its kind in the world, it links every contan of Switzerland.
It is run by hydro electric power and goes along the 15,000 miles of track at speed in excess of 100 mph.
The trains are so fast that the passengers complain about not being able to see any of the countries beautiful scenery.
INTRO — are the largest mountain system in Europe.
The proposal to extend skiing facilities on to another part of the Caimgorms called Lurcher's Gully could prove disastrous to wildlife, plants, locals and the mountain range itself.
Caimgorm's is the premier mountain range in Scotland without equal for size and altitude.
It is the largest piece of land least changed by man and should be able to stay that way.
It is an area of outstanding beauty supporting rare plantlife and the greatest asset to tourism.
The skiing developments in Caimgorm's attracted only 1.5% skiers from overseas and even if the proposal did go ahead for expansion they still could not draw skiers from Europe.
The larger resorts abroad have not worked economically even in countries with better natural conditions than ours e.g. North America and places in Europe.
The bad winter weather with no guaranteed snow cover could prove to be this expansion's downfall.
To compensate for this * heavy machi….
Once the snow has melted the Caimgorm looks unsightly — the chairlift pylons scatter the mountainside and litter dropped makes the slopes very dirty.
Many people smoke while they ski leaving cigarette packets & stubs.
Also food litter left attracts crows, seagulls and sheep, wildlife uncommon & unwanted to the area.
Ravens are in turn attracted to the sheep carrion and drive away natural nesting birds and wildlife.
One type of bird found on the slopes are Ptarnigan — *
It is not only birdlife but wildlife such as reindeer and plantlife.
* Ben Macam and rare liches has not been replaced with tougher rye-grass.
It is not only the wildlife and the plants that will be affected but also the public who do not ski.
* If the ski — *
Whereas before it was used for less damaging crosscountry skiing and walkers.
The present ski development is unsafe for walkers to walk through towards the carriers as the skiers do not give way to each other let alone walkers.
These walkers usually use small hotels and ‘b&b; 's but this new development would encourage more development in Aviemore.
More ugly, modern hotels will be built to facilitate prospective clients and the smaller places lose most of their trade.
*15%
These jobs that should be provided are small and seasonal and overall development would cost local *