

THIS YEAR THE SOCIETY'S Easter course is moving to yet another venue; this time it will be held at Bath University and will run from Wednesday lunchtime to Sunday afternoon with time allowed for sightseeing in the beautiful City of Bath or the surrounding countryside.
Those who attended last year's Course will be pleased to know that Jean Parmiter and Lucy Jackson have agreed to staff this year's Course, and they will be joined by two trainee-trainers, Avon's own Rosemary Gould and Chris Ruffle from Kent.
Cost to Society members if £115.00 to non-members £130.00.
We are also running our usual annual Week-end Recreational Course at Lilleshall, Shropshire.
cost to Society members is £39.00 to non-members £45.00
Those who attended last year will automatically receive an application form with this issue of Medau News — forms for both Courses can be obtained on request from the Office at Epsom (please enclose s.a.e.) or from Class Teachers.
THE A.G.M.
…will once again take the form of open classes in the morning and a ploughman's lunch; followed by the business meeting in the afternoon.
Over 100 members attended last year and found it an enjoyable and informative day.
We look forward to seeing as many of you as can come on Saturday 27th April 1985, at Hounslow Manor School, Hounslow, Middlesex.
TRAIN OF THOUGHT
Time, you old gypsy man, Will you not stay Put up your caravan Just for one day?
Who would have thought that even at the beginning of this century the poet felt the need for time to stand still.
How much more would he feel the need now.
We all need time, time to breathe, time to reflect, time to enjoy, time to live!
But —‘time waits for no man’ and that goes for woman too — bombarded as she is with ever new vogues, ever changing fads and fashions — constantly confronted with remonstrations to be ‘with it’and keep up to date.
Hey — wait a minute.
Did I say new vogues?
There's nothing new under the sun!
Life's basic needs remains fairly constant — but we juggle the formula for fulfilment of these needs, until having reached a frenzy we go ‘over the top’ and the formula has to be reassembled.
However — given some perception along the way we don't have to go right back to the beginning again.
The kernel or essence of what has gone before will, if preserved, initiate a new impetus which will lead us into unexplored territory.
Don's let's be bamboozled into jumping on any passing bandwagon.
Let's be selective — let's take time.
Only a classic endures, and sooner or later the fashion comes full circle.
Let us by all means give our classic a regular airing and add a new accessory.
We mustn't keep it locked away in the closet lest it turn to dust.
How best then, to ensure that our classic — MEDAU, of course— stays fresh and appealing?
Well, in their further training our qualified teachers and trainers are brought into contact with a great variety of influences, to widen their horizons and enrich their teaching.
Our visiting tutors' subject range from Dance to Diet, from Aerobics to the Alexander method, from Relaxation to Writing a Press Release.
We are looking forward to a visit from prominent physiotherapist Vivian Grisogono, who, with her vast and expert knowledge of treating sports injuries, has much to impart about the way we enthusiastically drive our bodies on to perform at a pace that often proves harmful.
Which is more or less where we came in!
Pace — timing — balancing output with input — recreating — presenting our classic in sometimes novel but always recognisable style.
The House of Medau is putting together its Spring Collection — make sure you are present when it is unveiled at the Albert Hall on April 20th.
PHYSICAL ‘84 at the Barbican Centre.
Gayle Hunnicutt autographed copies of her book ‘Health & Beauty in Motherhood’ on the Medau Stand.
Seated with her are actresses Jan Holden, Shirley Cooklin and Jeanette Sterke.
Through the efforts of our Press Officer, Lucy Jackson, our Stand was sponsored by many individuals and Our Price Records.
Decor arranged by Brenda Fenton.
Flowers supplied by Nimmo Silk Flowers.
Congratulations to the CCPR!
This year the Central Council of Physical Recreation celebrates its 50th Anniversary.
Started in 1935 as the Central Council for Recreative Physical Training, it remains, in spite of the many changes in social attitudes and lifestyle since its inception, a major force in sport and recreation in the UK.
As an umbrella body uniting over 250 national organisations concerned with sporting and recreational activities, it provides through its Divisional structure a forum where like-minded bodies can meet to discuss areas of common concern.
The Movement and Dance Division, known in the early days as the Recreative Gymnastics and Dancing Committee, was one of the first to be formed.
The Medau Society has been an active member since we became a national governing body in 1952 — indeed it was a member of the CCPR staff, Kay Evans who had been instrumental in guiding us towards national recognition.
Kay, of course, remains a close friend and advisor today.
We were proud to participate in the CCPR Wembley Festivals of Movement and Dance in 1955, 1958 and 1963, which some of you will remember, and so it was with particular pleasure we accepted the invitation to join in the celebrations to be held on 20th April at the Royal Albert Hall.
Over the years we have many times benefited form the advice and support which the CCPR gives so generously.
Thank, CCPR — and here's to the next 50 years!
Memorial Fund
Following a recommendation from Surrey Teachers we are setting up a fund in memory of Ann McMillan, whose untimely death last July shocked everyone.
Amongst her many other interests, Ann initiated some of the first Medau Classes for children and she also worked widely with young folk through scouting etc.
It therefore seemed appropriate that the Fund should be geared to helping interested young people become involved with Medau, e.g. to set up classes, youth teams, and to encourage teacher-training, etc.
If you would like to contribute please send your donations marked ‘Ann McMillan Fund’ to the Office at Epsom, where we will be happy to accept your gifts — large or small — during the whole of 1985.
An Award was made posthumously to Ann McMillan by the local Sports Council for her contribution to sport in the community.
INSIDE INFORMATION
SOCIETY ELECTIONS
You will find a ballot paper included in this issue of your Medau News because election time is here again.
There will be four vacancies in Aril when Pauline Kenward, Doreen Prescott, Joan Daniels and Patricia Keen finish their respective terms of office.
We have received six nominations for these four places and every current Society member is eligible to vote for one candidate for each of the four places.
Your completed ballot form must reach the Epsom Office by 30th March 1985.
REUNION
‘A Very Happy Afternoon’ seemed to be the general verdict of those who came to our Annual Reunion in Central London.
The Display Programme was of a particularly high standard,(picture are two of the participating teams), and our Christmas Fair raised over £800 for the Society.
BOOK REVIEWS
‘Any woman can have a confident and attractive aura if she is prepared to invest some time, energy and a little money into evolving her own personal style’.
This is a very personal book which covers a much wider field than the title suggests.
Chapters range from ‘How can I avoid looking frumpy?’ to the pros and cons of natural childbirth.
She has very definite ideas on, and devotes two chapters to healthy eating and sensible weight control, which are applicable to anyone and discusses such thought provoking lines as ‘Do you use foods to nourish your body every day or do you simply use your body as a rubbish bin for whatever food you find about in the kitchen?’
There is an excellent chapter ‘Must I exercise?’ which boasts a complimentary piece written from first hand experience, on the Medau method.
This is not a book written in a superior know-it-all way.
The author writes chattily from her own experience and is quite happy to tell of her own mistakes and why she now recommends what she does.
You may not agree with all she says and certainly many things may not be applicable to you — but — she sets you thinking in a refreshing way.
Another Specialist Teachers' Weekend
The latest in a series of regular In-Service events for our teachers and trainers is a weekend planned for July.
Last summer we held a successful day for teachers working in specialist areas (with stroke patients and with the mentally handicapped) and this year we plan a weekend of dance with a guest teacher from Germany.
Jutta Czurda is a coburg-trained Medau teacher now running her own Company and Dance School.
She was a guest teacher at the prestigious Medau Teachers' Whitsum Course in Coburg in 1983 and the trainers who experienced her work there have managed to persuade her to come to England to work with the English teachers.
The Residential Course will run from Friday evening 12th July — Sunday afternoon 14th July, the venue is the attractive Froebel Institute, Roehampton Lane, London and the cost is £55.00.
Early booking is essential as the places are limited.
The Royal Albert Hall Festival — 20th April 1985
Two Performances: 2.00 and 7.00 p.m.
Ticket prices range from £7.00 to £2.50.
Booking Office — Tel: 01–589 8212.
Please be sure to obtain your tickets direct from the Royal Albert Hall during February.
This will be a particularly prestigious occasion.
Do come along and give our two teams your support.
Not only (Medau) but also…
…
I am well used to a life apart from the circle that many of my Medau friends know me in.
My husband George is a parson so I meet many of the people who telephone or come to the Vicarage.
Sometimes it is just a matter of taking a message; at others (especially when we lived near a place that gave over-night accommodation to tramps) it has involved talking — or more often listening — to them.
Finding someone willing to give up time just to listen seems to be a problem for many people.
We have lived in a wonderful variety of houses, including one normally occupied by a pit deputy in South Yorkshire; a leaking gothic horror of a Victorian rectory in deepest Sussex that was literally falling to pieces while administrative matters blocked efforts to replace it and our present one near Lewes built in 1934 in the days of live-in maids, recently modernised but still half as big again as any built these days and with a double-size garden.
It was a fall down the cellar steps of one of these houses which started a long history of back trouble.
In one way the length of the history was a good thing as I have benefited in the end from the latest surgical techniques available in London, and although I still have to be careful it has made a tremendous difference to my life.
Earlier had been the months in bed on traction, then being encased in plaster, and later figure-moulded (embarrassing!) suit of plastic armour which at least allowed me to undo it and bath occasionally.
At this time George was in educational work and with no parish responsibilities I somehow volunteered to make tea at a keep-fit class which the local W.I. wanted to start.
A lovely lady, Molly Braithwaite, came to teach, and one day as I sat at the back I felt ‘Surely I could do a little of that gently swinging’, picked up a club, and was off ‘moving with the Medau’.
Eventually I qualified as a teacher and attended a course at Coburg; nowadays I specialise in teaching disabled people, but also enjoy being an ordinary member of a local class (which the Vicar kindly helps advertise).
NORTH-EAST
In vain has Adrienne written asking for news from the North-East to be included in the last two issues: for we had nothing to report beyond our puny struggles against the mighty Aerobics phenomenon.
But this time was different.
Proposals, Estimates, and tentative Timetables passed between Edinburgh, Epsom and Ponteland, and the outcome was The Edinburgh Weekend held last October.
Margaret Charlwood came by ‘plane and spent the weekend coaching Northerners in piano-technique, movement and use of taped music.
Friday evening was spent mastering rhythm-changes on the piano and weaving cheerfully around the furniture in an Edinburgh tenement, and on Saturday and Sunday we all camped out in a School Dance Studio for movement sessions.
The great idea had been to hold Saturday Classes open also to members of the Women's League and the Keep Fit Association, but in the event we encountered from our Sister Organisations a most unsisterly and almost total absence of support.
As an ecumenical exercise the weekend was a failure; as a marathon of movement and music for Medau enthusiasts it was one of the most enjoyable occasions ever, thanks chiefly to Margaret's own tremendous flow of energy, her inspired teaching and her musical inventiveness.
We thank her again most warmly and implore her most genuinely ‘Will ye no come back again?’
HERTS-BEDS-CAMBS
There was great excitement at the MacIntyre Home when Kate Humphries, Trainee Teachers, took ten Medau girls up to the London Barbican Physical ‘84 Exhibition last October.
They all met Lucy Jackson on the stand and the trip was a big talking point for weeks.
From St. Albans, Harpenden, Leighton Buzzard and Luton came many to a Sports and Recreation Afternoon for Active Retired at Luton Regional Sports Centre.
They joined in Medau Classes and various sports; they tried trampolining, pistol shooting and weight training.
Luton's Lady Mayor and her consort, along with various members of the Recreational Services, watched with interest and stayed to see the highlight of the afternoon: the Active Retired Medau ‘girls’ doing the Can Can!
This was enormous fun and right first time!
The encore wasn't quite but the cheers were still as loud.
The red stockings and garters are stored away but you never know — they may soon be out again for another airing.
Melbourne College celebrated its 25th Anniversary and Jean Moss's Medau Class gave a mini display in an Open Evening's programme.
Jean has been teaching there for 24 years.
A waiting list for one of Doreen Copas' daytime classes from the ‘83–84 session formed the nucleus of another new Class.
It is not unusual now to see several St. Albans and  Harpeneden Members turn up twice a week.
What enthusiasm!
BERKSHIRE
An earth-shattering event in this area was the retirement of Betty Hartley after 19 years teaching.
Class members were sad, but Betty exchanged her ‘Teacher's Hat’ for that of ‘Active Class Member’so that wonderful bubbly personality is still with us, and she remains choreographer to our own Display Team.
As her last teaching term ended Classes arranged their own forms of appreciation, complete with gifts and Marlow Class (the first one in the Area) laid on a surprise part in the 400–year old cottage of their Class Secretary.
As unsuspecting Betty appeared, her face was a picture of amazement on being greeted not only by present Class members but also by many who had attended years ago.
A buffet lunch of delicious contributions by the Class added to the enjoyable sunny June afternoon.
As one chapter ends so another beings…
Chris Markham now teachers sixth form girls at a Wokingham School — a splendid opportunity of introducing Medau to the younger generation and we wish her every success.
Chris has worked hard spreading the work and has also started a Class in Newbury, an area completely new to Medau.
Our Display Team flourishes under Betty's guidance, performing at several Rallies including our own and at one for the Women's League of Health & Beauty.
The Berkshire Rally is now well established and preparations are under way for the next one in March.
A Workshop Day at Marlow is also becoming a regular event, with local Teachers taking sessions throughout the day.
Last year there was also a talk on Nutrition, and this year we shall be hearing about ‘Hellerwork’ from a Medau Teachers who is also a Hellerwork practitioner.
KENT
Medau for All AGEs — a very true statement here in Kent.
Joan Daniels is proud to have six very keen pairs of Mums and Daughters, with three duos, the Clarke's, the Douglas's and the Pemberton's in one Class together.
Another pair, Carol and Sarah Pope, will be representing the Society at the Royal Albert Hall in April.
This really does reflect he true appeal of Medau as ages of these Class members range from 17 years to?????
Strood area bid a sad farewell to Janet McGowan when she moved to Cornwall.
She is sorely missed for the loyal support she always gave to Classes and Events and the Kent Team is not quite the same without her…but our loss is the West Country's gain and we hope to meet up with Janet at the Easter Course in Bath.
FUN RAISING.
No, the Society's Treasurer hasn't left out the ‘D’.
Kent is always full of ideas to help raise money and you can have FUN and raise FUNDS.
Well Done, all those Teachers and Class members who have been contributing in many ways, and keep it up in 1985.
HANTS
October 27th, 1984, was ringed around on my calendars as the FIRST Hampshire Rally.
As Medau is little known yet in Hants and West Sussex, it was publicised as an ‘Open Rally’ for anyone interested in movement to come and see for themselves.
Display Teams from Berks and Surrey arrived at Oak Park Community School, Havant, on The Day, meeting up with slightly apprehensive teams from Chichester and Cosham.
However, with Jean Parmiter and Ann Langford teaching things were soon under way and the Display Items went down very well.
The final item ‘Generations’ was aptly named as those taking part ranged from Jane Middleton, aged 8, up the scale to 90–years old Mrs. Constance Marsh, who reckons Medau helps a lot but mainly attributes her longevity to eating plenty of oranges.
Teachers Sarah, Caroline, Else and Wendy send a big ‘Thank You’ to everyone who supported their first ever Rally and helped to make it a big success — they are actually thinking of a second one this year!
WALES
Happy Reflections of a Visit to Coburg:
‘Arrived at Frankfurt Airport, Sunday, 15th July.
After a hair-raising experience on the Airport's fast moving escalators, boarded the train for Coburg, and eventually reached the Medau Schule to be warmly greeted by Bedu.
Every morning began with singing (in a different language each day), then off we went to work.
Bedu translated the Classes into French and English, but was so explicit in her demonstrations that it was not always necessary.
What a joy experiencing so many movements possible through Medau using the wide variety of apparatus including tambours, sticks, ropes, etc — some forms not yet used in our Welsh Classes, and sharing our love of movement with others of different nationalities.
On our final night there was a ‘leaving party’.
The English and Welsh contingent did a party piece ‘THE MUSIC MAN’— Medau Style, with Wynne playing the piano — we even gave an encore!
Fond farewells exchanged, we set off for home, our brains buzzing with new and exciting ideas to bring back to Wales’.
(Elizabeth Machin and Wynne Norris were members of the group which visited Coburg last summer).
ESSEX
Another busy year has passed, with Area Teachers meeting regularly for further training and discussion, and Essex Team undertaking a programme of regular Team Classes and rehearsals.
A ‘first’ was a Day of Movement & Dance for S.E. Essex at Rayleigh.
Essex Team showed a ‘taster’ of our work, Margaret Hickman took two classes, with Edith at the piano, and other Teachers manned the Information Stall.
It was a good opportunity to show our work and join in other movement and dance sessions, and we hope our efforts created much interest to newcomers.
Essex Team ran a Barn Dance in aid of Team funds, and the proceeds will help towards the cost of hiring halls for Classes and rehearsals.
We all enjoyed working on the item devised by Edith for the reunion and look forward to learning another item this year.
NORFOLK
We have been ‘good news’ to many since Radio Norfolk visited Mary Fox's Class.
Brian Guthrie interviewed Mary, Mavin Shulver (who had gone along for support) and some Class members, and the Broadcast went out over the air on the following Saturday.
Last September, prior to the new term, Towerham and Drayton Class Members invited all past members to a Reunion Coffee Evening in Drayton Village Hall, in celebration of Towerham's 25–year old Medau Class.
Original Tutor Muriel Alcock and her successors Ann Boast and Rosemary Frost were there, also Carol Ash, the original Adult Education Organiser, who spoke on the history of the Class.
A blue-and-white iced cake bearing our logo was made by Ann Boast's younger son Paul, and the event, which was arranged by Towerham and Drayton Group Secretary Kay Baxter, was reported in the Norwich Mercury.
Also reported in the Press last October was an account of a Medau Workshop session at St. William's School, Thorpe, bearing the theme ‘Flowing into Fitness’.
Eight different aspects were presented by Muriel Alcock, Janet Burns, Jane Fisk, Mary Fox, Stephanie Gerrard, Marlene McGee, Dorothy Ralph and Molly Scrutton, and a variety of music was used including ‘Top of the Pops’.
A new piece of apparatus has been introduced — the Broomstick!
Rita Horton led a pre-Halloween Training Session through an interesting experiment, researching the many ways of using this simple item to aid good movement.
In the week following this session Rosemary Frost successfully used the same in Class, amidst many giggles from her students.
The local hardware shop proprietor was perhaps not a little alarmed when asked to supply 15 broomsticks before October 31st!
JUMPING FOR JOY!
Ann Langford, a Medau trainer, hopes that by coming down by parachute she can send our fund raising sky high.
She will make a sponsored jump at Thruxton Airfield, near Andover on 10th March 1985, and the money raised will be divided equally between the Medau Society and Dr. Barnados — which is Ann's favourite charity as she herself was a ‘BArnardo's Kid’.
Toni Bergman will be administrating this event and will be responsible for the distribution and collection of all the sponsorship forms and monies.
MEDAU SOCIETY APPEAL 1984/85
YOU have all started haven't you??
You have — that's great.
You haven't — Oh dear!— some classes have because figures to date are £600.
Are you still wondering ‘What can we do?’
I have been attending a class where coins under 10p have been tossed into a jar since October and on counting these there are £8 already.
Another class have been selling tomatoes, pears and apples, even these ideas require no hard work — no real outlay (if home grown)— and no difficulty — Really!
So — can I please appeal to those of you (teachers and class members) who are having difficulty in deciding just what fund raising ideas to put into operation — 1985 is now upon us — and — Time Flies’.