

Editorial
We continue to be pleased to hear by word of mouth that Medau News is ‘interesting’, ‘well-presented’ and ‘a good idea’…this is, of course, very gratifying but still we cannot inveigle you into putting pen to paper and writing to us.
This time we hope to stimulate a reaction from you all by saying ‘NO MEDAU MAGAZINE IN 1979/80’.
It has been a particular source of worry that sales of the magazine have been so low; in fact on the current issue we made a considerable loss which as a small Society is very difficult to cover.
It seems regrettable that although we are a thriving and growing organisation we cannot produce, support and sell an annual publication which should involve and interest us all.
Perhaps there are even some who do not realize we have a magazine, and all those who do know and have supported it in the past, do you really want the magazine to die and be no more?
Once again the gauntlet is thrown down!!
We, the Editors of the Medau News, would like to know your views and suggestions on this subject and look forward to printing them in the January issue.
Whitsuntide Course at Coburg
Every two years the Medau College holds a Whitsuntide course for Medau teachers and I always find it most stimulating to renew contact with our German colleagues.
I persuaded our Chairman, Hilary Weedon, to come with me as she speaks fluent German and I am keen that this contact shall continue into younger generations.
We had five days of intensive work, much talk and discussion and the most beautiful summer weather.
It was the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Medau College in Berlin in 1929 but not much was made of this, Dr Jochen Medau explained that they were looking to the future rather than the past.
In October the new training scheme with start in which Medau music and movement will be combined with a training in physiotherapy.
This new venture seems to hold great promise for the future and we wish them every success.
MOLLY AT THE PALACE
Members were so kind in their congratulations that they will want to know what happened when I went to the Palace on February 7th to receive the M.B.E.
I was accompanied by Peggy Secord, who first introduced me to Medau, and by my brother.
The ceremony was held in the State Ballroom with an orchestra playing in the gallery.
The recipients' entrance was to the left of the platform where the Queen was standing surrounded by Yeomen of the Guard and several grand-looking dignitaries.
The officials in charge of us were most fatherly and reassuring!
One standing at the entrance gave each one of us a little push at the right moment for the walk across in front of the platform to another gentleman standing in the middle.
There one had to stand for a moment while one's name was read out — then another little push — a curtsey and four steps forward to just below the Queen.
The medal was handed to her on a velvet cushion and she bent down and hung it on a little hook with which we had each been provided on arrival.
Then she asked me ‘What is your work?’
‘Medau Rhythmic Movement which is a kind of keep-fit.’
‘And where do you do it?’
‘All over the country’.
Then she shook hands which is the signal to depart.
Four steps backwards — another curtsey and off to the other side where officials put the medal in a box and took back the hook!
I had only recently begun to walk much without a stick — however — after much midnight practice to a ‘pop’ record I did manage even the backward steps without a wobble which I felt was the least I could do as I was representing MEDAU!.
EXAMINATION CANDIDATES
We have great pleasure in congratulating this year's successful Medau Examination Awards candidates.
CRYSTAL PALACE
November is the time for our big Rally at the Crystal Palace Sports Centre; this year it will be on Saturday the 24th.
We are following the same pattern as our last Rally by not having a break during the afternoon.
This ensure that there is something going on the whole time for both the spectator and the participator.
Hopefully, there will be no long queues for refreshments as these will be available for sale all the afternoon.
There will be three open classes each with a different teacher from which you may choose one session; there will also be a separate class for the children and an interesting selection of displays.
It is always pleasant at our large gatherings for the Society to present a unified image which is why we ask particularly for all those taking part in the open classes to wear ALL MEDAU BLUE OR ALL NAVY BLUE.
If you are considering buying a new outfit for the occasion Carita House always has a supply of Medau Blue garments.
This is always a very popular event, one where you have the opportunity to meet up with old friends and we hope make new ones; so please obtain  your tickets early to avoid disappointment.
INSIDE INFORMATION
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 1979
The 27th Annual General Meeting was held at Rutherford School, Penfold Street, NW1 on Friday, 16th March 1979 and was attended by over seventy members despite a severe snow storm.
The minutes of the last Annual General Meeting were approved and signed by Miss Molly Braithwaite, M.B.E., M.A. (President of the Society).
Miss Braithwaite expressed her appreciation of all the hard work undertaken by the retiring Vice-Chairman, Mrs. Ann McMillan and said how much she regretted that Ann was unable to be present at the meeting because of her admission to hospital.
She then introduced and welcomed the new Vice-Chairman, Mrs. June Bascombe.
Election Results
Thanks were expressed to the retiring Executive Committee members Mrs. Vi Billington, Miss Jean Glass and Mrs. Cicely Harris and a warm welcome extended to the new committee members:
Presentation of Reports
The Chairman, Mrs. Hilary Weedon and the Hon. Treasurer, Mrs. Jean Parmiter presented their reports (details of which can be found in the Annual Report 1978–9 circulated to all individual members and group secretaries in January of this year.)
Forum
The meeting ended with an open forum on ‘The future of Medau’.
This was introduced by three speakers, Miss Catherine Stott, Mrs. Barbara Beecham and Mrs. June Bascombe.
Footnote
We are delighted to report that Ann McMillan has made a very good recovery from her operation.
We were delighted to see her at our last Qualified Teachers' Day.
EASTER COURSE IN LEEDS
A very successful Easter Course was held in Leeds with guest teacher Annette Kramer from Coburg assisted by Rita Quick and other Society trainers.
Some eighty students attended including several visitors from overseas.
Running parallel to the Medau sessions was a course organised by Anne Talintyre for the British team of Modern Rhythmic Gymnasts in training for the World Championships.
We were grateful that skilful programming precluded any of us from finding ourselves in the wrong session!
However we were most interested to watch the girls at work one evening when they put on a display for us.
This year was the first time the competition had taken place in England.
Twenty-nine nations competed at Wembley in this 9th World Championship.
MEDAU IN BELGIUM
Hilary Weedon, who has been teacher 2nd and 3rd P.E.
Students for a week each term at Lurvaine University, has been invited to continue the experiment during the coming academic year.
The Year of the Child
Not to be out done on an international occasion we can report here about some of our Qualified Teachers who have temporarily laid aside their small apparatus and have become mothers again:
PUBLICITY
The key-fobs sent to each individual member and Group secretary during 1979 have been a great success with many people writing in to the office expressing their appreciation; it is hoped to produce a further token during out 30th anniversary year.
The Publicity Committee are planning to have on sale for the first time at Crystal Palace a range of metalled key-rings and pendants which they think will make very nice Christmas presents.
A very good buy at 15p are our newest type of pens in blue and white with the logo and ‘Come alive with Medau’ also T-Shirts in blue with a similar motif both items obtainable from the office.
The Display Boards and Banners have been put to good use this year and are always available free from the office on request.
Book Review
The Moving Body by Pat Kennedy, M.C.S.P., Dip.
T.P., Dip.
Phys.
Ed.
Published by Faber Paperbacks 1979.
Price £2.50.
Pat Kennedy is a physiotherapist and physical educationalist with a vast experience of teaching and of work with the elderly and disabled.
This year she joined Rita Quick and Kay Latto on the examining board for the Medau Society's Teachers' Award.
‘The Moving Body’ is a concise and informative book written for all teachers of movement.
It presents a comprehensive account of basic anatomy, physiology and body mechanics in a straightforward and readable manner and gives valuable descriptions of some of the disabilities which might be encountered.
Clear illustrations and diagrams make this a most interesting and easy book to follow.
Pat Kennedy has given us much help and guidance in the past and we look forward to working closely with her in the future.
Two new training courses
We are hopeful that two new training courses will begin this coming autumn.
One will be based in Galloway, Scotland and directed by Rita Quick.
The second one will be in the West Midlands under the direction of Hilary Weedon and Jean Parmiter although the venue for this course has yet to be finalised.
Anyone who is interested in attending either of these courses should contact the Medau Office at Epsom.
CLASS LISTS
Class lists for 1979–80 are now available fro the Medau Office in Epsom.
This year there are two different lists covering (a) recreational classes, run either privately or by institutes of further education and (b) specialised groups which is more helpful for those looking for classes for the physically or mentally handicapped, blind, deaf and elderly groups in hospitals, homes and other institutions.
Please enclose a large S.A.E. stating which list(s) you require.
The 1000th MEMBER
This year, the second on from the Festival is still proving to be a bumper one for individual membership; we are now well in to the 900's and it would give great satisfaction and joy to all if the magic figures ‘1000’ could appear in the membership book lovingly kept by the Treasurer and Secretary.
In fact, that 1000th member will be the lucky recipient of a mystery gift.
Are you a group member?
Do you realize that for an extra 65p a year you would receive your own key-fob, regular copies of this newsletter and be our most vital statistic!!
Archivists
At last we have two people who have volunteered to become the Society's Archivists.
They have already made a start on collating and indexing all the paraphernalia that has accumulated over the years.
If you have any interesting item or piece of ‘Medau’ history tucked away that you would like to contribute please contact either:—..
SPOTLIGHT ON NORFOLK
EXAMINATION HOWLERS
1
‘Put class into one big circle, lift one knee up’.
Whose??!!
2
‘The outside partner should be passed on’???
3
‘Teach to clap this rhythm — when achieved teach it on the feet’ The sole reason being?
4
‘Legs become tired just about here’ In knee-d of a rest?
5
‘If time permits, walk class slowly round in a circle, bringing class to a quiet complete rest’.
R.I.P.
6
‘To pair off the class and make it more relaxed’.
No comment
7
‘The class has been running for 2½ years’ What stamina!
Answers to Crossword No. 2
MEDAU AMONGST THE BROWNIES
The telephone rang, and a voice asked if I would help the local Brownie Pack with a ‘Challenge’ using my knowledge of Medau Rhythmic Movement under the overall heading of Keep Fit.
Remembering the agony of years gone by, teaching in Sunday School, I grasped at a straw and replied ‘Sorry no transport!’
However, Brownie Helper's husband would act as chauffeur, so not being able to think of more excludes, I duly arrived at the appointed hour, to find a welcoming party of six little girls, all anxious to fetch and carry equipment.
Inside the Scout Hut were assembled many more children in Brownie tunics and, after their ritual song and dance, I was launched into my part of the meeting.
After establishing the fact that we had only one body, which could not be replaced by a trip to Marks and Spencers if it wore out, we discussed ways and means of preserving it!
I wasn't quite sure whether the little girl who volunteered the world ‘slim’ was being personal or not, but at least that led into a discussion on diet.
From the good food we progressed to adequate sleep and on to hygiene.
Hoping to get the answer that one of the first things we did no rising was to wash, I was a little disconcerted when my same little lady piped up ‘weight ourselves’.
Then to the important part — Exercise — and this led into a Movement session.
Excited Brownies grabbed the balls and soon everybody was bouncing!
What no piano!
Oh yet, it was tucked away in a cupboard, and was immobile and almost unplayable!
I did the best I could with the five keys that would produce a sound and vowed never again to sit in a cupboard.
Brownie helper Barbara once more came to the rescue and during the next week brought her daughter's cassette tape-recorder to my home where, in spite of my nerves and her dim knowledge of recording, we managed to get the music for a small sequence on tape.
After two more weeks of rehearsal, we were ready to perform in front of Brown Owl.
She clapped and praised our efforts and expressed amazement that the girls knew how many bounces to do without counting.
Then a little girl stepped forward and presented me with chocolates.
Could it be?
Yes it was.
My diet-conscious Brownie!
I am invited from time to time to sow the seeds of Medau, and last time Brown Owl allowed me to present each girl with a Medau leaflet.
It was encouraging to be asked by one small enthusiast ‘When I get a Lady can I join your class?’
The piano is now moveable and appears to have seven keys that strike a note, but I always take my tambour, and am eternally grateful to Francis and Rita for including in our training, advice on ways of accompanying movement without a piano.
MINI-FESTIVAL
Prompted by the tremendous success of the Royal Albert Hall Festival and in order to give wider publicity to Medau locally we, in Norfolk, will be producing our own mini ‘Festival of Movement’ on the 3rd November 1979.
We have hired St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich for the occasion and a great deal of planning and organising is taking place so that we shall provide a programme to delight all who attend.
We are very proud to have the opportunity of introducing our president to our Norfolk audiences; as Molly has kindly consented to handle the commentary for us.
We shall also be supported by the National Display Team and teams from Essex, Herts, Kent and Surrey and we are grateful for the contributions.
It is hoped to attract 500 people to each of the two performances and to follow up the event with an ‘Open Day’ to be held the next week at which the public will be encouraged to try Medau for themselves.
THANKS
Frances Almond and I feel quite ‘at home’ in Norfolk now.
It is already sixteen years since we left London specifically to help put Norfolk on the map in the Medau world.
Being the senior trainers for the whole county could be a full time job, and I am afraid that if that were the case we would have to give it all up.
Both of us have full day-time employment which is also fairly demanding of much of our spare time.
And both of us have many other interests and hobbies.
So how does it all keep going?
The answer is simple.
We have the full support and backing of the committee members of the Norfolk Training Branch of the Medau Society and a wonderful set of Qualified Teachers.
We don't have to delegate the work — they just take it on by themselves.
It would take too much space to list them all, but I will just mention one by name and that is Miss Phyllis Ratcliffe.
Phyllis was the county P.E.
organiser and she stayed on with Medau after she retired.
She gives so much of her time and energy to do anything and everything that comes her way and is also an invaluable link with the Education Office.
To her and all our helpers, without whom Medau in Norfolk would grind to a standstill, we say a very big ‘THANK YOU’.
ROUND & ABOUT
Last summer, following on from our display at the Royal Norfolk Show, we participated in a Festival to celebrate the Diamond Jubilee of the Norfolk Federation of Women's Institutes.
We were scheduled to perform our displays on two evenings in the ‘sports hall’ of the Norfolk College of Agriculture, which sounded very grand.
In fact the sports hall turned out to be a rather barren concrete building tucked away in a corner which nobody seemed very keen to visit!
So, at the very last minute we decided to perform on the lawn outside the main building.
This turned out to be very successful.
As part of the festival Sophie Roe gave an open class for children, which both she and the children enjoyed very much.
So much so that it inspired Sophie to give several children's classes in Norwich.
Also in Norwich, another ‘Food Facts and Figures’ Day was arranged by the sports and games sub-committee of the Norfolk Federation of Women's Institutes.
The varied programme included a breathing session by Ruth Rolph.
Several lecture demonstrations have resulted in successful classes — one at Bunwell is being taken by Rosemary High and another at Long Stratton by Mary Fox.
In March, Frances Almond was guest speaker a the Norfolk Branch of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy.
As a result of her lecture demonstration it is hoped that some  physiotherapy patients may be recommended to attend Medau classes.
: Our class for the mentally handicapped at Eaton Grange continues successfully.
There is a regular group of teachers who work in pairs with this class.
They all find it extremely hard work but very worthwhile.
We are hoping to increase the number of classes for the elderly.
Muriel Alcock, matron of an old people's home, is helping to organize classes on a regular basis in several homes in her area.
She also came to talk to us at a recent training day about what the very elderly can and cannot do.
One teacher who has recently started a class for this group is Rosemary High.
Her ‘young’ girls and sometimes ‘young’men are aged between 65 and 99 and they look forward very much to her weekly class which she describes as something of a frolic!
A frolic of a different kind was enjoyed by the old folk of St. Catherine's Church when they were entertained by a shown put on by Dorothy Ralph's Costessy class in April.
At our yearly rally in March classes took place by Rita Horton, Frances Almond, Ruth Rolph, Sophie Roe, Molly Scrutton and Ruby Philpott.
Displays were given by teachers and teachers-in-training and three solo items by Frances.
There were two W.I. Medau ‘get togethers’ scheduled this year.
The first was unfortunately cancelled because of the ‘blizzard’.
The second was held in the garden of Joan Hood's home in Woodbastwick.
Classes were given by Ruth Rolph and June Marfleet.
It seems that while Ruth was teaching she ‘lost’ the class.
Working on a long lawn, she wanted them to move down the ‘room’.
However beyond the tree designated to mark the end of the hall, a neighbouring meadow revealed some newly-hatched ducklings.
The temptation was too great and the whole class went to look!
This year Medau has returned to Cromer which in the days before Norfolk had any training scheme was the venue of the Medau Society's Summer School.
It was here that Madge Segger and Phyllis Ratcliffe became so enthusiastic about Medau.
Ruth Rolph has now re-introduced a recreational class to Cromer and numbers amongst her class members two of the original teachers who helped to put Cromer on the Medau map — Jackie Horner and Sheila Viles.