

EDITORIAL
We hope that as your Medau News — with its views, information and diary of events — comes through your letter box this September, you will agree that by receiving it by direct mail is a better system than sharing a few copies round from class member to class member.
The Society is always looking for new ways to improve its service to members and your encouraging response to the introduction last January, of a direct, one-category membership structure indicates that we are on the right lines.
More important still — your continued and generous support of the Society's work through donations and fund-raising activities of all kinds is clear proof of your willingness to contribute in an extremely generous manner.
For all of the help which you have given and continue to give freely we would like to thank you most sincerely.
May we now ask you to take on a more promotional and persuasive role?
In the next few weeks many people will be coming to class for the first time.
They will not be aware initially that if they join the Society in the autumn they will obtain what is virtually three months' free membership.
A subscription of only £1.80 or 80p if over 60 or under 16 entitles them to membership until December 1984.
Moreover should you persuade them to attend a local rally or the Crystal Palace Reunion they will immediately reap the benefit of obtaining their tickets at a reduced rate.
Please do your best to convince them that they really should take advantage of such a bargain.
If just two or three new members enrolled from each class our membership statistics would be rosy indeed!
PLANTING A TREE FOR MOLLY
On a very cold afternoon in February the then Vice-Chairman Hilda Lodge, accompanied by Hilda Hewitt and Pauline Kenward, planted a tree in memory of our Founder and First President, Molly Braithwaite.
The very splendid spades provided for the tasks were last used by H.M. The Queen and Prince Philip.
The idea for a commemorative tree was first mooted by Marlene Macgee soon after Molly's death and enquiries were instigated as to trees and sites culminating in what better tree than an oak and more suitable site than Regents Park just in front of St. John's Hall where Molly's thanksgiving ceremony was held.
The map pinpoints the spot for those who personally wish to view ‘Our Molly's tree’.
CRYSTAL PALACE RALLY
Our bi-annual Rally will once again be held at the Crystal Palace National Sports Centre on Saturday, 26th November when there will be classes to join in and displays to watch, the added excitement of the first draw of our latest money spinner the ‘200’ Club, also our usual sales stall with Medau T-Shirts, pens, books, notelets etc.
We would ask those who will be participating in the classes to try to wear either Medau blue or navy blue leotards, tunics, tights because this is visually more pleasing.
For prices of tickets etc. see back page.
EXAMINATION CANDIDATES 1983
This year the last four students from our present training courses took the Medau Teachers' Examination on 11th June and we are happy to report that all passed and are now qualified Medau Teachers.
They are .
PRESIDENTIAL PROFILE
Although from Canadian stock, I was born and brought up in a suburb of New York City.
I met Franklin in 1934 when my parents gave me a trip to England; we became engaged in 1936 and were married in 1939.
Our two children, Virginia and Peter were born during the war and after Franklin was demobbed in 1946 we moved to Peterborough where he works for an engineering company.
We saw Molly quite often after she moved to ‘Chart’ and we have lovely memories of two trips she made with us.
One to France when we visited our daughter and the other to Germany.
While in Germany we were delighted to have lunch with Elena Gerhardt and her husband.
It was a great experience to visit the Medau School in Coburg, where we watched a class given by Bedu.
We had dinner with Jochen and Ingrid and Jochen showed us over the school.
Here as elsewhere it was evident that Molly was held in great affection and devotion by her friends and we are happy that many are now our friends.
I did some Medau in London before the war but since then have been thwarted by a lack of classes in this area — but — I am always hopeful.
Everyone and everything about the Medau Society gives me a special and warm feeling.
I feel very fortunate as well as honoured to be associated with you all as your President.
Dear Members,
Some of you may not know that you have recently given me two lovely present, the first, for my birthday, being a beautiful flower arrangement which gave me great pleasure, particularly as I live in the centre of London and my nearest ‘garden’ is Regent's Park!
The second present was a book toke) a ‘thank you’ for having had the pleasure of being President of the Medau Society.
For both presents I thank each one of you.
I am delighted that Lady Braithwaite is now President; we are indeed fortunate in having her support and also that of Sir Franklin for, through them, memories of Molly and all she did to establish the Society and develop its work will be preserved.
I am most grateful to those of you who take classes for people who are unable to take part in our ordinary groups.
I still look forward to visiting classes and rallies in the future.
Best wishes to you all.
EASTER COURSE AT AVERY HILL COLLEGE
I had always promised myself a Medau weekend or week course.
Everyone knows that in fact you can get organised — so — leaving the family, animals and business I set off for Avery Hill College.
On arrival I was greeted with typical Medau friendliness and escorted to my own room over-looking a pool with resident ducks.
We all met at a pre-luncheon reception and then adjourned to the dining hall to sample the culinary delights which were to space our classes for the next five days; four classes with dancing after dinner was the order of the day, all meticulously time-tabled.
It was marvellous to be taught by new faces, especially Bedu who had come from Coburn.
The memory of her excellent teaching coupled with a rare glimpse into ones own psyche through thought and movement I shall never forget.
We sang (in  canon most of the time) learnt new dances and a little German, we wined and dined and held a most memorable party on the Friday evening.
Although the classes were not compulsory I only missed two, partly through exhaustion and I wanted to visit the Orangery and conservatory attached to the college.
The only drawback to the course was the way my calves refused to move first thing in the morning; the  pluses ?— meeting and making new friends and returning home refreshed and energised in mind and body.
INSIDE INFORMATION
ELECTION RESULTS
Meet your new Vice-Chairman and Executive Committee members.
Joan Daniels joined a Medau class at Blackheath in 1956 and started teacher training in 1961, which she interrupted to have a family, two sons and a daughter before qualifying in 1969.
She had meanwhile moved to Strood and was able to introduce Medau and establish classes in that area of Kent.
Joan is also a keen squash player and her mathematical skills have been an asset to the Society on a number of occasions e.g. masterminding ticket sales for the Royal Albert Hall — the 30th Anniversary draw and collecting various Society statistics.
Husband Roy has always been very supportive and part of the Medau scene.
Toni Bergman, a qualified teacher, was born in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, but moved south when 11 years old.
She completed her education in Croydon before moving to Guildford where she worked in the Social Services Department and then the personnel department of an Insurance Company.
From a child she had taken ballet and modern dance lessons and was naturally drawn to Medau after seeing a lecture demonstration.
Married Peter in 1978 and they have two daughters.
Adrienne Ring Manchester born, a former fashion model and executive secretary, she is married to a Furnishing Textile Agent and lives in N.W. London.
She is a Medau teacher and her other interests include The Royal Opera House, Street Markets and Sanctuaries which shelter and care for abandoned domestic animals.
Cecilia Taylor first tried a Medau class about 19 years ago and has been ‘hooked’ on it ever since; regularly taking part in displays, rallies and courses.
Has been a member of the Publicity Sub-Committee for about two years and is very interested in the progress of the Society in particular and in Movement and Dance in general.
She lives in Thames Ditton with her husband, Paul and three grown-up children.
Jan Weisner is married to a P.E.
teacher and has two sons, 18 and 9 years old.
She originally came from the Potteries, but now lives near Southend-on-Sea where she teaches in a special day school for children with learning difficulties.
Her interest in movement includes work with the Essex Display Team, Yoga and Jogging whilst relaxation is a penchant for Georgette Heyer romances.
She follows a semi-vegetarian, wholefood diet whose virtues she frequently extols.
Kay Maskell who has just retired after many years as the Chairman of the Finance Sub-Committee has agreed to become one of our Vice-Presidents.
SOCIETY TRAINERS ATTEND WHITSUNTIDE COURSE AT COBURG
Every other year during the Whitsuntide Holiday, a special course for teachers is held at the Medau College in Coburg.
At the course this year over 140 teachers came from various parts of Germany and the continent to take part in sessions of Expressive Dance, Duncan Dancing and International Folk Dance as well as Medau Rhythmic Movement.
Margaret Charlwood, Hilary Weedon and June Bascombe attended and were also present at the A.G.M. of the Medau Ring (the association of Medau teachers in Germany) when Dr Jochen Medau reported that the four year course combining Medau Rhythmic Movement and physiotherapy continues to be highly successful and that the college was extremely heartened by the large number of students applying for admission.
FILM REVUE
‘GIVE US THE CHANCE’ is a splendid film which not only shows work carried out successfully by professionals it also indicates how families and voluntary organisations can participate in enriching the lives of the physically and mentally handicapped.
Available for hire, 16mm film or video cassette from: — 
Book Review SKETCHING AT THE KEYBOARD
With its attractive cover this book invites one to delve into the contents.
From the simplest beginnings the reader is carried along on a step-by-step journey to adventures in ‘Harmonic landscaping’ and a variety of textures.
The dialogue itself makes compulsive reading and there are many musical quotations and ideas to pursue.
Already a popular book, there is promise of a supplement on Improvisation to follow.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 1983
The 31st Medau Society A.G.M. was held on Saturday, 30th April in the unusual setting of Barking Bowling Club.
The weather was perfect, the room inviting and comfortable which added up to a happy atmosphere.
Miss Kay Evans, Chairing her last meeting as the Society's President welcomed the four new committee members, Toni Bergman, Adrienne Ring, Cecilia Taylor and Jan Weisner and thanked the retiring members, Bridget Ewing and Berta Group.
June Bascombe having given her report as Society Chairman thanked Kay Evans for the invaluable support she had given to the Society for so many years and presented her with a book token.
In reply, Miss Evans assured the meeting of her continuing support and interest.
The Chairman then thanked Hilda Lodge, who, although retiring as Vice-Chairman, was continuing to serve as Chairman of the Publicity Committee and introduced Joan Daniels the new Vice-Chairman; she then went on to thank Kay Maskell and Jean Parmiter the retiring Chairmen of the Finance and Training Sub-Committees.
The Treasurer presented her financial report, details of which are in the Annual Report.
While introducing and welcoming our new President, Lady Braithwaite, June Bascombe said how pleased the Society was to continue its close links with the Braithwaite family.
Lady Braithwaite spoke of her memories of the early days when Molly and her mother were even then busy trying to find suitable material in the right shad of blue for Medau tunics.
The meeting was followed by tea (provided by Essex teachers) and a successful mini-bazaar.
MARGARET CHARLWOOD TO VISIT NORTHERN IRELAND
For the third year running, Margaret Charlwood has been invited to teach by the Northern Ireland K.F.A. at a weekend course for their teachers and students teachers in Lisburn.
Margaret is delighted to be making this return trip on what she describes as a warm and friendly course.
WEEKEND COURSE AT SOUTHLANDS COLLEGE
Thirty-five teachers attended a special course given by Veronica Portmann, a lively young teacher from the Gymnastickschule in Bern.
She took as her theme ‘Experience — Sensitivity — Creativity’ and her stimulating and thought provoking work was much enjoyed.
Not only (Medau) but also…
As I tell children in primary schools, I was six when I had my first piece published.
It was a paeon of praise for the comic I read at the time — a tuppenny coloured one!
Very high-class — and — my cheque was a box of notepaper with all the comic characters round the margins.
‘How did it go?’ they breathe, ‘can you remember?’
‘Sure’ I say cheerfully.
‘I like toffees and chocolates, and caramels and creams,
But when I have tuppence to spend then Bubbles is best — it seems’
accenting it like a demented Maurice Chevalier.
‘Isn't that terrible!’
But they are exchanged — awestricken — it seemed insulting to add ‘Well I was only six’.
I have, I hope and think, moved on since that day.
I've written a great many books for children and some for adults about children (several from both categories have caused a wave of national commotion), broadcasted, televised, been translated into every language including some I hadn't realised existed — and what about a bizarre unidentifiable Japanese edition that is put out as one of my books, that for all I know is a codebook for terrorists or drug-runners!
I tell stories, give talks, run writing workshops — for children and adults all over the country.
I enjoy this very much.
It's very warming for a writer, who works so much alone, to be so welcomed.
Telling one's own stories to children of different ages is extremely satisfying and also shows you where you went wrong in the rhythm of a sentence; unconsciously you alter it to fit the audience in front of you and get it right, so that it makes its point swiftly and powerfully.
Storytelling to six-year olds above all is the most hazardous and the most enjoyable experience I know, a sort of terror-sport.
At that age their faces reflect with the most uninhibited intensity every changing emotion, that goes with every separate circumstance of every single character in the story.
I am terrified to look at them because I know I will collapse into helpless laughter.
Lovely children.
This year I have five new children's books coming out (little ones), as well as some new paperback editions.
Crazily — the most recent think I have done — is start a children's bookshop in my own home.
NORFOLK
Jane Fisk giving one of the movement sessions at Norfolk's 23rd Annual Rally at Thorpe High School.
Also teaching were .
The day was enjoyed by about 260 Society Members and friends, and there was great interest in display items performed by Class Members and by the Norfolk Display Team, with solo displays given by Norfolk Trainer Frances Almond.
ESSEX
A lively Folk Group and Caller kept everyone on their feet at a Barn Dance held in March at Pitsea Leisure Centre, arranged by Essex Teachers under the supervision of Joan Reynolds.
A hearty supper was eaten and a bar constantly provided welcome liquid refreshment.
It was so good to meet old friends and make new ones in such a happy atmosphere that this social event will no doubt be repeated in the future.
HERTFORDSHIRE
It was winter wonderland around St. Alban's College when more than 80 keen enthusiasts arrived clad in warm woolies and boots for the Annual Hertfordshire Day Rally organised by Doreen Copas in February and guest teachers Vanessa Forbes and Chris Markham had risen very early to allow for possible hazards along their respective snowy cross-country journeys.
The warmth and friendliness, however, spreading through the classes soon overcame the shivers and all agreed it was a jolly good day.
An excellent tea was provided by class members and teachers and a beautifully iced ‘Birthday Cake’ had been made in celebration of Doreen's 21 years of teaching.
The picture above shows her cutting the cake with three of her ‘21 years old’ class members.
Audrey Foster, Monica Marshall and Rosemary Smith.
The day ended on a very lively note with Vanessa and Chris leading the way, closely followed by those young-in-heart ladies of the Harpenden Medau (Keep Fit Gently) class and the rest of the gathering.
SOUTH WEST
The region was very proud that Hilda Hyam received one of the special Silver Medal Awards at the 30th reunion, for it was Hilda who brought Medau to Weston-super-Mare and Bridgwater more than 20 years ago.
Her never-failing enthusiasm and dedication helped to build the strong support now enjoyed in this area, and although she is now retired, she still attends a weekly class.
Regional Training Days have continued and class members have enjoyed meeting together in two rallies, one held in April in Timsbury organised by Barbara Potticary, when it was refreshing to join in classes given by Edith Harlow once more and a local class rally held in Devon was very well supported and a most pleasurable event.
Plans are well in hand for the lecture demonstrations taking place in the south west during September; everyone is working hard to promote ‘Weston-super-Medau!’
LONDON
Congratulations to Lucy Jackson for taking the opportunity to run Medau classes during August and September at the Pineapple Centre in London, and for her recent success in publicising Medau in various national magazines and local newspapers.
SURREY
On a hot evening in July the Medau Society ran its very first Barn Dance at Bridge End Farm — a pukka barn with bales of hay, a six piece group, a delicious supper, a happy crowd of over 200 people and a very efficient band of voluntary workers led by Pat Shere and Toni Bergham helped the event go with a swing (and a clap) and lots of laughter.
The stork has been flying low and landed three times in the Surrey area recently, visiting .
CHESHIRE
Beryl Beddows became interested in Reflexology (Stimulation of the Body's Healing Forces through Foot Massage) some time ago and attended a Course in company with Yoga Teachers, Herbalists and Homeopathy believers, an Osteopath and Buddhist Meditators.
After a treatment session the patient is relaxed and almost ‘floats’ away in comfort and Beryl finds there is no shortage of ‘feet’on which to practice.
Now we know the secret behind that Cheshire Cat's ecstatic grin!
WEST SUSSEX AND HAMPSHIRE
A very happy afternoon will be remembered by many at Connors Keep, Cowplain, when Wendy Middleton took her Elderly Ladies Class safely through their paces in a special display item.
In spite of a few ‘stage nerves’ before the performance, they did extremely well.
Else Lynes had also brought along her active class to perform a display item before a most appreciative audience.
Wendy says that slowly but surely our name is taking hold in this wide area.
On he way to class one day a passer by noticed the Medau badge on her tracksuit and said to her companion ‘Oh look, there's the magic word!’
Hopefully, the ‘word’ will be spread further afield eventually by trainee Teachers joining the new Training Course this Autumn.
Caroline Little for family reasons had to give up many of her recreational classes, but started a class for stroke victims which has provided so beneficial and popular that it has now been recognised in an official capacity.
In fact she has been asked to give short lecture demonstrations of the exercises to two other stroke clubs in neighbouring Hayling and Emsworth.
NORTH-EAST
In May the Cramlington Branch of the League of Health & Beauty celebrated their fifth birthday at Newcastle Civic Centre and at the invitation of Maureen Murray our N.E. Area's Display Team contributed two items to the programme of demonstrations.
AT the point of accompaniment in their hoop items when Rita Quick abandoned her cymbal and headed for the piano, she arrived to find the stool gone!
However, Rita calmly carried on in spite of this rather inconvenient technical hitch.
Classes have continued over the breadth, if not the length, of Scotland and members from many areas met in Newton Steward in March, when Valerie Archibald organised another Medau weekend with classes given by Beryl Smith and Peggy Sigall.
The North-East may seem remote geographically but they are certainly great thinkers and doers. you will now find the first ever mention of the word ‘Medau’ included int he latest edition (published 12th May in Edinburgh) of Chambers 20th Century Dictionary, on page 781, inserted between ‘Medal’and ‘Meddle’viz.
Medau ma'dow, n.a. form of rhythmical exercise, mainly for women, using e.g. balls, hoops and clubs, developed by Hinrich Medau (1890–1974)