

CHAIRMAN'S LETTER
‘The business of ‘fitness’ and ‘good health’is healthier than ever’so says the advertising copy for the National Exhibition of Health & Leisure being staged at the Barbican Centre from 9–12th October.
Indeed, what a big business it is!
As we dip a toe into this rather choppy sea we appreciate even more that our work is a well-tried and tested educational system operating mainly under the safe anchorage of Adult Education.
From your response last year to the Questionnaire, clearly you felt that the Medau Society should begin putting up tougher resistance to commercial pressure and taking more positive approaches to publicity, advertising and the media.
I hope that though the efforts of the Publicity Committee and Press Officer you have seen that much has been accomplished through articles in glossy magazines such as Harpers & Queen and Vogue, good coverage in local press, new posters and Medau's BBC-TV Breakfast Time slot, filmed with Diana Moran, the Green Goddess, at the Pineapple Centre in Kensington — And — We are taking part in the Health and Fitness Exhibition already mentioned — So — Make a date to go!
Medau Blue featured large when we quizzed you on your views and the National Display Team wore Medau Blue at the last Reunion.
We are retaining our Medau identity when appearing at prestigious events and thanks to the generosity of one of our Vice-Presidents (‘Medau's Grandmama’ as she calls herself) Peggy Secord, the Team will appear in new Medau Blue outfits at the CCPR Festival at the Royal Albert Hall in 1985.
This magnificent donation has lightened the Society's financial worries on this occasion.
We do have an ever constant worry about finance and on the back page you will find our latest Fund Raising Appeal.
Please start thinking about how YOU can help to keep your Society flourishing!
Letter from the BBC
My dear Lucy,
It was such a pleasure meeting you and your class filming this week.
I have been interested to find out more about the Medau method for some time now — and what a pleasant experience it turned out to be.
For me personally, the afternoon's exercise and movement left me feeling very happy and relaxed.
With sincere thanks for all your help —
Diana
MEDAU TRAINING COURSE
Having successfully completed the first year of the new Teachers' Training Course the students have gone away to grapple with their holiday assignments.
We look forward to their return in the autumn, their enthusiasm renewed ready to tackle whatever lies ahead.
At Stockwell Manor School we meet a certain amount of competition for the working areas and sometimes need to round-up hordes of energetic youngsters who have invaded the gym or perhaps the quiet concentration of a theory lesson is assailed by a steel band at full volume.
While our residential weekends at Aston Clinton are more or less ‘home from home’ now.
Future Plans — We plan to hold a Potential Teachers' Day on Saturday 24th November 1984 as an introduction to training, prior to the next intake in January 1985.
So — to any aspiring Medau teachers we promise a challenge with hard work, tempered by the enjoyment of insight into the world of movement teaching.
CHANGES IN TIME
This year marks the retirement of five well-loved teachers, whose names are ‘household’ to many members.
Eleanor Pitman (Kent) one of the first Qualified Teachers, Eleanor looks forward to spending and enjoying more time with her family.
Pam Hook (London) though retired from ILEA recreational classes, she will remain active in many other teaching aspects.
Pam will be delighted to step in as substitute in times of need, as Teacher or Accompanist.
Hilda Lodge (Kent) has hung up her teaching cap, but will continue to wear her Executive and Publicity Committee hats for a very long time to come, we hope.
Peggy Sigall (Surrey) has moved to Hastings.
Although retired from teaching recreational classes, Peggy will be far from idle with her many other interests.
Betty Hartley (Berkshire) founder of Berkshire Display Team and always a popular teacher at Rallies and Reunions.
We still expect to see her ‘on stage’ on many future occasions.
The Society thank these teachers for their strong support and dedication through many, many years, and wishes them, on behalf of all its members, continuing happy times ahead.
OBITUARY
Ann McMillan, who died on 21st July, aged 55 years, will be sadly missed.
Her great kindness and sense of humour will be long remembered, as will the enthusiasm and energy which made her an outstanding Teacher and Society Member.
A qualified Keep Fit Teachers, she gained the Medau Teachers' Award in 1968 and for many years was an active member of the Executive committee, serving as the Society's first Vice-Chairman from 1977 to 1979.
She also edited our magazine for several years.
Ann pioneered children's classes at Leatherhead Leisure Centre and produced the children's items at Medau's 25th Anniversary Festival at the Royal Albert Hall.
A truly caring person, she gave generously of her leisure time helping every week at Leatherhead Swans Club for Disabled People.
We extend our deepest sympathy to her family.
INSIDE INFORMATION
SOCIETY ELECTIONS
Once again in 1985 we will be looking for four new members to join the Executive Committee to replace Pat Keen (retiring), Doreen Prescott (retiring), Pauline Kenward (now Vice-Chairman) and Joan Daniels, who took office as Honorary Treasurer in May.
Will you give this matter serious thought and see if you can either consider standing yourself or can nominate a ‘willing!’ candidate.
Please send your nominations to the Office at Epsom by the 30th November 1984 — If necessary ballot forms will be sent out with the January Medau News.
200 Club
In September 1983 we launched the ‘200 Club’ to help raise funds for the Society.
Thanks to the support of many members we raised well over £1,200 from which we gave £646 in prizes and had £600 for the Society.
The draws for the prizes were made at Crystal Palace, the Dinner Dance and the Annual General Meeting.
Much interest was created in the draws for the winning numbers and complete list of winners is printed below.
Thank you to everyone who took part in this venture, we hopefully will run another draw sometime in the future — who knows it could be your turn next!
PRIZE WINNERS
Easter Course at Walsall
‘Are we just lucky or does the sun always shine at Walsall?
It was our second experience of the Easter course at the West Midlands College of Higher Education.
Everything was excellent, the weather, accommodation, all facilities including a swimming pool, food and above all the company of so many like-minded Medau enthusiasts is always a happy experience.
For us, coming from an area where there is very little Medau we enjoy every minute.
The most enjoyable four days with ‘Jolly’ Jean, ‘Gentle’Joan and ‘Lovely’Lucy combined to give us a variety of sessions with different apparatus.
We were given the opportunity to try a ‘Pineapple’ session with Lucy — non stop movement to a variety of music from pop — classical, exhilarating and great fun.
Friday night, as always was party time with some superb entertainment and we were delighted to welcome two unexpected visitors in the guise of Torville and Dean.
It was the only time our abdominal muscles ached — with laughter of course.
The four days went all to quickly and our grateful thanks go to everyone who helped to organise such a smooth running event.
We are now looking forward to Bath next year.’
ANSWERPHONE
A new piece of equipment has recently been installed in the Medau Office at Epsom — An Answerphone, very generously donated to the Society by our President, Lady Braithwaite.
Working with Stroke Patients and Mentally Handicapped People
A rewarding training day for teachers, chaired by Kay Maskell and Kay Evans, was held on 14th July at Quintin Kynaston School, St. John's Wood.
Audrey Patterson and Joan McGrath led the morning session with members of their Stroke club and in the afternoon Moya Hood took a movement class for mentally handicapped people from the Home Farm Trust in Avening, Gloucestershire; the film ‘Give us the Chance’ completed a most informative and instructive day.
BOOK REVIEW
Healthy Living Over 55 (The getting on…
Guide) by Laura Mitchell, price £3.50, published by John Murray (Publishers) Ltd., London and Central Independent Television 1984.
Don't be put off by the cover but do read!— this is a book for all of us.
The author is a not-so-young physiotherapist — she is 77 — who has experienced serious illness and has mobility problems.
Nevertheless, she is delightfully forthright, alert and amusing.
The book dispels many of the negative aspects of growing older.
It is written in simple non-technical language.
The 8 chapters are all headed ‘Take Care of…’
To quote Laura Mitchel —‘We spend our lives wanting to be mature, well, now we are so let's make the most of it.
To do this, we must keep in trim, mobile and interested in ourselves and the community, on other words in life.’
‘There is always a way through and there is always interest to be found along the way.’
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The 32nd Annual General Meeting held at Eltham Hill School on Saturday, 12th May 1984 was attended by about 100 people.
The day began with lively classes given by Jean Parmiter and Joan Gatfield; these classes were followed by a tasty Ploughman's lunch when members were joined by our President, Lady Braithwaite and her husband, Sir Franklin.
During the lunch break our sales table was well patronised and the impressive display of press articles and photographs were inspected and admired.
The whole gathering repaired to the gymnasium for the business meeting and during the afternoon a presentation was made to Janet Rogers, the retiring Honorary Treasurer and the Chairman introduced both the new Vice-Chairman, Pauline Kenward and the new Honorary Treasurer, Joan Daniels.
The meeting closed with the presentation of floral arrangements to two Kent teachers, Hilda Lodge and Eleanor Pitman who had both started Medau in the early 50's as members of Dr. Anni Noll's post-natal class and having enjoyed that introduction Medau became a way of life and they both went on to quality as Medau teachers and have both taught continuously in the Kent area ever since.
Thanks were extended to all the Kent teachers who had hosted the event and the finale to a happy day was the final draw of the society's 1983/84 Fund Raising activity — The 200 Club.
LINKS WITH BELGIUM CONTINUE…
Four years of close contact with Leuven University, where Hilary Weedon regularly taught 2nd and 3rd year undergraduate PE students, taking Further Training Weekends for Teachers from Leuven and Brussels Universities, resulted in 4 Belgium students joining our own Summer Course.
Hilary now has a full-time post with Playboard, the Association for Children's Play and Recreation, and Margaret Charlwood will now represent the Society as Trainer at a week's Course for Teachers in Brussels in December.
NATIONAL DISPLAY TEAM
Following the audition held last April the new National Display Team has been formed to represent the Society at the CCPR 50th Anniversary Festival of Movement and Dance at the Royal Albert Hall 20th April 1985.
The Team will be directed by Margaret Charlwood who was closely involved with coaching the original team at our own festival at the R.A.H. in 1978.
The main team will be backed by our Teen's Team who will be performing their fast-moving ball item.
Not only (Medau) but also…
…
My life seems to revolve around ‘M's’— Medau, Mountains, aMateur draMatics, systeMs engineering.
Systems Engineering?
It still amazes me that I — an arts graduate — do this job.
Before the interview, I started the Ladybird book on computing.
‘What do you know about computers?’
‘Well, there are analogue and digital ones (Ladybird p.7)‘And what's the difference between them?’
(Well, I only got to page 8…).
Four years on, I advise customers what to install and how and when, and, I train their staff and demonstrate the products and…and…
It's a flexi-time job — start as long before 9 as you like and go on as long after 5 as the situation requires (6, 7, 8 — not mention weekends!).
Even the mystique has gone — these days we ‘professional’ computer people fall prey to micro maniacs at dinner parties.
‘Ah — computers — well, I'm working on a DO loop using the EPRON and the RAM via the BUS on my ZX81.
What should the fourth byte on the left contain?’…
I am trying to think of a suitably vague alternative title for my job —‘magnetic media operative’ might put them off.
Climbing mountains is a recent addiction.
I discovered only last year that he quickest way to forget problems is by leaving terra firma several hundred feet below you — the less firm — the more terra…
As for amateur dramatics, I prefer to write for others to perform but in the absence of anyone daft — sorry, I mean talented — enough to oblige, I have been known to tread the boards.
…(To Easter Course attendees — Trevor says ‘Gan canny lasses!)
Medau knits together these diverse threads in my life.
For several years now, a small but happy band of pilgrims, led by Rita Quick, have gathered monthly to keep Medau alive in the North East (‘Is it the 8, 7 or 6 person formation today, Rita?’)
Medau provides an essential change of pace, after hectic days in the fast-moving computer business.
It is also very preparation for climbing, since balance and swing are crucial, especially when you have to swing up six feet and balance on a ledge no wider than a fingernail…. and as for amateur dramatics — you should see some of our training sessions!
To finish as I started —‘Le monde moderne menaces my mellowness and mobility — Medau movement maintains me.
NORFOLK
Our teachers have been very active outside their normal classes.
Jane Fisk recently passed Stages I and II of the Tutor Training Course organised by Norfolk Education Committee.
Molly Scrutton was invited to teach at a KFA Training Course in Thorpe and she has taught at our own Rallies in Kent and Essex earlier in the year.
Marlene McGee was asked by the Head of Physical Education in Suffolk to demonstrate MRM in its traditional form at a conference in Lowestoft before movement teachers training under Suffolk Education Authority.
Some of her class members showed four short items and KFA teachers present were so impressed that they have invited Marlene to teach at their Teacher Training Course in November.
Marlene also  organised a Medau Get-Together at Lowestoft in May, with particular emphasis aimed at ‘young’ folk.
Dorothy Ralph has successfully started a Medau class for the Active Retired in Duke Street, Norwich.
Our 24th Annual Rally in Norwich last March was well attended and demonstrations by the Norfolk Display Team as well as Class Displays were applauded by the Adult Education Organisers, all ladies except for Mr. Michael Edwards, Principal Adult Education Officer for Norfolk.
SOUTH WEST
We do rather think of ourselves in this area as ‘Medaus out in the sticks’, being a long way from the hub, so to speak.
Medau came to Dartmouth — and in a wider sense, Devon — via Moyra Hopley who moved here from Essex.
She started a class in a local school where Yvonne Wilson was running a play group.
Yvonne joined the class, became ‘hooked’ and herself eventually became a Medau teachers.
Along the way they picked up a Swedish girl, Eva Vincett, who had married an Englishman, so then there were three!
There are now several thriving classes int he area and the three still fid time to devote to their other loves — with Moyra it's golf, Eva windsurfing and Yvonne tennis and badminton.
Regular training days and rallies are held with colleagues from Weston-Super-Mare and Bristol, the last of which was in April at Saltford Hall, Bristol, when Moyra Hopley and Rosemary Gould put everyone through their paces.
On that occasion teacher-in-training Sheena Mayell's Mum Cynthia provided a lovely lunch and Sheena's husband Howard was busy with camera, producing some nice photographs of the event.
Sheena and Howard have since moved to Somerset and we wish them every happiness in their new home.
SUSSEX
Much interest was shown in Medau at a recent ‘Come and Try It’ day at Nede House, East Grinstead where we held our own alongside aerobic sessions, soroptomists demonstrations, ballet.
Pat Keen gave a short talk on the history and work of MRM, with Vanessa Forbes, Janice Hewitt and Chris Jones as class members in a practical demonstration, ending with a performance of Vanessa's Surrey item which was first seen at the Crystal Palace Rally.
NORTH WEST
The Lancashire KFA (whose members are frequent visitors to our own Days and Rallies) have invited Beryl Beddows to give their teachers a Medau session in October — a very nice complement!
Medau members came from Lancashire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Deeside and North Wales to the Rally at Bulkeley School, Cheadle in February.
Many of our class members attended both the Easter Course at Walsall and the Lilleshall Course, returning back to base with glowing reports stimulating much interest for next year's Courses.
Sessions taken by Jean Parmiter, June Bascombe, Ann Langford and Wynne Norris (who stepped in at very short notice of Rita Quick) at our area training days have been greatly enjoyed and appreciated.
KENT
‘Our Elsie’ Streek is never at a loss for fund-raising ideas.
This time a sponsored ‘Ball Bounce’ took place during a Medau Open Evening and thanks to the stamina of class members and friends over £1,000 was raised in aid of Arthritis in Young Children.
This amount was further swelled by a generous donation from Norfolk of £200.
Pictured above our Publicity Committee Chairman, Hilda Lodge, looks on as Elsie present a cheque to Peter Allsop, local Chairman of the Arthritis & Rheumatism Council.
Also in the picture is Mr. Eley, ARC Treasurer.
Joan Daniels has now been appointed Honorary Treasurer of the Medau Society and we wish her the best of luck in balancing the books — figuratively speaking!
Joan Moore, class secretary, sends thanks to her friends at Alma Road School for their gift of a plan for her new garden in Chelmsford.
SURREY
With that brilliant pair Torville and Dean so much in the news, Easter Course members at Walsall couldn't believe their eyes when these idols appeared before them — on roller skates!
Much laughter and applause greeted Surrey girls Liz Baldock and Sheila Burridge in performing their roller duo with great skill! and finesse!
Jean Parmiter recently spent an afternoon with a Morden group of people suffering from arthritis.
They enjoyed taking part in the movement session Jean had devised for them and watching demonstrations given by the small group she took along.
We have had several rallies within our area, all as popular as ever and at Pat Keen's East Grinstead Wine & Cheese Evening in May we were graced by the presence of a certain Eastern Lady who performed a most exotic dance.
She bore a very strong resemblance to Vera Norman!
DORSET
Class members experiences in ‘other fields’ make interesting listening — 78 years old Joy Young one of Freda Lewis's most loyal supporters was born in Cape Town and has been an inveterate traveller throughout her life.
Only last year she toured India, visiting Khatmandu and flying over the length of the Himalayan range, getting as close as possible to Mount Everest — one of her most wonderful moments.
In earlier days Joy was a champion swimmer, helping to win the coveted Swimming Cup of the Cape and representing Western Province at the Curry Cup Games in Durban.
On coming to live in England she furthered her great love of music, giving piano recitals, teaching and broadcasting.
Although ‘retired’ Joy still helps to raise funds for the Bournemouth Orchestra an many local Medau class members support and share this keen interest.
HERTS — BEDS — CAMBS
Sports Centres are fine places for the active-minded public but they are not particularly suited to our Rallies, so Aldercine Hodson planned a special Sunday afternoon feature at Putteridge Recreation Centre, near Luton.
Lucy Jackson took two classes ‘Pineapple’ style and many strangers to Medau watched and participated.
The Centre's Management were impressed and class membership in Luton has increased.
Aldercine's Active Retirement Club at Luton Regional Sports Centre now number over a hundred on the register — almost half are men!
Whilst ladies bounce Medau balls, gentlemen engage in more vigorous work-outs in the multi-gym.
Teacher-in-training, Kate Humphries is PE teacher at the MacIntyre Homes and organised an Open Day for parents in June.
A group of twenty young girls showed how each is able to cope in her own way using apparatus to musical accompaniment — on this occasion they handled balls, hoops, ribbons and twisters and very well too!!
MEDAU SOCIETY APPEAL 1984/85
Interested in Fund-Raising?
NO!!
I hear you all chorus!!
I don't blame you in these days of ever increasing prices: whoever would have imagined the day would come when we would be paying 10/ — for a loaf of bread.
I am not writing to discuss the subject of inflation although give a soap-box to stand on I could go on for ever.
It's our Society that needs money.
‘Here we go again’ I hear you all chorus!! can I tempt you to continue reading?— Good!
As you all know our fund-raising project last years was the 200 Club and those of you who joined the club will be pleased to know that the venture made a good profit.
Starting in September we are organising a fund-raising year throughout the country in ‘Areas’.
‘Why do we need extra funds
’ I hear you all chorus!
To subsidize the various courses we run, to help the display team towards expenses and in general to be able to function as a society knowing that if something arises we can meet the cost without going bust!
How does one raise funds without losing your hair in the attempt through worry.
Below are just a few suggestions.
Raffles — Discos — Barn Dance — Cheese and Wine — Sponsored Swim — Slim — Ball Bounce — Filling a jar with coins under 10p — Coffee Mornings — Cake Stall — If every teacher pledged herself to raising among her classes just £20 between September 1984–85 we would raise almost £3,000.
‘What brilliant ideas’ I hear you all chorus ‘We will start immediately’— Great!
Progress reports will be published in the coming January and September issues of the Medau News.
— Good Luck!