

Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at North Westminster Community School, Penfold Street W2 on Saturday 14th March 1987
National Development Plan — Notes on Discussion
welcomed everyone and said it was gratifying that so many had made the effort to be present and she extended a special welcome to the representatives from Norfolk, North West and the West country.
Two days before last Q.T. Day the Society's representatives had an interview with the Sports Council Grant Panel — the serious situation arising from that had been explained to all teachers present and everyone was asked to take a copy of the Development Plan to study.
Since then every Q.T. has received in their notes a red paper outlining the Grant Aid meeting also a letter containing a revised timetable in which you were asked to think about specific items.
Since our last meeting The Medau Society has been offered a Grant for one year only — which is very generous of the Sports Council under the circumstances and for which we are very grateful — BUT THERE ARE CERTAIN CONDITIONS:
We must increase our own earned income —(This was why you were asked to think about P.A.F.)
We must have specific projects aimed at increasing membership from the majority of Medau participants.
Unless the objectives outlined in the first year of the Medau Society's Development Plan are achieved only applications for support to specific projects in line with the Council's strategy would be considered in future.
In order to comply with these conditions the Society needs the help IMMEDIATELY of EVERY Q.T.
then introduced  our Sports Council Liaison Officer who has always been most helpful and had volunteered to come along and present their point of view.
encouraged us by saying that the Sports Council appreciated our work; also the specialised training of our teachers BUT we were receiving 63% of our income from the Sports Council and that was not acceptable.
It was essential that we become more professional in our outlook and make ourselves more financially viable.
Also they were very concerned with the differential between participants and Society Members.
She said the Sports Council would not abandon us but in order to qualify for full Grant Aid in future we must show great improvements in these areas.
Professional Affiliation Fee
The Treasurer itemised the benefits received — printed publicity material — availability of a full-time secretary — access to a photocopier and word-processor if needed — mailing facilities.
If every teacher at present teaching paid PAF our income would be £840; last year it was £728 and the cost of publicity material alone cost £619.
It had been suggested that a form of graduated PAF be introduced according to the number of classes taught by individual teachers.
In the discussion that followed it became clear that graduated PAF would not be popular.
It was clearly felt that PAF should be regarded entirely as an automatic fee in recognition of a teacher qualified and belonging to a professional Society.
It was also accepted that an increase in PAF was necessary with perhaps a higher fee for active teachers with an associate fee for non-teaching teachers.
A renewal card or invoice was suggested to be sent each September to cover PAF, Insurance (if required), QT fees and Membership.
Insurance was another area in which the Sports Council felt we should be earning income — this will be researched by the Finance Committee.
Membership
During 1986 there were 8,374 participants and only 2,144 Society Members.
Teachers were reminded that our comparatively low membership fee covers an Annual Report, three copies of Medau News, Renewal Cards, Membership Card, Course Form plus Secretary's Salary for administration and telephone, postage etc.
Group Membership was mentioned, but thought to be a retrograde step the Sports Council favours Individual Membership with special categories i.e. Over 60s — Under 16's — those on Social Security — those attending certain specialised classes.
Copies of the enclosed hand-out can be obtained from the office by those teachers who think it would be useful.
One suggestion is that to make sure everyone gets the message, including absentees, names from the register should be written on the handout and brought every week until distributed.
Undoubtedly the best time to sell Membership is when people have Medau contacts beyond their own class or in the euphoria of an extra enjoyable movement session.
Fostering Society awareness at a local level can be a great help — stamping  membership cards in areas was suggested — From the objectives stated in our Development Plan in the first year, it is calculated that the minimum Membership needed for 1987 will be 3,300 — and the responsibility for recruiting the majority of this must rest with our Q.T.'s — the burden can be eased by working together on local projects and targets have been set for each area to reach by the end of this academic year.
When setting these targets facts taken into consideration were — number of classes — the average participation level — the distance from Head Office — the length of time classes have operated.
Recreational and specialised classes have been  targeted separately.
Please — get together in your area to keep instigating projects until your target is achieved.
Some areas need to recruit well above target to achieve success.
Congratulations on your efforts so far this year — some of you may have achieved your target already, if so, please keep going to help others in your area.
A special draft letter is available from NDO to approach the administrators of specialised classes and where no money is available at source it may be possible to get recreational classes to sponsor a particular home or handicapped class.
If you have problems — please contact NDO.
Teacher Training
, Training Course Administrator, expressed the need for a continuing intake of trainee teachers.
A Potential Teachers Day will be held on 4th July 1987 at  — all Q.T.'s are asked to encourage likely candidates to attend — forms giving venue details and cost are available from the Office.
outlined the Training Course in its present condensed form and stated that its success or difficulties would be assessed in the near future.
It was felt essential to continue the Course at a National level and be available to students from a distance and as our training strength is already at full stretch it would not be possible at present to consider a weekly training course, which had been mooted to run alongside.
Perhaps future circumstances would change and this then might be possible.
It was stressed that Q.T.'s with class members on the Training Course had an important part to play, both in encouragement and giving recreational back-up to the specialised training received as trainee teachers.
Message from Kay Evans
We have heard from our benefactors, the Sports Council, that this year they are granting aid to the Society to the extent of £10 per head per member.
Understandably they have warned us that this generosity cannot continue and 1987 is a crisis year.
What must each of us do to eliminate the crisis?
Already some teachers have thought and acted upon ingenious schemes to increase membership and to make ourselves more financially self-supporting.
We must all follow suit.
It is a case of sink or —?
I know we can and will — swim.
There is no time like the present.
Start Now — Good Luck — I shall follow your progress with great interest.
Thank you to all who took part in the discussion, your views will be presented to the Executive Committee who will then make decisions concerning our future plans.
Efforts will continue to be made to obtain advantages for our members in various fields, although our membership is too small to attract offers from large national companies.
Any Medau member may now purchase leotards and leisurewear direct from Freetime at the wholesale price on single orders by quoting their membership number.
Leotards are made to order, so small children and extra outsizes can be accommodated as well as any variation of sleeve length, neck or panel inset (it would probably be best to telephone the more outrageous requests)
We intend to develop a travelling ‘Road Show’ with display boards, videos, literature etc. supported by live  demonstrations where possible.
If there are any suitable events in your area please tell NDO.
There seems to be a trend this year for ‘Health Days’ of various sorts, and these make an excellent platform for us — don't forget to mention we are an educational charity as this can drastically reduce any charges.
A pilot scheme is now ready for Junior (ages 7–11) and Youth (12–18) Awards at Bronze level — Silver and Gold are in the pipeline.
The Bronze  Award is geared to a ten week or one term basic course which could be introduced into schools, youth clubs etc. by any qualified Medau teacher or qualified school teacher who regularly attends a Medau class and is a member of the Society.
It should be attainable by every pupil who has worked with application and enthusiasm to improve the performance level at which they started (this opens the door to those with handicaps or difficulties)
A certificate will be presented to the successful candidates.
Syllabus and assessment forms from NDO.
We will be exhibiting at the Sports Medicine in Action, Kensington 31st March /1st April.
We expect this exhibition to be of particular interest to sports administrators and physiotherapists.
Teachers' Weekend — Froebel Institute 10/12 July
Regretfully, this weekend has had to be cancelled as  is now living in Malaysia and is unable to fulfil her commitment.
Annual General Meeting 11th April
The AGM will be held at Wheathampstead School,, and organised by Herts teachers.
Format as previously — open classes in the morning followed by a ploughman's lunch — meeting in the afternoon followed by films.
Please make every effort to attend and encourage your class members to come as well.
Don't forget to fill your attendance slip and return it to the Office as soon as possible.
Annual Reunion
Medau Society Reunion 1987 will now be held at Seymour Leisure Centre,,— Further details will be given at June Q.T. Day.
Tree Planting
It was announced that two trees would be planted in Regent's Park on Wednesday 18th March at 11.30 in memory of  and .
Q.T. Representative
has expressed a wish to resign her position  as QT Representative due to family commitments.
Enclosed is a job description — please send all nominations, with candidate's permission, to the Office by the end of April.
A vote will be held if necessary.
Radio Interview
Congratulations were expressed to , Press Officer, for a very successful interview given on LBC Radio.
Examinations
Seven student teachers will be taking their examinations on 21st and 28th March — we wish them luck and hope to see them at next Q.T. Day.
New Society Chairman and Vice-Chairman
announced her resignation as Society Chairman as from the AGM and took great pleasure in introducing  as next Society Chairman and  as Vice-Chairman, she was sure they would make a good team and wished them every success in the future.
Society Barn Dance
A Barn Dance to celebrate the Society's 35th Anniversary will be held on 4th July 1987 at .
All details from  —.
Thanks to teachers from Inner Surrey for an excellent tea.
Tea at the next Q.T. Day will be provided by Outer Surrey.
Date of the next Meeting
20th June 1987
WILL YOU HELP?
Over 8,000 people regularly enjoy the benefits of Medau classes — but — only 25% of them belong to the Medau Society.
Unless this percentage can be dramatically improved, we shall receive no financial help from the Sports Council in future towards our administration and training of new teachers.
The membership fee for 1987 is only — £2.75 —(over 60's and under 16's — £1.75) for which members receive three copies of Medau News; an Annual Report; full information, reduced rates and priority bookings for all events in the Medau calendar, including day and residential courses and rallies; certain trading privileges and full voting rights.
To show you care about the future
JOIN THE MEDAU SOCIETY NOW
Application forms available from all Medau teachers — or —
.
QUALIFIED TEACHERS' IN-SERVICE TRAINING PROGRAMME 1986/'97
Once more we have tried to give you a balanced programme which reflects your comments and requests.
You will find that we have invited three outside lecturers during the year, all of them highly recommended and each covering a completely different area of work.
is Head of Department at the London College of Dance and Drama at Bedford and impressed everyone who experienced her sessions at last year's Movement and Dance Day in the Eastern Region.
Many of you wanted to have a follow-up to the successful day on working with the elderly held earlier this year, and we have therefore asked , who some of you will remember from that day, to give specific tips on how to ‘handle’ elderly people; has also agreed to share some of her knowledge and experience with us later in the year.
‘Save a life’ means literally that — what would you do if someone collapsed in your class, or in the street in front of you?
Come and find out the right way to approach an emergency.
In between the ‘jam’ the trainers will try to give you the ‘bread and butter’in an interesting and enjoyable way.
We are pleased to welcome  as a fully fledged addition to our ranks, and as you will see, she will be starting to take QT sessions this season.
Our two assistant trainers, and  are also breaking the ice gently during the season, with  taking a breathing session and  sharing with us some of the techniques she learned during her recent ‘sabbatical’ year.
I'm sure you will all welcome them to what can be a daunting experience!
The ‘Adults Learning’ session with me in March will help marry some of the theory of adult education to the Medau teaching method — this has been part of the Teacher Training Course for some time, and we thought that some of you who have been qualified a little longer might like some theory to back up your practical experience.
We are glad that  is able to be with us twice this season, and that  has agreed to continue her regular music lessons for the early birds as well as taking a number of sessions. , and  make up the rest of the team and we all look forward to working with you.
Finally, don't forget the Taped Music Workshop in London on Saturday 27 September.
This should get our year off to a flying start so contact the office for details if you haven't booked your place yet.
Good luck with the start of your classes — and see you soon!
To all Qualified Teachers
As your Qualified  Teachers' representative over the last four years I have witnessed many new and exciting changes taking place within the Medau Society.
Our management and financial structures, the training of our new teachers, and our development have all undergone reform and re-evaluation, in order to present a modern and efficient image.
Part of my job as your representative has been to put the views and ideas offered by you, the teacher, to the organising committees of the Society.
Sadly many of the views, expressed to me, have taken a negative or critical tone, and far too infrequently have I been able to pass on constructive or positive ideas and opinions.
As teachers, the future holds many challenges for all of us.
If we wish to continue to be a force in the field of movement and exercise then we each have to move with the times, and adopt a streamlined, professional and positive approach to all areas of the Medau Society's work.
Medau has never been a static or sterile form of movement.
Over the years adaptations of style and emphasis have meant that we have not been left behind in the changing exercise scene.
Our teachers have always been encouraged to develop their own personal style of teaching, whichever area they wish to work in, but this has never meant compromising the ideals and basics to which we all adhere.
How awfully dull it would be if all our teachers approached a class in exactly the same way, with exactly the same movements, all executed at the same pace and with expectations of the same rigid standard of achievement.
It is good to know that the name of Medau is being kept to the forefront of public attention with the publicity surrounding the launch of  's video ‘Medau — The Art of Energy’, and the articles recently published in the Sunday Telegraph.
Some teachers, I know, were concerned by the soundtrack quality of this video, when it was shown at a recent Qualified  Teachers' day.
Perhaps what was not realised was that this was a preview recording, not the finalised production recording which would be on sale to the general public.
I understand that the video soundtrack has been ‘balanced’ and that the music and voice levels are now compatible.
The video itself was warmly received by Jochen Medau, and is seen by the Society as illustrating very well one aspect, of the many facets, of our work.
The faster fitness style and stamina section featured will appeal to many younger people, and videos of this type are very popular with those who cannot, or do not wish to, go to a regular class.
Make the most of this heightened public awareness of the Medau name, it creates a climate of public interest which gives each of you a wonderful opportunity to discuss and show all of the many sides of our work — specialist classes for the handicapped, classes for Toddlers, relaxation and Breathing classes, and recreational classes for every age and ability, each one structured to the needs of its class members.
Enjoy, and make the most of, the  benefits that this publicity can bring to you.
May I urge each and everyone of you to show support and consideration to all your colleagues and to the Society, be positive in your thinking and openminded in your views.
Together we can achieve much.
Good wishes and success to you all,
Dear 
We are planning to feature the spread of Medau throughout the country in the Souvenir Programme for our 40th Anniversary Celebrations, and need as much historical background as possible to link into current activities.
Could you please ask your colleagues, friends and class members and jot down what is known about how Medau started in SCOTLAND, the people responsible for promoting it there, dates (as far as can be remembered), plus any unique events/human interest  anecdotes from the last 40 years.
Don't worry about the purple prose (unless you are that way inclined), as the programme editors will be amalgamating all the information into one article, which we hope will be of interest to all Society members whether or not they are able to come to the Fairfield Hall.
Please record thoughts on cassette if you prefer.
Some good photographs will also be needed (to reproduce approximate size 3–3½ × 4–4½), but we hope there will be some exciting modern movement shots, a few personality ‘head & shoulders’, and the odd special interest archive picture.
Please mark all photos so that they can be returned after use.
We should be most grateful if you could let us have your thoughts either as soon as possible or by the next QT day (September 21st).
Looking forward to hearing from you.
Programme Editors   
To all Qualified Teachers
Once again a new academic year approaches, and in order to help you expand your skills, and develop your ideas for future lessons, our In-Service Training days will recommence on Saturday 22nd.
September 1990.
As you will see, from the enclosed programme for 1990/1991, all our Trainers have again been working very hard, to provide you with Q.T. days which continue to be exciting, different and which reflect your requests and ideas.
The success of last  year's Q.T. days was shown by improved attendance figures, a  livelier and more positive attitude, by those attending, and some very good feed-back.
All of which contributed to making happier Q.T. days.
It is particularly pleasing to see some of our more recently qualified teachers already participating so fully to the life, and continuing success, of the Society.
May I remind you that all Q.T. fees, P.A.F. and Membership subscriptions become due on 1st.
January 1991.
As before, you may of course spread the cost of payment between September 1990 and January 1991, if you wish.
This year you will see that Membership subscription are also included on your invoice, a new innovation, so that ALL fees may be paid together.
It is very important however, that a Membership Renewal Card should also be completed, and accompany your membership payment.
These forms are necessary for Office efficiency and VITAL for our records.
In-Service Training day fees are being held at the same cost for the third year running, despite inflation and a probable increase in the cost of premises for Q.T. days.
This makes your Training days extremely good value for money — a bargain not to be missed!!
One major change for 1991 is to Q.T. Insurance.
It appears that, contrary to popular belief, many Adult Education Institutes do NOT now provide insurance cover to tutors employed by them, and that this tendency is escalating, in view of current cut-backs in educational budgets.
In the light of this worrying development the C.C.P.R. has negotiated a Civil Liability Insurance policy, on behalf of all its members, which gives wider cover, for more people, at lower premiums that our own current policy.
Our research, and unbiased professional advice, has shown that it would undoubtedly be in the interest of ALL our teachers to be included in this comprehensive ‘blanket cover’, whether teaching regular private or Adult Education classes, ‘one-off’ local events, rallies, or classes for other organisations.
The cost of premiums for this new and wider insurance cover have, therefore, been included with the P.A.F. payment, both the full and associate fees.
So you can rest assured that if you are teaching  regularly , or only occasionally, you will have the protection of Civil Liability insurance.
, the Treasurer, will be at the September Q.T. day if you have any questions regarding this matter, or ‘phone her on .
I wish you well for the remainder of the holidays and look forward to seeing you all again at our Qualified Teachers days.
Best wishes,
QUALIFIED TEACHERS' IN-SERVICE TRAINING PROGRAMME 1989/90
I am pleased to send you the Q.T. Programme for the coming year.
You will see we have brought forward the first meeting to 23rd September — to help you get in the mood and inspired to start teaching at the beginning of the new term.
This year's programme is designed to give you some fresh ideas for classwork and there are five sessions which we have left open to negotiation.
We hope you will come with suggestions in September, either specific movement themes or particular facets of training that you would like covered during these sessions and the teachers/trainers you would like to teach them.
We are also offering group music lessons for a limited number of people.
If you wish to take up these lessons (which will carry on throughout the year) please let me know as soon as possible so that we can arrange the groups.
We have invited one outside lecturer,, who will be showing a different approach to mobility and stress release and I am sure his work will give food for thought in your own teaching.
You will also see that we have programmed in the September 1990 Q.T. Day, sot hat in 1990 our year will run from January to December and not September to September as in the past.
We are planning two special in-service training days — 12th May a day on teaching the elderly to include — observation of a practical class, understanding physical disability and definition of terms — helping hand — discussion.
A ‘Health for Life’ day is planned also during the summer term — date and venue and further details for both days will be available at the January Q.T. Day.
I have heard that some of you are concerned about your teaching and feel that things are changing but I am sure your fears are unwarranted, as you are all able to run successful classes in your own style.
Some of you have asked about the changes in the current  training  course We have been forced to cut initial training to four terms.
Piano improvisation has therefore been taken out of the course time and is now an option.
I am sure you will realise that this was a difficult decision not lightly taken and we will be assessing results carefully before planning further courses.
Otherwise, the syllabus is practically the same as in the past but with the emphasis on accompanying and coaching movement with voice, percussion and taped music, which does give the lesson a different feel.
I am sure you well remember saying ‘I can't do that movement because I can't play for it!’
Now with the accent much more on playing the rhythm, it is easier to create movements without the fear of what to play on the piano but it is not an easy task to find suitable taped music to enhance the carrying quality.
We are fortunate inbeing able to use the video camera at training weekends and once you have over come the shock of seeing yourself, most students find it a valuable addition to their training.
If you feel you would like to join in one of the training days, held at present in Horley, Surrey on  or come to the Green Park Residential weekend 10.12 Nov. we will be delighted to welcome you, so, please give me a ring.
If you have not been able to come to Q.T. Days for a while, please try to come during the new session.
It is good to meet and discuss with colleagues how your work is going and to enjoy a day of movement together.
Looking forward to seeing you in September.
To all Qualified Teachers
I do hope that you are having an enjoyable summer break from your classes, and that you are benefiting from the glorious weather we are having this year.
But with the approaching academic year our thoughts must turn to preparing for the forthcoming term.
Qualified Teachers days are designed not just to help you with thoughts and ideas for future lessons of your own, but to expand and develop your knowledge and understanding of Medau, and, with that, we also hope you have an enjoyable social day.
Unfortunately in the recent past circumstance has forced upon us a number of changes to our Q.T. days.
The venue has had to be moved, and financial implications have meant a reduction in the teaching time available, and the abandonment of teas at the end of the day.
We thank you for the patience and good humour you have all shown during a difficult time.
However we are acutely aware that these changes have all meant a loss of the more social aspects of the day, which are very important, and which we all enjoy.
In order to restore more time for you to be able to talk to your friends and socialise, an idea has been put forward that Q.T. notes could be prepared in advance of Q.T. day.
The notes would then be distributed on the day, and if any item required discussion time could then be made available.
This would, possibly, reduce the time taken over business matters in the middle of the day.
This is a brief outline of one suggestion, if you have any other thoughts or ideas on how we can create a more even balance between work and recreation, then please do come to the September Q.T. day with your suggestions.
If you are unable to get to this day, but have some thoughts on this matter please contact  (N.D.O.) on , or myself, before the 23rd.
September.
This is your day and we will endeavour to organise it in a way that reflects your needs and requirements.
As you will see the Q.T. days for the 1989/90 programme have been arranged with one day at the beginning of each term, as requested by you the teachers, and reflect the requests and feed-back given during the past year.
In future the programme will run from one January to the next, therefore this year four terms have been included in the programme to take us to January 1991.
The costs for these days, if paid in full, are held at the 1988 fee level.
So for this year you will be receiving four Q.T. days for the price of three!!
As you are aware, in the past the fees for Q.T. days, P.A.F.  Membership of the Society and Public Liability Insurance have all become due on different dates.
This occasionally has led to some teachers inadvertently overlooking some payments.
In order to make accounting simpler, for both you and the Treasurer, the Finance Committee have decided that in future all payments will become due on the 1st.
January each year.
Some of you I know will welcome this new opportunity to pay all due fees together as one lump sum in January.
However we do not wish anyone to feel that this is too great a financial burden for them, so if you prefer payment may still be split between September and January.
All we ask is that all fees are finally paid by the end of January.
Any teacher who has paid the Insurance fee for 1988/89 will automatically be covered for the four month period September to December 1989, until the insurance fee next falls due on 1st.
January 1990.
If you have not paid Public Liability Insurance, for private classes, during the past year you will NOT be covered for this period.
If you now wish to be included on the Society's insurance, from September, you should pay your insurance fee at the September Q.T. day.
Can I, at this point, reiterate how important it is to have this type of insurance cover if you are taking private classes.
This means any class taken on a voluntary basics, classes paid for by a private concern,(W.I. T.W.G. sports sections of firms etc.), are hiring your own premises and running a class, or are coaching any display team.
The Society has obtained very good insurance cover at a very reasonable premium.
The details of cover are available from the Office.
We live in a litigation minded world and liability at law can be very expensive.
I wish you well for the remainder of the holidays and look forward to seeing you all again at our Qualified Teachers days.
Best wishes
Dear  
1989 MEDAU STATISTICS FORM
I do not appear to have received your statistics form (pink) sent out with QT notes, which should have been returned in November.
Could you please let me have it now, or, if you cannot find it, give the following information about all classes that operated in any part of 1989 (including ‘IR’ = irregular, ‘SC’= short course, and any discontinued during the year):
Full Address of Class Venue
Day and Time
Type of Class (i.e. Recreational, Breathing, Special Needs etc)
Organising Body (i.e. Private, Ad.Ed/Borough, WI, Housing Assn. etc)
Teacher
No. of Roll (maximum at any time during the year)
New/Ongoing/Discontinued (ONI=ongoing with new teacher)
Also needed are the date, venue and number of people involved in any Displays you have Produced, Lecture/Dems given, ‘Come & Try Its’, Other Events you have taught at or arranged, and Static displays mounted.
I shall be away until January 11th, but need to process this information IMMEDIATELY I get back, so please, please, please have it waiting on my doorstep.
Wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year
Sincerely
Dear 
I have done my best with the Scottish Sports Council's questionnaires that you sent down, and enclose a copy of my covering letter for your information.
Full details and syllabus of the teacher training course have been sent to them, and the syllabus and assessment sheets for the Junior and Youth Bronze Awards, which apply throughout the British Isles, while the statistics that were requested apply to Scotland only — I felt the letter was needed in case they thought there were only 4 teachers in the whole Society!
Many thanks for concocting a circular for  's Edinburgh week-end.
I hope it all goes very well and that a good time will be had by all.
With all good wishes,
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL PENFOLD STREET W2 ON SATURDAY 10 MARCH 1990
CHAIRMAN'S NOTES
Once again my sincere apologies for my absence, as I explained last September, this weekend is my mother's 80th birthday and it falls to me to host a celebration and to entertain friends and relatives during the weekend.
I do hope that each and everyone has been hard at work encouraging your class members to renew their membership and getting new class members to join the Society.
We cannot stress enough how much the grant from the Sports Council depends on the present 3000+ members being increased.
The meeting, with the Grant Aid Panel revolved around getting all those who participate in classes  beckoning members and extending our training into new areas.
This, thanks to the trainers and N.D.O., is all in the pipeline, with Taster Days and leaflets distributed to get a new training course off to a good start in Cambridge, this September.
YOU can do you part to help this project by making known to class members when and where the course is and PLEASE do hold membership drives in your classes, many of you have had excellent results in the past, although we know that others do find it very difficult to ‘sell’ membership, but you can still ‘whip up’some enthusiasm if you try.
HELP IS ALWAYS AVAILABLE IF YOU NEED IT.
I hope to see some of you at either the Aston Clinton Weekend in April, the Working with Elderly Day in May or on the trip to Coburg, which I am looking forward to very much.
1.
APOLOGIES
Apologies have been received from .
2 IN SERVICE TRAINING DAYS
i.
MOVEMENT AND EXERCISE FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE.
The response from Medau teachers has been good but we can still take a few more.
We do need to fill all spaces for outsiders in order to subsidise the Medauhalf.
Please circulate forms to everyone you know in the ‘movement’ and ‘caring’field.
This is a prestigious event and deserves publicity, even if they don't come.
Green forms are available from the Office, for other organisations this gives more information about THEIR programme.
ii.
STRESS RELEASE AND MOBILITY.
Following the very successful session with  at the January Q.T. Day a further programme has been arranged for 7 July at the  (the venue to be confirmed).
Time 10.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m.
Applications should be made to the Office as soon as possible — Fee £10 — Closing date 27 June 1990.
3 NEW TEACHER TRAINING COURSE
We need to attract as many people as possible to enjoy a good day of movement at the Training Taster Days at Bedford College on 28 April — on 9 June and  on 16 June.
Please publicise these days to your class members.
They may well know likely candidates living in those areas, especially ex-class members.
4 SPONSORED BALL BOUNCE
The final total raised was £1718 — a magnificent effort.
Many thanks and congratulations to everyone concerned.
It is hoped to present a cheque to the Asthma Research  Council at the Kent Rally.
5 PUBLICITY AND SOCIETY SALES
Due to family circumstances , our Publicity Officer, has had to resign.
Our gratitude and thanks go to  who has worked hard and contributed so much to this post.
Is there a good ideas person out there who would like to take on this job???
The N.D.O. would be happy to work closely with them and handle most of the routine paper work and liaise with the Training Sub-Committee.
Only four Executive Committee meetings a year would be involved as the Publicity Sub-Committee is at present in abeyance.
, who has organised the Society Sales for the past few years  feels the job now needs a fresh input of ideas — Would any one like to take this on???
If you are interested in helping in any way with either of these posts (they are both part of our Publicity Department Plan) please talk to  or .
6 FAMILY ACTIVITY WEEKEND
A Family Activity weekend at a holiday camp at Camber Sands has been suggested as a possible future Medau course.
Could you ask your class members whether they might be interested in such an activity?
Feedback to  (Teachers' Rep) or  (NDO).
7 NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT OFFICER
has agreed to become our full-time NDO and will be working from the Office several days a week — the actual days have yet to be decided.
8 COBURG COURSE
All Qualified Teachers attending the Coburg Course are reminded that their final payment of £170 is due by the end of the month.
If you have any of your class members attending please let them know that this payment is now due.
PLEASE NOTE THE OFFICE WILL BE CLOSED FOR THE DURATION OF THE COURSE.
9 ANNUAL REUNION 1990
This year's Annual Reunion and Christmas Fair will take place on Saturday 24 November 1990 at  (venue to be confirmed).
VOLUNTEERS ARE NEEDED FOR THIS DAY!!!
i.
Overall Co-ordinator for the Day
ii
Co-ordinator for Teas
iii
Co-ordinator for Sales Stalls
iv
Stewards, Stall helper and other sundry ‘jobs’
Please contact either  or  a.s.a.p.
10 MEDAU SECRETARY
, our long serving secretary will be leaving us at the end of May.
Thanks and best wishes go to her from all the qualified teachers for all her help and hard work on our behalf during the twelve plus years that she has held this position.
11 EVENTS AND DATES TO NOTE
i
MULTI-MOVEMENT DAY at Worthing — Sunday 29 April — Medau session from 2–3p.m.
Volunteers to boost open class will be most welcome.
Contact .
ii
IN-DEPTH DAY AND AFTERNOON RALLY at  Saturday 5 May Rally tickets from  (£3.50 members only) In-depth applications from  (£3.50 morning only)(Whole day to include rally — £6)
iii
MOVEMENT & EXERCISE FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE at  on Sunday 13 May (see item 2i)
iv
STRESS RELEASE & MOBILITY at  (venue to be confirmed) on 7 July (see item 2ii)
v
BARN DANCE at  on Saturday 16 June Tickets from  at the above address.
Please tell your class members.
vi
LILLESHALL WEEKEND is definitely on — HOORAY!! from Friday 12/14th October — Staff will be  and  — Cost Residential — £70 Saturday — £12 and Sunday — £10.
Application Forms available from the Office.
— Please tell your class members.
vii
REUNION & CHRISTMAS FAIR 1990 at  (venue to be confirmed) on Saturday 24 November.
12 DATE OF NEXT QT DAY
Saturday 22 September 1990 at .
Dear 
I do hope that you have enjoyed the summer recess from teaching your classes and that you managed to find some sunshine for your much deserved holiday.
May I please ask you to give a little time to thinking how best you personally can assist the Society to raise enough funds before the end of this year to complete our Development Plan for 1988?
As you are aware we will not be receiving all of the Grant that we have applied for this year and have been told by the Sports Council that our Grant is to be reduced over the next 3 years and then cease.
This is in line with Government policy, making all Sport and Recreation self financing in the future.
Fine…if we were one of the sports who take ‘Gate Money’ and have a following of spectators who supply an income but as you are aware this is not ‘US’.
In this mailing from the Office you will already see that a National Draw is taking place, this was planned 12 months ago to increase our income, now we have to rely on the profit to see us through the lean times.
We also have our fundraising Annual Reunion in November when I know that your support will be given as always.
My letter to you is a personal plea to join with your colleagues and assist the Society to raise more funds during this coming term.
It is hoped that those areas who are large in numbers will raise between three and four hundred pounds each and send this to the Treasurer before Christmas; those areas who have fewer teachers and not so many classes are asked to raise £100 each.
You will appreciate that as Chairman I have not given up the fight to get as much financial aid and help as is possible to keep our heads above water; we must fight to keep all that we hold dear and promote the Medau that we all benefit from both in health and fitness, and as teachers, financially.
However large or small your contribution whether by holding a Coffee Morning or Class Raffle, it will be a step towards improving our situation and if every teacher makes an effort to encourage her class members to give their support to us we shall do everything possible to continue to support them, with more teachers and classes.
I know that you will give your support as always and help achieve our goal.
Yours
QUALIFIED TEACHERS' IN-SERVICE TRAINING PROGRAMME 1988/89
Once again we have tried to reflect in the year's programme the feed-back we have had from you and this year we have obviously been particularly aware of the financial constraints upon us.
In addition to the reduced Sports Council grant we have now been informed that facilities we have been able to use free of charge for QT Days would in future cost £210 for six hours, the maximum permissible time.
This has forced us to look afresh at the regular London days and, with the prompting of a number of the most regular attenders, we have decided to drop the June day, which in recent years has had a low attendance.
This means that the three remaining days will be packed more tightly and although it is too late for this academic year we will in subsequent years have one day at the start of each term.
Because of the tight scheduling within each day we would ask you to arrive on time for each session.
Guests this year are especially relevant.
The first guest tutor will advise on self-defence and I know you will all welcome the opportunity to become more ‘Street-wise’ at a time when attacks on women are so common.
Our January guest is , who is the Oxfordshire Advisor for Dance and comes with very strong recommendations.
March sessions will focus on selling yourself and your subject, more and more teachers are being asked to interview for jobs these days and your presentation and image could make all the difference.
Two optional extra days are being added to the overall programme both to be held at .
13 May — A Movement Accompaniment Day run by  and , which will also include an opportunity to try out the machines in the Fitness Centre.
17 June — A Health for Life Day run by 
You will, I am sure, be happy to welcome student teachers to sessions taken by specialist tutors.
You know that the Training Course, too, is under pressure and we feel that it is of great benefit to share resources in this way.
It is also an opportunity for student teachers to talk to you and share experiences before their qualification, a much appreciated bonus for them.
Good luck with the start of the new term — see you soon.
IMPORTANT IMPORTANT IMPORTANT IMPORTANT IMPORTANT
TO ALL QUALIFIED TEACHERS
The Development Steering Group met in April to discuss a letter from the Grant Assessment Panel of the Sports Council.
Those of you who were present at the AGM will be aware that we have been told by the GAP that the Society's grant will be drastically reduced during the next few years and will cease after 1991.
The greater part of the grant has in the past been to help finance our teacher training.
In order to become more cost effective it is essential that an all out effort be made to attract an increased number of potential teachers to attend the proposed day in July.
In order to create a more modern image Potential Teachers' Day will be advertised as ‘An introductory workshop for an in-depth look at the Medau method of training and teaching movement’.
We also need to assess the financial viability of our further training days — in particular— the London fees and the Trainer/Participant ratio of Regional training.
The low number of trainers, who are already stretched to their limit, gives rise for concern.
We are therefore looking to YOU — Perhaps you are prepared to help in some way???
PLEASE — come to Qualified Teachers' Day on the 18th June and be prepared to discuss this VERY IMPORTANT ISSUE — you supported our plea when we asked you to help boost membership, come along and listen and you will be given an opportunity to express your opinions.
TO: ALL QUALIFIED TEACHERS
FROM:
Once again I am pleased to send you the QT programme for the coming year.
First of all, though, I must apologise because we have had to make some changes to the staffing for our next training day on 22nd September.
In the New Year's programme we are planning to share the experiences and ideas of a wide range of teachers to show their individual approaches to various aspects of the lesson.
You will see that some topics/themes are still open, and we want to repeat last year's idea of negotiating these with you.
Please think about these sessions, and come with your ideas in September.
We will once again be offering two piano improvisation courses for a limited number of people, meeting on each QT day throughout the year.
If you were one of last year's groups and wish to continue, or if you would like to join a group for the first time, please let me know as soon as possible.
Our one outside lecturer in the programme is  MCSP, Helpline Manager of Arthritis Care, whose session entitled ‘Specialist Advice for Teaching the Elderly’ will bring us up-to-date on current thinking about exercise for older people.
We are also prepared to run an extra In-Service Training Day in the summer term, as these have proved popular in recent years, so come with your ideas for that too.
Those of you who attended this year's day given by  seemed to have gained a lot from it, so what else would you like?
The new pilot teacher training course combined with the City & Guilds 7307 Further and Adult Education Teacher's Certificate, is to start on 6th October at .
The course will be spread over six terms with four Saturdays and one weekend each term.
If you know of anyone interested in training, please let us know so that we can send them the details.
If you would like to attend for a day or a weekend, we would be delighted to welcome you, but do let us know in advance!
You can get all the details from  or  in the office.
The other trainers and I look forward to seeing you on 22nd September.
Very best wishes
SOCIETY MEMBERSHIP
Following a a recent meeting of the Membership Services sub-committee when the main topic of concern was how to encourage class members to join the Society, it was suggested that the method that I use to encourage class members to join could be passed on to you.
Once during the course of a conversation with a fellow teacher she expressed the difficultly that she experiences in ‘selling membership’ to class members because she felt that there was ‘nothing to offer them.’
Whilst I admit that not everyone of my class members have joined I do have a good percentage mostly I feel sure through loyalty to me as their teacher.
‘Do you enjoy your weekly class?’ is my opening question.
‘If you don, then all I ask is that you show your appreciation of your teacher by supporting her and joining the society in order to help us provide more teachers.’
The Society's  assets are our Trainers and Teachers, without them there would be no Medau classes.
Membership gives a sense of belonging without further commitment, true you can attend Courses, Rallies, Cheese and Wine evenings, the Annual Reunion if you wish, that is for the individual to decide.
In answer to‘what can I offer them?’ a short explanation that every member receives the Annual Report and 3 editions of Medau News which with postage accounts for half of a full membership fee, the remaining money goes towards administration expenses.
‘Please help the Society to become self-sufficient and able to train more teachers so that we can offer classes in more locations and take over from those teachers who are waiting to hang up their leotards and tights’.
I belong to several organisations, some are small and local who need willing helpers and supporters.
Others are big like The National Trust, RSPB etc.
Membership of these and other worthy causes mean that our countryside is not lost to over development.
I cannot afford to send donations to every appeal that comes through my letterbox, but I can walk for miles in glorious locations and sit for hours enjoying the birds in my garden.
I ask for no return.
‘YOU can be a member and not commit yourself any further if you prefer’
MEMBERSHIP FORMS ARE ON THE TABLE
If this helps only a few teachers it would still be one step towards our goal of all participants in classes joining the Society.
Perhaps YOU would like to try this way?
In September 1990 we are relaunching the ‘Voucher System’ every NEW member will receive a voucher to use in exchange for a ticket to a local rally, if the organisers are able to absorb the costs please do, otherwise the society can assist by refunds if requested.
It would be appreciated if you would return all used vouchers for our records in the office.
Thankyou for taking the trouble to read my letter, perhaps you would like to try this approach, if we all work together it will be to  everyone's advantage.
My best wishes for the start of your classes in September, good luck to those of you starting new classes and especially to our newly qualified teachers.
Yours
Dear
Medau restarts Monday 30 September, 7.00–9.00 p.m. in the dance studio at Forrester School,.
We have a few problems this year.
Edinburgh District Council very nearly cancelled all evening classes in schools, but have reprieved them on condition that the fee per person rises to £30, and the income from each class per term is the equivalent of the total fees from eleven full-paying participants.
The concession rate will be £7.50, with the usual free categories.
£30 will seem an absurdly high sum to those of you liable for the full fee, and I would be happy to organise a pay-by-instalment system over the term, if this would make things easier.
If the class members do not meet the District requirements, we can think about going private, as we have done in past crises.
Anyway, do turn up at Forrester School on 30 September, bringing any friends you think might Medau too, and we shall see what can be managed.
Please note that I'll be away from Edinburgh 7–21 September, in case you want to ring and discuss things.
With all good wishes
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL  ON SATURDAY 10TH JANUARY 1992.
CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS
A very Happy New Year to you all.
I must take this opportunity to say a personal thank you to each and everyone of you for your kind support and all the good wishes that I have received during the past six months.
We would like to hold a National Draw this year, and this is only possible with your wholehearted support.
Ideally we should launch it at the 40th Anniversary Celebrations and hold the Draw at the Annual Reunion in November.
As in the past we would like to share the profit with another charity and a member of the Executive Committee has offered to act as Promoter for us if we could donate enough to provide 10 holidays for handicapped and needy children where she works (£600).
I feel sure that we could achieve this with your help.
A reminder please that we need nominations for the Executive Committee for election at the A.G.M. Three retiring members must be replaced.
Also members are needed for the Finance Sub-Committee — please give this some thought.
is making good progress after her recent knee replacement.
Sadly,() died of a heart attack just before Christmas.
Flowers from the Society were sent to Coburg for her funeral.
Two fatal accidents in tragic circumstances were reported — to  's husband and to  's new daughter-in-law.
QTs send love and sympathy to them both.
NATIONAL LOTTERY:
The Sports Council have requested our support to lobby MPs to ensure more funds for sport.
The next reading of the private  member's bill is on 17th January, so would as many people as possible press the case with their MP — to make life easier, a draft letter is available to which you need only add MP's name and your name and address.
BOOK PRICE REDUCTIONS TO MEMBERS:
Bargains: MRM now £1 to members and Music Book £2 to members.
Still £2 and £4 inc. postage to public ordering from office.
APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE:
40TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS:
Hospitality: More beds are needed especially to accommodate the German team on Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights, and a few for Friday night only for long distance Medau performers — please ask in your classes (ten mile radius from Croydon or along the route from Dover preferred) and send  offers to  .
URGENT!!!
Hotels: Details of Croydon hotel rates to suit all pockets are available from the office.
Tickets: Members were given preference initially, but now bookings are open for everyone.
Please take leaflets to class and try to organise parties.
Parking is difficult so coaches and group travel on public transport are ideal.
Publicity: A3 Posters are now available.
Please ensure one is displayed in every Institute and as many other public places as possible (but make sure you have permission to use the space).
These posters will service to underline our status to support your local classes as well as publicise the event.
Stewards will be needed for both front of house and backstage plus programme sellers — either or both performances.
Offers to Chris Harmer please,.
MEDAU NEWS EDITOR AND ASSISTANT:
has resigned her position as Editor's Assistant (Thank you  for all your hard work) and we are delighted that  is helping temporarily.
wishes to retire as Editor after the May issue of Medau News, and our thanks go to her for a long and excellent Editorship.
is willing to stay on until September in a ‘handing over’ mode.
This could be a joint or individual post, but plays a very vital role in the Society's contact with our members.
If you would be interested in contributing in some way please telephone  .
NATIONAL INITIATIVE ON MOVEMENT DANCE & FITNESS FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.
Medau will be organising the London regional day for interested teachers from all disciplines, which will be held at the Laban Centre on Sunday 1st March — places are limited so early application is advised (details and application forms enclosed).
Offers to drive some of our demonstration class members to the event to  please.
is organising the day in the South West at Riverside Leisure Centre, on Sunday March 29th (details from ,);
is Chairing and KFA are running the South East Regional day on Saturday 7th March at Hethersett College, Redhill.
Southern Regional day will be on 21st March at London Valley Leisure Centre, 9.15–5.15.
A Medau Teacher who teaches a class with Physical or Sensory Disabilities is required to teach for a short period on this day.
It would be necessary to bring along some class members — a fee will be paid.
Contact  for  further details and application forms.
All regional days cost £15 including sandwich lunch.
Dates and contacts for all other regions can be obtained from .
MEMBERSHIP:
Please help to publicise membership in class —‘stand up’ boards are available for you to put up in class.
It is very helpful if the renewal cards can be used, so please take the opportunity to remind all class members.
ASSISTANT TO TREASURER:
We are delighted that  is willing to stand again for election as Hon. Treasurer, but she feels it would be in the Society's interest to have an Assistant Treasurer who would become familiar with our accounting methods and be able to take over should  be away for a short period.
Ideally, this person should also serve on the Finance Sub-Committee.
If anyone would like more details please ring  on .
IN-SERVICE TRAINING DAY:
Saturday 4th July at Laban Centre,.
10.00am–4.00pm.
Medau Faster Fitness in morning with  and Nutrition in relation to exercise in the afternoon.
Keep date free, application forms in April.
PRINTED SASHES:
SOS!
Are any of our silk printed Medau promotional sashes tucked away in your drawer?
Return to  please (4 missing).
SHOULD WE HAVE A MEDAU TRACKSUIT?
In the designer 80s/90s we all see  etc.
Logos everywhere.
We too have ours on T-shirts, Sweatshirts, scarves, pens, badges and so on.
Now we are considering our own Shell suit with a small logo on the front.
A sample colour has been made in high quality Tactel, fully cotton lined, in one basic colour with coloured trims.
This would retail at £47.50 which compares very favourably with some of the better suits on the market.
Interest has been shown already, but before a decision can be taken to invest Society funds, we would ask all QTs to take a straw poll in their classes to establish interest.
Favoured colour so far is basic navy blue with red/white trims, but this is open for suggestions as the range is vast.
Initially only the one colour combination  would be offered due to  manufacturing costs.
NEW TEACHER TRAINING COURSE:
Our next training course will be starting in London in September and there will be several Training Taster Days held during the summer to promote it.
Details are not yet finalised but please keep any potential teachers ‘on the boil’.
IDEAL SPORT EXHIBITION:
Will be held at Earls Court in conjunction with the Ideal Homes Exhibition 3–5 April.
Medau will be involved in a ‘Come & Try It’ session on Friday 3rd April (please tell class members as lots of ‘plants’will be very welcome) and our  National Display Team will be performing in the Extravaganza on Sunday 5th.
Both will be during the afternoon — detailed times should be checked with the office nearer the day.
TEACHERS' DIRECTORY &: CLASS LISTS:
These are now kept on computer disc and copies can be run iff at any time.
Please ask the office when you need an update.
TEACHERS' REPRESENTATIVE:
If you have any suggestions, grumbles, or general information that you would like fed into the Society, please talk to ,— she would like to know what you think anyway!
PETROL COUPONS:
Please ask  your class  members to continue to save all types of coupons and stamps.
£214 was redeemed from Green Shield Stamps plus numerous assorted raffle prizes, and we hope to collect enough for a CD player from Esso soon.
REUNION RAFFLE:
Thank you from  to all the teachers who pre-sold raffle tickets for the re-union.
It helped to swell the takings considerably: Profit £486 from tickets and £124 from Green Shield stamps making a grand total of £610.
SURREY/SUSSEX/HANTS TEACHERS' DAY:
Next meeting on Saturday 29th February at Court Lodge School,.
2.00pm.
Variety of teachers!
MERTON RALLY:
Saturday 21st March.
Details from  , Tickets from  .
ALISON BELL:
Would anyone like to volunteer to organise ALISON BELL Party Plan?
A nice social job — not too much involved and you do get to see all the new designs etc. first.
Details from  .
BAVARIAN EVENING:
This event was organised by  and  and proved to be a very successful evening.
Unfortunately, it was poorly supported by Surrey Teachers which was said.
There has been some concern that several teachers took tickets to sell but failed to let  know whether or not they had sold them which made catering difficult.
Please if you take tickets for any event, let the organiser know if you have sold them or return them promptly.
LUNCHTIME AT QT DAY:
I think we must allow more time during the lunchbreak for notices — they are too rushed towards the end!
Please let me know if you wish to speak during lunchbreak so that I can gauge roughly how long it will take.
: NEXT MEETING: Saturday 11th April 1992 at North Westminster Community School, unless you hear otherwise.
NATIONAL VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
Current position, January 1992
Following intensive work over the past 2/3 years, standards for ‘Coaching, teaching and instructing’ within the Industry Lead Body for Sport and Recreation have been produced, and are now out for consultation.
All the movement organisations are seen as falling within this area, which also covers all governing bodies of sport and recreation.
The Society has attended several meetings, commented on two drafts of the standards, and is on the whole pleased with the proposals as they are at present.
The full draft standards across all the technical working groups within sport and recreation run to over 500 pages, and less  than a month was given for response, including the Christmas and New Year period.
In general, there is nothing in the standards which we would not agree with, and any omissions we can add ourselves anyway.
The important thing to remember is that NVQs are for the individual, are broadly based and non-specific, in five levels, and once accredited the individual, from school leaver upwards, builds up a personal record of achievement which will be recognised by employers across the country.
A candidate will be assessed by internal assessors and will have to prove competence across the range of standards at whichever level they are going for.
Assessors will be trained centrally to ensure parity across the country, and national verifiers will monitor common standards, working with the academic validating bodies.
Existing qualifications will have to be recognised for the time being, probably for some years, and APL, or accreditation of prior learning, is something the National Council for Vocational Qualifications is still exploring.
The first 2/3 years will be testing out the scheme, with nothing cast in tablets of stone, and opportunities to comment.
A small pilot is running with very few governing bodies.
One major concern for all governing bodies is the resourcing of the whole undertaking, and no clear answers have been given.
The Trainers and the National Development Officer have been involved in the draft standard consultation exercise, and welcome the development.
Dear 
We do not appear to have received this year's Statistics Form with details of your classes, and would be very grateful if you could send it back as soon as possible.
It is very important that we get this now, so that we can complete the statistics analysis by the end of the year.
Yours sincerely
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL  ON SATURDAY 21ST SEPTEMBER 1991.
CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS
— welcomed everyone at the start of a new academic year, and hopes you all have a record number of enrolments.
APOLOGIES RECEIVED FROM:
The following two messages were read out:
a) from :
My sincere thanks to you all for the most beautiful flowers that were sent to me in hospital during my recent operation.
I have been able to get on with ‘getting better’ simply because my colleagues have taken responsibility for my work load ever since the Executive Committee Meeting in July, and I cannot thank them enough for all that they have done.
It was quite a shock to be told that I had Cancer and that I needed an operation as soon as possible.
However, with so many friends wishing me well, sending flowers, gifts, letters, cards and asking after my welfare, getting better and getting on with life has been my priority.
You will be pleased to know that the operation was a complete success, and apart from getting tired, when I do too much, no medication and no treatment is necessary.
My classes will for the time being be taken by other teachers, all of whom have said that they will look after them until I am ready to have them back.
Meanwhile, my apologies for not being with you today and I look forward to a FANTASTIC reunion with you all at Crystal Palace in November.
b) from :
Hello to everybody.
I'm sorry not to be with you today.
I'd like to say thank you to everyone who sent the lovely cards and get well messages — they cheered me greatly.
I am making good progress — slow but sure — and have now graduated on to walking sticks, although I feel very wobbly on these having had the crutches for a month.
Unfortunately we have had to make some slight changes to the programme today, but hope you will like the idea of all learning something to perform for the final part of the Reunion in November.
It may well inspire more of your class members to attend, and another draw will be the St. John's Ambulance sponsored event.
I am sorry I omitted to mention our guest lecturer for the year in the letter sent out with the QT programme.
He is Robert Harrold, Chairman of the National Dance branch of the Imperial Society of Teachers of Dancing — a very experienced teacher who lectures and examines in many parts of the world.
I am sure you will enjoy the session and find it very useful in your own teaching.
The extra In-Service Training Day on the Faster Fitness area of our work, together with Nutrition, will be held on Saturday 4th July 1992, venue to be arranged.
Please make a note of the date.
Best wishes and good luck for the new season
QTs were delighted to hear that both  and  are making excellent progress and sent them our warmest wishes.
NEW TEACHERS' REPRESENTATIVE:
welcomed  to her first Q.T. day in post.
1992 ELECTION FOR NEW CHAIRMAN:
You all know that  retires from her position as Society Chairman at the next AGM.
She has served the Society for an extra year as we had no nominations for a successor.
was delighted to tell you that we have already received our first nomination for this position in 1992.  has been nominated and seconded and, as she is not a current elected member of the Executive Committee, it has been decided to invite her to the remaining Executive meetings as an observer so that she gets used to how the Society functions.
If we have further nominations for the Chairman's position, the same invitation will be given.
PROMPT TRANSMISSION OF MEMBERSHIP MONIES:
Please make sure that any money collected by you for Society membership is paid promptly to the office.
In two separate incidents this year, sent a letter to a member asking for membership and was very embarrassed to learn that the member had paid her teacher some long time earlier.
SILVER NECKLACE:
As shown in Medau News.
Would you please mention in your classes that when ordering it would help us if they could also state their  teacher's name.
CONTACTING NDO:
With regard to our overworked (but ever smiling N.D.O.,, please help to improve the quality of her life by phoning her at home between the hours of 8am–9am or during office hours.
Please do not phone on Sundays and Bank Holidays unless it is a dire emergency.
ALISON BELL PARTY PLAN:
We would like a volunteer to take over the party plan sales of Alison Bell Leisurewear.
These usually take place at enjoyable social occasions and the organisation is not arduous.
A comprehensive job description is available, so if you might be interested please contact   or  .
CRYSTAL PALACE REUNION
Saturday 23rd November at Crystal Palace 2–5.30pm.
Organisers:
a) TICKETS: Available on approval from    price £5 Members and £6 to Non-Members.
PLEASE let  know about any unsold tickets by Friday 8th November.
b) STEWARDS: Lots of Stewards are needed to lighten the workload.
Names to , and if certain times of the day are inconvenient please let her know when volunteering.
c) ST.
JOHN AMBULANCE SPONSORED EVENT: A sponsorship form  will be given out with every ticket and the St. John fundraisers expect all our members to take part.
It will be a 15 minute Exercise to Music session at a level suitable for all our members, lead by Olympic gymnast Hayley Price, who represented Great Britain in 36 Internationals, including the 1984 Olympics.
Every participant will receive a certificate signed by a number of Olympic personalities, and there will be some ‘special prizes’ distributed during the session.
Attractive posters have been supplied by the organisers — please get them displayed in public areas with a request to sponsor yourself or a Medau member (other classes in an Institute/Hall/Club could be very fruitful).
All monies collected with be shared equally by the St John Ambulance appeal and Medau.
d) BALLS: We would like to use balls for one of the classes and need as many teachers as possible to each bring 10 marked balls in a marked carrier.
Your offer is needed to  () by return please.
e) VIPs: If you would like to invite your head of Institute as a V.I.P. guest, please do so.
Remember that you will act as host on the day, but you and your guest are welcome to come to tea with the other guests.
will be in charge of hospitality; please let her know that you will be bringing a guest by 8th November ().
f) RAFFLE:() is in charge of the raffle — please let her know if you have a gift, or money will be welcome so that she can purchase something.
MEMBERSHIP:
Message from : At the present time we are 140 members less than we were in 1990 — this is solely due to a shortfall in the number of sponsored groups as several classes for the elderly in sheltered homes were closed due to the cut backs.
We have actually increased our individual membership which is really a marvellous achievement.
Naturally we have had a number of people who have not renewed this year, and I am enclosing a list of those to all Teachers who are involved — please, if these people do return to your class this term give them a gentle reminder.
If any of you are teaching groups who could be included in the sponsored system, please get in touch with me as soon as possible.
Please keep up the good work by introducing all your new class members to Medau membership; forms with the new prices for 1992 are available from the office.
Thank you in anticipation.
DIRECTORY INFORMATION:
Telephone numbers only will be given for contact in general.
Home addresses will be given only to other teachers.
If you do not agree to this please let us know.
All correspondence from members should be sent to the office for forwarding to the relevant officers, and members should not be encouraged to call at anyone's home without an invitation.
PETROL COUPONS
Please ask  your class members to continue to save for us — all brands.
As many Esso as possible by 14th October please, as we could just have enough to get a colour television for the Reunion raffle!
Green Shield will shortly cease their gifts so please send in what you have.
STATISTICS FORMS:
The forms need to show the maximum possible numbers to include everyone on role at any time between January and December — please return them at or before the Reunion, but let us know verbally as soon as possible of any major changes — the office likes to give up to date information to enquirers.
ON LINE:
‘Friends For Fitness’ was a pilot scheme whereby a register of volunteer ‘friends’was kept by the ‘On Line’sports enquiry agency, who then matched them with enquirers about sport.
The ‘friend’ then made contact and took the new recruit along to join in her activity.
The success rate of  introducing people to a new sport was extremely high.
Should we devise a scheme on these lines?
REDHILL RALLY:
Unfortunately the date printed in Medau News has had to be changed due to the School being unavailable.
The date is now DECEMBER 7th, tickets from  () price £3.50 Members and £4.50 Non-Members (tea included)
NATIONAL INITIATIVE ON MOVEMENT DANCE & FITNESS FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.
A meeting took place on 15th September (attended by  for M&D Division plus, and  for Medau) to determine the format of a seminar day which will be replicated in each Sports Council region, to which delegates from all regional governing bodies and relevant organisations will be invited.
Medau will be organising the day for the London region, which will probably take place at the Laban Centre on a Sunday in February/March; all regional training days must be complete by 31st March 1992.
EASTER COURSE:
Message from ,: As you will have seen from the Spring/Summer course form, we are offering a shorter course next year.
We are using this as an opportunity to try an alternative method of staffing.
The Easter Course usually attracts a good number of Q.T's, and it is hoped that we can use some of them to assist with the teaching.
There will be one Trainer — myself — teaching all sessions on Tuesday afternoon and Friday morning.
On Wednesday and Thursday, when we also have day students, the group will be split.
If you are going to be at the Easter Course and would be willing to teach a session (or two!!) would you let me know, so that I can begin to plan the programme.
You will be paid the Society rate for the hours you teach.
As well as providing a different type of course for our Members, this will help to reduce the workload for the Trainers — who will have an especially busy time in our 40th Anniversary year.
Please do your best to sell this, and our special Anniversary Course to your students.
NEXT MEETING:
Saturday 11th January 1992 at North Westminster Community School,.
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL  ON SATURDAY 12TH JANUARY 1991
A VERY HAPPY NEW YEAR TO YOU ALL.
1.
APOLOGIES
Apologies were received from .
2.
NOMINATIONS FOR EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Looking ahead to the AGM, nominations are needed now for class members or teachers to serve on the Executive Committee and play a vital role in deciding how the Society is run ON YOUR BEHALF.
3. 1991 YEAR OF SPORT
Will be launched by Princess Anne next week.
If sponsorship is finalised, there will be a festival of movement at Brighton Conference Centre on Saturday 14th September — early evening performance, and workshops throughout the day — ticket buyers will be given a voucher for a free local follow-up class (cost to be redeemed from Festival funds).
If there are likely to be any problems with your administration accepting these vouchers, please advise NDO.
The week from Saturday 9th March to Friday 15th March will be ‘Be A Sport For Comic Relief’ week, and it would be rather nice if every town/area in the country where we have classes could put on an event tied in with good local media coverage (advanced warning to newspapers & radio — they will have received national press releases and be anxious to get local news)— a sponsored ball bounce is probably the easiest thing to organise, but please let us know your ideas.
4.
TEACHERS' REPRESENTATIVE:
is reaching the end of her term of office and will be retiring at the AGM.
We need some nominations for her successor, so please approach whoever you would like to represent you to see if she would be willing to stand.
Duties are mainly to attend QT day, organise notices and write up the notes; she also represents all the teachers on the Executive, Training and Membership Committees.
will be happy to have an informal chat with anyone interested,.
5.
ANNUAL REUNION 1991
Crystal Palace is booked for Saturday 23rd November.
Offers of displays (time limit 5 minutes) should be sent to  stating apparatus to be used, before rehearsals commence.
We hope that all the full county teams will be used, and there should be no confusion with the next item…
6. 40th ANNIVERSARY — 1992
Exciting plans afoot!!
On Friday 22nd May we shall be staging a Festival of Movement at the Fairfield Halls, Croydon (afternoon and evening performances) to which  will be bringing a team from Coburg, then she will stay to teach a residential course at Easthampstead Park from Saturday lunchtime until Monday lunchtime.
Please tell all your class members to keep that Spring Bank Holiday week-end free.
We would like to show the widest possible range of Medau work, performed by representatives from all parts of the country, emphasising the importance of rhythm, but not filling the stage with large groups for every item.
Choreographers who would like to produce an item for presentation on stage at the Festival are invited to send in their ideas for items with the following themes:
Dynamic Opening
Lively Ball
Swingy Rhythmic Club
Sustained Hoop
Contact & Levels
Dance Style
Free Movement
Rhythmics
Springy Leg Work
Sensitivity/Sustainment
Alternative Apparatus — Full Item and Short ‘Pieces’ needed
Special Needs
Ideas to be outlined in writing by Thursday 14th March to , so that the programme content can be decided by the Festival Sub-Committee by Easter.
Choreographers who have been accepted can then form their own performance group and start rehearsing.
7.
LOGO FLOWER BEDS
has arranged with Reigate & Banstead Council to plant a commemorative flower bed featuring our logo, in honour of our 40th Anniversary in 1992.  will be happy to let you have a copy of her initial letter if you would like to suggest the idea to your local council.
8.
PETROL COUPONS
Response has been excellent and we are putting them to good use — please keep them coming!
9.
RALLY/REUNION TICKETS:
It is vital that all unsold tickets are returned to the organiser by the date specified (or at least notify them by telephone that tickets are not yet sold).
The caterers need to know numbers in time to plan, and at an event like the Reunion with various groups it is important to know the balance — this year one class had only 22 people, while others were ‘climbing up the walls’(because two teachers with tickers in Group F had failed to let us know that the tickets were not sold).
Please co-operate in future.
10.
VIDEO
/video entitled ‘Medau — The Art of Energy’, will be launched in February, and be available from High Street stores.
There will probably be widespread press coverage.
the ASSET Award for Special Achievement in 1990 and will be teaching at their Convention 22–24 March at Loughborough University.
11.
GYMNAESTRADA FUNDRAISING
The response has been magnificent, and the team are very appreciative of your support.
There will be a COFFEE MORNING at the Old Barn Hall, Bookham on Thursday 14th February, 10am–Noon.
If you are reasonably near please ask your class members to come and bring their friends.
12.
DISABILITY CONFERENCE
BSAD/KFA Conference at Nottingham University 22–24 March — Keep Fit for People with Disabilities.
Further details from , National Operations Officer,.
is in the Chair.
13.
WORKOUT WITH THE STARS
Our members are invited to participate at Crystal Palace on 28th April to raise funds for MIND charity.
Forms from the office.
14.
EQUIPMENT FOR SALE:
15.
OFFICE ADMINISTRATION:
We have a problem for last two weeks of January.
has been called for Jury Service for 2 weeks as from 21st, and  will be in Singapore for the week commencing 28th.
Several volunteers have offered to help out in the office, and, if necessary, can be ‘phoned at home in the evenings .
We should be fully operational again by 4th February.
16. 1990/91 CLASS LIST:
Now produced in Area sheets to save paper; if you actually need a list for the whole country ask .
Please let the office know about any alterations when they happen (we like to be up to date!).
17.
BOOKS ON LOAD:
Would QTs who still have copies if J Rogers: ADULTS LEARNING and/or L B Curzon: TEACHING IN FE please return them either to  or any trainer.
18.
FORTHCOMING EVENTS:
Easter Course, Chichester 2–7 April.
Forms sent to all teachers and members with Medau News.
Super course in attractive location — please mention in class for the sake of those who are not yet members.
Applications to office.
20.
AU PAIR/EXCHANGE
17 year old French girl would like to arrange an exchange OR au pair/baby sit for Summer 1990.
Contact  .
21.
EXERCISE WORKSHOPS:
will be running Workshops at the Dance Studio, on the following Saturdays from 1 pm–4 pm:
22.
DATE OF NEXT QT DAY:
Saturday 20th April at North Westminster Community School,.
PLEASE NOTE THAT JANUARY QT DAY WILL BE ON 12TH JANUARY (not 5th as in Medau News)
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS DAY HELD AT NORTH WESTMINSTER COMMUNITY SCHOOL  ON SATURDAY 22nd SEPTEMBER 1990
CHAIRMAN'S NOTES
welcomed and introduced 3 of our new teachers who were present.
They were  from Orpington, and  who had travelled from Devon to attend their first QT day.
from Reigate arrived later.
She was also pleased to welcome , our Liaison Officer at The Sports Council.
, now recovered from a spell in hospital which caused her to miss the Coburg course, sends her best wishes to you all and sincere thanks for all the lovely cards, letters and flowers which she was delighted to receive.
then asked that if you know of anyone who should receive flowers from the Society please could you tell .
We can only send flowers if we know of the occasion, either happy or sad.
Please accept our apologies if any event or occasion was overlooked.
Since March of this year quality greetings cards in many designs have been available for Society members to purchase for £1.00 each.
20 pence for every card sold goes into the Molly Braithwaite Fund and with your help to date £70 has been raised for the above fund.
1 APOLOGIES
Apologies were received from .
2 IN-SERVICE TRAINING DAYS
Dates, venues and programmes will be notified in January 1991.
3 ANNUAL REUNION 1990
This year's Annual Reunion will take place at Warwick Park School, Peckham on Saturday 24th November 1990.
The doors will open at 1.00 pm.
Christmas Fayre 1.15–2.00 pm.
Classes will begin at 2.00 pm.
There will be Displays and Teas and the doors will close at 5.30 pm.
Tickets are only available on Society members, at a price of £4.50 (under 12'2 £2.50), and Membership Cards should be shown at arrival at Warwick Park.
Tickets may be obtained from the Office.
Please return all monies and any unsold tickets by 9th November.
VOLUNTEERS ARE URGENTLY NEEDED!!!
see next page
co-ordinator for the Christmas Fayre
Raffle Organiser
Stewards
YOUR HELP IS REQUIRED with any of the above jobs.
PLEASE contact  if YOU can help in any way.
will be co-ordinating the Display programme.
's class will be providing teas — offers of home made cakes and scones would be much appreciated — to  please.
The following stalls have been offered for the Christmas Fayre, and all contributions to the relevant organiser will be gratefully received — please ask in your classes.
4 LILLESHALL
The Lilleshall Course on 12th to 14th October 1990 is now absolutely full, with a waiting list for cancellations.
5 TEACHER TRAINING COURSE
The new Teacher Training Course, combined with City and Guilds 7307 (Further and Adult Education Teacher's Certificate) begins on 6th October at St. Andrews Community School, Cambridge.
As on previous courses any Qualified Teacher wishing to attend for a day is very welcome to do so (£10 per day), and  is making a new list of teachers who might like to take up spare places on the Aston Clinton weekends (£55).
Please send in your names very quickly if you are interested in 26th–29th October 1990.
6 MOVEMENT & DANCE LIAISON GROUP — SEMINAR
This is the second seminar in a series organised by the Greater London and South East Movement & Dance Liaison Group designed to bring members up to date with the many changes taking place in the 1990s.
Topics will include Compulsory Competitive Tendering, Local Management of Schools, the Community Charge and National Vocational Qualifications (probably a lot more interesting than it sounds in black & white!).
If any Teacher is interested in attending this Seminar more details are available from the Office, also an application form, which must be returned by Friday 9th November 1990.
7 MEMBERSHIP
is officially our Membership Secretary and will be in the Office on Tuesdays whenever possible — so if you have any enquiries regarding membership this will be the best day to contact .
There is still money available for sponsoring Group Membership.
Group membership includes all those attending a Medau class in a residential home or a Day Centre for the elderly or disabled.
If you have such a group and would like them to be enrolled for membership please contact , who will require a full list of names.
A reminder will be going to all teachers who may have lapsed Society members in their classes.
PLEASE do encourage them to rejoin the Society, we need all the members we can get.
With the new classes starting now, it is a very good idea to take along some Medau Rhythmic Movement books to display at your class, particularly during the first weeks — new class members are often keen to know more about Medau and at £1.50 these books are very good value.
Copies are available on appro. from the Office.
Stand up boards and backs are also available and are particularly useful for Membership notices, so you can always have one on display.
As a Membership incentive for 1991 we will once again be offering a FREE VOUCHER to all new members.
This scheme is beginning now and therefore also gives three months extra free membership.
The Voucher may be exchanged, by the member, for one ticket to a Rally, up to December 1991.
Anyone organising a rally may reclaim the ticket money from the Society if they wish — please contact the Treasurer.
8 STATISTICS
Statistics forms will be sent out with these notices.
Please make sure that EVERY class that operated at any time during 1990 is included (even if now not running) and give the maximum number on the roll.
Please RETURN DIRECT TO THE OFFICE OR TO  (Area Organisers will be notified of results) on or before 24th November (Reunion).
9 SALES
A new system of ‘goods on approval’ will take effect from September 1990.
Please see enclosed letter from .
10 PUBLICITY
A great many people have been getting good local press publicity for Medau during the summer.
Our thanks go to them, and to  who represented us on T.V. in the ‘Garden Party’, a national lunchtime magazine programme recorded in Edinburgh.
Photocopies of recent items in the national press are available from the Office.
11 PETROL COUPONS
Please could you ask all your class members to donate any unwanted Petrol Coupons, all brands acceptable.
We hope to collect enough to get some major prizes to help the Gymnaestrada fundraising effort.
12 GYMNAESTRADA FUNDRAISING
Surrey teachers are promoting a draw which takes place at their rally on Saturday 1st December in Redhill.
The money raised will be used to assist with the expenses of the teams taking part in the Gymnaestrada 1991.
We ask you to sell/buy the enclosed tickets, 5 for £1.00, to support us.
Further tickets can be obtained from any Surrey teacher.
With your help we hope to make a substantial contribution.
THANK YOU.
A letter is also enclosed from  on behalf of the Gymnaestrada team.
13 OFFICE ORGANISATION
Apologies for change of plan since Medau News went to press:, our new helper, will be in the office on MONDAYS, THURSDAYS and FRIDAYS.
will be in the office on Tuesdays and  on Wednesdays whenever possible.
14 EVENTS AND DATES TO NOTE
15 TEACHERS NEEDED FOR CLASSES
16 DATE OF NEXT QUALIFIED TEACHERS DAY
The next Qualified Teachers day will take place on 12th January 1991 at North Westminster School,.
PERSONAL
and  send their thanks to all QTs for the lovely chard and flowers to celebrate their Silver Wedding.
thanks her many friends for the lovely selection of get well cards and letters she has recently received.
ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO TEACHERS' DIRECTORY
Dear Medau Teacher 
MEDAU SOCIETY SALES
With effect from this month it has been decided to organise the Society's ‘appro system’ on a slightly different basis.
At present there is no time limit on how long you hold stock — with the result that many appro forms date back some years.
This results in goods gathering dust and discrepancies occur.
It is  our intention to keep goods turning over at a livelier pace and it would therefore be appreciated if you would return any goods which you are unable to sell.
You can then begin afresh and show your classes the latest lines and colours.
If our records show you have goods on appro at present a list if attached.
If you do not agree this list it is most important that you contact me or .
If you have paid for, or returned, any items it would be helpful if you could give some indication of the date of payment or return and whether a cheque was used.
Similarly, some goods are unaccounted for and it may be that you have sales items but are not shown on our list,(including publications).
Profits on sales form an important part of the Society's income.
Not all class members can attend rallies etc, they, and the Society, depend on you to keep them up to date with the latest stock.
I will willingly make up sample packs or special orders.
Please contact me with your requirements.
Although postage has to be charged extra, often visiting teachers, trainers and other ‘travellers’ to your area are willing to act as couriers.
To whom incidently, the Society is most grateful.
If you have any ideas for boosting sales in your area, please let us know.
Thank you for your enthusiasm and interest and we look forward to an excellent year.
Best wishes
1991 MEMBERSHIP INCENTIVE
To give you some extra ammunition for your membership sales campaign, for 1991 we shall be re-introducing the free rally ticket scheme for new members, whereby one free voucher will be issued to every new member enrolling for 1991 (commences October 1990 with first three months' membership also free).
The voucher can be exchanged for a ticket to a rally of their choosing.
The organiser of the chosen rally should issue a ticket to their event free of charge, in exchange for the voucher.
The voucher may then be forwarded to the office together with the member's name, and a refund of the purchase price will be made to the organiser by the Medau Society.
If the organisers feel that their event can cover the cost of the free voucher/ticket and do not seek reimbursement from the Society, please advise the office of the names of all those who have claimed free tickets, so that the overall success of this scheme can be monitored.
Vouchers are only valid for rallies taking place before 31st December 1991.
WOULD ALL TEACHERS PLEASE PUBLICISE THIS OFFER WELL IFF YOU HAVE A LOCAL RALLY THIS TERM.
AND AGAIN AT THE START OF THE NEW YEAR.
IDEAS ON HOW TO SELL MEMBERSHIP TO CLASS MEMBERS
1) Give a short explanation on why it is so important that all class members should join the Medau Society;—
The grant that we receive from the Sports Council will only continue to be given if each year our membership increases.
Without this grant the Society would have great difficulty in functioning, we depend on this grant to help pay the ever increasing cost of training new teachers which is imperative to the development of the Society.
We are grant aided towards our office and our full time Secretary, our development officer and all the administrative costs that are incurred.
2) What do they gain from joining?
New members for 1988 are offered a free voucher to attend a Rally of their own choosing.
All members receive 3 copies of the Medau news annually and notification of all Medau events.
In most cases Members are offered a cheaper rate to attend events and are given preferential admittance over non members.
Each member receives an Annual Report and the opportunity to propose people to stand for the Executive Committee.
All members are invited to attend the Annual General Meeting and have voting rights.
3) Ways of raising money to buy membership
a)
Weekly raffle.
b)
Collecting Tin.
c)
Coffee mornings or Ploughman's lunches etc.
d)
Sales — bring & buy, exchange of paper back books, second hand leotards
e)
Social event — possibly linking with another class in the area.
e.g. Cheese & Wine evening with an open class/es/ Talk and discussion on health and fitness.
f)
Private classes — include Society membership in the fees.
4) Membership for those in Homes for the Elderly, Handicapped etc.
After an appeal at a Qualified  Teachers' Training Day money is now available to help those  Teachers who have classes in this category as it is realised that in some cases it is impossible for these people to be asked for money.
Several classes have offered to sponsor groups for the less able.
Please contact  if you require help.
Dear 
As you will have probably read from your QT notes, we need to have accurate information available in the office, ready to publicise classes for the start of the new season, and this year they are being put on the Word Processor so that in future only alterations need be notified.
It is helpful if we have the full postal address of the class venue, and detailed information about the organising body, i.e. the department (Health, Recreation or Education) of which Council, or the name of any organisation promoting or affiliating the class, i.e. Residents Assoc.
Women's Institute etc.
The telephone contact number for each teacher has been included, and I should be grateful if you would check yours for code and number, as several of these have changed recently.
I enclose the sheet of classes in Scotland as last known — could you please check the details of all your classes and let me know as soon as possible if there are any alterations or additional details available.
Wishing you a very happy and successful 1987/88 season — if there is any way in which we can help promote classes, arrange publicity or membership benefits for you, please do not hesitate to ask.
With all good wishes,
9th World Gymnaestrada
amsterdam 1991
Dear Colleague.
As you know, the Society has accepted an invitation from BAGA to send a team to Amsterdam in 1991 as part of the British Team to participate in the 9th World Gymnaestrada.
A group of 30, comprising members of the NDT and 50+ team, are already hard at work with their preparations.
The cost of the trip will be £300/£350 per person, which as you can appreciate is no small sum.
The team members are busy raising money in a variety of ways to go into a fund towards the costs but do need all the help they can get, any ideas, suggestions would be most welcome.
There is one way in which you could be of assistance.
One of our sponsors, Hills (Medway) Ltd. of Bromley, have offered as a donation a new ‘Living’ Gas Fire, fully approved and tested worth £210.
It has been suggested that instead of the usual raffle we invite people to make a donation to the Amsterdam fund using a printed card.
At the re-union one card will be drawn to select the winner.
In the event of the fire being unsuitable there will be a cash alternative.
Obviously the more donations made the better.
If you feel that you could interest your class members, family, friends etc into participation in this scheme please contact:
at the office or  .
Thanking you in anticipation.
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at  Saturday 12th March 1988
1 CHAIRMAN'S NOTES
welcomed a number of student teachers who had come to share the day as , our guest teacher, was to give a percussion workshop during the afternoon.
The meeting with the Grant Assessment Panel of the Sports Council took place in February and Pauline explained how well the new plan had been received by the panel who had expressed their hope that the rise in membership numbers would be maintained.
The official letter giving the amount of grant we would receive and the conditions of the grant had yet to be received by the Society.
Teachers are reminded that a Rally takes place at East Grinstead on 23rd April.
Tickets are available from .
Please encourage participants to wear Red, White, and Blue — a prize for the most appropriate outfit!
2 MEMBERSHIP
a) Current Membership
Well done to all QT's who have already enrolled themselves and reminded their class members to renew membership but to date we still need over 1,000 members to meet Sports Council requirements.
Please, once again, remind all your present members to renew membership and try to enrol as many new members as possible.
The Membership Services Committee have devised a list of ideas for selling membership (enclosed).
It may help YOU with finding new ideas to encourage enrolment.
If you have any fresh ideas or schemes, which have helped you to enrol new members, please do let us know, so that we can spread the word.
The Free Voucher scheme is proving to be very popular.
Please could we remind all rally organisers to return the vouchers to the Office, even if you are not claiming reimbursement.
b) Membership Numbers
Now that membership is recorded alphabetically on the word processor it is not necessary to have membership numbers.
Therefore any new member this year will not be issued with a number and from January 1989 all numbering will cease.
c) Society Membership for Mother & Toddler Groups
A new grade of membership is being introduced specifically aimed at Mother & Toddler classes.
If the Mother (or the adult) accompanying the child is a full current member of the Society the child can be enrolled for 50p and receive a Medau balloon.
c) Specialised Group Membership
There are specimen letters available, from , which may help you get new/renewed membership for Specialised Groups.
Don't forget we do need to show a positive involvement from EVERYONE who takes part in our classes.
3 QUALIFIED TEACHERS' WEEKEND 15/17th July 1988
There are still places available on this weekend, which will be of great benefit to all teachers.
Closing date for applications — 30th April 1988 — After this date course will be open to student teachers and other movement organisations.
4 POTENTIAL TEACHERS' DAY 9th July 1988
Potential Teachers' Day will take place on 9th July at Queens Road Centre,.
PLEASE — look our for any potential people in YOUR classes and do encourage them to go to this day.
5 QUALIFIED TEACHERS' TRAINING DAYS
The Training Sub-Committee will soon be planning the programme for the 1988/89 Training Days.
If you have any specific requests and/or ideas for future training please contact  Training Sub-Committee Chairman as soon as possible.
6 MUSIC TAPES
has produced two tapes of his own music.
‘Music for Dance 1 & 2’ Tape 1 consists of short pieces — Tape 2 contains longer items for creative work.
The tapes are available at £6.75 each or £12.50 for both inclusive of p/p.
Cheques made payable to ‘’ and sent to  .
7 N.D.O.
will be out of the country from 3rd July–24th August, she is very anxious that plans for even more new class launches in September should go ahead smoothly.
First approaches to Adult Education Authorities should have already been made for the Autumn term but it is still worth getting on their lists.
is happy to assist if you need help or introductions.
Have YOU made arrangements for a new class yet???
8 STATISTICS
Please let us know about EVERY class you teach however specialised and whatever it is called unless it is directly resulting from another qualification e.g. if you teach a yoga type class and do not have a yoga qualification, this statistically should be a Medau Breathing and Relaxation class.
9 INFORMATION DISTRIBUTION
It has been our practise for some time now to give out names addresses and telephone numbers of local teachers to any one making enquiries at promotional events.
This is a very valuable method of following up the initial contact and we hope you will agree that this may continue.
It is realised now that your permission should have been obtained before disclosing such information and if any teacher does not wish this to happen in the future please notify the NDO —— without delay — hopefully with alternative suggestion for publicising your class.
10 MEDAU REUNION 1987
Many congratulations on the splendid final total received for the sponsored event at the Reunion — £1857.18.
A cheque for £928 will be presented to the British Kidney Patient Association at the ‘With Women In Mind’ Exhibition at Portsmouth 18–20th March.
11 MEDAU REUNION 1988
If there are any area display teams willing to perform at the Annual Reunion on Saturday 19th November to be held at Warwick Park School, please contact  at ,,
12 MEDAU IN ACTION
A Day of Medau has been arranged at — Havant Sixth Form College — where there will be classes to watch and join in — a sponsored ball bounce (to support Queen Alexandra Hospital Body Scanner Appeal)— Medau Sessions — Displays In depth Morning £2.00
All Information and Tickets from  —.
13 MIND — WORKOUT WITH THE STARS
Forms and posters for MIND Workout With The Stars are available from  for anyone able to promote this event.
For additional information please read Jan.
Q.T. Notes.
14 DINNER DANCE 7th May 1988
Please let  know if you are coming to the Medau Dinner Dance on Saturday 7th May  1988 to be held at the Zoological Gardens Members' Restaurant,.
It promises to be a really super evening once again.
So come on everyone gather up a party and dance the night away.
15 SOCIETY SALES
Thank You everyone who has helped to promote Society sales.
Our sales figures were UP last year and we would like this trend to continue — Keep up the good work!
New items this season are — White Scarves (square or long, with a small blue logo)— Iron-on Badges available in four colours plus (royal blue for teachers only) and Sweat shirts and T-Shirts in a new range of colours.
If you have not taken goods to your class recently, please consider doing so.
Sales-packs containing samples of our goods are available or you may prefer to take specific items.
If you tell  () beforehand of your requirements these can be brought to Teachers' meetings rallies etc. for collection.
If you have money and/or goods outstanding, it would be very helpful if these could be returned before the end of June to simplify half-yearly stocktaking.
16 GOOD NEWS
Everyone will be happy to know that  and  have each recently given birth to daughters.
Details and photographs will be in Medau News.
17 FOAM BALLS
Newitt & Co.
Ltd.,, supply the following foam balls 
18 TEA
Congratulations to  (tea was her treat) on completing 10 years as the Society's Secretary.
Thanks to SE & SW London for preparing tea.
Tea at the next Q.T. Day will be provided by outer Kent and Essex.
19 DATE OF NEXT MEETING
The next Q.T. Day on 18th June will be back at .
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT  SATURDAY 7TH JANUARY ‘89
1 APOLOGIES
2 TEACHERS’ REPRESENTATIVE
has been unwell for some time and has undergone many diagnostic tests.
Since the QT Meeting on the 7th  has indicated that she is feeling a little better and for the time being is willing to continue as the Teachers' Representative, however, it is possible that in the future she may require assistance to carry out her duties.
Please note that her telephone number after the 26th January will be  and her new address is:—.
3 MEMBERSHIP
Please positively encourage everyone to renew their membership for 1989 and speak to all non-members and offer them a Medau News to read (special copies available continuing membership form and letter from the Office or ) there is a surprise gift pack for all new members in 1989.
Family Membership (£10.50) covers two adults and any number of children living at the same address this new category needs to be publicised.
 Wherever possible we should try to make provision for children (perhaps by showing videos etc. to keep them amused while a class takes place) Please consider this as a possibility when planning an event or rally.
4 FUNDRAISING CONGRATULATIONS FUNDRAISING CONGRATULATIONS
CONGRATULATIONS to everyone who worked to raise the extra £2000 needed in 1988 — the many ways that you devised and involved your class members in helping with was  FANTASTIC .
Thank you all very much.
The need to generate our own income has to continue but we are  loath to keep asking our teachers and members for ‘money’— so —‘please’ perhaps all Area Organisers and QTs will consider organising enjoyable profitable events for the benefit of members and the Society during 1989.
Please share any bright ideas you have — details to  — thank you.
Will any teacher who raises funds in the name of the Society (even if used immediately for a specific purpose) please send a brief statement to the Treasurer, as we need to show the extent of our own fundraising in the Annual Report and to the Sports Council.
5 TRAINING
The new Teacher Training Course at Horley (four terms of four Saturdays and one residential weekend per term with piano as an optional extra) will be commencing at the end of January.
Further applications will be welcomed but are needed immediately.
6 DEVELOPMENT
Many thanks to everyone who helped with the Motivation Survey last year — the results underline the need this year to take every possible opportunity for free local publicity would you all contact your local Borough Recreation Officer (or any other official source) for a list of forthcoming events and get us involved with static and/or physical displays whenever suitable.
NDO will be happy to help and/or make the necessary arrangements.
Our national and county display teams are a great asset to the Society but need to be seen by a much wider public to promote our work (indoors).
The London Sports Council produced a report on the Abolition of ILEA and requested comments before negotiations on implementation take place.
It is available to be read by anyone interested.
We shall continue to monitor the situation and the NDO would welcome comments and feedback about what is happening in your locality.
The many political changes in policy in 1988 has created a great deal of uncertainty about the future administration of classes.
Don't forget that THERE IS NO CUT BACK IN THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WANTING A CLASS but future methods of provision may be varied and unfamiliar, we need to be adaptable and keep our eyes wide open to take advantage of every opportunity.
Some preliminary spadework could reap long term benefits — friendly relations with the daytime Head Teacher and staff of the school where you teach (or your children attend) would help if the school decided to run its own evening classes or if you needed to negotiate low cost hire of the premises yourself what about a Junior Award Scheme for the school's children?
7 NEW CLASSES
Thanks entirely to your efforts the statistics show a slight increase in the number of classes and participation, despite a drop in the number of active teachers — 1989 presents a further challenge — so — if anyone would like to help to explore new possibilities — Business classes, Women's groups, Leisure Centres, Work with Children, Health Farms etc. please contact the NDO.
8 CITY OF LONDON'S 800th ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS
The CCPR Movement and Dance Division is co-operating with the Barbican Centre in arranging a Family Festival of Dance and Movement on the afternoons of the Spring Bank Holiday — Sunday 28 and Monday 29 May 1989.
We have agreed to take part along with member organisations and have a half hour slot for a ‘Come and Try It’(volunteer ‘plants’ welcome) and short demonstration.
9 POSSIBLE ENGLISH COURSE IN COBURG — WHITSUN 1990
Following the successful English Course in 1986, we have been offered a course from Thursday 31 May to Tuesday 5 June 1990.
Please talk to your class members and let us know at the March QT DAY if you feel there would be support for the idea.
The major expense would be travel the course fee would be DM250 (around £80)
10 1989 COBURG CELEBRATIONS
60 years a school — 35 years in Coburg — 10 years of the Physiotherapy Course — 's 50th birthday.
There will be a celebratory weekend in June and  has invited a group from the NDT to take part.
will use her latest item and the team are planning how to get there.
, as the English representative on the Executive Committee of the Medau Ring has been asked to speak on the history and development of the Society in England since the 30's and is busy doing her homework.
11 1989 CLASS LIST
The new list will be produced shortly based on the annual statistics returns.
Please let the NDO know immediately about any new classes or alterations — thank you.
12 SUSSEX BARN DANCE
Keep date free — 17 June 1989 — Details later from .
13 MRM's
's Medau Rhythmic Movement is still a bargain at £1.50 a copy — PLEASE — take some copies to your classes to sell.
New members, particularly, are always interested and it is some while since we had a ‘Sales Boost’ and we need the shelf space and the money!
14 NEXT QT DAY
Just to refresh names and faces (especially to help our newer teachers and forgetful established ones) badges will be provided for you to wear.
We are concerned by the drop in attendance at QT Days recently and would like some feedback as to the reasons.
Please make every effort to attend on 11 March — but if you cannot make it — Please complete and return the appropriate slip.
15 PHOTOGRAPHY COMPETITION
Details to be announced in May Medau News.
Entries to be displayed at Crystal Palace Reunion.
Please encourage class members, their photographic friends and relatives or anyone else wishing to snap subject matter in class.
There will be various categories in which to enter good movement pictures and we hope to both generate more interest in Medau and find new ideas for our publicity boards.
16 PRESS OFFICER
This post is still vacant and anyone interested on becoming involved with the media is invited to contact Publicity Chairman —.
17 DATE DUPLICATION
Please check with the Office before arranging events to avoid duplicating dates.
When asking guest Medau Teachers to teach at rallies please check that she holds own private insurance cover otherwise let the Office know at once so that cover can be arranged for her.
18 MEDAU NEWS
The Editors welcome and need YOUR copy for inclusion, both on local events and any editorial ‘pieces’ from your classes by the deadlines .
19 CRYSTAL PALACE
The Reunion this year will be held at Crystal Palace on Saturday 25 November.
Offers, please, from groups or an individual to organise the day.
Contact the Office or .
20 EQUIPMENT
Offers of surplus equipment — broken hoops or balls in need of revalving will be greatly appreciated by the NDO to help new teachers trying to establish classes.
21 DATE OF NEXT QT DAY
Saturday 11 March 1989.
MOVEMENT ACCOMPANIMENT AND FITNESS DAY
Saturday 13 May 1989 — 11am–4pm
Organised by  to include a variety of work on movement accompaniment including piano improvisation and a session in the Fitness Centre with their qualified supervisor Applications with fee (£10) must be received by 11 March (QT Day)
HEALTH FOR LIFE DAY
Saturday 17 June 1989 — 11am–4pm.
Organised by  Full programme at next QT Day.
please delete as appropriate
I wish to attend Movement  Accompaniment Day 13.5.89 and enclose remittance of £10
I wish to attend Health for Life Day 17.6.89 and enclose remittance of £10.
(If support insufficient fees will be returned in full)
ATTENDANCE AT QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAYS
I do not attend QT Days/I will not be attending QT Day 11 March because:—(please tick as appropriate)
I do not like the venue
I have family commitments
There is no tea
The programme does not appeal
The Chairman's eyes aren't blue
We start and/or finish too early
The weather/travel
Other (please elaborate)
Would you prefer one QT Day in London and the other two held in the Home Counties?
Dear Member 
Medau Society National Draw
This draw is one way in which you — a Society member — can help with the tremendous task of raising much needed cash.
YOU could win one of the following fabulous cash prizes:—
A £1000 in all.
The draw will take place at the Society's Annual Reunion to be held on Saturday 19th November 1988 at .
Please do your best to sell the enclosed book of tickets and return the money and counterfoils direct to me,, by no later than 10th November.
I can supply you with more tickets or you may contact the Office or your own teacher.
All cheques to be made payable to ‘Medau Society (National Draw)’.
Should you feel unable to help in this venture for any reason would you please be kind enough to return the tickets to me.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
NOTES FROM NDO ON RECENT POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
COMPULSORY COMPETITIVE TENDERING (CTC):
Sport & Recreation is a very small part of a huge leisure industry which over the last 20 years has seen a massive increase in both the provision of Local Authority facilities and in participation levels.
The current legislation is designed to ensure value for money in local provision, but there must be a balance between quality of service and the cost.
The Local Authority must CONTROL leisure management despite privatisation and determine the pricing and opening hours.
Every group who use sports facilities managed by their Local Authority should make sure that provision for their space is included in bid specifications.
The Local Authority decides the balance between social good and economic efficiency and Governing Bodies need to work together with them to negotiate favourable terms.
By law, 35% of LA managed facilities must be out to tender by January 1992, 75% by August 1992 and 100% by January 1993.
LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOL (LSMS):
This is a modernisation scheme introducing market forces with the aim of moving State schools in the direction of Independent schools.
There will be an increase in the powers of the Head Teacher, Governors, and Parents with a corresponding decrease in the powers of the Local Authority and Teachers, an obligation to make better use of finances, and opportunities for the customer to determine the operation.
Education Authorities can direct schools to let premises to Adult Education and to Youth Organisations, but the budget given to schools cannot be used to subsidise anyone else's use — any subsidy must come from elsewhere.
The school has to pay for maintenance of the buildings, rent, rates, heating, lighting, cleaning, caretaking etc. and gets its income from PTA, Lettings, Adult Education.
Schools must calculate the ‘True cost’ of letting  facilities which will probably reflect an increase in charges, but will generally want to have better  facilities and community involvement to attract recruitment.
If the true cost of providing a class cannot be met by the students, application for a grant may be made to the Local Authority or the Sports Council.
Schools may decide to re-assess the ‘true cost’ at a more economic level if they are left with a lot of unused space — so don't give up, keep negotiating!
NATIONAL VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS (NVQs):
The ‘Industry Lead Body’ for Sport and Recreation has been established as part of the national government initiative for the development of vocational qualifications for the whole of industry.
The word ‘industry’ is used in its broadest sense, and the aim is to improve qualification throughout society.
QTs can rest assured that your teaching qualification will be included in those being identified by the Lead Body.
Limitations to the initial work of the National Council for Vocational Qualifications were due to an insufficient timescale and finance — the principles were right, and they are now  scheduled to take  effect in 1993.
For Sport & Recreation there will be 6 Technical Standards Working Groups covering:.
.
The work of our teachers will fall in the Coaching, Teaching & Instructing group, who have to identify over 300 job titles and group them into headings before setting the standards for each job through analysing the Tasks, Skills and Knowledge involved.
Starting with the Key Purpose which will state the aim of the job, a number of Key Roles will then identify what is to be achieved (objectives), and a number of Units will provide the methods of deciding how each Role can be implemented.
Each unit will include several Elements of Competence from which measurable Performance Criteria can be derived.
Subsequent stages will cover Consultation (what makes work effective) and Implementation (quality control, validation procedures, national delivery).
It seems probable that initially existing Governing Body qualifications may be ‘rubber stamped’, and subsequently validating agencies may include the City & Guilds and RSA.
I am very pleased that  (our former Sports Council Liaison Officer), and  (incoming Vice-Chairman of the Movement & Dance Division) are involved in the various working parties, and I am confident that they will ensure a fair assessment of the criteria for all Movement & Dance qualifications.
There is another board for Art & Entertainment whose Sector Committees include: Music; Performing Arts (covers dance and the teaching of dance); Visual Arts; and Creative Writing.
An interesting comment from the Arts representative was that ‘it is financially impossible to train people in the same way they did 5 years ago’.
Every group who use sports facilities managed by their Local Authority should make sure that provision for their space is included in bid specifications.
The Local Authority can provide grants towards use of facilities for deserving cases which includes Sports Council Target Groups.
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT  ON SATURDAY 23 SEPTEMBER 1989
A short session held before the lunch break proved very worthwhile when teachers were able to put forward their requests and ideas for future QT days and see them slotted into the programme.
A revised timetable for the next three QT days will be sent to you all when finalised.
welcomed and introduced the three newly qualified teachers and presented them with their certificates,.
will be spending the next few months at her home in Italy while she recovers from an attack of shingles.
She sends her very best wishes to everyone.
1 APOLOGIES were received from .
We are pleased to announce that  gave birth to a son , on 29 September, mother and son ‘doing well’ and  promises to be with us all at the January meeting.
2 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
On the advice of our Sports Council Liaison Officer a new four year plan, to start from January 1990, has been submitted for consideration by the Grant Assessment Panel.
Two copies are available for teachers to read and pass on, please contact the Office is you would like to see the plan.
The Development Steering Group will be represented when we know the date of our interview which should be during October/November.
3 MEMBERSHIP URGENT PLEASE encourage all new class members to join this term and any old members who have omitted to rejoin this year; numbers are very important as we must show a steady growth in membership in order to keep our commitment in the Plan.
Sponsorship of  Specialised  Classes can be arranged — if you do not already organise a linked sponsorship between your local recreational class/specialised class please send list of names and venue to either  or the Office to take advantage of this scheme.
4 ANNUAL STATISTICS If you did not attend on QT day you will receive a computerised print-out showing details of your last year's classes (between 1 January and 31 December and include short courses, holiday classes, irregular specialised work etc.)
Please amend (in pen) where necessary, showing maximum on the register at any time during the year and TICK to indicate no change and return to your Area Organiser or   BEFORE 11 November 1989.
5 FUTURE TEACHER TRAINING COURSE The potential teachers day held at Potters Bar did not generate enough local interest to become viable although several people from a wide variety of locations are showing interest —.
If you have someone in your class who would like to train please try to keep their interest alive.
A ‘Come and Try It’ /pre-training day has been arranged in Cambridge on 8 April 1990 and venues in two other areas are being negotiated.
6 PRIVATE INSURANCE Those of you who are covered by our  insurance please let the Office know if you wish to continue to be covered or not.
The annual fee will not now be due until January but it is vital that we know the names of all who wish to participate next year — NOW.
7 ANNUAL REUNION Tickets are now available from the Office, please make every effort to help us fill the 1000+ seats.
will be pleased to receive donations of money or raffle prizes and has raffle tickets available for you to sell to your class members.
We are sharing this year's Sponsored Event with the Asthma Research Council (our official 1989 fund raising event) Your support and that of your class members is urgently needed — contact  at the Office for tickets and sponsor forms — NOW.
is co-ordinator for the display items.
8 PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPETITION Details are in the Medau News, the entry date has been extended to give you time to motivate class members to enter.
We are looking forward to a bumper entry.
9 NATIONAL DISPLAY TEAM.
An audition will be held on 24 March 1990 from 10–12.30 venue to be arranged.
Please encourage your good movers to come along.
There are some exciting times ahead as we have indicated our willingness to take part in the Gymnaestrada 1991 in Amsterdam.
We shall also be celebrating our 40th Anniversary in 1992 and look forward to a national celebration in or close to London.
10 IN-SERVICE DAYS Teaching the Elderly, this day has been arranged for 12 May — London venue to be notified later.
Information on other days will be available at the January QT day.
11 EQUIPMENT S.O.S. — HAVE YOU ANY SPARE EQUIPMENT???
Equipment is urgently needed for trainee teachers hoping to start classes shortly.
HOOPS (any condition) are needed most.
Contact  on .
12 ALISON BELL LEISUREWEAR ‘Party Plan’ sessions are under way these are good publicity and make a profit for the Society.
If you would like a sample pack to run a promotional event for your class members (and possibly include a showing of the Medau videos) contact .
13 CARITA brass ball valves are available from the Office and these can be used on the white pimply Battel balls.
All new Carita balls have rubber valves (also available from the Office) these cannot be interchanged with the brass ones.
14  MEDITERRANEAN HOLIDAY TEACHING Are you interested in teaching Medau within a one week multi-movement holiday organised by Leisure Plan in Tunisia, Malta, Majorca???
No fee but all expenses paid for a teacher working three hours a day or a half price holiday if working one hour a day.
Commission will be paid to the Society on six or more adult Medau members booking a holiday.
This could be a good way to introduce Medau to a wider public.
Please contact .
15 DAYS OF MOVEMENT AND DANCE Medau will be represented at a number of multi-movement days promoted by GL&SE Sports Council in conjunction with local authorities.
16 MISCELLANEOUS
HOLIDAY CLOSURE The Office will be closed during the week 9–13 October while  is away and re-open on 16th Oct.
's asks if any QT's still own any one-piece navy and white leotards?
If so can she borrow/beg/steal them for a class item???
Please contact  on .
17 QT NOTES JANUARY 1990 the suggestion that the notes could be prepared in advance and handed out on QT Days was given a mixed reception.
It has been decided to try this method out for the January meeting, posting out only to teachers not attending.
THEREFORE PLEASE if you have any notices for inclusion these must be sent to  (Teachers' Rep) early in December.
Late details to the Office not later than 15th December.
YOUR CO-OPERATION FOR THIS EXPERIMENT WILL BE MUCH APPRECIATED.
18 LATE NEWS You will be sorry to hear that  's husband died suddenly at home after many years of ill-health and we send our heartfelt sympathy to  and her family.
19 DATE OF NEXT MEETING Saturday 6 January 1990 
ANNUAL REUNION 1988 ANNUAL REUNION 1988 ANNUAL REUNION 1988 ANNUAL REUNION 1988
DATE 29th November 1988
TIME 2.00 until 5.30 pm (Doors open 1.15 — Fayre open prior to Rally & during Tea Period)
VENUE 
PROGRAMME Open Classes, Christmas Fayre, Displays & Tea, & time to re-unite with old friends.
COST £3.50 (400 tickets to Members only)
ORGANIZER 
It is hoped that each area will organize and be responsible for a stall.
Stalls booked so far:—
Please contact  () with offers for other stalls and please give names of persons organizing the stall.
Also offers of items for all the stalls.
Suggestions for other stalls:—
Offers of cakes for tea would also be welcome.
Tickets will be available after 1st October 1988 from the office — 400 to Members only.
Please enclose S.A.E. with your ticket order — thank you.
CAR PARKING WILL BE IN THE SCHOOL PLAYGROUND — ENTRANCE — LYNDHURST ROAD.
1992
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Teachers are reminded that the following fees fall due for payment on 1st January 1992, but may be paid earlier if desired.
Please complete relevant sections on right when making payment, and delete items NOT required.
PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATION FEE Including Civil Liability Insurance for all teaching commitments, private, A.E.
etc.
QUALIFIED TEACHERS TRAINING FEES
MEMBERSHIP OF THE SOCIETY
Please also complete the relevant Membership Renewal Card(s) when received.
Please make cheques payable to the Medau Society, and enclose a S.A.E. if a receipt is required.
Notes of Qualified Teachers' Day held at  on Saturday 20th June 1987
PLEASE READ CAREFULLY AS THERE MAY NOW BE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.
1.
APOLOGIES
Apologies were received from .
2.
WELCOME
The Chairman,, welcomed and presented certificates to three newly qualified teachers attending for the first time.
Three further teachers also qualified last March namely 
3.
TEACHERS' REPRESENTATIVE
presented  (retiring Teachers' Representative) with a beautiful bowl of plants on behalf of all the teachers and thanked  for her work over the past years.
All necessary information had been efficiently handed over to the new Teachers' Representative,, who was then introduced and warmly welcomed by .
We wish  well with her new responsibilities.
Please Note:—
4.
FEES AND MEMBERSHIP SUBSCRIPTIONS 1987/88
Payment of Fees
An Invoice will be sent to teachers in September stating PAF and Insurance — due 1.9.87 and QT fees — due 1.1.88.
Society Membership because of administrative difficulties will not be included with this invoice.
Payment for invoiced fees may be made at the Oct.
Q.T. Day or alternatively on the due dates.
Membership fees should be paid to the Office using the renewal slip which you will receive with the January Medau News.
It is VITALLY IMPORTANT that ALL fees are paid promptly, particularly P.A.F. and Insurance as the Sports Council Grant Panel will expect us to prove that we are measuring up to their requirements in the Autumn and we can only do this by showing monies actually received and in the Bank.
YOUR CO-OPERATION IS ESSENTIAL!
5.
CLASS MEMBERSHIP
expresses her thanks to all who have made such great efforts to recruit new members.
However — a few more new ones in September will help swell the total before we go to the Sports Council in October.
6.
CLASSES IN SEPTEMBER
Many of you have already made plans to expand your classes next season but still more are needed.
If anyone requires official introductions — backing to negotiate halls — personalised promotional material or the use of display boards and/or video — please contact  who will be delighted to help.
If you are not currently teaching and feel that some ‘refresher’ training would be useful, this can be arranged.
We need EVERY qualified teacher to take on a full workload this year.
URGENT — NDO would like to hear from any teacher interested in a men's class in London SW1 (evening) or a handicapped children's class at Dartford.
The Eastern Region Movement and Dance Liaison Group are holding a teachers' workshop at Homerton College, Cambridge on Saturday 19th September — 9.30–4.30 — £5 for the day.
Tutor — Anne Day of the Dolmetsch Historical Dance Society and a tutor from the London College of Dance and Drama.
Application forms from the NDO.
8.
TRAINING WEEKEND
30th Oct–1st Nov. at Green Park, Aston Clinton.
There are a few places available to Q.T.'s who are interested in taking part please contact  immediately but send accommodation fee — £32 to the Office.
9.
AREA ORGANISERS
In order that up-to-date class lists are available locally and nationally please return details of ALL classes you hope to teach in the Autumn, to  your Area Organiser by 31st July.
Area Organisers do a good job collating the information and publicising classes and the information is needed in the Office so that  can produce national class lists.
They need YOUR help and co-operation — SO — Do It Today!
A new Area Organiser is required for the Greater London — South West — volunteers please!
In the meantime all class details for this area should be sent to .
10.
ANNUAL REUNION
IMPORTANT DETAILS
This event will now be held at Seymour Leisure Centre, on 21st November 1987
There will be Open classes — Children's class — Mother and Toddler class — Displays — Raffle — AND — a Fundraising Event.
Volunteers are needed as Stewards and someone to organise the Raffle.
Please contact either  or the Office.
Details will be in the September Medau News.
11.
PUBLICITY AND LEAFLETS
Mother and Toddler classes are currently very popular and a leaflet on this type of class is being produced.
Video footage of a chair-based active-elderly class in sheltered housing and a residential home where the participants are all over 80 years, is now available.
A handout is currently being produced for those responsible for caring for the elderly.
Anyone wishing to use the video — obtain this leaflet or have more information please contact 
12.
THE ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE AND PHYSICAL ‘87 EXHIBITIONS
Alternative Medicine 9/10/11/12th July Rainbow Room Kensington  is manning a static stand at this event and will be advertising all aspects of our work.
Physical ‘87  6/7/8/9th August.
is once again organising participation in this event which is also being held in Kensington.
Your help and support for both events will be much appreciated.
13.
For all those unable to attend the last A.G.M.  had brought along the gold necklace and bracelet she had received on her retirement as Society Chairman.
14.
Congratulations to  on being invited to become the representative of the Medau Society on the Executive Committee of the Medau College, Coburg, Germany.
15.
DIRECTORY
has just completed an up-date for the Teachers’ Directory to include all the newly qualified teachers and new addresses, telephone numbers etc. where known of established Q.T's.
Please check your envelope to see if your address/postal code is correct or if you have recently been allocated a new telephone coding PLEASE send relevant information to  at the Office as soon as possible.
16.
SALES
A big thank you to all of you who have been promoting the Society's sales items.
Due to your efforts sales are ‘just’ above those for the same period last year.
Please keep up the good work.
There is a physical limit on the amount of goods I can carry to Q.T. Days and other events.
Please telephone me beforehand to ensure you can collect the exact items you require.
I shall be delighted to hear from you.
on .
17.
OFFICE CLOSURE
is hoping to take a few days off during August probably from Wednesday 12th–Wednesday 19th when the Office will be closed.
18.
TEA
Thanks to Outer Surrey for an excellent tea.
Tea at the next Q.T. Day 10th October will be provided by Inner Kent.
STOP PRESS
Please note that Personal Freshness and Appearance are a priority.
We have received a complaint that on Q.T. Day ‘Someone's Mum had not told Her!’
Don't let that someone be you!!
We appreciate that it was a warm day; make sure that you come prepared in future with toilet bag and a change of leotard.
Thank you
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT  ON SATURDAY 20TH APRIL 1991.
CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS:
welcomed all QTs and most especially our Vice-President .
Many tributes were paid to  's invaluable help and friendship to the Society over many years, a cake made and decorated by our members was presented to , also a basket of flowers, and QTs joined in her 90th Birthday celebrations.
APOLOGIES:
Apologies were received from:.
TEACHERS' REPRESENTATIVE:
was proposed and duly elected to be the next Teachers' Representative.
Grateful thanks were recorded to  for her excellent representation over the past four years.
LECTURE DEMONSTRATIONS & OUTSIDE EVENTS:
Lists are available showing the many teachers who were active in this way during 1990, helping to fly the Medau flag.
Many thanks to all of them and perhaps the list may inspire a few more in 1991!
AGM:
Saturday 18th May 1991 at .
Open classes and a Ploughman's lunch will be followed by the business meeting.
Acceptance forms are needed in the office as soon as possible, particularly if lunch is required.
LOCAL AUTHORITY CLASSES:
We know that local authorities are in financial difficulties and many are having to make drastic cuts in all areas.
Please encourage class members to lobby their local councils about cuts in classes, either personally or by petition.
Noises need to be made NOW so that when the political situation improves we shall be able to negotiate classes on good terms.
, our Sports Council Liaison Officer, has asked us to co-operate with a survey to give her some ammunition to fight on behalf of all the Movement & Dance organisations.
The enclosed questionnaire needs only ticks for Yes or No, but if you would like to add any further statistics or details we should be very grateful.
Many of you have already sent in details about individual classes but it would be helpful if you could use this form now.
Please return to  if you could use this form now.
Please return it to  or the office within the next week.
RECENT PRESS:
Copies of editorial in ‘The Sunday Telegraph’ and ‘Women's Realm’available from the office if required, and the  /video entitled Medau — The Art of Energy will be launched on 15th May.
QT INSURANCE
Everyone who has paid their PAF will receive a copy of the Certificate of Insurance issued by Perkins Slade.
However, if you need a copy of the full policy (12 pages of small print!) please ask for one.
BOOK RECOMMENDED BY :
‘BONE-LOADING: The New Way to prevent Osteoporosis’ by   and 
YEAR OF SPORT:
We were offered a free half-hour demonstration spot at the Ideal Home Exhibition which was organised at very short notice.
Many thanks to all those teachers and members from Kent and Surrey who helped.
Sponsored crazy ball bounces took place at the Kent Rally and in all  's classes to support the ‘Be a Sport for Comic Relief’ campaign.
Well done!!
The Festivals at Brighton, Blackpool and the West Country Big Top have had to be cancelled due to lack of sponsorship.
However, the Greater London & South East Movement & Dance Liaison Group will be organising a more modest Festival at Crystal Palace on Sunday 29th September 1–5 pm with open sessions and displays.
Please tell your class members.
TEACHER TRAINING WEEK-END 14–16 JUNE:
A few places are available for QTs at Aston Clinton — Names to  as soon as possible please.
FUTURE QT PROGRAMMES:
A form is enclosed to help the trainers know what YOU like on YOUR day.
PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE send back your answer to the office by 7th June.
NO NEED TO SIGN IT.
TAPE SWAP SHOP — QT DAY 21 SEPTEMBER:
Please bring any tracks on tape that you have used and found useful to share your ideas with others — bring your own recorders, particularly double ones.
IN-SERVICE TRAINING DAY, 6TH JULY:
An introduction to the principles of CALLANETICS and STRESS MANAGEMENT, at  10am–4pm.
Tutor: £10 fee for day.
Application forms to office by 26th June.
40TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS:
Spring Bank Holiday Week-end: Afternoon and Evening performances at the  on Friday 22nd May 1992 — 1,400 seats for each performance, national and regional Medau items plus guest team from Germany, with  staying to teach on a residential Week-end Course at Easthampstead Park (Saturday lunchtime until Monday lunchtime).
Please start telling people NOW.
If class members want to operate a savings scheme for the Festival and Week-end Course, please encourage them.
Bookings will start in September.
Co-ordinators for the event will be:— VIP hospitality,— production,— publicity,— tickets,— facility arrangements, printed programme and liaison with other groups.
has offered to co-ordinate hospitality for the Coburg girls and any of our regional teams who need to stay on Friday night.
Please ask in all local classes if members could offer anyone a bed for the Friday night, and pass on details to ,.
The programme will include a nostalgic item produced by .
Please send in your name to the office if you were in the 1955 or 1963 Wembley items or ‘Fascinating Rhythms’ at the Society's 25th Anniversary at the Albert Hall.
Various producers will be arranging auditions for their own items in local areas, but members from any area can be considered for a dance style ‘Charleston’ produced by , or a humorous expansion on the ‘Mrs Mopp’theme by  — audition details from producers.
Please remember that performers cannot be involved in more than two items.
CRYSTAL PALACE REUNION
Saturday 23rd November at Crystal Palace.
The event will be organised by , and .
Offers for stewarding and displays will be appreciated.
will be coming to September QT day to teach QTs something that they can pass on to their classes so that everyone attending the Reunion can join in.
THE CHARTERED SOCIETY OF PHYSIOTHERAPY
In January 1991 they published ‘Ten tips for healthy exercise’.
We had hoped that it would go much further — however, point number 1 is ‘Avoid classes that don't have suitably qualified teachers.’
Photocopies are available from the office for any teacher who wants one.
MEMBERSHIP:
There is a shortfall on the membership at the present time MAINLY due to the closure of some of our SPECIAL NEEDS groups.
Please contact  if you have any groups requiring sponsorship.
Congratulations to all those who found the 320 new members, unfortunately there are over 450 people who have not renewed.
Would all teachers give out a gentle reminder please.
Last year's total 3,091.
Present total 2535.
MERTON IN-DEPTH MORNING AND AFTERNOON RALLY.
Saturday 4th May,.
Few tickets left £4 each session.
Contact:,.
HERTS RALLY:
Saturday 11th May at Potters Bar.
Tickets from  .
SUSSEX MULTI-MOVEMENT DAY
Saturday 8th June, 10.30–5.30 .
Tickets £5.50 all day or £3 afternoon from   or  .
KENT DAY OF MOVEMENT
Saturday 22nd June 10am–4pm,.
£8 Members only.
Tutors: and .
Forms from  .
SUMMER CLASSES:
ORPINGTON —.
Term 11th June–9th July, 5 weeks £11.25, details from   plus Tuesday 4th June 1.30–3.30pm.
Free Lecture/Dem and Come & Try It Open Class — EVERYONE WELCOME.
ORPINGTON — 10.00–11.30am 18 June–9 July inc. (4 weeks) £12.
Details from  .
WOKING — Tuesdays 7.30–9,00pm details from ,.
CHERTSEY MEADS — Wednesdays 2.00–3.00pm (Mature), details from ,.
BERKSHIRE BBC (, and ) proudly announce the release of the video you've all been waiting for —‘THE WILDE SHOW’.
Yes, you can now experience the fantastic Charity fund-raising production staged by the Medau Society at the Wilde Theatre, Bracknell.
Movement-Dance-Fashion all in one glorious extravaganza.
Thrill to the swirling ribbons, wonder in amazement that no one dropped a club — GASP at an empty stage (slight technical hitch, not our fault — REALLY).
See , and  as you've never seen them before (for this reason the video carries an 18 certificate!).
You can't afford to miss it.
The suspense, the drama, the joy, the happiness (sorry that's ‘Gone With the Wind’ isn't it!!)
And all for a hire fee of just £2.00.
But you'll surely want your own copy and for just £5.00 it's the bargain of the year.
All profits to Charity.
Contact , OR   and curl up in front of your video for an evening of entertainment, the like of which you've never seen before.
GYMNAESTRADA:
As this was the last meeting before the Gymnaestrada takes place in Amsterdam, on behalf of all QTs  sent our love and very best wishes to ,, and all members of the team who will be representing us.
NEXT MEETING:
Saturday 21st September 1991 at .
NOTES OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS' DAY HELD AT  ON SATURDAY 11 MARCH 1989
1 APOLOGIES
2
welcomed everyone with the news that  had been awarded a GL&SE Sports Council Award for Services to Sport, in the category of ‘Raising Standards of Performance’ for her work with the National Display Team.
showed us the lovely crystal glass which she had received the previous Wednesday at  Wembley Conference Centre.
3 TEACHER TRAINING COURSES
The new course at Horley has an intake of 14 and the initial sessions have been very encouraging to the trainers.
We now need to recruit for the next course, there will be a Training Taster Session on the Easter Course on Friday 31 March and a Potential Teachers Workshop at Potters Bar (just off M25) on Saturday 24 June to launch a new course starting there in September.
PLEASE ENCOURAGE YOUR PEOPLE TO ATTEND.
4 EXAMINATION
Guinea Pigs are needed for the Examination which will take place at  on Saturday 8 July.
Please ask for volunteers in your classes either to come all day or just a.m./p.m .
Please send names to  before 24 June.
5 MEMBERSHIP SHOCK HORROR
There are 43 qualified teachers who have yet to renew their membership for 1989 — If you are one of the forgetful ones please renew TODAY and do ask all your class members whether they have remembered to do so.
6 IMPORTANT INFORMATION REGARDING THE OFFICE
Due to our present financial situation the Office will from the first week in June be manned 10–4 Monday Tuesday and Thursday.
We are extremely fortunate that  has agreed to continue to work as part-time Secretary to the Society and she will be there to deal personally with any Q.T's queries etc on those days.
It is hoped to man the Office with voluntary help on as many Fridays as possible and definite closure on Wednesdays.
There will, of course, be the answering machine for you to make use of — Please do leave a message or at least your name.
That way we hope to continue to serve you well.
7 CITY OF LONDON'S 800 ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION
The Society's slot at the Barbican Festival is at 2.15 p.m. on Sunday 28 May Do come — Dressed to work and support us in the ‘Come and try it’ session and cheer the NDT on.
Please contact the Office if you would like details of the two days programme.
8 1989/90 QT PROGRAMME
The programme for next season will be compiled in June.
Please send requests to  in good time.
The trainers would be grateful for any feedback about QT Days.
Do you enjoy them?
If not why not?
Comments please to  by the end of May.
9 PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPETITION
Details will be in the May issue of Medau News.
It has a threefold purpose
i
To get good action shots for publicity use
ii
To create wider appreciation of the beauty of Medau movement
iii
To generate more interest in our work by getting it talked about
You may enter either Black & White or Colour with prints minimum size 8″ × 6″ — featuring 1, 2 or 3 figures — or a group taking care with the back ground and ensuring good movement.
Please encourage photographers to come to your classes.
10 REUNION AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE SATURDAY 25 NOVEMBER ‘89
will be co-ordinating the event and would appreciate all offers of help (if only for short periods during the day) Offers of display items to  as soon as possible please.
11 FUND RAISING
After Easter the Society will become a ‘Party Plan’ agent for Alison Bell Leisurewear — we hope to tie in with your  coffee mornings and social events where people can see and try on the range before ordering.
Opportunities to show videos, with publicity and membership drives would be welcome and the leisurewear could be the ‘carrot’ to attract newer class members and friends.
There will be a discount for Society members and one can join on the spot.
Details from  .
Please do carry on running your own events to help the Society.
12 ENGLISH COURSE IN COBURG — WHITSUN 1990
This course has already created interest so has therefore been confirmed.
More details will be available at the next QT Day and a list of names is being compiled in the Office.
13 MOVEMENT ACCOMPANIMENT DAY 13 MAY
This day has been cancelled due to lack of support.
14 HEALTH FOR LIFE DAY 17 JUNE
This day is definitely on Sat. 17 June from 10.30–4.00 at  Fee £10 those of you had put your name on the list and have not yet sent your fees PLEASE do so now.
There are still a few more places available if you are interested please send to the Office as soon as possible.
Tutors: and .
Aims of the Day
1
TO gain a positive attitude towards oneself, others and the world around
2
To develop a sense of responsibility for ones own health and wellbeing — including our plant earth
3
To find out what is meant by ‘wellness’ as opposed to freedom from illhealth
Programme includes sessions on diet, exercise, alternative medicine/therapy. positive thinking/stress, massage, music, sotai and wellness.
15 MEDAU RHYTHMIC MOVEMENT by 
PLEASE check that your local library has a copy and take it ‘out’ to show continuing interest.
Request they buy a copy if they do not have one!
Please also have a sales splurge on MRM's Cook Books and the Music Book — many new people in your class will not know about them!
16 LOCAL PUBLICITY
Some feedback on the response from local Recreation Officers would be appreciated — we had immediate success in two known cases but no other developments have been reported.
Does this mean you FORGOT!?
If so please do it now so that we can have static or physical displays in every area to publicise Medau and YOUR class/es.
You do not have to be involved after the initial contact unless you want to be.
17 TEACHER NEEDED
A teacher is needed to take over a long standing recreational class at  in September.
Mondays 2.15–3.45.
Details from .
19 DATE OF NEXT QT DAY
Please note that the autumn QT Day has been brought forward to September to coincide with the beginning of the Academic Year Date:— 23 September 1989 —
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Gives notice of the
37th ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
to be held at


From 12 noon on Saturday 1st April 1989
The business meeting will begin at noon with a glass of wine/fruit juice
A buffet lunch will be served from 1 p.m. at a cost of £4.50
Please complete the tear-off slip and return to the Office at Epsom by 20th March 1989
Please complete as applicable and return to:—
I am resident at the Easter Course and shall be attending the A.G.M.
I shall be attending the A.G.M. and enclose £4.50 for lunch
I shall be attending the A.G.M. only
I shall not be attending the A.G.M.
SIGNED
Please make your cheque payable to ‘Medau Society’
MEDAU SOCIETY MEMBERSHIP
WHAT DOES THE SOCIETY DO?
Links together all the people interested in Medau Rhythmic Movement
Organises courses to train new teachers
Runs further training courses for qualified teachers all over the country
Promotes weekend and holiday courses and area rallies
Holds an Annual Reunion
WHAT WOULD YOU GAIN FROM JOINING?
The satisfaction of belonging to a worthwhile organisation and helping to promote the development of Medau work
Two issues of Medau News, the Annual Report and other relevant literature
Reduced fees at events promoted by the Society
The right to elect members on to the Executive Committee and to vote at the Annual General Meeting
HOW CAN YOU JOIN!
Complete the attached form and either send it together with your fee to: or hand it to your class secretary.
HOW MUCH DOES IT COST?
£1.80 
Medau MARDLE ISSUE 4
HAPPY ATMOSPHERE!
SUPER COURSE!
GOOD FOOD & ACCOMMODATION!
MARVELLOUS MOVEMENT SESSIONS!
FRIENDLY STAFF!
SO MUCH LAUGHTER & FUN!
Just a few of the many comments received from those who attended the very successful Easter Course, held for the first tile at Norwich City College.
Some sixty-three residents and thirty-seven day people enjoyed the very lively and varied sessions tutored by  and  — both from Surrey — and still found energy for dancing in the evenings.
At the party on Saturday evening, the many other talents of Medau enthusiasts came to the fore, revealing vocalists, story tellers, tap dancers, can-can girls etc., etc!
We were very pleased and honoured to receive a visit from the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress, both of whom displayed a keen interest in our work and were even inveigled, by , into performing with the ‘Dopple Kloppers’, being taught at that session!
All in all, it was a happy and stimulating Course and as one resident put it ‘looking forward to the next time in ‘bootiful’ Norfolk!
CONGRATULATIONS
to  and  on successfully passing the Medau Teachers' Examination.
We, in Norfolk, are exceptionally proud that their determined effort and hard work has enabled both to pass the exam in only eighteen months of training.
WELL DONE — AND 
CAN YOU BE A MEDAU TEACHER?
As newly qualified teachers ourselves, and I can recommend it as stimulating rewarding and fun!
We have had eighteen months of movement training, anatomy, theoretical subjects and music — and yes the piano can be mastered surprisingly quickly!
There is an Introductory Workshop to be held in London on Saturday, 9th July ‘88, so why not go and see for yourselves what Medau Teacher Training would involve.
If you are interested, have a talk with your teacher, or phone  on  or me,, on  and we'll tell you all about it.
We really do need you to Keep Medau Alive in Norfolk.
JUMBLE SALE — SATURDAY, 2nd JULY ‘88
A jumble sale is to be held at  on Sat. 2nd July ‘88.
The money raised will help promote Medau in Norfolk, will assist the further training of teachers locally and will help provide financial assistance to student teachers, in training.
Please support us by providing bric-a-brac, clothes, unwanted but saleable articles, etc.
If you can offer any practical help on the day, please ring  on .
, member of Holt morning class, was congratulated on being sworn in as a Magistrate at Norwich on January 19th.
She lives at Sheringham.
EATON class members presented  with flowers and a garden token to celebrate the occasion of her 80th birthday.
Gardening is another of  's active hobbies.
1-A-M
Institute of Advanced Motorists
Having been on a test drive with an observer at a Road Safety Day, I found my driving was in need of an overhaul.
I joined the local branch of the I.A.M. and waited for an observer.
— I was fortunate in having a traffic control police sergeant from Halesworth.
I duly arrived for my first drive.
(All observers give their time voluntarily as the more safe drivers there are, the safer we all are).
I found I was expected to make progress, entailing fast driving within the speed limits on all roads.
After two sessions, I really began to enjoy driving the I.A.M. way.
I was expected to double de-clutch, better for the gear box, and to talk my way through signs and observations.
After six sessions I was ready for the test, driving from Eaton Park, on all types of roads, sticking  religiously to speed limits and observing as I drove.
After an enjoyable 45 minutes, I was told I had passed.
Now I can sport an I.A.M. badge on the car!
MEDAU AND ME.
M is for Medau and Molly so bright
E is for Exercise — let's get it right
D is for depression — now melted away
(Tuesdays, come quickly, for my Medau day)
A for a cuppa — we all need a rest
U is for US — We'll all do our best.
Yes we'll all do our best — we're in Molly's team
And hope on the day it will go like a dream.
Perhaps with ‘two left feet’ I should never have volunteered to take part in the display, but  kept saying ‘it's coming, it's coming’.
But seriously speaking, going to Medau classes has done wonders for me.
If you have any friends suffering from depression do try to get them along to a Medau Class.
It is wonderful to lose yourself for a little while and you do meet such nice Medau people who don't mind if you can't do it quite right and nearly drop your club on their foot!
TAVERHAM AND DRAYTON class members were so engrossed in their Nautical Display,(theme suggested by ), for the Norfolk Rally, that one lady who had to back out through illness, wrote an apology to ADMIRAL  from SEAMAN !
A BIT OF NORFOLK SQUIT!
Well thas like this here.
There wus this little owe boy from Langham.
His mother wus allus sendun him down to tha willage shop.
One day she sed to him ‘go and git me sum lavertry pearper’.
Wall, the wery nex day he wus back in tha shop with the lavertry pearper tucked under his arm.
Mum sed can yer change it?
The company dint tan up!
Sent by , member of Holt afternoon class.
(gained a distinction last year at the Cromer Festival of verse speaking etc., which has a class for the Norfolk dialect.)
BRITISH HEART FOUNDATION.
Are you a knitter?
If so, will you please save the paper bands around balls of wool?
These can be put to very good use in aid of the British Heart Foundation.
B.B.C. THEME TUNES
WANTED
Second hand tapes of B.B.C. Theme Tunes.
(Not Volume 2 please).
Please ring  on .
NORFOLK TRAINING BRANCH, ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING.


WEDNESDAY, 7th SEPTEMBER ‘88.
If you are a member of the Medau Society, you will be very welcome to attend the Annual General Meeting of the Norfolk Training Branch and gain an insight into Medau affairs in Norfolk and perhaps air your views.
We meet at 7.15pm, in the Dunham Room.
FORTHCOMING EVENTS
The afternoon opens with a Medau session tutored by  followed by country dancing led by .
Tickets will be available later from W.I. .
Programme to be arranged.
Further details later.
Further details from your teacher.
Why not organise a party to go to the Reunion?.
This is always an enjoyable afternoon comprising open movement sessions, followed by regional displays.
A ROSE BY ANY OTHER NAME!!!
I have it on good authority that someone living at Hempnall became very enamoured of a stray mink she found outside her house.
After a few days its rightful owner came to collect it and informed her that it was in fact a ferret.
Nevertheless she loved it just the same but had to sadly wave it goodbye, much to the relief of her cat who took a dim view of the competition!
ROYAL NORFOLK SHOWGROUND
29th and 30th June ‘88.
A Medau publicity stand will be situated in the Norwich Sports Council marquee on both days of the Royal Norfolk Show.
COME TO Our Introductory Workshop for an In-Depth look at The Medau Method of Training and Teaching Movement at  on Sunday 9th July 1988 — 10 a.m. for 10.30 a.m.–4 p.m.
Topics will include:
The follow-up Course begins September/ October 1988
SOMETHING DIFFERENT FOR TEA, PLEASE MUM.
Have you and your family tried pasta meals?.
They make a real change.
Look out for packets of Record and Buitone products, which offer very good free Recipe Books, full of appetising ideas.
Although on Medau training days we were continually told ‘not to count’, when I asked by Medau teacher, for her FLAPJACK recipe, she said ‘remember 3: 3: 4:
that is
3oz. butter or margarine
3oz. sugar (I prefer  moist brown)
4oz. scotch oats
melt not cook, butter in a saucepan, stir in sugar and oats.
grease and flour a 7 ″ sandwich tin, pour in mixture and cook at 350 degrees, for 20 mins.
Will harden as it cools.
Delicious if spread with chocolate.
Thanks,, it has proved acceptable on many occasions.
What's green and goes red at a touch of a button?
‘Kermit in a liquidiser’.
TWO VEGETARIAN DISHES.
Stuffed Peppers
2 eggs
1 teasp. yeast extract
8ozs. finely ground mixed nuts
8ozs. chopped onion
8ozs. chopped celery
4ozs. grated cheddar cheese
½ teasp. thyme
½ teasp. marjoram
salt and ground black pepper
1 clove garlic, peeled and crushed
6 green or red peppers
sunflower oil for brushing.
Beat eggs with yeast extract.
Mix together all ingredients, including garlic.
Mix well with eggs and spoon mixture into peppers/ Brush liberally with oil and bake in pre-heated oven at 200 degrees C or 400 degrees F (gas mark 6) for 30–40 minutes.
Half a stuffed pepper makes a very good starter for a dinner party.
Brazil and Walnut Loaf.
2 large onions
oil for frying
6 ozs. breadcrumbs (fresh)
8 fluid ozs. warm water
vegetable stock cube, marmite, salt, pepper, basil and sage (or mixed Herbs)
4 ozs. brazil nuts chopped or ground
4 ozs. walnuts or hazelnuts, chopped
2 ozs. plain flour
2lb. loaf tin greased and floured
Oven.
375 degrees F or equivalent gas mark.
Chop and fry onions until soft.
Add water, stock cube, yeast extract (1 teasp) Add seasoning and half teasp. of herbs.
Add breadcrumbs, stir well, remove from heat and leave for moment.
Chop or grind nuts and add to mixture.
Add sieved flour, mix thoroughly.
Place mixture in tin and cook for 35 mins.
DID YOU KNOW THAT COOKING SALT CAN HELP YOU FEEL FIT AND WELL?
Six handfuls of salt in the bath water is especially good for ‘aches and pains’ and can make you feel fit and refreshed.
A lot of activity or exercise during very hot weather makes us lose a lot of salt through perspiration.
Replace the salt and your energy with a teasp. of salt dissolved in water and drink.
If you run out of toothpaste, dip your tooth brush in salt — it's an excellent tooth cleaner.
A saline solution is handy as a useful eye-bath or anti-septic gargle.
Use 1 oz. salt to 1 pint of boiled water.
AN OPPORTUNITY MISSED!
The entire class at DRAYTON were all laughing at once during a broomstick session in NATIONAL SMILE WEEK, GRINNING FROM EAR TO EAR.
Why, oh why, did your press reporter have not sense enough to book a photographer?
PLEASE let me know on  if you have any tit-bits for either Medau News or the local Press.
Don't blame me if you only read about Drayton and Taverham classes.
— it's your fault!
HAVE YOU A FAVOURITE RECIPE, HANDY HINT TO PASS ON TO OTHERS?
PERHAPS YOU HAVE EXPERIENCED AN AMUSING INCIDENT?
HAVE YOU ANY NEWS OR VIEWS TO EXPRESS?.
IF SO, SEND THEM TO ME,, FOR THE NEXT EDITION OF THE ‘MEDAU MARDLE’
MEMBERSHIP
FACTS AND FIGURES YOU NEED TO KNOW
IMPORTANCE OF SPORTS COUNCIL GRANT
Part of the Medau Society's submission to the Sports Council was that we increase our membership numbers, and therefore our income — if we do not achieve this it will have repercussions on our grant.
To try to explain the problems to you, the Membership Services Committee gave a 15 minute talk to QTs on Saturday 12 January, highlighting some of the problems we are likely to face if we do not increase our membership.
WHAT THE SOCIETY SPENDS MONEY ON (in round figures)
WHERE DOES THE MONEY COME FROM?
All these figures are based on the 1989 audited accounts.
The above two lists speak for themselves, but what is evident is that the smallest income is from membership and the biggest income is from the Sports Council.
Looking at the proportion of membership to Sports Council money over the last three years:
you can see that if we do not increase the membership to a bigger proportion of the Sports Council Grant, we are in trouble.
YOU have a chance to alter the top line (membership), if not you, as members, can look at the expenditure sheet and suggest where we start making cuts.
SUGGESTIONS ON HOW TO SELL MEMBERSHIP
The new leaflet (enclosed) designed to help you sell membership on YOUR CLASS, includes application form.
This is your ammunition — PLEASE fire it in the right direction!
Current subscription details should be included (more peel-off labels available shortly, or write in box).
Make comparisons with other organisations, e.g. Leisure centres £250 per annum with few facilities included; slimming beds from £250 with no other activities etc.
Teachers with private classes can make membership compulsory (as it is with many other activities) or offer a free class on enrolment.
In Adult Education you could raffle one or more memberships specifically, or pay from fundraising throughout the year.
A sheet of ideas for you to try is enclosed.
For those who find it too difficult to discuss, any member of the Membership Services Sub-Committee would be happy to come along to your class or coffee morning etc. to put the case for you — please contact .
IDEAS ON HOW TO SELL MEMBERSHIP TO CLASS MEMBERS
1.
Get them in the right frame of mind — keep atmosphere relaxed and friendly
2.
Tell them about the aims of the Medau Society, what it does for them, and for others
3.
Explain why it is so important that everyone who benefits from Medau work should demonstrate their support through membership.
In order to train new teachers and support qualified teachers with further In-Service training, we rely heavily on Grant Aid from the Sports Council, who, in turn, expect us to show a steady increase in the number of Society members.
The future of your class may depend on those people who support the Society now.
4.
Highlight what they will gain from joining:
(a)
All new members for 1991 will receive a voucher to exchange for a FREE rally ticket of their own choosing;
(b)
Three copies per year of Medau News and notification of all Medau events.
(c)
Reduced fees and priority booking for Courses, Rallies, Reunion etc.
(d)
Voting rights afforded to members
(e)
The satisfaction of knowing that their support is helping to sustain and develop Medau work.
(f)
Local events for members.
5.
Give a free class to old and new members and ask them to renew/join if they enjoyed it.
6.
Ongoing fundraising in class to pay for membership (can be administered in many ways — talk to ):
(a)
weekly raffle
(b)
collecting tin
(c)
coffee mornings/ploughman's lunches etc.
(d)
sales — bring & buy, exchange of paperback books, second hand leotards, home produce, plants etc.
(e)
social event/mini rally — possibly linking with another class in the area e.g. Cheese & Wine evening with open class or Talk and discussion on health and fitness.
(f)
private classes to make membership compulsory or include subscription in the fees
(g)
leisurewear party with Alison Bell samples to try on
7.
Group Membership for Elderly/Disabled classes:
Several teachers have arranged for their recreational classes to sponsor a specialised group, and the Membership Secretary has funds in hand to finance the membership of other specialised groups — please send in the names of all participants and the venue of the class.
THE MEDAU SOCIETY & SOUTHWARK ADULT EDUCATION
IN SERVICE TRAINING DAY FOR TEACHERS
at 
Saturday 6th July 1991
10.00am–4.00pm
TUTOR:
CALLANETICS (Morning)
An explanation of the principles of Callanetics, with discussion on the benefits and possible restrictions of the programme, followed by a practical session for direct personal experience (one hour) and rounded off with questions and, hopefully, answers.
STRESS MANAGEMENT (Afternoon)
This session will be devoted to understanding the fight and flight response and the effects of stress on our body, mind and emotions.
Topics will include: Ways of dealing with stress, how breathing is affected by stress, making ourselves more stress resistant by self observation as a whole person, and a practical relaxation session.
If time allows, exercise to aid relaxation and food as a stressor will be discussed.
Applications with £10 fee for day should reach The Medau Society, by Wednesday 26th June.
APPLICATION FOR IN SERVICE TRAINING DAY ON ‘CALLANETICS’ AND ‘STRESS MANAGEMENT’at  on Saturday 6th July 1991, 10am–4pm