

Soon the European Community will be a single market.
IN BRITAIN THERE IS NOW A WIDESPREAD DESIRE TO COMPETE EFFECTIVELY BECAUSE, AS EVERYBODY KNOWS, OUR PROSPERITY DEPENDS UPON IT.
IN FRANCE AND GERMANY THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDES LONG-TERM SUPPORT FOR INDUSTRY THROUGH TRAINING AND, MORE GENERALLY, INVESTS IN THE FUTURE THROUGH QUALITY EDUCATION.
BRITAIN DOES NOT.
IF BRITAIN CONTINUES TO REFUSE TO INVEST SUFFICIENTLY IN EDUCATION THEN INFLATION CANNOT BE BEATEN AND THE SLIDE INTO DEFICIT AND DEBT, UNEMPLOYMENT AND INSECURITY WILL CONTINUE.
TO STOP THAT SLIDE WE NEED TO GIVE THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE PRIORITY TO LONG-TERM MEASURES — AN EDUCATION AND TRAINING STRATEGY — THAT WILL INCREASE PRODUCTIVITY AND COMPETITIVE STRENGTH.
WE HAVE TO SHARE THE EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE.
WE MUST RAISE OUR STANDARDS OF TRAINING AND EDUCATION TO LEVELS THAT COMPARE WITH OUR COMPETITORS.
THE FACTS
Only 35 per cent of young people in Britain stay on in full time education and training.
In France, 66 per cent Of 16–19 year olds stay on in education.
America and the Pacific Rim countries have 80–90 per cent of their young people staying on at school beyond 16.
In Japan the figure is 90 per cent.
In the EC only Greece sends fewer of its youngsters to college or into training.
There are more students in higher education in South Korea and soon Taiwan that there are in Britain.
Nursery education is available for 44 per cent of 3–5 year olds in Britain.
In France, 95 per cent of the same age group have nursery education.
In Italy 88 per cent, in Spain it's 60 per cent , in Belgium 95 per cent .
Nearly half of Britain's workers do not have a qualification — even an ‘O’ Level or its equivalent.
6 million adults need help to improve their basic reading and writing skills.
A study in 1987 showed that 44 per cent of adults could not understand a basic fire safety notice.
27 per cent could not subtract £1.80 from £5.00.
France is spending £24 billion on education this year (1990).
It is the only budget heading they have not cut.
They have exempted it from public expenditure cuts because they see it as an investment for the future.
International tests show that attainments in Mathematics by British teenagers lag behind German and Japanese teenagers by the equivalent of two academic years.
While Britain's schools are suffering from a shortage of teachers, there is a surge of early retirements among demoralised staff.
In 1990, the DES was forced to set aside an additional £287 million to pay for pensions as so many teachers wanted to take early retirement.
Even that budgeted amount was insufficient to meet the demand from teachers wanting to leave the service.
The Government plans to increase education budgets, in real terms, by 3.2 per cent.
Inflation is 10.5 per cent.
In recent years there has been a dramatic increase in the number of people undergoing vocational training in France.
Britain cannot match the French achievement and in some subjects the number of people undergoing vocational training has declined.
A survey in 1987 found that 52 per cent of the workforce in Britain did not undertake training.
According to the Institute for Manpower Studies skills shortages affected less than 5 per cent of firms in manufacturing industries in 1982.
However, by 1986/87 the figure was 12 per cent.
By 1988 it was over 20 per cent.
In 1987 only 2 per cent of British companies planned any training for their workforce.
France today trains three times as many mechanical and electrical craftmen and technicians as Britain.
Britain does not train enough technicians with intermediate vocational qualifications, therefore it is forced to use graduates whose skills would best be deployed elsewhere.
12 per cent of all technicians in Britain are graduates.
In France, it is 3 per cent.
British companies spent as average of £2.00 per worker on training in 1984, a mere 0.13 per cent of turnover.
The average US company spent seven times as much and the Germans 14 times as much.
The average employer in Britain provides 14 hours off-the-job training each year per worker compared with 30–40 hours in Germany.
The British Government, despite widespread support for investment in, and expansion of, training, is cutting £350 million off the training budget.
BRITAIN TODAY
Latest figures published in the Treasury's Economic Progress Report show that in 1986 the UK was lagging behind in US, Germany, France and Canada in GNP per person.
The UK trade deficit with West Germany in 1979 was £1.3 billion.
In 1989 the trade deficit was £8.9 billion.
In 1978, UK inflation was 8.3 per cent, the same as the EC average.
Now it is 10.5 per cent compared with 3.4 per cent in the EC as a whole.
Prices increased by 120 per cent from May 1979 to February 1990 compared with 37 per cent in Germany.
Britain produces fewer cars than Spain, fewer ships than Denmark, fewer manufactured goods than France, than Italy or Brazil.
In 1990, so far, Britain has imported:
more than a million cars
2 million TVs and videos
3 million computer
SPEAKING FOR THEMSELVES
‘The crisis in British education is not as bad as it is portrayed.
It is worse.’
‘Britain is under-educated, under-trained and under-qualified.’
The Confederation of British Industry.:
‘Human history becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe.’
‘Do we as a nation compete in the hi-technology, high value-added, high wage end of the industrial spectrum?
Or, do we slide into a low technology, low value-added, low-wage economy?
That is really no choice at all; but the implications are clear.’
‘The reason why so many of Britain's 16 year olds continue to grasp regular jobs, when they are available, are not only because they prefer immediate earning to studying or training, though the pay is usually a distinct attraction.
The plain fact is that if most 16 year olds turn down full-time employment they merely reduce their chances of being in jobs two years on.’
From a study of 16-19 year olds in four British towns.
‘What are Britain's 16 year olds learning?’
‘Huge contributions from parents are saving schools from a complete breakdown.’
‘…left to itself the market will function in such a way as to cause great harm to the interests of young people, companies and taxpayers alike.’
‘Britain's less adaptable, less skilled work-force is one of the reasons it has got stuck trying to compete with the high volume, low-wage countries.’
The Economist.
‘A national scandal.’
leader of Britain's private schools on the low levels of funding of state schools.
We note the manifest failure of the Baker Education reforms to improve standards of living.’
A motion to the Conservative Party Conference.
Bournemouth 
‘A raw deal.’
Senior Chief Inspector of Schools,, on children's education..
.
Chancellor of the Exchequer failing to mention training once in his speech on government expenditure plans to the House of Commons.
‘One of the most long-standing problems in this country is our failure to prepare our school-leavers adequately for work.’.
BRITAIN — LEFT BEHIND IN EUROPE
The British people are very much aware that we are behind in Europe.
Labour believes schooling should be brought up to levels seen elsewhere in Europe.
We believe languages should be a much more integral part of schooling at all levels.
Labour will ensure Britain plays an active role in Europe.
Three quarters of British people believe the quality of the nation's education is declining.
76 per cent of voters are also considerably worried that the British system of education is falling behind that of other countries, according to an opinion poll published in November 1990.
Britain's regulation to the bottom of the class was ‘damaging the economy in the long-term’, they believed.
Nearly two-thirds say that from what they know of other European countries education is better managed in countries such as France and Germany.
A mere 8 per cent think British schools are superior.
It's clear.
Britain lags behind the rest of Europe.
OUR POTENTIAL REMAINS UNTAPPED
Investment in education and training — the ‘commanding heights’ of a modern economy — is crucial to Britain's long term success.
Labour's objectives in education and training are ambitious: we want a skills revolution in Britain.
We want to make British people the best educated and trained in Europe.
Investment in education promotes economic growth but Britain has failed to use the opportunities offered by oil to prepare its economy for the challenges it now has to meet.
Only intervention and investment in education and training to promote the  nation's science base and to enhance technology can reverse Britain's decline.
The North Sea Oil bonanza — money that should have been spent encouraging and harnessing the potential of young people to live in a new, modern world — was instead squandered paying them to stay on the dole and to stay away from schools, colleges and training.
In eleven years to 1990 there was no coherent national programme of education and training.
As a result Britain is weakened by skills shortages and the potential of millions of under-educated people remains untapped and unfulfilled — wasted.
People understand — on an abstract level — that education and training are important.
Yet, the opportunities that can flow from education and training, can also be personally liberating.
Education promotes not only economic growth but social justice too, and allows people to develop their talents to the full.
A modern economy will only flourish by using the skills of the majority.
But during the last decade the challenge of achieving expanding opportunities for the many has been ignored — instead, the priority has been to bring benefits only to the few.
GOVERNMENT OFFERS PUPILS A RAW DEAL
Far sighted.
Governments throughout the world are investing more in education and training.
Labour wants Britain to have the best education and training system in Europe.
We want children to fulfil their potential.
Every child has a right to the best education and every parent should be confident that their child gets the best start in life.
The Government's emphasis has been on changes to the way the education system is run.
In other words, reorganisation.
The shake-up to the system — the city technology colleges, the opt- out schools, assisted places, the creation of markets in education, the pecking order and competition — has not improved education.
It has made teachers and parents punch-drunk and over-burdened.
The changes have not worked.
The problems have got worse.
More than half the public — 57 per cent— disapprove of the changes now being implemented in schools.
Meanwhile, the children in the schools suffer.
Pupil are getting a ‘raw deal’ according to the Senior Chief Inspector of Schools.
Huge contributions from parents are saving school from a complete breakdown, according to an investigation by the Mail on Sunday.
Recently, the Schools Inspectors reported that half the nation's schools are in urgent need of physical improvement.
The shoddy state of schools sums it up: Britain is getting left behind.
TRAPPED IN A LOW-SKILLS CYCLE
Labour believes training is vital to the national interest if we are to produce competitive goods and services that will bring success to the new Europe.
Training is also the key to unlocking the vast, untapped potential of individual women and men.
The Conservative Government does not believe in the need for a broadly educated workforce.
It believes that nation's wealth will be increased through the vision of a few entrepreneurs.
Wrong.
If the British economy of the future is going to be competitive, we need to spread to the major of all people the skills now enjoyed only by the minority.
Without a well-trained workforce Britain will find it increasingly difficult to match the productivity and income growth of other countries.
The facts speak for themselves.
Our educational decline means that the bottom 40% of the ability range of school pupils receive much less benefit from 11 years of education than their counterparts in such countries as Germany.
To compete, we need to send as many youngsters into colleges of higher education as they do in Japan and the United States.
Yet in the 1980s Britain missed its chance to reach for those targets.
We needed to leap into the advanced education of the future.
Instead, we are trapped in a cycle of a low skilled workforce being supervised by poorly-trained managers, producing low quality goods and services.
Instead of responding to the challenge, the Government has stifled the demand for improvements in skill levels.
No other European country has such a large proportion of its workforce without any qualifications at all.
Britain has higher proportions of untrained workers than any of our international rivals.
60% of German manufacturing workers have at least intermediate qualifications.
Less than 30% are similarly qualified in the UK.
THE SKILLS GAP
In a modern economy, every individual in every organisation needs to be involved in lifetime education and training.
Skills shortages can be seen daily where we live and work:
There are not enough teachers in our schools.
British firms are forced to recruit graduates from abroad.
The Channel Tunnel is being built by engineers from Egypt and Hong Kong.
Our apprentices regularly leave Britain for training because they cannot obtain it here.
Once Britain was lauded for its education system.
The best primary schools in the world.
The very highest standards in our colleges.
Graduates in demand across the globe.
Now, we are at the bottom of the league.
In every area of skills training Britain lags behind.
Bottom in the educational achievements of the broad group of society.
Bottom in provision for youth training.
Bottom when it comes to providing specialised higher level skills training.
Bottom in developing our managers.
After 11 years our workforce remains inadequate, blighted and above all, neglected.
YEARS OF NEGLECT
Labour wants more opportunities in education.
We also want to ensure that we get more from the resources we invest.
Neglect of the educational needs of people starts at the very beginning.
In nursery schools, or rather, the lack of them.
88% of 3–5 year-olds in Italy have nursery education available to them.
95% in France.
60% in Spain.
In Britain, despite a promise from a Conservative Government of nursery education for all, it is only available for 44% of 3–5 year-olds.
And parents know the general quality and provision, despite the efforts of many, is low and poor.
The demise of quality education, once the jewel in Britain's crown, has been a feature of the three Conservative administrations since 1979.
We now spend less of our national income on education and science than we did in 1979.
Its share of GNP has fallen from 4.5% to 3.9%.
If they had maintained the commitment of the last Labour Government — 5.5% of GNP — British education would have been £3.6 billion better off this year.
France is currently spending £24 billion on its education budget.
At over a 9% increase on the previous year, the education budget is bigger than the defence budget.
But in the UK spending on education is being cut in real terms.
In Britain, in November 1990, inflation was running at 10.5 per cent.
However, the funding in real terms of education projected for 1990 –91, means an increase of only 3.2 per cent.
Between 1979–1988, the amount of central Government spent on schools was cut by 17 per cent or £790 million.
Capital spending on schools has been cut by £190 million or 32 per cent since 1979.
And yet at least £4 billion is needed to bring school buildings up to adequate standards.
UNDERMINING SCHOOLS
Creating a dynamic economy depends upon improving our education.
Labour believes parents, teachers and pupils all want more effective schools.
Employers also need them in order to compete internationally.
Despite the pre-eminence of information technology in assisting Britain to improve its economy, the allocation of funds for information technology was only £10 million in 1989 — for all the nation's schools.
In schools, more books and other basic materials are needed.
Private schools spend on average £56 per pupil per year on equipment.
In state schools only £38 per pupil is spend in secondary schools and £25 in primaries.
Total secondary school spending in Britain per pupil is 7 per cent lower than America and 12 per cent lower than in France.
Teacher vacancies in schools have increased by 26 per cent during 1990.
Teachers and their employers claim that Britain is 10,000 teachers short.
The new national curriculum is threatened by a shortage of Maths, Science and Language teachers, according to the Chief Inspector of Schools.
2.4 per cent of all teaching posts were vacant in September 1990.
This is not an acceptable turnover.
It means one in four schools do not have a full staff.
In other words, the education of 250,000 pupils is being severely disrupted.
Bad today, the situation will get worse when in a few years the number of potential recruits begins to decline.
The Government admit that, by 1995, at least 1,000 Maths teachers, 1,300 teachers of Chemistry, 2,500 language teachers and 6,000 technology teachers will be missing from the total needs.
Unlike other countries in Europe, teachers' pay and status in Britain is not high and the support and assistance they receive is minimal compared to counterparts in Germany and France.
That's why when schools are suffering a shortage of teachers, there is a surge of early retirements among staff.
Between 1987/88 and 1989/90 the numbers of teachers taking early retirement rose from 7,574 to 12,343.
In March, 1989, 40,000 teachers under statutory retirement age were receiving pensions.
UNDER-TRAINED, UNDER-QUALIFIED
Everyone knows that Britain gives its young people less education and training than the industrial countries with whom we compete.
Labour wants the British people to be the best qualified and best trained people in Europe.
The neglect of education means British school leavers are not only younger but much less qualified than those of our major competitors.
53 per cent of school leavers leave at the earliest opportunity — 16.
Post-compulsory schooling in Britain does not have a nationally-agreed set of vocational qualifications.
In Germany, 600,000 young people a year entering training.
They complete a three-year programme that leads to a nationally recognised qualification.
Three times as many technicians, builders and electricians are trained in Germany as in Britain.
In Germany, retail shop workers have nationally recognised training programmes.
Current British Government inspired reforms of vocational training have been described by one expert as leading to the creation of a ‘certified semi-literature under class.’
A ‘TRAINING GHETTO'
Labour will replace the YTS with a new training guarantee — a traineeship lasting up to four years and leading to qualifications recognised throughout Britain and the rest of Europe.
The Youth Training Scheme (YTS) has failed to generate a qualified workforce among the young.
The YTS caters for two-thirds of 16 and 17 year-olds and despite the best intention of trainers, is viewed with suspicion by many young people.
The wider public regard the programme as a ‘training ghetto.’
In 1986, the YTS became a two-year course but the number of people obtaining basic craft qualifications has still fallen.
In 1975, 15,600 passed City and Guilds Course 200 (part 1 level).
In 1985 only 8,000 did.
In 1975, 22,000 obtained Engineering Training Board Basic Training Certification.
In 1988 only 8,000 did.
A report by the National Institute for Economic Research found that in France two-thirds of shop floor workers held an appropriate intermediate qualification (CAP) or higher.
In British firms one in six had the nearest equivalent qualification.
Between 1986–88 more than 76 per cent of YTS trainees received no qualification.
The two-year period of the YTS differs in comparison with our European competitors.
In Germany, in order to develop the higher skills needed by many occupations, the majority of manual and non-manual training courses last three years.
And the German trainers — the Meister — have higher qualifications than their British colleagues.
The gross cost per trainee in Britain has been cut by 10 per cent since 1985.
The Government plan a further cut of 6 per cent by 1991.
In cash terms, the Government invests £206 per trainee per month.
In France, in 1987, one in four workers were receiving training.
French companies on average in 1987 spent 2.54 per cent of net salary costs, a total of 28.6 billion francs on training.
In 1989, a third of the British workforce have had no training whatsoever at any stage of their working lives.
German employers spend about three times as much on training as their British counterparts.
British firms spend 0.13 per cent of their turnover on training.
In France, Germany and Japan, the figure is two per cent.
GRADUATES: AVOIDING WASTE
A Labour Government will seek to double the numbers of those benefiting from higher education over the next 20 years.
Graduates are crucial to Britain's economic future.
In 1990, both Britain and Japan had around 200,000 graduate engineers.
Now Japan has a million more than Britain — and 150,000 new engineering graduates a year.
The Japanese output of engineering graduates per head of the population is about two and a half that of Britain.
French and German graduates are asked to use their skills in more appropriate ways than British graduates.
In Britain, the ‘drag-down’ factor operates; graduates make up for a shortage of technicians with intermediate skills.
A third of British graduates are employed permanently in semi-skilled work.
MANAGERS MUST BE BETTER INFORMED
Labour will work with industry to make management training a priority.
British supervisors and managers are less qualified, more poorly trained, less well informed of training and its importance than French and German managers.
They also get fewer opportunities to train, re-train and learn management skills, once they are in post.
Only 24 per cent of managers according to the London Business School have qualifications up to‘A’ level.
Only 12 per cent of British managers have a first degree.
We have fewer graduate managers than France or Germany — less than half the graduate management complement of France.
, the Shadow Employment Secretary, argues Britain suffers from ‘low-skill’ management that is the cultural norm.
The battle is one against ‘entrenched amateurism’.
IN THE 1990S THE TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTION AND THE ADVANCE IN OUR COUNTRY'S FORTUNES DEPENDS UPON A SKILLS REVOLUTION.
WE WANT TO EMPOWER BRITAIN.
WE WANT TO ENABLE OUR PEOPLE TO FULFIL THEIR POTENTIAL.
BRITAIN MUST BECOME THE CAPABLE COUNTRY OF EUROPE.
ACCESS TO TRAINING FOR ALL OUR WORKING LIFE
The right to training (vocational, technical and professional education) is recognised in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The International Covenant on Economic and Social Affairs, signed by the United Kingdom, imposes legally binding obligations on contracting parties to provide training.
The European Social Charter requires Member States to provide or promote, as necessary, technical and vocational training for all people.
The Community Social Charter declares that workers must be able to have access to training throughout their working lives.
The British Government has not signed the Charter.
Eleven out of twelve member states have.
The Government rejected the concept of a right to access to training.
They believe in the limited aim of facilitating access to training.
But this should not be done by measures which add to employment costs, they argue.
Such measures place unnecessary and bureaucratic regulations on employers they claim.
Labour believes employees have rights.
We believe training is an investment not a burden.
TRAINING: A CHARTER FOR QUALITY
In a modern economy, every individual in every organisation needs to be involved in lifetime education and training.
Labour is determined to create a ‘skills-culture’ in which everyone is entitled to go on learning throughout their working life.
Employers and employees need certain rights.
The right of employers and employees to know the Government's national training requirements for the future.
The right of employers and employees to be aware of clear objectives and detailed targets for training performance.
The right of all to have access to a national system of vocational qualifications and standards.
The right to an individual record of achievement for all young people.
The right of access to the information needed to allow individuals to make informed training and career choices.
The right of employers and employees to have the quality of training monitored and evaluated.
The right of all to improved access to training, including policies designed to ensure equal opportunities.
The right of women to have access to training, particularly returners to the Labour market.
The right of employees in small business to have access to improved training.
The right to adequate financial support for trainees.
BRITAIN: A CAPABLE COUNTRY
LABOUR WILL IMPLEMENT THE MOST RADICAL TRAINING PROGRAMME EVER DEVISED FOR BRITAIN.
OUR TRAINING REVOLUTION WILL BE BUILT UPON:
A NEW NATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR TRAINING, DELIVERED LOCALLY IN EACH COMMUNITY, WITH THE OBJECTIVE OF ENSURING THAT IN THE MID-1990S EVERY COMPANY, LARGE OR SMALL, INVESTS IN THE FUTURE  THROUGH TRAINING.
A NEW COMPREHENSIVE SYSTEM OF VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS COVERING EVERY AREA OF WORK — QUALIFICATIONS OF QUALITY AND EXCELLENCE RECOGNISED BY ALL.
A NATIONAL TARGET FOR THE UPGRADING OF OUR SKILLS AGREED IN CONSULTATION WITH BOTH SIDES OF INDUSTRY AND THOSE THAT TRAIN, PUBLISHED YEARLY.
THE AGREEMENT OF SECTOR-BY-SECTOR INITIATIVES ACROSS THE WHOLE OF BRITISH INDUSTRY.
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE, A NEW ENTITLEMENT TO TRAIN FOR A PERIOD OF UP TO FOUR YEARS, WITH A QUALIFICATION AT THE END OF IT COMPARABLE TO THE ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENTS OF THOSE WHO HAVE STAYED AT SCHOOL.
OUR AIM IS TO SECURE LIFETIME TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL ADULTS WHETHER IN WORK OR UNEMPLOYMENT.