

Dear Mr. Brown,
I enclose an entry for your ‘Food & Drink’ competition, plus a small donation to your funds.
Four crossword puzzle addicts with assorted academic degrees (including a professor of modern languages!) are decidedly miffed at their inability to find a plausible solution to question 2, so I have written in what came first to my mind.
If you can be bothered, when the competition is over, to write the correct answer on the enclosed p.c. and pop it in the post, I shall be very grateful.
I hope the restoration fund goes well.
Yours sincerely
Peggy 
I have been invited to comment on the enclosed document.
No comment, I think.
We didn't tell you that Callum Campbell, across the road, died suddenly last Thursday from a heart attack.
The middle son, Nigel, had to be recalled from holiday in Ireland.
We are very sad for them — funeral on Tuesday.
I am reading an extraordinary book about a man who was ‘given away’ by his mother at 2 weeks old, and managed to find her again in his thirties.
In the last chapter he described the birth of his son.
Funny & moving.
You would both like it.
Bob is off to a Healing Service.
I shall now seal the envelope.
Bless you (natural, not supernatural blessings!)
All three — Much love, Mum.
To Steff & Jeff
Weren't we slow?
The eye is good beyond expectation.
Hope all goes well with you.
Many thanks, Gloria.
I found the article very interesting, & I was glad to be reminded of the pictures.
I think I understand a little better what Hockney is getting at with his ‘reverse perspective’, though that seems a perverse way of describing (I think) an immersion in his subject matter.
The comparison between Watteau & Picasso was illuminating, and I was quite surprised that he admired the Watteau, though I suppose it could be a case of one manneristic painter admiring another?
(I begin to feel it is awfully easy to talk out of ignorance & still sound not unlike Berger et al…)
I hope all your plans go forward without a hitch.
Best wishes
Dear Sir
Your ref AGG/LJH, 1st March
Please will you supply me with the following:—
Should the feed bars be kept in a refrigerator or freezer?
My Visa number is  expiry date 09/94.
With thanks  
Dear 
Thank you for your letter.
I'm sorry you have had so much trouble contacting us — blame the wonderful Indian summer we are having.
I enclose a cheque for £25 made out to Covenant House, since our Charities Aid Vouchers aren't going to work for Bruce Harris.
If this is suitable, and since you have kindly agreed to pass it on, we don't need any receipt or acknowledgement, but, sadly, I think we should come off the mailing list.
No doubt we shall hear about the street children from Amnesty & other sources from time to time.
With thanks & every good wish —
Dear Joan
We were pleased to have your Easter card, and hope that the year continued as well as it seems to have begun.
We have had a good year with minor upsets, such as a cataract operation for me which was no trouble at all, and has resulted in a dramatic improvement in my eyesight.
Both Richard and Rob seem to be jogging along quite nicely.
Richard has installed an organ in his living room, which we had an opportunity to hear when we stayed with him in August.
I think it has a very good sound and is well worth the room it takes up (2 manuals and pedals, but no pipes as it is electronically voiced).
It pleases me because I was afraid music was being pushed out by computers — and I was chuffed to find that I could still ‘work’ the pedals after more than 50 years!
The neighbours are mostly spared, as he practices with earphones, and no sound emerges.
Very civilised.
Ewan is walking well but not talking.
He is an engaging young man and delights Rob by showing a marked and discriminating interest in any musical instrument he gets hold of.
The three of them are spending Christmas with us, which will be lovely, but no doubt a bit fraught, as one highly active child will be joined by one ditto kitten, who thinks nothing of leaping on to your lap at mealtimes, digging her claws into your legs for support.
Her mistress having died, she adopted us, not we her, about 5 weeks ago, and though our old cat finds her a bit of a trial he does seem somewhat rejuvenated by her presence.
This is more than the note I intended.
I hope 1994 will bring you all sorts of good things.
Dear Mary,
Thank you for the lovely long letter, and for the Amnesty card.
The children do well, don't they?
Yes, it was silly of me to forget that you had been to Scotland often — one of those mental slips which I am increasingly prone to.
I must say, that when you live here as opposed to visiting, the apparent lack of walks — and I agree that this is so — vanishes.
We are blessed with any number of possibilities, especially if we take the car less than five miles, and are still finding new ones, to our great delight.
We can't really complain of being immediately affected by all the building, and we can still see Oban Bay and the ferries coming and going (at a distance, it's true), but it's a bit of a shock to find a major extension to Oban on our doorstep, more or less.
I think you will have to treat yourselves to one of those records (or, I suppose, tapes) that provide you with an orchestral piece minus one instrument — for instance, I believe you could obtain a Beethoven concerto minus the piano part, which you then supply.
Seriously, I am sorry to hear about your duetting partner.
Bob and I are progressing as a piano/clarsach duo, and of course some of the  accompaniments to his songs tax me to the limit, or have to be vetoed altogether.
What I find tiresome is when a simple vocal line is set to a hair-raising accomp (no!
I just can't spell that word).
No prizes for guessing that Brahms is a major culprit.
I seem to remember finding Pirandello quite beyond me, but I am glad you continue with the Literature class.
I have just read my first Smollett —‘The expedition of Humphrey Clinker’, and found it most entertaining, as well as throwing quite a different light on the eighteenth century.
It had never occurred to me how smelly the Bath Assembly Rooms probably were, for instance.
At the moment I am deep in Bertrand Russell's ‘History of Western Philosophy’.
He is such a lucid writer — and although he defends himself ably against the charge of superficiality (which has been levelled since I was a student) the breadth of his scholarship is so immense that the defence seems unnecessary.
You sound poised for a pleasant Christmas, which is nice.
We are looking forward to having Rob, Joyce, and Ewan, though I foresee problems with Gemma.
Did I tell you about her?
She is a small cat or kitten whose mistress, we are told, died.
After living rough for some time she decided that we offered the best chance of a home, and moved  in Fizzy's attitude is ambivalent.
Now Joyce likes cats, but is alarmed by small animals which move fast and appear unexpectedly (this is how she described the mouse which recently terrorised her).
If that isn't a description of Gemma I have yet to find a better.
As for Ewan, he will probably be vastly amused until those sharp claws get in the way.
Not that she is a vicious cat: quite the contrary, but claws are meant for holding on, aren't they?
Bob has done some really good drawings lately.
Even the figure-drawing class,(which seems to me the dreaded end, and the model hasn't even got a beautiful figure) has produced at least one lovely charcoal drawing.
For a Christmas letter, this has gone beyond bounds.
Dear Rose and Sonia,
It was nice to have your letter, and I'm glad the holiday was a success.
I should think you both deserved a restful time.
By now you'll have got well used to your new job, I expect.
It sounds fairly taxing, with being on night call, but I'm sure you'll make a success of it, and hope it brings you a lot of satisfaction.
I wonder if you miss the hairdressing at all?
I suppose it means  meeting fewer people and in that way is a loss to you, but  if you get on well with your lady that could be even better, and it is good that you have weekends free.
I hope Sonia has now passed her test.
I think I would be happy to be driven by her, which ism ore that I feel about some, these days.
I seem to be more nervous in that way than I once was.
My own driving has become a pleasure again since a cataract in my right eye was dealt with.
Ewan and his parents are coming for Christmas and we are looking forward to that.
We saw them in Glasgow recently, and were the proudest of grandparents when Ewan consented to come for a walk with the two of us.
He is surprisingly slow to begin talking, but a good walker, and we were able to take him to the canal where there were ducks, swans, horses and icy puddles to interest him, so that was fine.
The timer on my cooker has just begun to bleep, so I'd better go and attend to the dinner.
I've had one or two burned pans lately, and that goes against the grain.
Have a lovely Christmas, and I hope the New Year will be very happy for you both.
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:—
I enclose a Christmas card for Wilson Efren Ruiz, although we have not yet heard whether he received the greetings and small gift which we sent last Christmas.
What concerns us more is that a letter written by Wilson's aunt in August 1992 informed us that Wilson's mother was having an operation on her throat, and that her situation was ‘very bad’.
We are naturally concerned about this, and would welcome some information, which, indeed, I have already requested (in vain).
Yours sincerely
My dear Ruth,
Thank you for your letter.
You wrote on a dreadful wet day, and I feel very smug in saying that we have had very little rain for about 2 months now.
This is the most splendid autumn we have had here, and I wish you could have enjoyed it with us.
Still, at this very moment (I have belatedly realised) you must be enjoying your cruise.
I was surprised to hear you have a fear of drowning, but I don't expect that is bothering you on a big ship.
I hope not, anyway.
Myself, I find enclosed spaces far more alarming, and, oddly, tend to get increasingly uncomfortable in over-large  department stores.
We shall look forward to hearing about your trip.
Bob was wondering whether you got his letter thanking you for the book.
I think the address was suspect, though I cannot now remember how.
When I read it, I was at first very put off, but I'm glad I persevered, as in the end I was quite charmed, and thought it contained some very shrewd observations, too.
I'm sorry we have nothing to offer on the subject of hums.
As I think I said, such noises as I have experienced have eventually found explanations.
However, I do hope your hum will vanish when you get home, as I know how trying a continual buzz can be, depending a bit, I find, on the pitch.
It's all very well increasing my  legibility by means of this machine, but it has it's drawbacks.
I have just wiped out a whole line by carelessly resting my finger on a key, and earlier it kept telling me ‘mistake’— not, of course, helpfully saying what the mistake was.
I had to call upon Bob's expertise.
Now some rolls I put in the oven for dinner have burned!
I had better go.
Dear Dorothy,
Thank you for your letter.
I didn't realise how long it was since I got it.
Time goes faster and faster — do you find that?
It is a shame that you haven't been having the gorgeous autumn which we have enjoyed.
Indeed, are still enjoying.
Today is calm and sunny, and all the Autumn colours are still much in evidence.
Your rowan has surpassed itself, and though the pretty pink berries have now been eaten by the birds, the leaves are a lovely mixture of typical autumn shades.
Our walks have been outstandingly enjoyable, and yesterday we walked on the estate which you and Bob pained when we went to the Crinan Canal.
There were a number of holiday cottages there, and we were so taken by their outlook that we talked about taking one for Christmas, but this morning saner counsels prevailed.
After all, I imagine that the chances of suitable weather at that time are less than 50/50, and it could be miserable.
Wherever we are, we are hoping that Rob and Joyce will spend some time with us.
Ewan will enjoy it this year.
I am reading Michael Tippett's autobiography (which he calls ‘Twentieth Century Blues’).
There seems to be a lot about his dreams.
Strange man!
Not only is the new hospital looking almost finished (though I expect there is a year's work to do on the inside), but site preparation is continuing way up the glen.
This consists in part of literally ‘moving mountains’ in order to fill up the water meadow.
I had rather hoped that the legendary West Highland dilatoriness would have prevented anything much happening for years, but instead the scheme is going ahead fast.
Nothing exciting has happened here, which is perhaps a good thing.
I hope you and Cyril are well and enjoying life.
This way my ‘writing’ is as clear as yours.
Dear Roger
I am sure you would be amused if you could see me struggling to do such a basic ‘computer thing’ as merely use it as a word processor!
No new tricks from this old dog, I fear.
It was lovely to hear from you and know that you were happily settled.
Thank you for writing.
Your accommodation sounds most luxurious for a student, and I hope that you get your piano installed, no matter with whom you have lessons.
Ignorant me only knows of a Paris ‘Conservatoire’, but I presume there must be such an august institution nearer to hand (and foot).
Have you got your bike with you?
When I was at London-evacuated-to-Cambridge I went everywhere by sit-up-and-beg-bike (no gears), even when it meant cycling in ruts in the snow left by cars (tricky).
I shouldn't worry too much about your reading list and full timetable.
You'll cope.
Of course we'll look you up if ever we're within hailing distance, and no doubt you'll do the same.
We have had a beautiful autumn, with lots of walks in a countryside really ablaze with colour.
Bob has even been able to sketch outdoors a couple of times.
He has embarked on a drawing/painting course which seems to be about as full and hectic as yours, but then both your chosen activities are a mystery to me.
It seems to be time to get dinner, so I will leave some space for Grandad.
Dear Mary,
You haven't ‘become a poor correspondent’ at all, and I very much enjoyed your last letter, thankyou.
As usual I am amazed by your energy, especially all the travelling you do.
It was a pity Mollie had a day in hospital whilst you were in Scotland, but I am glad the holiday was a success otherwise — I do wanted you to like Scotland.
Incidentally, Bob and I have been involved in some hospital visiting lately, and were surprised to find that more than half the patients in the ward had been taken ill on holiday, and consequently felt doubly cut off.
You will understand, I'm sure, when I say that I hope Jessie has found peace by now, and is no longer a drain on you.
Bob is still waiting to be summoned by Paisley Hospital, but luckily he has had very little trouble meanwhile.
He should go soon, but he is also due for a ‘flu jab as soon as suitable vaccine is available, which is a bit of a nuisance, as the two things don't go together very well.
I have had a bit of ‘medical’ excitement myself since I last wrote: first when I overturned a full supermarket trolley on to my leg, bursting a small artery with dramatically bloody results.
That kept me on reduced activity for about three weeks.
Then a fortnight ago I had a cataract removed, but there must have been more to it than that, because not only am I startled by the brightness of things, but the vision in that eye is practically perfect, so I am not wearing glasses most of the time, though for faint or small print (not piano music: hooray) I shall have to get some more specs.
It doesn't seem fair that my relatively small problem has been dealt with so efficiently, whereas you and others I know have to struggle on with far greater difficulties.
The Lake District holiday was lovely, and so was the week we spent with Richard in August.
He enjoyed — almost proprietorially — showing us the museums in Ironbridge, which certainly are outstanding.
One of them takes the form of an almost completely restored mining village, complete with a stream-driven miners' cage, ironworks, a bakery selling delicious break baked on the spot, as well as other ships and an ‘antique’ house suitably equipped — i.e. with a black-leaded range and
Dear Jenny
Thankyou for your letter.
You sound really well and cheerful, which is lovely.
Fancy Kent being 61.
Please give him our best wishes for the year.
We have been having lovely weather, so we have been able to get out quite a lot.
The autumn colours are especially lovely this year.
My cataract operation was no trouble to me, and a great success, so I am happy about that.
It is a long time since I used this word processor, so I am pretty dozy about it still, but I reckon it is an improvement on my handwriting.
I have always quite liked typing, and with one of these mistakes are easily put right, which is lucky for me.
My dear Bill and Gwen,
Thankyou for your letter.
I was amused by your comment that you were sure we wouldn't cross this time, because we nearly did.
The cataract op. was brought forward a fortnight, so by yesterday I was quite ready to write some letters, and yours was top of the pile — only we went hospital visiting instead.
The improvement, incidentally, is amazing.
I am doing this without glasses, and what is so marvellous is that I can play the piano without glasses for the first time for at least 12 years.
I am seeing the surgeon on Monday, and shall ask him what magic he employed.
I still need new glasses for small or faint print.
My typing is a bit rusty, but must be more legible than my hand-writing.
I don's like to think of either of you digging in your heavy clay.
Myself, I gave up digging years ago, with far less excuse, except that here, two inches down and you're into rock.
Diana evidently takes after her mother.
I can only suggest, Bill, that you swaddle them both and keep them immobilised for a week.
All our lot are well, though there is some parental concern that Ewan is not yet speaking fluently (well, not at all, actually) but he makes up for it by taking a keen interest in all musical instruments.
Roger is now settled at Birmingham University, or rather at the ‘University of Central England’ and seems rather overcome by the amount of work expected of him, but has otherwise fallen on his feet.
He is sharing a house with some second year students, and even has room for his piano (a gift from Ruth's mother some years ago).
It sounds as though you haven't shared our wonderful Autumn.
Lots of sun, and no gales yet to blow away the leaves, which are as colourful as we have ever seen them.
My geraniums (pelargoniums if you must) are making a brave show at last in spite of one or two early frosts, and I am delighted that a tiny sprig of gentian given me by a neighbour has four vivid blue flowers.
We are quite enjoying the Weekly Telegraph, but I have to remind myself, when I come across possible cuttings, that you have probably seen them already.
Time to make some dinner.
Keep well and don't overdo things.
Much love from us both.
Dear Bobbie,
I feel quite ashamed that I haven't answered your letter — apart from a card — before this.
I kept thinking that perhaps you were still in Australia, but I expect that was just an excuse!
I do hope you had a good trip and found everyone well.
In fact I see from the note that accompanied the birthday card (thank you) that it seemed a particularly happy visit this time, and that you planned to come home in June!
It just shows how mentally disorganised I am these days.
It was sad to read of Peter's problem, but as you say, he will probably grow out of it.
Ewan seems to have inherited the Foxcroft love of walking and never wants to turn back.
I'm not sure that Joyce thinks this altogether a good thing.
To our surprise, she turns out to be not much of a country girl at all.
Rob teases her by saying that she'd rather go round a supermarket than climb a mountain, but there's ‘many a true word…’ and all that.
Still, she's a lovely lass.
Our year has not been very eventful.
We had a beautiful Spring holiday on the Beauly Firth, and could not have chosen a better time to be there, with all the different kinds of foliage on the hillsides, and the spring flowers on the banks.
In August we had a very happy weekend with Rob's family in the Lake District, and this Autumn there was no need to move far from here, for I have never known an Autumn like it for sun, and abundance of colour which lasted, slowly getting deeper and richer, for about 10 weeks.
As far as health goes, we have done pretty well, discounting the minor trials of age, and we are lucky in that they are minor.
I had a very gory accident with a shopping trolley, but the gash in my leg has healed beautifully, and about two months ago I had a cataract removed (local anaesthetic: all the rage these days and an absolute doddle).
This was such an unlooked-for success that I now only need glasses for reading.
I am looking forward to getting new ones next week.
It seems unbelievable, as I have worn bi-focals, or latterly tri-focals, for at least 15 years.
Our only other news is that we have a new cat.
It's the old story — we didn't choose her, she chose us — but she's very sweet and a great source of amusement.
I shall put this in with your Christmas card, so here's wishing you every happiness at Christmas.
I was glad to hear from Richard, with whom we spent a very satisfying week in August, that David has found a new girl-friend — Sally too, I believe — and that they both seem to have survived the breakup.
I hope you manage to see everyone during the holiday period, as I know how much that means to you.
We are looking forward to seeing our Glasgow contingent, but I wouldn't really encourage Richard to come so far, even with a motor-cycle combination (his latest vehicle — I tell you, the Foxcroft genes are strong), at a time when the weather is totally unpredictable.
Well, that really must be it, so ‘Bye for now.
With love from us both—
Dear Jenny,
Thank you for your letter.
Fancy your niece being five years old.
Children grow so fast — we see Ewan about every month or six weeks, and there's always a big change.
I think your doctor is right when he says that you need time to get over the loss of your dad and your friend, and it is only right and natural that you should think of them a lot, but  if you try to turn your thoughts to good and happy memories of them that will be the best way of honouring them, and will help you, too.
I still miss my favourite sister, who died over twenty years ago, but of course I think of her much less than I used to.
It is good that you are able to look after your friend with the sick husband, and I expect you are still seeing Maureen.
Do you attend the church still?
I don't know if I told you that we have acquired another cat?
Her owner died, and she was living rough, so when she bounced into our kitchen and made it clear that that was where she wanted to stay in it was hard to turn her out, even though Fizzy finds a young and very playful cat rather a trial.
As you say, it will soon be Christmas, but I thought there was time for one more letter before then
With love —
My dear Bill and Gwen
As always, it was lovely to have your letter.
It came to us via Portsmouth!— Quite a well-travelled missive.
I'm glad everyone is well at your end, and hope that still applies, as it does here.
I have finished with the Birds magazine, but thought you might be interested, especially in the article on page 32.
The photographs are always splendid, too.
Oh dear — arrival of a cat to harass me.
Did I tell you that we'd been adopted by a kitten?
Seemingly she had been living rough since her owner died and knew a good home when she found one.
Fizzy is less than pleased, but I have to admit that she adds to our amusement and wreaks havoc in about equal proportions.
Winter has come at last, and we have had some severe frosts, but we are still getting quite a lot of sun, in marked contrast to last year's everlasting grey skies.
No doubt you are thinking about Christmas, and will have your usual family get-together.
I don't know how you do it, Gwen.
Rob and family are coming for a long weekend, so we shan't  have our usual Christmas Day picnic this year, but we'd much rather have their company.
We were in Glasgow last weekend, and were quite chuffed when Ewan consented to come out for a walk just with us two, as he clings to Joyce a bit at the moment.
He is a great walker now — distance no  object — and we had a fine time looking at all the things the canal had to offer, including frozen puddles and flying swans.
The latter were a bonus (for me, too) as he can spot an aeroplane before it is visible to me, and these were something new in the sky.
So far, rather surprisingly in view of his family's origins, he says very little, but he obviously understand much of what is said to him.
Bob is away on a day's painting course today, so I am catching up with my letters before the Christmas deluge.
We have already had one Christmas parcel, but that was from Hong-Kong, and arrived early because it was posted in England at the convenience of the man of the family, who flies jet airliners for Cathay Pacific.
AT present the family have no plans for returning to England in 1997, but I think they could decide pretty quickly if they needed to.
I think Chris Patten is right to stand up to the Chinese, even though it may make very little difference in the end.
That's all for now, look after yourselves, and make sure you don't overdo things, Gwen.
Lots of love from us both —
Dear Margaret and Edwin
I haven't really much to add to Bob's letter.
Gemma is very sweet — and quite destructive.
When she first came she ate so much so often that I thought she had worms, but she settled down to a very moderate appetite, so the worming tablet the vet.
gave her has never been administered, for which much thanks, as dosing cats is no fun.
I hope you are both as well as you can be, and to make up for my lack of inspiration here is a poem which I discovered in a very nice book of modern Scottish poetry:—
Dear Bill (if I may so call you)
I was very sorry to hear of your father's death, and would like to offer my  sincere sympathy.
It is a great consolation, I feel sure, that he went peacefully, and that you were there with him.
It was very good of you to write such a long letter, and I was most interested in what you told me.
Yes, your mother (Kathleen to us) kept house and looked after my sister and me when my mother died.
I was just seven then, and Joan was almost twelve.
Winnie was the eldest — she died four years ago just after her  eighteenth birthday.
She worked then in the Westminster Bank.
Billy, at 82, still lives in Peterborough with his wife, and has his married daughter and sundry grandchildren within easy reach.
In fact they call daily.
Bill was with Boots the Chemist, and may have been working in Peterborough when Kathleen was with us — I can't remember.
Certainly Joan and I knew her best, and she and Joan became good friends.
Various people came after Kathleen, but no-one came anywhere near taking her place for either of us.
She told us stories about her childhood in Clophill (I think) but she never told us anything unpleasant, whereas I remember one good lady who loved to horrify us with tales of ghastly happenings!
It was Joan who told me of her death, and it was probably then that I wrote to your father and we started to exchange Christmas cards.
I wrote to him some years ago for some gardening advice, and had a very nice and helpful letter back.
I didn't really know him — my main memory is of going with him and Joan and Kathleen (she was enormously proud of him and I was quite ready to do a spot of hero-worshipping) for a walk in Cardington meadows.
Later Joan and I went to your home when you were about two, but I think Roland was working, and you played outside most of the time.
Oh yes, ‘Roland’— that is how we always knew him, and I was mightily confused when he started signing his Christmas cards ‘Jim’!
I expect you know that Joan was killed in a road accident over 20 years ago, not long after the death of her husband.
We keep in fairly close touch with Ruth, the eldest child, who lives in Tunbridge Wells, but John, the baby born in Turvey, corresponds with nobody.
Fortunately his wife, whom some of the family have never met, nevertheless writes a long newsy letter every Christmas.
They have one  son, and live in Bath.
John is a car salesman.
As for myself — Bob and I have been married for forty-six years, and spent most of our married life on and around Manchester, where he was (eventually) Market Research Manager in an engineering firm, and I practised social work when not fully engaged with the 2 children.
Richard, 43, teaches in Telford and his one son attends ‘the University of Central England’(what a mouthful).
His wife, unhappily, died 5 years ago.
We see as much as possible of both Richard and Roger, but the distance from our friends is the only real disadvantage of having retired to Oban.
However, this doe snot apply so much to our other son, Robert, who is a private music teacher in Glasgow, so we see quite a lot of him and his wife and their baby son, who arrived just over a year ago, when we had given up hope of any more grandchildren.
I didn't realise, by the way, that Kathleen was a ‘rebel’, but if so,— apart from Winnie perhaps — she came to the right house (or House).
Dad was always the politest of men, but we were never in doubt that his respect was given for character only, never for mere rank or status, and there seems to be a streak of non-conformity in all his descendants so far.
Thank you again for writing.
I shall think of you at Christmas, the more so as my own father died one Christmas Eve, and Richard's wife in the week before Christmas, so I know how it feels to have sadness at that time.
Dear Jenny,
It was very nice to hear from you and have your latest news.
From what you said, I didn't think that you were very settled, so I am sending you this note via Mum — I suppose you may go home to see the new baby, anyway?
Not that I expect you to be so baby-besotted as the people round here — with good cause, of course, as Ewan has to be a paragon!
Even his fond parents don't call him that when he rampages through the flat creating mayhem, and Joyce was recently heard to declare that she'd rather do Rob's tax returns than look after the baby.
Well, well.
The fact is, the child resembles his Uncle Richard, who was decidedly ‘wick’ at this stage, rather than his father, who was surprisingly placid.
Enough of that.
We did admire your survival of the Weymouth weekend, and hope the Caribbean trip is or will be a tremendous success.
It was quite a relief too, that you backed off the Pakistan venture.
It's not a country I should care to visit on my own.
We have had a good year, barring accidents, and although the summer weather was disastrous we have been more than compensated by the most beautiful Autumn ever.
It began very early in September and has really come to an end today with the last of the leaves falling overnight and the first serious snow on the mountains.
I wish you could have visited us then, but of course all our visitors came when it was wet.
We ourselves were quite lucky with holiday weather, both for a week on the Beauly Firth, a week with Richard in Telford (outstanding museums and the Shropshire Hills), and a weekend in the Lake District with Rob.
A kitten has adopted us.
She arrived about a week ago, and we found out that her owner had died, and she was running wild.
Her destructive powers are even greater than Ewan's!
She has dismantled and unstitched my slatted blind single-clawed, and has just arrived to see what she can do here.
I can't compete, so Goodbye.
 With love 
Dear Margaret and Edwin,
Thank you for the interesting card from Ireland, Edwin.
We hope the trip continued as well as it had begun, and that you got home refreshed.
You seemed to be managing well on your own, Margaret, all credit to you.
This fabulous Autumn continues with a brilliance of colour such as I don't ever remember, and we have been able to have some lovely walks.
We consider ourselves very lucky.
Roger wrote us a nice letter from Birmingham.
He seems to be settling in well, and has quite a lot of contact with Richard.
Last time we ‘phoned Richard he was in the middle of roasting a duck for birthday meal with Roger and Katie (his ‘lodger’).
Rob and Joyce always sound very busy, which I suppose is not surprising with a small child.
The Open College of Arts tried to interest us in their ‘creative Writing’ course by sending us a magazine compiled from the students work.
 Some of the most effective poems and stories were rather bleak, but I attach a couple of poems that  appealed to me.
Talking of cats (we weren't, but the first poem does!)— a pretty kitten from who-knows-where seems to have adopted us.
He moves like a streak of light, and seems to be across the kitchen and into Fizzy's food as soon as the back door is opened.
It's only a matter of time till he learns to use the cat flap.
He (she?)— I never can tell with cats) is obviously used to people and we think he must have a home somewhere, but he's always absolutely ravenous, and we can't refuse him food.
I shall have to ask around today and see if I can find his owner.
I'm sure Bob will have some more solid news for you, so I will sign off with lots of love.
Dear Susan,
We gather that you are about to be visited by Anne and the other Susan, not forgetting Megan.
Bob and I had all sorts of schemes for us all to meet, including asking you to come to Edinburgh as a halfway house, but we realised that actually that is rather more than halfway for you, and wouldn't be at all easy.
For ourselves, we are inclined to avoid long journeys, especially at this time of the year.
We went down to Richard's for a week in the summer, but broke the journey at Moffat both going and coming.
This makes us feel very feeble, as we have friends of our age who think nothing of motoring from here to Lowestoft in the day — but such feats are not for us, though we flatter ourselves that in most respects we are in pretty good nick.
So it looks as though our scheming is of no avail, though we are still hoping to see you here one day — surely our wild country must appeal to a shooting man?
Instead, please will you give the enclosed card to Susan and give them all our love?
Also, if I get it written (which I may not, as I am expecting someone to lunch and want to catch this afternoon's post) forward Jenny's letter?
She wrote to us in July, and we were delighted to hear from her, but she is such a roamer that I don't feel confident in replying to the address she gave then.
Life here goes on rather quietly, as you might expect, but we have enjoyed the most marvellous Autumn I think I have ever known.
Since the beginning of September until this week there has been practically no rain, and the wind has never reached gale force, so the leaves have stayed on the trees far longer than usual, with a constantly changing pattern of glorious colour.
We have been able to enjoy some lovely walks, and even to find some new ones which are usually too boggy to attempt.
The week with Richard was a very happy one, and we also has a most enjoyable week near Muir of Ord, a weekend in the Lake District with Rob and Joyce, and sundry visits to them and from them.
Ewan is a very lively character, and good to have around.
Bob is writing for a third (!) attempt on his prostate gland, but seems to have got caught out by overspending on the part of the hospital involved, which has caused a delay in non-urgent ops.
The same hospital called me in early for a quick and very successful  cataract operation (lens implant), seemingly in order to treat as many patients as possible before the go-slow came into effect.
I hope you are all well, and end with a liberal distribution of good wishes to whoever is with you at present.
With love
Dear Anne & Robert,
Yesterday we received p.c. from Stephen — isn't he sweet to write to us — which reminded me that we had a much appreciated card from Alaska some time ago.
The tundra flowers must be very exciting & in fact your whole trip sounds wonderful.
I hope you found some gold!
We have been doing much more mundane, but nonetheless enjoyable, things.
A week overlooking the Firth of Beauty in May, which coincided with the sheer magic of Springtime in that area.
On two days, since the sun had abandoned the East, we fled to the West Coast (Scotland is very narrow just there) where is shone magnificently, & gave our egos a boost by some moderated, strenuous hill-climbing.
In August we had a long weekend in the Lakes, with Rob, Joyce & Ewan which went well, & also a week in Telford with Richard which we thoroughly enjoyed.
We all went to see Bill & Gwen.
Gwen seems very tired to me.
She has trouble with her eyes, and with her legs, all due to some form of arthritis, I think.
Bill is much as usual, but his deafness leaves him looking very ‘out of it’, at times.
Roger did not do as well as hoped in his ‘A’ levels, but will probably go to Birmingham to do a BSc in Computer Engineering.
The course at Glasgow on which he had set his heart was no longer open to him.
In some ways, he may be better off at Birmingham — nearer to Richard, & to all his pals and usual haunts.
He may even be able to continue earning a bit by playing (piano) for pubs & clubs.
He did quite well out of it during the last year.
That seems to be our news.
Bob is still waiting for another ‘go’ at his prostate.
I am having a cataract removed (day patient: local anaesthesia) in a fortnight's time.
Hope all is well with the Howes clan.
With love
Peggy
Dear Ruth Adler
Your name was given to me by Liz Robertson, in connection with Bruce Harris's visit, and as I have failed to contact you by ‘phone I thought I would write.
My problem is that we wish to give a small donation to Bruce for the street children, but our charitable giving is channelled through Charity Giving Scotland, whose vouchers can only be used by a charity registered as such in Britain.
Does the Associacion Casa Alianza fulfil this condition?
I feel a resistance to trying to send money to the USA for passing on to Guatemala, and would prefer to send you something to pass on to Bruce, if you agree.
I'm sorry to bother you with what must seem a difficulty of my own making, and enclose a S.A.E. for your reply.
Yours sincerely
Peggy S. Foxcroft
Dear Dorothy
I am writing (I think) out of turn, to wish you a happy birthday, & say that a small parcel is on the way.
I hope it arrives safely.
We had a very enjoyable week with Richard, including a visit to my brother in Peterborough.
Richard did all the driving, which increased the pleasure, and we had one short ride in his bike & sidecar, which brought back memories.
I rode pillion & Bob in the sidecar, because the only spare helmet was too small for Bob.
Besides walks on the hills we visited a number of museums, which I think you would have enjoyed, especially a large display of ceramic tiles.
The weather was good throughout, and since coming back we have had some real summer at last— with some dreadful days mixed in.
We visited Bob's sister on the way home, and had to good b-&-b's at Moffat, going and coming.
Moffat is much more of a tourist centre than I realised, but a pleasant little town.
Bob has finished his Art Course, but is going on to do another, beginning this month.
He would have liked a more advanced drawing course, but as that is not on offer has settled for a painting course.
We hope all goes well with you.
Have a good year.
With love
Bob & Peggy
My dear Bill & Gwen,
Bob reminds me — quite rightly — that it is high time I wrote to you, to say how nice it was to see you both, if only briefly.
It would have been better if we could have come at the weekend & seen something of the family, but Richard had long-standing plans involving friends of his who could only come (from Macclesfield) on Saturday.
I must say, Gwen, your garden looks a treat.
You really do have green fingers.
Richard was also pleased with the visit, and drove us home at high speed (Bob said he touched 100 mph — can't say I noticed.
Shades of Win: she would have been horrified.
Also, by the say, 84 tomorrow).
We had a very good time, & good weather, for the rest of our stay, & I think Richard enjoyed showing us the many attractions of his area as much as we enjoyed seeing them.
He has become a real Telford native.
I must say, it was nice to have a chauffeur in strange territory.
Poor Roger crashed rather badly in his A levels.
I can't think he was helped by all the upset at home during the past 18 months — mum taking a new man, & more or less telling both children that they could go & live with their Dad (or Dads).
Richard's place  is open to him, but not very convenient, and whilst Phil (step-dad) is very supportive, he has moved into his new girl-friend's house, which comes kitted out with 3 children, so that in fact there isn't an awful lot of room for Roger.
However, all is not gloom.
He only got a ‘C’ for music, but he was the only one in his group of nine to pass at all, which in an odd way is a consolation — & suggests poor teaching.
he got a ‘D’ for computing, & a near-miss (fail) in Physics.
He has been toying with various possibilities (we suggested he could come to us & repeat the year at Oban High — a somewhat unlikely proposition, I admit) but seems likely to plump for a 4-year course at Birmingham, leading to a BSc in Computer Engineering.
Incidentally, he has decided to ally himself with the more stable elements in his life, and now styles himself Roger Foxcroft.
My cataract operation has been moved forward a fortnight for the rather odd reason that the hospital is ‘having to cancel all non-urgent operations in October’.
As Robert remarked, it ‘smells of Accountancy’.
I wish your eye trouble could be solved as simply, Gwen.
We have had some welcome summer days in the last fortnight.
You too, I hope.
Take care.
Much love from us both —
Peg
REMINDER NOTES
8/8/93 Letter — see Amnesty file.
8/8/93 — Clean towels for Bob (not Peg) on return.
Clean sheets for Peg (not Bob) on return.
Clean sheets for Bob mid-week 23rd-29th or Sat. 14th.
See Christine re.
Fizzy.
24/8/93 3oz: pint.
cold mix then boiling 10 mins.
27/8/93 Christmas —?
Cartoon books for families (3) Chocs for Gwen Single rose vase for Mgt (Also — Jacket for Rchd's b-day)
Dear Anna Reid
Please will you send me (perhaps enclosed with the next statement) a new book of vouchers?
Many thanks
Peggy S. Foxcroft
Dear Liz Robertson,
I belong to the Working Group for Children (A.I.), and my husband and I would like to send a donation to Bruce Harris for the Asociacon Casa Alianza.
However, our giving is organised through Charity Giving Scotland, which issues charity vouchers.
These can only be used by Charities recognised (and given a number) by the British Charities Commission.
That is one snag.
The other is my lack of understanding of sending money abroad — on the face of it, anything we send is liable to a double loss, once when exchanged into a form suitable for sending to America (Covenant House) and again when passed onto Guatemala.
Seeing that Bruce Harris is to be in Britain in November, I wondered whether it could be arranged to send him something then instead.
If you can advise me I shall be very grateful.
I enclose a S.A.E.
Yours sincerely
Peggy S. Foxcroft
Dear Jenny,
Thank you for your letter.
It was nice to find it waiting for us when we got back from Telford — a change from all the bills!
We had good weather whilst we were with Richard, and he kept us well entertained both with walks, and with visits to the local museums, of which there are a good many, mostly very interesting, especially a complete mining village with a working ‘cage’ driven by an enormous steam engine.
The whole village has been renovated, and is kept going by volunteers, who seemed to enjoy themselves hugely, even tho' some of them had to clean up (including black-leading a coal range).
As usual, the ‘antiques’ in the kitchen were things Bob & I used as children.
Makes us feel old.
This week we have actually had two days of summer.
I hope you have had some good weather, too.
With love
Peggy
My dear Richard
If this is any use to you you are very welcome to it, as I have another.
It is rather awkward to get your fingers into, so scrap it if you can't use it.
Bob has taken the plunge & acquired a video recorder — masquerading as my birthday present to him.
I haven't attempted to master its intricacies yet, but no doubt we shall both acquire some sort of proficiency in time.
The weather bucked up once we were back, tho' it is far from warm.
Hope you have good weather for the rest of the holiday.
I hope no news from Roger is good news.
Someone a few doors away had their house gutted by fire last week.
No casualties, thank goodness.
The fire was said to have started from the fridge-freezer.
Bizarre.
Much love from us both —
Mum
My dear Roger,
We are disappointed too, on your behalf, but at least the Hertford offer sounds very interesting, & we shall look forward to hearing more about it.
I shall be amused if you go there, as that is where I went to school (Christ's Hospital).
The girls have joined the boys at Horsham now, which seems a good move, though other changes have been made which I don't like at all.
Tell you about it some time (perhaps I already have!)
If it is only — or mainly — accommodation problems which stop you repeating the year, Grandad & I would like you to know that you are welcome to live here & go to Oban High School.
Of course there are lots of questions which would have to be sorted out — the difference is the Scottish Education system, & the courses offered, for a start — & you might well have doubts about cutting yourself off from your friends & so forth.
I know of one person who failed completely the first time round, & did very well the second; and Lord Rothschild mentions an eminent scientist, who got one ‘C’ the first time & 7 (yes, seven) A's the second, but he was a genius — or a freak.
The noble Lord is not, you understand a personal friend of mine: just my current reading matter.
We have been out & about as usual, still finding new places to walk within 20 miles of here: not bad after 7 years.
We may make a trip to Glen Nevis next month.
It should be quieter than.
Over to Grandad.
Glad you are keeping chirpy.