

You enjoyed yourself in America
Eh?
did you?
Oh I covered a nice trip, yes
Oh very good
saw Mary and Andrew and
Yes, you did
in fact the whole family was together for Mary's wedding 
Oh very nice , very nice, yes.
It's horrible
It is horrible isn't?
Have you been busy?
Yes
Yes, oh.
Jim's been for a, this afternoon at the Hart and Straw Club
oh, not very well, we erm, we stopped going after Christmas because we had bad chests both of us
Oh
both cold and it's hard going that three hours in the morning, you know
Yes
but we'll go back again.
Well I've had to stop my classes
Yeah
because I'm, I'm so busy
Yes
er, among other things I'm writing a commentary on Romans in  Sutwana 
Oh very good, yes, aha, so er Jim's been very busy with his talks and different things and er  we packed in, you know, after Christmas cos we both worked and we thought we'd have it, you know, and we caught this flu bug and
Mm
er, anyway we're alright now so, you know 
Good 
we shall go back, erm after Easter
Yes
hoping, permitting, you know, if it's not too expensive, it got very dear you know
Yes, that is also a thing to 
Yeah 
erm, I'm, I'm feeling a bit hard up at the moment, I had a 
Yes 
a bill for repairing the car for two hundred and thirty pounds and  so
Oh, and everything comes at once, doesn't it?
It does, yes 
You know , yes, that's what we find, and we've had water coming through the roof
Mm
when they put a new roof on I think they pinched the ledge round the chimney, er
and it comes through there so we've had a lot to do
Yeah
inside, there's always something isn't there?
Yes
And you're busy at
aren't you?
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
we'll have a meeting on Tuesday to decide whether we're going to have a
or not.
Yes, well, as a matter of fact er, the moderator was talking to me on the telephone
Aha
I think it was yesterday
yeah
erm, he wants to come along and see you
Yeah, aha
erm, I, I don't think there's any question about you getting a minister
Do you think we'll get one?
Oh yes
Oh
erm, but er, you know,wh whether it'll be a good thing to link up with somebody I don't know yet
No
that's one of the things he'll want to talk about
Yes of course, er, you know this thing we've been talking about joining with the
Yeah
do you think that's going to come to anything?
Well honestly I, I don't know because I haven't been in the discussions 
No 
before
but, the ordinary, the congregation at St Jones hasn't
Mm
but erm, we've got friends in the Methodist church and they told us things that er, you know, absolutely
to us, er, whoever represents us doesn't come any of the bring anything back and you don't know
Mm, well the thing is there's some similar conversation going on in
are there?
but, er, I don't think they've got as far as yours have
No, oh, I mean personally I think it would be better for the United Reformed to join up with the shared pastures instead of joining up with the Methodist because the Methodist have got plenty of churches in their area, haven't they?
They have there, yes, and 
Yes 
and the trouble is of course, they've, the Methodist haven't really joined up themselves
No that's true Alan, no, aha, I know, aha, and they want to pay somebody a fee to do a service, how many service have we had done?
Oh
We enjoyed the moderator very much when you was a
Good
We
I liked him very much
Mm
and
of course he'll be coming up tomorrow for
Yes 
That's , that's at Hollywell
Yes
I expect somebody from St. Jones will be coached.
How's Nigel these days?
Well he's off sick as far as I know
Mm
but, I did hear something, I don't know whether it's true, that the doctors took him off the
because that, he wanted to go up for a medical which was a bit erm, unethical , but I don't know whether it's true it's, you know it's just what someone said 
Oh 
it was on good authority, but you know you got, the things get exaggerated
Yes
I haven't seen him, I, I think they were away at the weekend
aha 
 

well he's, the last time I saw him was, was being having, was trying to have a lot of fund raising things
Mm 
and er , what's, what's the last one?
Oh it was the Valentine's cover, it, it'll
and we'd all made different things, you know, and there was loads of food, but his children wanted one particular thing, well they were late coming in and of course it had gone, so he, he wasn't very happy 


and he didn't stay long and he didn't, he, he did look terrible, he did really
Oh
but, er, I don't see it, that kind of a job which he's going to do, if it don't have
Hello
Hello, hello
and, looks so ill, it's not very  good for the  people he's looking after is it?
No, oh well let's hope he'll get better
Well I hope so, yes
er, but I, I, I've heard that erm shingles does have this sort of after effect
Yes, aha 
but you know, it takes a long while to get over it
Yes
but I hope he will because 
Oh, I hope so
I mean he's a young man and he's 
Yes 
done a good job I think 
Yes oh yes, that's right
I mean he's, I think we'll miss him, but I think he's entitled to a move he's been here for a little while 
Oh yes it's been nine years by the time he goes 
Mm 
it, oh yes it is, I'm surprised that he stayed so long
Mm
but there you are, that's how it goes, anyway I hope to see you
Right
You'll have to come up sometime
I'll try and do that
I'll give you a ring, a ring for you to come up
Right, thanks very much 
Lovely to see you 
Goodbye
Yes, bye
They want to know what spoken English is like
You can tape me by all means, but they probably won't like my voice
Er, now what do I want?
Erm, oh half
have a large one
Yes I think so, or,
more often by medium, I don't really know which one is best
Well, er, if you poach an egg, those are too big
Mm, no, let me have those then, cos I do sometimes poach an egg
Yeah, well, they say that they're too large to poach them with, they come over the top, there we are, thank you.
Er  I want, I want to make a casserole have you got either a neck of lamb or an ox tail or something like that?
I've got some ox tail, erm neck of lamb Philip have you got one?
Neck of lamb's off
Well I'll have an ox tail then 
That's one thirty for the whole one, is that too much for you?
No I'll use that I think
You can freeze it if you don't
That's what I do
if you don't want it all  did I see Robert with you the other day?
Was it Robert?
He was, er 
Has he got a Volvo Robert's car?
Er, well both Robert and David have got Volvos, so 
Oh 
er, if, if it was, if it was the last few days it was probably David
Yes, I think it might of been Wednesday
Er, yes that was David, Robert hasn't, Robert's coming next weekend, but he hasn't been here for a few weeks
Yes, I just saw you at the crossroads you see
Mm
and I was sort of concentrating so I just 
that was David that was with me, er, now the next thing is I want something to cook quickly er, er let me have a pound of sausages
Right, well we've got different types of
so I don't know what you, whether you would like
er
ordinary pork
mm
leek, sticky thing, pork and ham, pork and tomato and herbs
Goodness what a choice,
if you like something
they're all quite nice
Yes, er  oh I should think er  let's try the tomato one, I haven't had, I haven't seen sausages with tomato in before 
Well they are , they are very nice, half a pound or just a couple?
Er, half a pound will do, no give me a pound, I'll put them in the freezer and
Right
use them as they come 
er
  

and er, one of these chicken fillets I think please
Hello
Hello
Morning
Morning 
Ninety four pence
I think that's about all I can do so far
Right, thank you
 

three eighty five  do you want them in a carrier bag?
No, I'll put them in this, why use up your carrier bags, anyhow this is an easier way to carry
It is 
 

five, pound coin underneath, ten, lovely
Thank you very much
Thank you very much
Take care
I'll do that
Working the weekend?
Well, er only in the evening, but we've got a
tomorrow so I'll be out all day
right, good bye
You're not Welsh speaking at all, are you?
No.
Mm, mm, but you are Welsh?
Was born in  Brockly 
Aha
I wasn't born
sorry about that
That's alright
my father, well he does speak Welsh and my mother could understand it
I see
but she couldn't speak it
Mm
and I'd always been sorry that my dad told us, you know.
I've been trying to learn it, but I haven't got very far
No, I don't think I, I'm too old now
I'm almost sorry that
Well I was er seventy six when I started learning it  
Yeah , me nephew he lives up by erm  Clan Derris 
Ah yes
Mm
and by he and his wife were headmaster in the village  village of  and their master, headmaster used to give Wallace two lessons and they had it in different houses, you know
I see, yes
because they get very naughty up there
and they're living there and they don't speak Welsh
Mm
you know they, when they first went up there to live, they er, had quite a problem, and the trouble was, was, the two boys they were born in Australia you see and they came here, and one was four and the other
yes
of course they had a problem hadn't they?
English speaking in the house and Welsh at school


so it was quite, and er  then they, they, well they weren't learning very well at all 
Oh 
they always seemed backward, they found that they took them to different specialist and the truth is, they've both left school now and got jobs, but they were er, dyslexia
Oh goodness
they found out both of them
Oh
but they got jobs, quite good jobs, and the fella who it is employing them, he's one himself, so he employs that sort of people you see?
Mm
But they get on now
Good
but they, they passed the driving test first time and you know er, they couldn't find out what it
Mm, sorry it, he was only partly the language then?
Pardon?
He was only partly the language then?
Yes, yeah
Mm
yeah, that's very, you know it'll, it quite embarrassed in school and that and erm for them
Mm
but er, as I say they've grown now and got these jobs and they're quite happy.
Good
But surprising the people that you don't realise, you know, it troubles the parents and as I say they took them to a number of specialists and given different things
Mm
couldn't find out
Mm 
why , and then of course this all came out 
alright
alright, goodbye then
Do you want your paper?
Oh it's not very valuable is it?
Thanks
Thank you, goodbye
I don't think I  I'm likely to say anything use, use down and taken in evidence against me
It's all supposed to be anonymous anyway.
Right, now, do you like er
Yes, oh yes, yes
Right
It doesn't, it doesn't really matter, right
Right, hope that'll be alright
Yeah  that's a nice er, slot, were you looking to go out in the garden?
Yes, er, a, yes
Er, help yourself 
Have a, take as much as you like, there's another packet there
Oh  right, that'll do me I think, thank you.
I didn't want to put the new stuff on top of the old until er knew whether we'd finished or not, yes I think I'll have to open it 
Getting into those things is er  a major task  innit?
Yes
These plastic bags and various
 

That's a nice big greenhouse you've got there.
Yes, er, we put that on as a, we bought it as a do it yourself job.
Oh yeah, aha
how long ago, I mean how long has it been there?
Erm, nearly twelve years I think now, no must, must be more than that
 

ah, have to get a pair of scissors 
What brought you to this part when you, went back to
Well largely because we couldn't afford a house in the area where we both grew up
Where was that?
The south east London
Oh yeah, oh right
At least I was born in Kent but er brought up in south east London
Oh yeah, where the, whereabouts?
Erm, born in Welling and er and then, then we moved to Lewisham
Mm, mm 
erm, that was immediately after the war, you know, the first war
Right  did your erm wife come from the same area?
Well, in a way, although her parents were Scotch
Oh 
her mother's family from St Andrews and her father from Dundee
Oh  but they moved out of London long before 
Erm, oh he came to London to get work
Yeah


Yeah 
And what made you choose this particular part of
Well one, one of my sons is married to er,gir , girl whose family live in Buckley
 
Oh, oh 
and er  originally when, when we first sought to retiring, retiring, we were attracted to the Dales, but we couldn't afford that
No  no this is the great problem of er  at the moment, oh it was C W M when you retired wasn't it?
Mm
And erm  and did they, had they got their nanny form of assistance?
They had but it was erm, much less satisfactory as a U R C one
Mm
but they've changed now, they're more or less on the same basis as the U R C
Oh
but erm  it didn't look a very attractive proposition at the time
Oh
for one thing, if we'd taken one of their houses and I'd died first, my wife would of been left without a home
Oh dear
except for going to the er, you know, they've got that place in Worthing erm 
Yeah 
erm
Yeah
Levers House
Yeah
but we were, neither of us very keen on that
No not really, no  Could you of chosen  erm  where to have the house or did they have some, that had been left for that purpose?
Erm, I'm not really sure, we didn't go into it very deeply
No
Fortunately Ruth had some money from her father which covered buying this house
Oh, oh 
erm  At that time property was fairly cheap in Bradley
Mm, mm
we got this for seven and a half thousand
Oh, blimey, mm
I think it cost more than that now
Oh I think so, yeah  you wouldn't purchase the land that it stands on for that now 
Mind you it's only a paper profit because you can't rely on it
No, no  Where are you from originally ah?
London, east London, East Ham  actually I was brought up till I was about seven  er in the same area, but erm  in a place called Beckton
Oh that's where the gas works used to be.
That's right, yeah, just over, not far over the water from er the Woolwich 
That's right , no, yes, I know not far from where we live really
Mm, mm  and I often tell people that er, those who don't come from London don't realise  the difference between north and south
Mm
south London they're two different worlds aren't they?
In a way
Yes
for the people who live there they are, anyway  the river's a great divide
Oh yeah  Yes, it's amazing how a big delight it is, despite all the bridges
Oh that's right, mm  You didn't go straight from college overseas
Well, as near as possible because, erm, I mean I was appointed to, to Africa while I was still in college
Oh, mm, mm
but then there was delay because of war conditions
Mm, mm
so  so it was nearly a year before we actually got away
aha
in the end I took a, a
at Hayes in Kent
Oh yeah
erm, on the understanding that er, if a passage came up I would leave
Mm
well, erm, I took the chair at my first church meeting and tended my resignation
Oh did you?
Mm, erm 
The war was over by then?
No
Oh
this was nineteen forty two
Oh
oh no, the war was very much on at the time 
Mm  What vessel did you go on then?
Erm a free French one called Desaraed
Oh
flying the flag of Lorraine
Oh really?
Mm  Erm did you go in convoy or?
Mm, we started out in convoy in Liverpool
Mm, mm
and we were in con convoy for about a week, then we suddenly found ourselves alone
Oh
and we had a whole month at sea without seeing land
Oh dear  you were pleased to get off weren't you?
Very
And where'd you land?
mm, yes 
So where, what, what route did you take?
Goodness only knows, I think 
Oh 
I think we went pretty well across the Atlantic erm 
Mm 
right  quite a long way west
Oh 
we didn't have any trouble from U-boats, but we picked up some boats
Yeah
from a ship that had
Yeah 
the rules were not to do that, the ships weren't supposed to stop because apparently the submarines sometimes lurked there
Oh, waiting for others, yeah
but er, they did stop, not for long, erm, there's a, a
er when they sited these boats they got out their cargo derricks
Mm
and er, let, let down, erm a hook each end of each boat
Mm
picked boat people and all, dumped them on the deck and went on full steam ahead
 

was that though, that passenger vessel that had been sunk then?
The one that's been sunk
Mm
was, was a cargo vessel
Mm 
they got a less star crew and
as well 
Yours was a passenger ship was it?
Mm 
Are you
your wife's
with you?
No
Yes 
Have you got her passage, haven't got her
at the last minute, mm well in fact we heard on Monday it was a passage and we sailed on Friday
You had everything packed up already
Mostly 
You took a good deal with you at that time I presume
Yes, quite a lot, well as much as we could
Yeah
er, oh  erm, erm we didn't have anything like furniture
No
but er
only your personal
quite a few books
Oh I see 
excuse the wrapping but it keeps the
that's alright, thank you 
erm 
 

Dustbin?
I meant to put this one out as well 
You made them did you?
Yes
Mm  So when did you first come back for leave, on leave?
Erm
nin , must been ninety, nineteen fifty I think, yes, we had eight years before our first
yeah, yeah
And you had some advantages
Yes
and you get acclimatized in that time
Oh yeah, that's right, yeah
erm, you know in the sense of regarding the country as home
Yes that's right, yeah, yeah, yes that's right
I mean to our children, although they've been away from  Butchwana for quite a few years now it's still home
It is, yeah, definitely
Andrew the eldest still keeps his  Butchwana passport
Oh does he?
Oh  oh  how many times have you been back since you've retired?
Twice
Aha, cos it's a very expensive business to
It is, yes
to go backwards and forwards and I'll try this I think  yeah  and the last time you say was in September 
September 
This September?
This past September, mm
Did you find much change since your last visit, previous visit?
Oh quite a lot
Oh
economically it's changes in it.
for the good or not?
Well in many ways yes, they, there's powered roads, there's electricity and even water on tap, they never had
oh
not, not everywhere though they've got water on tap, but quite a few places
Mm  where were you mostly, well where was your first appointment?
Erm, well first of all to  Denotra which is in er, not far from the South of France
erm  the  river is, is erm just a bed of sand most of the year
Yeah
it does, when it ru , when it rains it does come down
Mm, mm
and fast
Mm
Then we moved to  Sawori and after that  Damole up in the north west
Mm
and finished in  when I was doing a, a late training programme
Oh, mm, mm
for the, for the whole country
But you mostly doing district work are you?
Yes, until, until I moved to  Rubansi 
And they were in traditional mission stations were they?
More or less, yes
Was that doing 
we, we didn't have the big stations that you know, people who seemed to have in China and that and
No
and India it was usually just one man and his wife
Right, yeah, yeah, yeah
Er, are you ready for tea or?
Yes please, mm, mm
Sorry I'll have to put you where the teapot is
That's alright, do you put milk in first or
I generally do, I don't know that it matters
Say how much
That's alright
Do I stir it first the tea?
I doubt if it needs it, but er
Oh 
Oh it's a bit weak
try and stir it, see what happens 
Oh well, perhaps I didn't put enough tea in  that'll do 
Oh how long were you doing the, day training?
Oh for six or seven years 
Er was that ministers that and or only, all 
No la , local preachers 
local preachers.
Where did your ministers go for training?
Erm well in the early days we had to take a kiddies bible school
Oh of course, yes
but then later on it was to erm,
set up, which started at Adams and we used the American mission near  Lovedale well it was a part of Lovedale and erm, now, now it's at er, they call it The Federal Theological Cemetery
Oh yeah
and it's at, it's near Peter
now, what's the name of the place erm?
Mm  ah  just lost the name of the place, but it's quite near Peter
that's the place that Jack  was found
Mm
yes  yes I've been consulting him a bit about my Romans project
Oh yeah, so
mm, no, this is very nice this er 
That's a recipe I got from, well Ruth got it from our daughter-in-law from America
Oh 
It's a New England recipe
Oh is it?
Have you been there the New England?
Mm 
I put that back?
Yes  just remember to open it again
Did I sugar it?
I don't think you did 
Was there at your next tour of service shorter
Yes 
after that first one?
the next one was six
Oh
then it gradually reduced to two, right at the end we were getting
every two years
Yes, that's right, yeah
but that didn't happen very often to us because it was just being introduced 
That's right , yeah, yeah  Yes our first tour was five, it was supposed to be four, but, we erm, er for some reason or other we didn't really want to come home, ha four, so we stretched to three
well we had one more tour after that, erm, but the  and would really of referred to of stayed, made the next tour longer than two
Mm
but er, rules are rules aren't they?
It seems  I, oh I seemed to feel that it, it was, if we wanted to see three it was gonna upset, well they seemed that, I thought it would save money if they
Mm
but we stayed home then, yeah  I'm not quite sure where you did go
Zambia
Ah
I had been into Zambia, but not very often 
Oh
In fact when I was stationed in  Mule I used to travel through Zambia to get to one of my out stations
Oh did you?
simply because the roads were better that side, when it was Northern Rhodesia
You crossed on the pontoon did you?
Yes
And then came back over the bridge?
O , over the falls bridge
Oh we did that a few times when the, the borders were closed with
came across pontoon through, of course it's a much more e , elaborate pontoon now then it was then
I'm sure
that was er
oh it wasn't very elaborate
well you could get one, one and a half ton truck on it  and it was driven across with a couple of
engines
I can't remember of it
the others with a, the engine midway
 

I know they did put in er a, a much better ferry they 
Oh yeah , yeah
and then of course the Americans paid for that road up to 
mm, that's right, yeah
but er, which really was a waste of money it was, well it's used a bit for tourism now
Mm, mm 
but it's , but commercially it was of no importance
No 
but it was er part of the sanctions policy against Rhodesia
Yeah that's right 
Where were you in, in Zambia?
Erm, I was, we was all the time we were there, in er
Ah
the theological college
Mm
er, the only time I really went any distance was er, well, I went with er Paul  to 
Oh yeah
it was er, at a time when this an African district committee sent representatives to the central and visa versa
Oh, oh 
Mm 
That must of been some time ago
Yes
Nineteen fifty something I think 
erm, of course the economic out in Zambia the economic situations is disastrous now 
and the drought of course has made it worse
Pardon?
The drought 
The drought yeah, yeah  just now the drought seems to be much more widespread now doesn't it and er into South Africa
Well I was looking at the er
Very bad
erm 
and they were saying that er, South Africa's going to have to import food this year 
That's right, yeah 
normally, South Africa feeds these other countries north, further south in, in bad years
Mm, mm.
Yes South Africa has erm, er, er, we have a regular erm A four sheet two, two sides of A four sheet, erm it was weekly, but it's erm a fortnightly
Mm
newsletter
now it's just a news sheet from, of Zambia
Mm
er, it's pretty youthful this country with it's
Zambian er, call it Zambian newspa , newspapers so it's very liable as to what, you know it's no comm , it's not comment at all, it's just, and erm the last one two weeks ago I think it was, indicated that erm South Africa's production of maize would be, oh I can't remember, but a lot short of what they require themselves 
Yeah, oh, it's down to about a quarter of normal it is 
A quarter is it?
As low as that.
Because there are worries that it's going to er, effect the outcome of this mad ref , referendum, you know they the farmers are sort of desperate and they think they need government help and they think they wouldn't get it because of the black government  so
But erm, Botswana's erm, doing quite well
Oh yes, well you see they've got the names
Yes that's right, but erm, unfortunately Zambia's the copper, has had the copper and
Mm
the copper
erm  and of course, er, normal years they also earn quite a lot from exporting their cat 
If any of you want a copy of the document on  Alders referred to in the  Ecumenical report I have some here you can study it over lunch.
Before we go on to keep the, to  to look at the minutes  and   for the young people who were actually on the weekend in .
Sharing everything on a different .
And what I've asked is that they actually did   and not separate it.
The suggestion had been that in the galleries  
 
So as they come in would you make a statement  and then two minutes  they had  and that one's just next year.
It makes a lot of difference cos if you've been in a church hall before!
 
Although, you don't  .


Just this table.
Perhaps that's  why we haven't got a group for the next one.


Quite warm again.
Yeah.
They're doing it by the .
Oh!
What we booked the church?
Do you want to see him?
We got  books here that the trouble!
Oh yes.
Things like bibles.
Yeah,they quite like.
That there like that.
No that'll be better.
Got my thick old coat, I wished I hadn't put it on now!
haven't got the 
I thought it would be here!
Well  yes
You know.
you never these da 
I don't even think you know us.
I know your husband, but I don't think I've known before.
I don't know 
Oh yes you have met me before!
Oh ha, have I?
We met at the  don't you remember?
Oh yes, I'd forgotten that bit.
When you told us about Naniel   and a  , you know?
The 
Yeah.
name of the shop.
yes 
Oh yes.
it was !
May I  and I hope that the young people will join us, they'll feel welcome to  join in any conversation   during this  session of  of, you know?
And just one other plan we'd welcome  is the young people in the  come in.
I think he would welcome you as well.
Stand up.
I can't remember your surname, I've gotta be honest.
You really wanna know?




Sorry?


, right!
Very Dutch!


Mr Bob  is the  Minister of  in the United States of America.
But at the moment serving with the group of churches in  Ealy, Bathyclyn and also with   erm  part time  working in  Ealy as the youth worker for the community  working partly for Dr Barnados  partly for the ULT  and Methodist  and he'll acting in it as well in  Ealy and sponsored by the  Global  of the United States.
The , obviously.
We welcome you.
.
The  minutes of the last thing on the , and everybody should see who elected president, although some people will have forgotten, but I haven't.
And  before  any  I ask you whether   there are two additions to these minutes.
Right, the first addition is  on the last page  under the  erm  the  Royal Hall of Ministers and Elders to er  remember their .
Erm  printed in the  official copy for this  but left off this copy  were the names, also the Reverend    of  Glangothwyn and the Reverend Victor   of  Hamwell Erm  does anybody else wish to  make any comments on the minutes of .
Knowing Martin  what  John has just told me about him  if I didn't know him I don't think it would me anything!
Brief details like that are meaningless!
I trust the Ministerial Committee  to make decisions and bring recommendations.
On the other hand, I would like to meet the candidates to see what they look like.
But that doesn't apa , but what they look like is not going to affect whether I  support the Ministerial Committee or not.
What actual details do we give to you?
Despite what David said, that 
Yeah.
rather hurt!
Putting it in therefore, we did read the description.
Yes, oh oh.
Actually, I think David is right.
I , it didn't come over, but for me when we interviewed Martin is one of most refreshing interviews  I've had the pleasure of taking part in!
He's a man of  rare   who was so privileged to go to Cambridge  and to be interviewed.
And came back having learnt a new verse 
 
which was probably written about twenty or thirty years ago  but recognised that his own congregations  would be very suspicious of them!


And it delights from this  thank you John.
Okay  number two would you please affirm the call of Ian   for  in the psychiatric unit.
No.
Would you of .


our counselling .


I've been involved in interview with .
Don't you like my ?


Right.
Yes, he's about  five foot eleven!


erm  he is a member of  Vanroch Caerphilly  at URC  and has done  I think  he is currently at   and erm  have felt a gentle call emerging over the last  few years  and erm  all started in Cambridge, that's about it, that's all I can say.
Oxford.
Oxford, sorry!
Had too much .
All in favour of er Ian's  call being  affirmed please.
Thank you.
And thirdly, we ask you to affirm the call of Peter   for praying for  in the ministry.
Peter is a member of  right, he's actually a member of  Clygarthy URC but he works  and has erm  as a  form of day pastor  and .
Member of  Clan othel URC and has worked and  served as a form of day pastor at  Clygarthy URC  and he  has come from the Anglican tradition  Church of England  and he has erm  over the years towards the reform tradition.
He  seeks to work as a   ministry within the Vale  and brings tremendous  in  erm to the ministry which he  he will hopefully let the side  .
He is also a self-employed  .
I thought he'd be touting for business!


We are not at the time of business, we are here to affirm the call!
All in favour please show.
Thank you.
As we come to end of  of that part  we have erm   Burmingford Hall of Ministry two, three people  and we have also  as part of the report recognised the timing of Roy , where's Roy?
Roy, who is sitting over there.
Lastly,recognise this man is Bob, who's sitting over there.
Erm  those two people, along with Bryn   erm  were also in, in college together.
So they started their ministry off together, and I think it's  something quite special to me  and to recognise that we  have sent three people off on a journey  and three people, two here, have come to the end of a journey and  just part of the journey  and are beginning to discover that  will be  discovered in the life  of the three human beings, human beings
 
at the time.
Shall we remember  and these three friends in life.
Lord we thank you for the ways in which you challenge and call people  to all forms of ministry within the light of your church.
And especially we thank you today for the call of Martin  and Ian  and Richard  to the Ministry of Word and Sacrament within the light of your church.
We pray for them and their families.
We pray for them in their studies.
In their pilgrimage to  discover more of your presence in their lives.
As they begin a particular stage of the ministry  we also pray for those who are coming towards the end of that particular stage of the ministry.
Remember especially Bob and Roy  and we pray that you will enable them to find fulfilment and enjoyment, and enrichment  in their lives as they  step forward  in faith and confidence in  Lord in your mercy 
Amen.
Amen.
Reports are not always about revolutions  and that's important!
And you will see that we now have  a good  erm  .
Well, over to Noel  to relax with each other thoughts, questions, comments about the life of the ministry of the church.
And  happens  some people have prepared particular presentations, you will see after one is on , and one of political insubordination, one on the process of learning together.
Five  districts have erm  prepared some of vision  in order to  share that vision or that example of what is happening in the districts, relating to the ministry  erm  with the   and those who have come to us as well.
And  one church has prepared a  little presentation or  mind-stretching, heart-stretching thought of church and community.
So we're, we're here now to relax.
To talk about the Ministry of Office.
I think, in starting this off, I would like to  encourage as many people to take place in conversation, if possible.
And I will include in that  those who are  younger than most of us here.
Er, to talk about what  you think about the ministry  of the church as well.
We're talking about this  partly because of the document passed in the ministry in which, everybody has avidly read  and erm  has been  talked about after the seventeenth  er, in York  in July.
But I think the more important reason for talking about  the Ministry of the New Church, or the Ministry of the Church  is because of the  erm  developing needs and the  developing thoughts and ideas which are actually  additions  which are the, the crucial area  where ministry takes place.
First of all, I think it would be useful if we were clear  that with the new , ministry was a waste!
Too often, we are limited in thinking of ministry as those who  either do or do not work where  are thought of.
And, we might call those Ministers, if you like, with a big M.
Erm  but we'll be talking about the Ministry of the Church.
We're actually talking about, I mean, if you remember this , we're talking about  the absinity  of the body of Christ.
That is the Ministry of the Church.
But each one that's here  however old or however young  are a part  an active part  an essential part  a crucial part  of the Ministry of the Body of Christ.
We are these.
And how we relate  within the church  and how we relate outside the church  although, in essence, there is nothing outside the church  there is nothing that that position .
Okay?
As you look into your shaving mirror in the morning, you shall say, hello Minister, how are you?
Or as you look into your drawer in the morning, to find out what you need  to put into your hand bag in the day, you say hello Minister, how are you?
Okay?
That's .
We're also talking in terms of a ministry  which  what you expect  is very often what you get  you're trained to be somebody , okay?.
And one of the things that these trainings help you   is that if you expect something of a child  then you're much more likely to get it!
That way it's positive.
If you expect that child is going to  do a fantastic job  on that painting  then that encouragement and confidence is coming across.
It also works negatively!
If you don't expect much from little Tommy  then, little Tommy is less and less likely to give you anything much!
So we're talking about ministry.
We're talking about something which is bound by our expectations.
We need to be aware of our expectations  because our expectations can be  limiting  and can be stretching and  inspiring.
We also are exercising the Ministry of the Church  within a context.
We've learnt something about the church and .
One of the contexts in which we are exercising ministry is that we have  for the last fifty years  well I haven't personally!
But for the last fifty years or so  for most of us  the experience of the church  has been declined  and  closer  and  reducing number of people with dog collars.
Okay?
There have been negative interference.
We need to be aware  of how those can actually triple the numbers.
We need to be aware of how  we are  subconsciously  taught.
A Geographer  knows that  and  the whole environment importance.
A Geographer also knows that in order to  use maps  you need to know  where you are.
You can't get anywhere without knowing where we are.
Half of our exercise in listening to each other is to know where we are.
In order that we can begin to recognise  the movements and the visions and the views  of where we can be.
Knowing where we are in terms of the way in which we are tricked into having  bad .
Knowing where we are in the way in which we are tricked  into believing that erm  our churches now are weaker than when they were founded  and  probably most of you, many of you have heard my children's prayer.
 
the children are the difference between churches now and churches in the past.
Especially at church anniversaries.
.And nine times out of ten when I ask the congregation  whether your church is bigger now than it was when it was founded  nine times out of ten the congregation say, it is smaller now than when it was founded.
And nine point nine times out of ten they are wrong!
We've got a wrong  false  image of the .
And that is harmful!
And it's parallel.
Those visions come from within ourselves.
Come from the way in which we don't necessarily take on board what we are learning.
They come also from  orgasmic enters or whatever  such programmes there are go around these days,!


Carole, you tell the people sitting next to you what orgasmic is.


What did he say?
I don't know !
Is it Derek Nimmo?


In the nineteen fifties.
I never
Erm
I never watched it, in fact.
There's also the whole of notion of what we are saying by our ministry together.
Okay?
What we are, what we are saying by our buildings.
sort of ended in a little  
What we are saying by our notice boards.
Many of which are still in action.
What we are saying by our commitment or our attitude.
What we are saying by  the way in which we share what we are saying by our commitment to justice  and peace.
All of these are involved  and a part of our ministry.
And, that again, might be me  but many of you when you've heard me say it in a service  I've ended up  with my asking at the end of a sermon  asking the congregation to smile.
Now, you know that's  how many of you I, have I done that to?


Well that, that may be a reflection on me, okay?
But  what are we saying by our expressions  both within worship and outside?
And of course, our discussion of ministry i.e. the activity of the people of God  is not just a domestic thing about the URC.
I mean, we  we get bound up with  with all sorts of domestic things, and will, I expect, later today.
But it's also  erm  about discovering the completeness of the ministry of the people of God  as we enter through the various commitments that we have  to our sister churches  in Wales and in Britain  and in the world, whether it's routine or a particular relationship of members or  All that's part of the context  of the ways in which we're talking about  and sharing with each other with God.
Please smile?


There is a list here  three major's presentations on  communion  on political insubordination  and on the pilgrimage of learning together.
I think what we'll do is hear each of those three presentations  and then I will allow a time for comment, especially discussion  after each  I will limit that  to make sure we get time for all  so that's  that's the way we're going to do it.
Thank you.
But first of all  in terms of a precedency attitude  I hope I'm looking in the right place?
Nannette  erm  is going to  lead us in our  .
Nannette would you like everybody where you are and who you are?
Nannette  the Minister of the United Reform Church in Merthyr  also sharing the ministry with the Presbyterian Church of Wales in Merthyr and Merthyr Vale.
Thank you John for that introduction.
I remember John coming to Merthyr and asking the young people to find, see if there was anybody who was over a hundred in the congregation!


And the dazzling thing was that quite a few made a beeline for  a lady who co , could at least give  thirty years!


I thought  haven't noticed from where I'm standing!


In preparing ours for today  and  the whole question of thinking of being, main precedency of communion rests in our understanding erm, of ordination, which I know  later we  we will have time to discuss.
But, may I ask yo , of you a question  not for answers but will  erm  perhaps come later in the debate  and that is what does the  service of Holy Communion mean  to you?
Our answers  will get crushed.
But one thing that I would share with you  and it's this, is that  whenever the  friends of Jesus eat and drink together  they remember him  his sacrificial love for them  and the wonderful gift of freedom that he has made possible.
I'll say at the outset, that Holy Communion is not something that we play about with.
Our communion service is part of the rich tradition which has been passed down to us  from Jesus Christ.
But having sa said that  I have to share with you the  a key element er, in the life of the church has been the ordained Ministry of Word and Sacrament  and pastoral care.
And there is no intention to dispense with this kind of service.
But concern is expressed  in the number of jobs that the perfect minister is expected to do.
I stand here, I am not a perfect minister because I am over forty  I've got  children that are not too awkward but  erm, could be awkward  and, I haven't a spouse  ah  and ah  I stand here saying that I'm not good at everything  I'm good with young people, I'm not o only good with old people  I try to do my best.
We know the picture of a perfect minister  but  we  there is a challenge  to relief ministers  to do the work that they are called to do.
This will lead to  a long deba debate.
But, it is  it seems from this report that  is in front of us  that it is now appropriate for the URC  to take a new step with regard to the local ministry of elders.
Already this morning the question has been asked about providing elders.
And it is that  each local church, of whatever sign  should be invited to nominate from amongst their elder division  those elders who district council  might consider and recognise as dividing elders  for a stated period of years  with authority to do , provide them all services of worship and meetings of that local church, as the need arises.
And this has been suggested, the same thing, the understanding that we have now of special authorization  which obviously doesn't work.
The reasons for looking at this change and, I quote the reports  the  the ways the district council interpret the existing clause  about provi ,precedency  is the district council  ah, interpret in very different ways.
A second thing is that  a co , is it right that a company of people  should be deprived of a sacrament  because an ordained minister is not available?
Remembering the words of Jesus, that where two or three are gathered together.
The third thing that the re , the report says is that there is no magical element about sacraments.
But  sacrament has everything to do with the grace of God  and the faith of the church.
And this proposal is seen, lastly, as developing  local leadership.
The proposal is that presiding elders  and whether proposal is the right word, but the suggestion that presiding elders  be  appointed following our conviction  that every local church  should have regular sacramental worship  with presiding  with people  presiding  being allowed.
Can I close by saying that every time Christians share the Lord's supper  they are publicly declaring their needs to be fed with the living bread and wine.
What does the holy  communion, what the Lord's supper  mean  to you?


and  our visitors from other churches are also welcome to join in  in any discussion or comments.
And any more, for those who feel like it, there's provision for
Sorry?
Anyone who's visiting from other churches.
And  we lack provisions  that allows for a presidency in the absence  of a minister  is a good one as long as it is monitored closely by  district council.
And  be that there no magical  erm   like you, which I agree there is a mystical.
Like it isn't   you know that  the Eucharist, er the the  the communion is very central to our worship  and  having had ten years working at the Navy  that was an eye opener  and deepening of my own spiritual awareness  in the, as in the sanctity that I got, the sacrament  and how other churches see it  and er  helped to create a very   affirm, at the very centre of my own  if you like, pilgrimage.
What had abhorred me in the past  and sometimes, er, perhaps arrive and been to the church and say, oh by the way it's communion!
And  have that sprung on me  I I I, I I feel terrible because  the communion service i is, is something I have to prepare for  in myself  and obviously shape the whole se se service around it.
And I think we need to heighten, sharpen our awareness of  erm  what I understand by communion  and er  er, also to er, to remember that the  injunction of Paul as he was  you know that I have  received of the Lord at which I deliver unto you.
Those words of execution as we continue to read them.
There's a severe warning against those  who can't do it in a spirit of  of of, lardiness and, and not discerning  to the body and and, and the will of Christ.
Perhaps that needs to be reminded about them.
But they sho er er er, it's good to have  and sharing it  but I  but I, but I, I personally feel as long as it's  well monitored within the  within the district council  in the event of a minister not being able to be there  then  er a reco , er som , a recognised person to  .
Right  when we
Who, who are you?
Oh  you ask difficult questions, that's all you can get!


No giants in  Ardmore Vale!
No giants  in  Ardmore Vale 


You'd make  do that!
See  Is it me?
 
 
.
Ah?
I've forgotten what I was gonna say!
Yep.
Erm  oh yes  my next question was  er, what is holy communion?
I'd like to re-phrase the question  what is holy  in  communion?
Okay  well I mean
do we say, what is holy in communion we then recognise that it's not  what  but who  who is holy  in communion  okay?
The holy, as in communion to me is a who  not a what!
Okay?
And I think that debate  er between the, the  tradition and, and the  the   and and er, Roman Catholic traditions, you know i er, this business of elevating the host and and  substantiation   so the elements themselves that, that it become holy  alright?
And then it's a kind of a what, you know?
It's the body of a what, and the blood as a what!
Have you read ?
But that's not it!
And that's not what Paul meant  when he said  the body of a what!
He meant  who?
That is holy.
And who is holy?
Jesus Christ.
Alright?
You wanted it, and that's it!
When two or three are doubted  they're wrong!
So, what's the who?
That's the holy to me.
And the other who of holy  is the Saint.
I'm making this point because I think that we can get really  to verify  
You're always going on about
You know  this whole of idea of things and ritual being the holy  and that things in the ritual there  yes, there are sacred symbols  and they need to be handled in that, that, that sense of sacredness, but the  that which makes them sacred  is the person, our Lord  and us  in communion with him and with each other and it seems to me that wherever that happens there is sacrament.
Wherever that happens there is  holy communion.
Even if the elements aren't even present.
Okay?
But I think I think those elements are important otherwise Jesus wouldn't have made a point of it!


David     East Wales.
Can I clarify please what exactly we are talking about here?
Because the do document, Patterns of Ministry  does not  talk about lay presidency!
It talks about the presidency of ordained people!
Elders  who are ordained!
Now, I rather wish it was talking about  lay presidency  and I would go along with Nannette  on the question of a lay person  presiding in communion.
Ecumenical dynamite, I know!
But I think we need to be clear  whether we are talking  about ordained or lay people  and further on in the discussion whether we can indeed justify that division.
How can try  and allow an elder   as an ordained minister of the free people .
Can I say that need holy communion as a group thing  in a way of our communion  and  as a church we are going to be Roman Catholic.
It is the community  as a  an affirmation of the community  and to say that we need to have an outsider in to do that  because there is not an ordained minister there  to me, is a little like the situation in some Anglican Parishes where there's a woman  sitting
We will move on  .
I'm allowed to say something  pilgrimage of love  and the parish knows that too because something  that er  it's .
So the three words that's come to my mind immediately are  go and do!
And you will recognise them as the words of Jesus.
They are  direct  they're clear  they're simple  and most importantly  they are words of one syllable.


But they  still have a conscience  and they challenge that they .
Now the  the annual assembly  has challenged us to engage in  what is called integrated trading.
Personally, I prefer to speak about  learning together  because I think it's more  friendly use, er, user friendly  I think I understand it better  and it reminds me  that it's connected with disciple-ship.
Because I'm quite sure that  the young people  this morning  everyone would know  that the word disciple  means


Follower  isn't it?
Well you're all shy aren't you?


yes?
Means a learner.
Now the word disciple means learner.
So that we're all involved  disciple-ship is integrally, er, learning is integral  to our disciple-ship.
And we are involved  not just, spasmodically or occasionally  but continuously.
And learning together  as we've been reminded more than once than this morning  engages us all  irrespective of age, irrespective of experience  it engages everyone  and it's worth emphasising that the quality of learning  does not depend upon the size of a congregation!
And I say that in a right of some statistics that appear in today's agenda.
The quality of learning  depends upon the measure of our response  and of our commitments.
It involves sharing our gifts  with each other freely and generously.
It means erm  learning  with each other and learning from each other because none of us knows it all!
And I think, also, it means being open  open to one another and open  with one another.
And when you put all that together  I think we would recognise  that there is no single    of learning  that suits every congregation  because congregations differ, one from the other.
And we remind ourselves that the spirit is also  infinitely versatile and flexible in its activity.
But when we consider learning together  are a model.
To use an educational term  it's an active model  it's an active model of, model of partnership  and of sharing.
Patterns of Ministry  to my mind  can be interpreted as  patterns of sharing  and partnership is active and not fussy.
Partnership is  creative  and not rigid.
Partnership is  dynamic  and not .
And then  learning together  is a model  of dynamic  encounter  or dialogue, one with the other.
And by that, I mean  that we engage one another in a process.
We cannot all, as it already been emphasised  by the last speaker  we may not all be able to do the same things  we have not all got the same gifts or the same  responsibilities  er  within the church  but you all  have the same responsibilities  in this light of God.
And that implies that  our learning together  engages us in  dynamic encounter  dynamic dialogue  which also releases  some of those energies in various areas of life  that would otherwise be sealed  or indeed, locked!
And I were to guess that  learning together is also  a model of  rich  and diverse possibilities.
There is no one who can foresee  what are the ultimate results.
Or what is the ultimate outcome of any learning process?
There is no blueprint  that one could lay down  but with a  on  the infinite  versatility of God  to use and deploy the gifts that we are able to offer  to his service.
The Holy Spirit is also flexible  and progressive in operation.
And therefore, in learning together there are  rich  and diverse possibilities.
And I would suggest through us learning together  is a model  of effective evangelism.
For evangelism  at best is a congregation learning together.
Learning together for the word.
Learning together for the sacrament.
Learning together through prayer and worship  and all the activities of the church.
Learning together by entering, entering into  the experience of one or the other  and also  engaging the community around the church, not superficially  but er  realistically.
And it would seem to me  that unless this morning's exercise  which has been so rewarding and so  profitable  unless this morning's exercise is to dissipate  into another piece of feeling  and er  pleasurable discussion  then we ought to take quite seriously  the, the words of Jesus.
Go and do!
And see whether we can no , we could put this  matter of learning together  that every member of  of our church   high on the agenda.
Well, at the next er  elders meeting  the next church meeting  the next district council 
 
or whatever.


We'll move on.
And  read the  please  six  and visions from  Viscuss The first one is going to be  given a bit more time  and then the other five are going to brief.
And we'll ask Christian, who's erm  an  elder
Yes, right.
In   Garmonchaty to share an experience of their church  in terms of using ministry.
A ministry that we don't often think of as a ministry.
Correct sir?
.
Er, in the introductions I didn't stand up and er, introduce myself cos I felt it would steal a few minutes of my er presentation!


This is re , it is my first visit to a .
My name's Chris , I'm from the river town  URC in  just down the road.
What we've been embarking on in the  er  the URC church in  Shodden is er budgeting  the title of my  talk today is budgeting for growth.
We hear about budgets in all walks of life, indeed we saw a red box only a few days ago.
I'm afraid I've only got a little red one!
 
This will happen next week.
So we've had the most famous budget of all.
I suppose  you could argue that his budget was er, a budget for growth  but my discussion this morning is apolitical.
But I'll make not comment on his budget at all.
The basic principle of a budget  is straightforward  it's to forecast your   forecast your expend expenses  so they can make plans  for the future.
Big and lit , little businesses alike  budget for growth.
It enables them to make most, most cost-effective use  of their resources.
So why shouldn't a church do the same?
On this approach, following a presentation  and a discussion  led by the Reverend Bill   about eighteen months ago.
And I've written this paper, not to  give information  and details  on, how you do budget.
There are plenty of papers and books  and guidance from the URC to help you do that.
What I'd like to  share with you this morning  is  how we as a church took that challenge  and the experiences we feel we've  received  from taking that challenge.
We have begun to feel the benefit.
Well how was it at er   Shodden Well, like any other church we thought we were doing well.
We were just getting enough money in  to do  just enough in the church.
The church was helping  the spirit.
Helping in kind.
Helping the fellowship.
What more as a church could we ask for?
Well maybe they can   like any other church  was the an , or is, the Annual Church ge the Annual General Meeting  and as John pointed out this morning  of course, we look  at what we've done in the past.
The finances  the well being of our own flock  what we have done.
But, look at the tense, it's what  have done .
It's a retrospective view.
That is important, we learn from experiences.
But it's what we've done in the past.
What about the future?
How many of us actually, in our church meeting, look forward  to what we want to do?
Where's the direction of your church?
Where's the direction of your fellowship  that they can follow?
Are there any problems that may be looming on the horizon  that perhaps you ought to be addressing before they reach the door?
We need to grow together  and enjoy the experience together.
So what changed us?
Well, the presentation by Bill  helped  in supporting  provided was the .
We've heard it all before!
But not, at any time, in the context of the church.
A number of us went to that presentation  the minister, the church secretary, myself, and the treasurer at the time  and a few of the elders.
We listened and learned  that if the church is to grow  it must consider all its resources!
Reference to that again this morning.
We must tap that wealth with talent.
I suppose really we learn by who sent us that evening.
A sense of purpose  a sense of involvement  a sense of direction  a sense of satisfaction  and a sense of achievement.
We're beginning to experience all those.
And I suppose we also experience a sixth sense.
A sense of humour  
 
we've heard that again this morning.
And Bill, in there, used sense of humour  to get some of his points over.
But we've got all of those.
talk from any of you.
If you look closely at that  to what depth  to what depth do those senses reach  in your church?
Our church has money to spend on  on anything!, fabric, fellowship  worship, mission  the list is endless!
What a delightfulness to choose from!
But what priority do you sign to it?
Which one do you choose?
How much  on each of those?
One of the problems you may be facing in your church is inertia  the feeling that  we're doing fine  everything's ticking over.
But remember, the same effort  reaps the same reward.
So we returned from that evening together  and were very enthusiastic about what we heard.
The seed was sown in good soil.
The treasurer indeed, faces the same old 
 
task every year  to ask church members to give a little bit more  to pay the bills.
What a depressing thing to ask for!
Just to keep up with inflation!
Just to keep the wolf from the door.
Wouldn't you generate a more positive attitude  if  you were aligned your increase  or the request for an increase  through the a  an increase in activity  in the church itself?
That, is true growth!
So what did we do?
Well, first of all we told the people  at the earliest opportunity  we told the church members what we've learnt  told them about our  of the advantages and our enthusiasm and commitment to the process.
We tried the process.
We selected a single project to just  learn  how to do it  just go through the process simply.
It took about nine months of planning from start to finish  on the one project we did.
We had a programme on four consecutive Saturdays, last October  help reach the .
At, not a significant cost.
It's a significant step for our fellowship.
And  the benefit is, we want to do it again this year, that's great!
Plus, taking , keeping it and doing it  if you see benefit in that.
So that was a benefit to  people outside  and people inside the church.
We have learnt at getting  a number of people  into our congregation.
So that was our first success when we decided  that process.
Forward planning  and setting objectives  were a good way to focus attention.
So, we set objectives  and sub , subsequently  planned a budget  to ensure  that it's successful.
So what's the timetable?
Well I'll take you back six months.
The elders were advised in advance that we were going to discuss  the future,.
This enabled the eldership to start thinking about  what we want to do next year  to grow together.
So, in the next elders meeting  we used a management technique, brainstormers  think the  say what you think.
And  we gathered all this information  we grouped it into those categories, admission, worship,and such like.
Then later, couple of months later when we found that list  checked that we understood what the list meant  and we presented that list  to our church meeting.
This will ensure that there's commitment  and that the direction is understood  for the next year.
So, in that presentation discussions followed  and that list of nine things, I think it was, surprise surprise the church wanted to do all nine!
Now there's a challenge!
So what we did then, is we went  to do, to do fact-finding, costs, people resources, effort  and any options that might be open to us.
And  the culmination of the production of some financial information that simply enables you to ensure  that you can meet those goals  in that coming year  if you choose to do so.
So at the Annual, Annual General Meeting  it was conducted i , very much in the same way as before  presenting the previous year's activities  but this time, we presented a budget!
Very similar to the example that Bill  provided  in his hand outs.
We listed a our expenditure  his forecast  we used the forecast based on experience and inflation.
Some of them are at best guesses!
But then you foil a new project to your expenditure and say look  if you want to do these  as indeed, you've expressed  then it's going to cost you so much.
If you get that agreement there  one hopes you get that commitment.
On a technicality the bu , the treasurer can still control it.
He can measure every clause of what the income is , against what the expenditure is  so that we have some control  to ensure  that the church life grows  and we don't stumble.
So, we have true growth.
What are, finally, what are the benefits that we've seen here?
Well  if there's a commercial activity you could argue that  but i , in the chu , context of the church  what have we achieved?
We have focus  we have a direction  we maintain the fiscal control  we are aware of what we're doing as a church  we have the  the members commitment  indeed, we have their involvement  in what we want to do.
It is future planning  it is growth  it is commended to you all.
And I'd like to leave you with one last statement  just enough, but just enough, is not enough!
Thank you.


We're going to   now  from  first of all  I'll say it in order and then you can come up  .
Jean  from South Wales, come on Jean!
Then Russell  from East Wales  then Henry  for North Wales  then    from West Wales  and Becky  from Mid-Wales.
Can you remember your names?
Your,yo 


Okay?
Right!
It's going to be
Jean, you've got the floor for ten minutes!
Oh!
Jean    .
Er, I'm Jean  from Merthyr Tydfil  and I'm the secretary  on the committee.
Within the South Wales district  the question education can always, as well as trying to  help and support  carry pe I've worked in  junior churches and  many more education  churches.
It's very much concerned  with the training and Ministry of Elders  and a few weeks ago  a part of our programme  we held a very successful and lively meeting  on the subject of church membership.
It was initiated by one of our ministers  erm, who felt it would be useful for churches to share  er, their procedures for  preparation for church membership.
As he said, I know what I do with my congregation  but how do others  er, approach the subject?
Under the leadership of the Reverend Kenneth   this meeting developed into a much wider consideration  of the leaning and significance of church membership.
Does it begin with infant baptism?
Are all children and me , and adults who have been baptised  members of the church?is not or you'll be actually encouraged  or pressured  to misinterpret the membership  or should we wait for them to be informed  er er, to wait for them to, to feel the ?
One or two elders   confessed that they have not been baptised!
And others were not sure whether they had!
So what about them?
We realise that this is a subject  which warrants much  consideration, as we think about the life and reverence of our churches  and look to the future for .
And we hope that our district will continue to be, be aware  of ways in, in which we may help elders and  churches in their ministry.
Thank you.
Russell?
Russell , East Wales district.
Erm  I'd like to tell you a story  about  a vision of Ministry in East Wales.
When I'm about to tell  you a story, I thought to myself well  stories that Jesus used to tell were parables  and when I looked at them in the bible  they had a kingdom meaning to them.
And I thought to myself  yes, I'll tell you a story!
I'll tell you a story about  a place I went
Now  so much more time has been released for us  to be the church  but at the same time we have nowhere to hide  and nothing to blame!
It has meant, that churches  need to be bold  and be young  or a threat to what we belong to  as the edges between church and  and community have blurred  we are now much more vulnerable.
Somebody said, like a tortoise without a shell.
And we need a greater trust in God.
It has also meant a greater love for one another as we can share our faith  and come face to face with who we are.
I'm glad that Pat used the word  exciting  but all the story you've heard this morning are exciting!
But, it does Pat, doesn't it  also danger!
It also means fear, it also means pain.
I don't know no any more what church is  I don't know any more and I'm supposed to come this morning and help to discover what unity is!
It blurred so much  and in the blurring  we have discovered our own vulnerabilities.
And having raised our banners of church  proudly  a change is all    what changes should have been!
I see now narrow mindedness  I see the  deathedness I see suspicion of other communities  I see jealousies.
However, I am discovering that the church  probably not the community  but more a communion  and that's perhaps an answer to what Nanette  ?
Or within the communion of our Lord Jesus Christ  in word and sacrament  and that living out of his love is his body  and finding community.
Communion  actually the Holy Communion  has become so much more important to us  and so much more exciting to us  because we're not just celebrating the living Christ  we're also celebrating the crucified Christ  and we're simply meeting our pain and our joys  together  in communion with him.
I once watched a film on the telly  it was a pretty crap film really!
It was American  no, sorry it's not!


See  yes  the thing about community .
It was a simple story, and I would of forgotten it  er, about a woman struggling to bring up a family in a depression.
The story was that her husband in the deep south  was killed by some young hoodlums who were black.
She was left to bring up a family  she had to go the banks for money  the banks were all   and they refused her money  to keep the farm going.
She took on a black lad  and because she did that she was ostracised from the rest of the community.
He eventually was driven off the farm  but the respectable white people who went to church.
The story, of course, was a happy ending, that she struggled on and she did it.
But for some strange reason, and I don't know whether they direct it to Christian  the last shot of the film, almost unnoticeable because the credits were going up  she went back into church  and it was a communion service  and all you saw was her receiving the bread and passing the plate  and the plate was to the young black lad on the farm  and you thought, he's come back!
But then, no  he passed the plate then  to the woman's husband  who had been killed!
And then the plate was passed from him to his murderer  and it was passed round until it was passed to the bank manager who wouldn't give her the money  and then back to her.
And somehow, but I can't explain it  in that moment  that what community's about  it's about the not yet  as well your .
About the journey  being on  and the reconciliation o , of them .
And that's where we are   and  this morning.
Thank you.


We thank you to everybody who's contributed to  to our speaking this morning  .
There's a lot for you to talk about over lunch.
And on the journeys home.
.Just a reminder that erm, expenses and apologies should be given to Suzanne or Eileen.
Erm  if any  have been  those elders or ministers  will advise us the days they are going to come, those ministers who are   and seen, if we do so that we can remember whom our chosen .
Downstairs there is a bookstall and there's a , today upstairs .
Bon appetit!
Oh dear my batteries are going flat!
Oh no it's alright!
Erm
So what, are you trying it out for somebody are you?
No, er
We to , were you recording ?
I've been doing, doing so.
You have?
Now, you won't  about the Wrexham .
Er, yes.
Did you have, did you read those words?
Er  yes, I just glanced through it.
Oh!
Well  actually there's no decision yet from the church meeting
Yeah.
so we've still got to
.
Yes, but they could 
And they could 
sell it.
I mean, my favourite  but .
Mm.
And it was a major problem of finance  it seems to me  when you've two possible avenues left to take.
When you  I think it's  yes.
One is  getting a loan from the church
Mm.
and repaying it at  five percent interest or whatever is a rate of 
Yes.
fare.
And  there's no guarantee they'll  they'll lend it.
If they ask for money.
The other is to apply to come back   that  I  the interest that I .
I was told that o , over a year ago   but I haven't found any yet!
I see!
I've got a lot of information about tru charitable trusts but all !
I can't see that any one of them which is  you know, would have that as one of the things.
I see.
Now I haven't finished, but I mean I, it really is at the top of my mind,yo , you know it hasn't  I haven't given it top priority.
Well you've got a lot of other things to think about I'd say.
Well all the other things have been  more urgent, so therefore, I haven't really pursued it to its limits.
Mm.
So, you know if  if you find there's a  position for  when they absolutely need help  you know, phone me again or write to me again and tell me you've  you've, you've set everything .
Well keep in touch.
But, well I mean I  it's a  so far, I really don't push.
I see.
I've got the names of lots of 
Mm.
I'll try to get started.
But, you know  if you need some   I can't  any of them a , as being willing to .
Mm mm.
In the pipeline.
But there may something at the   there might 
Oh there mi there might be!
I think might be  because it's a  the four churches toge together.
That's right,.
If it  need it  to share the cost of the new one  but once it goes on the 
Sa 
four churches
Yes.
and not on the one.
and er, also  therefore  you'll have the , if you like
Yeah.
or .
I wish some other churches would come and .
Well we'll be stuck into finding a finance man  er, to watch the cost over the .
You need ?
Yeah, I mean .
You've gotta look at  the same as .
Have you got
Erm   in the personals
to me .
and the personal situation now  is that  economic climate   get a house  how many are talking here!
 
 
sometimes from a .
Like, you'd better   can I get rid of these?
Please!
Would you be able stay with the one you've got?
Well the one we've got above our   in fact, there's one next door to us going for sale at the moment  and they're asking advertised prices   else you'll be getting about fifty thousand on top  that's ours.
It was a short   she wants fifty thousand pound for !
And because  that one  even if we didn't rule out   it says fifteen forty.
Mm.
And it seems for the churches  we'd then be looking up to point  forty perc , fourteen percent  for fifty thousand pounds.
A , actually  John was suggesting  that we might talk nicely to John's dad about the money they've got invested in the sale of their pro , their ground.
I don't know how far we'd get but er  it's worth looking at.
The only thing is though, I mean, you see but  I think the church itself  and  I would say the church as the group now
Mm.
would be looking at that  as a more meaningful  contribution to .
Mm.
Well what else can you talk ?
So to be able to   the  sweepstake   in the past  another church and they could be, they could be  on the interest  you know, the amount  towards  running costs such as this.
Well, to me running costs wouldn't be  and the cost of towards  borrowing  a house is the same way you know.
Well exactly!
The point is that   looks very nice .
Yeah.
You know, but I mean if the church cannot find   contributions it really can't !
Well you see , like  like  .
Exactly!
Yes well  erm  we're still going to have to talk about it with the elders you see.
Sorry, what did you say?
We're still going to have to talk about with the e , with the 
With the 
joint elders group.
Yes, yes, yes, yes
Erm
Quite right!
which meets on Monday.
Er so  I might be in touch with you after that.
Oh right.
But I mean even now you can  you can read that thing out to me.
Yes.
I mean, that, that was  you er   goals, you know.
No, no messing, I mean I did that   ages ago and I,i , it just arrived!
I think I was already in .
Did you have a good holiday by the way?
Lovely holiday, thank you.
But I wa but I was there for a fortnight and when I came back  I, you know it's  preparing for Synod just takes all the time we have somehow and I
Oh yes.
I  I was only off the plane just last week  I'd better have a look at this  
Yeah.
dear, dear, dear!
Just a mi , matter of interest where do you come from because on this  dictionary thing I'm supposed to put down what people's local accent is?
Ah, that's good!
Only Oxford, no I'm, mine is in in  inexplicable because I've lived in so many places and I pick up accents!
I was born in Lancashire, so that's 
Mm.
the basis of it all.
I've had the roughest edges knocked off it when I went to University.
And the , but then I went to live in  Northern Ireland so I've got a so picked up a fair bit of Northern Ireland.
Yes well, it does happen when,whe 
Cos it's a hybrid, it's an old 
It 
it does happen when you move around.
Yeah it does.
In  I think it happened to me to some extent.
Well it does, if if  if you pick up  accents, some people never change!
That's true.
some people, doesn't matter where you go they never change!
But, if you are at all I mean yo , you, I think you pick up reflections.
Mm.
You know, I haven't been consciously stru , striving to change my accent.
In fact, you know I'm consciously now not to become a Welsh accent  because if I've got the Welsh accent added to it all it'll be horrendous!


But er   
Right.
I have 
Yeah.
isn't it?
Yes.
It's at least distinctive!
It is.
On the notice you sent out  the other day for Monday's meeting
Yes.
I think you put a paragraph first  that said maybe we will need to consider  our recommendation
Yes.
and the, of course, you went onto to number one the man's    two er, group secretary  who draws it out  I forgot what the other one was.
Yes.
Maybe in some thing which  at the moment  is that the be number one.
Er  which wo , which one you mean, the
Well tha tha that number one be the question on recommendation.
I see!
Oh yes!
Well I was thinking that.
Yeah.
But it really is, it might have got lost in the paragraph  mighten it?
Cos when the  comes underneath.
I see what you mean.
It isn't being critical at all but  on this position situation that might the first thing that we
Oh yes, I was assuming that  erm  a I do , I didn't really set it out as a formal agenda just as a
Just as a note 
a reminder, like.
Erm  I don't know what the situation will be in the other churches.
Mm.
And I must say between us at the moment  there wasn't a strong feeling  what it's all about.
Not a strong feeling in favour?
No?
No, I'm only saying  as prepared  with 
Mm.
.
Well erm
I mean, this is nothing to do with a  don't worry that's  we don't want them thinking that the house is the issue cos it isn't, alright?
The house  what rate is ?
Yes.
Whether there are  the  
No I thi 
which  erm  we had an elders meeting on Thursday and between Sunday and Thursday  various people have comments and people along
Mm.
on Saturday or Sunday    erm  there was erm  a tale at the elders meeting on su , subversion  and overall feelings  erm  erm  that we wouldn't .
Oh!
That's a pity!
Yeah  well that's    erm, I mean, the only talking is between us at the moment it's just, you know,.
If, of course, on Monday  that's a vote, a recommendation is taken
Mm 
you know  we would accept a reco , whatever the  Monday's meeting was.
Yes.
We we wouldn't mean sticking out of the wood and saying no .
Yeah but
In fact, report back just all about meeting and say
Bu , but o , on the other hand yo you've got to se you've to er  give the information that you have about the feeling in the church!
Yes.
In fact we  i it would  expressed interest  it will be expressed a week on Monday.
Yes.
Erm  I mean I  I, I don't know, I mean i it's not not, it's not my business to even look 
Oh yes.
one way or the other!
I , it's simply my business tosortof  help the works.
See, mm it  that's true yes.
That if it's as well   well before the meeting Monday because  at the end of the day  you know  we, we gotta look at the matter going forward isn't it?
Yes.
You know   is  going forward to a week on Sunday and then whatever else happens  we're going through the process aren't we?
And having this all come on Monday thinking that everything is  we gotta  to the church we're feeling  well if we don't go through now, where do we go?
Well I don't  I don't think  that should influence them too much.
I mean  it  one wants to get a settlement quickly
Mm.
but it's more important to get the right person than to do it 
Well cer 
quickly.
well certain things  like John  there
Mm.
a number of people  
Mm.
and then what's it amount to?
If I use the word aggression.
Yes.
I mean they
It just came over in his sermon on Sunday morning!
It's cos I wasn't for that.
Weren't you?
No.
Still   he quoted  that he'd dealt with  in his past.
Mm.
And people felt there was an aggressiveness  a about him!
Mm.
And in trying to bring these four churches together  it would be a li you know, not .
A lot of tact may be needed at times, yes.
And  you could see them all so  nervousness  anxiety  that I wasn't told about.
And unfortunately this 
First can we have you back in the church !
we've had this problem in the past with John !
And with  makes 
Ooh!
Ooh!
makes you wo wary 
Mm mm 
and cautious!
Yes well  erm  I mean  you can't help being aware of past experiences.
Everybody back in the church 
There again 
please in two minutes !
in getting, trying to bring the four together again 
Starting again in two minutes !
Mm.
Back in   
you'd wanna make sure yo the right role of leadership is needed  and er  certainly this helps in that as well.
Even when.
Er just    more negative .
Well that seems to be the mood .
Well  what the church meeting's got to decide 
the church meeting will have to!
It's the church meeting's  final decision.
I mean even if, even i , even if the elders recommend positively  if the church meeting goes against it, well that's it!
.
But erm  on the other hand we we've gotta try, as a group of elders to come together I 
Mm.
must admit.
To see what goes.
Erm, some of us may go to  tomorrow  and 
Mm.
That'd be a good idea, I think!
Perhaps in some way, yes.
Erm  I I feel by going to  cos  sometimes they're more involved than  these days.
Than, than in talk with God 
Yep.
yes.
Well not, that isn't how it  but 
Oh no, I know what you mean.
and  I got a greater kinship because they're a small group.
Mm.
And I go there every month.
Mm.
So, you know, I do feel quite involved in what they're doing and they're  they will readily come and share with you.
Nice!
You know?
And we'll see, we'll see what goes.
And I, I thought it's where we've  we could share the minutes together before Monday's meeting.
Right, well 
In , in this situation we've all  and again  the who implication, not only  Wrexham  but .
Oh yes!
Er  but we  we wasn't sure for North Wales that  it's the  type !
Mm.
What is the right situation?
You know  basically, by enlarge we don't know.
Right well
We will see you se , seven thirty on Monday isn't it?
Yes  yes I'm 
Then it's  then it's Friday again afterwards?
Okay, all the best!
Er, it's er, Kevin isn't it?
Yes.
Yes, Kevin  Kevin   er  I don't know whether  but she's none too well!
Ah 
Oh I'm sorry!
Erm  I'm trying to find somebody about getting this put right.
Mm.
But she's had meningitis back which is a bit tricky for old health!
Mm.
So whether she'd like some, I don't know.
Right.
Hello!
In our last meeting  John  the need to  do a little thing that would  the district  but I felt that because of the time pushing  that wha , what's his name has said about the erm  the River 
Yes.
adventure  was probably enough  that erm  I would have flown a kite    and one or two things otherwise!
So I felt because the  time was pushing, passing so much, and the 
Yes 
that was .
and  I naturally er  I thought Chris gave a good report!
When's, yeah
Well it was practically the same as he did at district wasn't 
Yeah.
it?
Yeah.
Oh it's very articulate, very good!
Mm.
I didn't know he was gonna be here .
Erm  oh well maybe yours can be saved up for another time?
Mm.
That's it!.
Mind you don't step on the !
Oh I'm sorry!
No I didn't like to go and step on the  !
Er  can I hang this up and no , so as not to take it into the church?
Where can I 
Well where , where do you wanna hang it up?
Ooh sorry !
Sorry !
Here we are  put it there.
Yeah.
Right.
Alright ?
Woops!
Thank you.
Thank you very much .?
If I forget it, it's not desperate but I'd like to take it.
What, are you taking it   ?
Ah, switch it off.
Right, that goes in upside down like that.
Moderator and friends let me say first of all that I'm glad to  be able to make these speeches  on behalf of the member churches of   and I'd like to  also on, particularly on behalf of the England and Wales , though I did realise having said that  that you have a minister of the University of Penryth is also a member of this Synod, and therefore, you've got me three things!
Er


I greet you  greet you on   on behalf of these.
And, but I, I'm glad to make a greeting from a, a wide range of churches  erm, I've got to discard this figure because I've got .
But including churches that are,Orthodox church and the Lutheran  Lutheran churches in Wales  and now  hopefully, during this year  some sanctity  churches in Wales.
And so that there will be a  a broad spectrum of people  who with us  confess a common faith, serve a common Lord and proclaim about our gospel  serving within this number of people in Wales and therefore I'm glad to bring you greetings  for that reason.
I'm glad to bring you greetings because  I think you serve a particularly unimportant purpose!
When, when I was asked to comment  be before  John was, was ever elected  erm  is that  you elect moderators from e , whatever happened to a moderator!


Be before you were chosen by whatever process  a number of us was asked to comment and one of the things I felt it important to say  was that the URC plays a very important role  both in being a bridge between all these nations  but also serving a particular reform tradition within Wales.
And that this larger responsibility, having more local responsibility combined in one small church is an important role.
But I think that came through in this morning's conversation.
And I'm glad also to  to to  greeting, it's my last part John, if you'd like to know!


Erm  be because  out of that debate this morning I sense you have much to offer the rest of us  and I hope that that conversation will not be a conversation confined your Synod or to the  to the assembly of URC  but that we'll find ways of sharing that perception of ministry  with those of us in other churches  cos  you don't need me to tell me, tell you that that key question in the whole ecumenical debate, not just in these nations but worldwide  and I think that from within this reform tradition in which I share  I will hope that we will find ways of offering that perception  of ministry, in all its forms  as erm, a symbol and a sign of the ministry of the whole people of God  we have that to offer the churches in Wales  and worldwide  and I hope that we can find ways of doing that.
And for those reasons  and for the fact that I, more or less enjoyed the journey  and had to come anyway as a chauffeur!
 

Thank you Noel.
We move to the Ecumenical  group, it's on page  number fourteen?
Page four  on page four.
Thank you moderator.
Having read the Synod class letter I will assume you haven't acted on it and therefore rule, resolution one.


You will see this report for debate.
Not half!
If there are no questions on the  paragraphs of the report not covered by resolutions
Are there any questions or comments  on paragraphs one or three, or four onwards?
No.
In that case  resolutions.
I then  resolution two  which is continuing the process that we were introduced to  the last Synod and the previous Synod  consideration of the endless discussion document on Christian initiation.
I hope!
, anybody wish to speak to this in  will you  any visitors?
Silence!the resolutions before you  and the second, the working party  and to consider and coordinate from  to endless .
All those in favour.
Any against?
I think  it's important also that  having done that  that also replies  the eagerness and activity in which it was  
Ha!
about the whole process of Christian initiation.
I mean, having done that we haven't yet set up a working party  and let the rest of the world  forget about us!
As one seems possible.
Number three please.
Resolution three concerns the agreed procedure and service for the ordinat , the electoral statement  held as a United, United Reform Presbyterian Church of Wales churches.
I all had hoped  to be able to bring before you  a final draft  of  th the service  it has not yet finally been passed by the Presbyterian Church of Wales  therefore, discussions on what form  and how it will be printed have not yet taken place.
So you've got the latest draft, with the latest amendments  those of you who  have taken one to se , look at it.
If you haven't  I assume you trust  the URC doctorate worship committee  and ecumenical at home committee and the  group!
Oh ha!!
Absolute !


I am happy to let those erm  tra , procedures of the electional, ordination and induction of elders in joint URC  Presbyterian Church of Wales .
Yes?
Question?
Yes, only one question I've got please.
Er, erm
Under the line!
Oh Sorry!
I di 
Within the next, er month or so  a national consultation is being held within the URC  to consider the advice of  producing  a programme of training for eldership which will be used throughout the call of the church  and if there are any suggestions or any proposal that anyone would like to make  I shall be very glad to receive them within the next month.
Thank you.
Any other questions or comments?
And you .
Yes, but I'll try to be brief.
 
As I understand things, and I work from what I know  to what I don't know  anyone ordained an elder following these guidelines is recognised as an elder within the United Reform Church and within the Presbyterian Church of Wales.
As a result of that, and I think  to make sure this is something we would have to ask the  advisory committee  but I would read it  that that includes mutual recognition of eldership.
And so in my  
That it would yes.
But I'd want to consult the giant advisory committee  before putting that into print.
Yo , that's an important question that comes as a  we can attempt  or  the group can attempt to answer that question  the in reports of the next   so we don't lose it off the agenda.
Yes.
Would that be fair?
Yes.
I'll just put that aside.
All in those in favour of the resolution that we  commend to these  to the church  
 
we agree the procedure for the election of ordination and induction of elders  in  and in churches.
Please show?
Any against?
Actually I've rather hurried through  that objective part of our  I only had my  time  to bring before you  one other very important issue  and two other pieces of information.
There are a few copies remaining of  newsletter.
There's also information about the International Ecumenical Fellowship  which is something that you as an individual can do  to support ecumenical work.
If you want to know more about it, pick up a leaflet.
If, we have run out of leaflets  pick up John !


Because he is a member  and he can tell you about it.
The most  important thing  in this report  is from the Council of Churches for Britain and Ireland  and it's a resolution  that they passed  on Northern Ireland.
You should have this  received this in the pew  when you came in  this morning.
The reason it is important today  is because tomorrow  has been  requested to be appointed to be  a special day in prayer  for peace  justice  in Northern Ireland.
Like this resolution  I would urge  all of you  when you go back  to your congregation  those ministers who  are following the moderator's request, those ministers from the South who will not be  conducting morning worship tomorrow because of the long journey  request whoever is conducting worship to use this  in the service  in the prayers!
Those of you who are here without ministers  badger your minister!
When you get back tonight  or tomorrow  to include this  in your time and prayer  in one of your services tomorrow.
And don't  let it stop there!
A day of prayer is important  as it changes our pattern of prayer  and as it changes  our concerns week by week and year by year.
Some of the  attempts at peacemaking  the churches in Ireland are making  may seem worrying  may seem politically subversive  but how will we respond  to the longing for peace  to the desire  for reconciliation  for the hope  the stakes   that will result  in a permanent and just solution?
I commend to you all  this  
 
of prayer.
And will move  that  this document be taken back  to your local churches and used.
We .
We move to  page five, the top half of page five and   and Graham will introduce the  world famous issue.
Having cre , credit by David  's withering look  I always say you have to be terrified!


It's a bit 
I'm a spy!
Oh, after all that it didn't work!
It's at this point in our agenda when er  the world search  it's  our agenda  and er  in introducing the report there are just four things I want to comment about.
Er, I refer, first of all to  the continuing links we have with the church in Hungary  and to remind that there is a, a party of young who are currently negotiating the  er, visit to Hungary at this present time.
And er, we would hope that that programme of reciprocal visits will continue over the ensuing years.
We also find there are, and I hope that you will read it carefully, because I think you will find it  a fairly daunting report  which comes from Hugh   who has managed, you know, has been working, erm, in  er, Romania  with the Bishop  erm, who more or less, kind of, started off the, or whose work started off the  the revolution that took place in Romania.
Within that report he tells us  erm, the rather startling disturbance story, that in fact  it almost suggests, has been suggested the revolution hasn't happened because the situation  has continued as before with a different name  but basically with the same  er  with the same kind of programme intact.
And in the creation of unity, unity  there's deep concern about the status of American churches in Romania  and obviously the Hungarian church  in Romania is affected by that whole process so I would urge you to read that letter  to remember the work of Hugh erm  and to  be aware of, of what  the situation is  in that part of the world.
It seems important that I should have links, in developing links  you ought to see that as part of our agenda.
Hugh, himself  I think he is completing his work  and there, in, in a few months time  and I know there have attempts made to find someone to replace him.
As yet er, that has not been possible, but if you knew of anybody, young person who you thought might be suitable  and might  mi , might like the challenge of an interesting venture of this nature  I'm sure if you let us know, or let the moderator know  we'll be very happy to, er, suggest that name or see if there's any, any possibility  erm, in continuing that .
We also feel it's important that we should  be doing just a bit more than just having exchanges, that there is a whole process of  that needs to go on.
There's an assumption  by some politicians that just because there is this  immense change taking place in Eastern Europe, that this is victory for Western capitalism  erm, I think there might be some of who might be a bit cautious about that victory and might believe that er  there is still much that needs to be shared and understood  and it isn't as simple as perhaps some political figures might suggest it could be.
So I want to, first of all, in presenting this report to remind you of the importance of that link  and for us to encourage its development.
Secondly, the World Church erm  is your agenda in the sense that  you might be interested to know there is a  erm  a video now available, er  which introduces the work of CWM for the churches.
And that video can be obtained from Tavistock Church, in Tavistock Place  it costs twelve pound fifty, with one pound fifty postage  erm, but I think that it has been recommended to us and a number of the provinces have asked for copies to be made available  and then maybe there are some churches within our provence that might like to have that video so that they can draw the attention of their churches to the work  of the Council for World Mission.
Thirdly, we will in a moment be hearing a report  erm, about the  World Council of Churches  assembly which took place in Canberra  so there is another aspect to the World Church hitting our agenda today.
But fourth, and I think it was reflected very much in the discussions this morning  just to simply remind you that you are the World Church!
You know, we sometimes think of the World Church as being something that's out there beyond us, but we are the World Church aren't we?
We're  we are part of the that process and it's  it's sometimes encouraging for us to remember that there are  small denominations, small groups like us around the world  who are struggling to make their Christian witness real  in their particular context.
And it's important that the kind of story that we're being told this morning, or to continue to be told, we are to continually hear and observing 
 
stories  because they are encouraging  it does make us feel that even though we are a small denomination that does not stop us from preventing new ideas which we can share and in which we can learn from each other.
So, I would hope that out of this experience of this morning you will continue to er let some of those stories come forward  and, and let us hear them and let us share in them.
And, with those comments moderator, I'd like to present the er report of the World Church, Church and Mission.
Are there any questions, either on the report or in what ?
Then it gives me great pleasure now to erm  I always knew that John al , has had something different from the rest of us you know  he has that kind of air doesn't he, that  that status in the pulpit which  you know,?


And of course, I've now discovered what it is, he's a distant relative of the  Archbishop of Wales.


There was always er  there was always something there!
There was just something about his daring .
 
that's alright then.
I'm not gonna do that John.
Erm, I'm  I'm never sure about Bishops and Archbishops, erm  I remember Archbishop Runcie once commenting about  er, an activity that took place at the installation of a Bishop and it's, I gather, I mean I've, I haven't actually been to one, but if you're Bishop or an Archbishop  when they act to  the triumph and act of installation took place there were  you'll find that the person was surrounded by Bishops and they were all sort of looking in on this er, this body that was gonna be installed and somebody once asked what are they doing?
Ar , Archbishop Run , Runcie said well it's just simply an operation to remove their backbone!


Erm  I don't know!
I would like to er  say that we are very  grateful today to be  able to welcome amongst us his grace  erm, the most reverent Alwyn  who has just recently been elected as the Archbishop of Wales.
We're delighted that you have found time out of your busy schedule and timetable  to come and spend time with us today and we're very glad  that you are able to do so and I would ask  er, John, our moderator if he will receive me now  and invite you to address our .


Well, first of all may I  respond positively to  those kind words of welcome that you extended to me.


At least, I feel at home.


I won't say any more!
Some of you may have listened very attentively to the, to a programme that put o , was put out a week ago I think, with Betty   er, in Welsh  and er  some of you therefore, will know something my background.
Er  last year  and time has flown hasn't it?
Last February, twelve months last February I'm, I was privileged  to  travel to Canberra  in Australia  fortunately not on my own, because there are wi , witnesses.
Er


There were seven of us from Wales  er  and two of them are present here this afternoon.
Noel was present and   presenting the Welsh independence in   and also  Gethyn was present  erm  I'd like to see, er, know that Gethyn was representing the Church in Wales  apart from the fact that he's also a baptist.
Er, as you know, Gethyn does work  for the Church in Wales now  and this, in a special way, is a  testifies  to  the fact that he is  er  an ecumenical person.
Working ecumenically  in Wales.
He is also  a secretary of  Envis that is the commission of covenant to churches  of which we are all members of churches.
Yes, I er  I went in February nineteen ninety two  and certainly this was a great privilege  to be there for, was it, three weeks?
Three weeks I think  er  spending time with members of other churches  and also members of others cultures from all over the world.
The er  I've got to keep an eye on my watch, this is what I'm going by!


It's a   more than anything else.
I know that you are behind schedule  and I don't want to incur the wrath of your moderator!


During the, the fortnight in which we met in Canberra  eight hundred and twenty six of us were official delegates  er, to the World Council of Churches.
Delegates from the member churches.
And, in a sense  the World Council of Churches at this point can be regarded as the supreme legislative body  of the World Church.
And you're quite right  er  we must regard the World Church as meaning ourselves.
We tend to refer to the World Church as something outside our particular constituency  and we mustn't forget that we must own the World Church.
And this is something that came home to me very much in Canberra.
We  we are  from Wales  and I would like to say  that all the Welsh representatives were at one.
That we could own what was going on in Canberra.
This was not entirely true  of other  people from other churches  in the United Kingdom unfortunately!
The World Council of Churches assembly takes pla , place roughly every seven years.
And though the World Council Churches was formed  before the second world war  yet, the first assembly was not held until nineteen forty eight at Amsterdam!
Second assembly was held in nineteen fifty four at  Edmunston in the United States.
And then it was fir , er, the turn of the third world  the third assembly  was held in New Delhi in nineteen sixty one.
And then, the fourth assembly er, was held in  Loopsala Sw in Sweden  and the fifth assembly was  er, held in Nairobi.
And then  er, the sixth assembly in Vancouver in nineteen eight three  and the seventh assembly  in Canberra, last year.
Now, you'll see that  it has a tendency to go  all over the world  wherever it is invited  but whoever invites the World Council of Churches now  must, in fact, be able to cope with a great number of people!
Not only delegates  but also people who attend as a service from other churches outside the membership of the World Council  and also  to cope with the press.
Unfortunately, in this country we were badly served by the press!
And it had, it'd be true to say that whatever you read in your newspapers  er, while we were in Canberra, I would advise you  not to believe half of it!
Or a quarter of this!
Because what came back to us was very much tittle tattle gossip  that people picked up in  er, Canberra!
And, it is true to say that that did not represent the  what really went on in Canberra!
Because, above all, it was an experience  experience of meeting people from different churches  wi experience of meeting people of different cultures  experience, too, of listening attentively and worshipping with people of different church traditions of your own.
And that was  something to  er  an experience to cherish!
The World Council Churches on this occasion reviewed the work accomplished during the seven and a half years since the last assembly  in Vancouver in Canada.
It rec , received a report therefore, from the Central Council of the World Counc , Council of Churches  which meets  I think, once a year  Noel can correct me on this  once a year, or a at least once every two years.
And then we have a member from Wales on the Central Council of the World Council of Churches, Miss Carole  who  er, although she is from Wales, member of the church of Wales  she now lives in Belfast.
But er, we were not successful in putting up an  er and er to have a member of Wales elected on this occasion to serve for the next seven years  unfortunately!
And er  i , it, this caused a great deal of hurt, if I may say so?
And then the er  Council also  set guidelines for it's programme in the years ahead.
It also chose presidents, it also chose, a  hundred and fifty members to serve  on the central committee, or the executive committee  of the World's Council of Churches.
It also made statements on pressing issues  in the church and the world.
And these, above all else included the Gulf war because  this  war was on while we were in Canberra.
And this really owed a great deal of tension!
We er, the we, we have also to make statements on the  indigenous people and land rights  because we were confronted with the position of Aborigine people  in  er, Australia.
And we were concerned about their land rights  or in other words, their human rights 
 
their natural human rights.
I'll speak about that in a moment or two.
We were concerned too  about internal conflicts  in certain countries  and especially in South Africa.
But all these statements revealed the desire of the assembly to pray more ardently for the spirit of unity to reconcile  people.
Indeed, this was a very rare opportunity for all delegates and visitors, as I said, to meet  to listen  yes, and to hear it first hand about the life and witness of more than three hundred member churches throughout the world  in a hundred countries!
It was certainly and opportunity for the churches together to look at the world situation in conversation together and thus, to deepen the faith which have to proclaim  at arriving at a common understanding of the situation.
It isn't the  you are not expected, at least, I was not expected to  to see the Council producing masses of pages for our reading afterwards  and this report, by the way, is worth reading.
Sounds of the spirit.
If you had read this  I shouldn't be here this afternoon!


But are we going to inflict that on you?
But, can I say this  that what mattered most to me was the fact that I have been in conversation with so many people  and to be able to allow that conversation to affect my faith  and a faith that I have to  proclaim day by day and Sunday by Sunday  from the pulpits of my church.
As previous  as in previous assemblies  worship wasn't central to our activity.
Besides, morning worship there were midday sermons and in sessions  together with evening worship.
What I missed most at this occa , on this occasion was the opportunity for bible study, but I think  getting pe er, a visitor of another kind there was able to visit some of the bible studies each morning.
The daily pattern of study and discussion work was divided into two parts  in the morning, participants met in small groups  in the afternoon, all members  met in  session   sessions  reports from central committee  and also er, reports on developments in the World Church.
The main theme of the assembly, therefore, was  the prayer  come holy spirit renew the whole creation.
.Appertaining to a  to infuse  through dramatic presentic presentations  the main theme  by the or aboriginal of Australians telling about their life  and struggle.
Other Ecumenical topics presented were the life and history of ecumenical movement  you retain and justice and peace  ecumenical sharing.
and indeed, the recent programme justice, peace and  integrature of creation featured very prominently in our discussions.
And no doubt, it will continue as a very important theme for the future.
Some themes of the assembly therefore were  giver of life  sustain your creation  spirit of truth  set us free  spirit of unity reconcile your people  Holy Spirit transform  and sanctify us.
What about the background, therefore  to the assembly's discussion?
But first of all  the global situation in the Gulf.
This marred the peace situation!
Plane flights had to be diverted  so, by the time we got to Canberra we were very conscious of the destructive element  of the Gulf  in our prayers and in our discussions.
Secondly, we were made aware of the effects of what can be described as liberation thinking and liberation theology  not only in South America  but only, also, in the Pacific regions  Asia, Japan and Korea.
Then  there was the influence of the third world, or the two thirds world  the churches  the politics  and the cultures.
And then fourthly, more and more the orthodox churches placed, played a very significant part in guiding the port of   as far as  as the assembly was concerned.
Significantly to, there was the abstinence of Roman Catholic church influence  and dominance.
Some of us, some of us tried to make a plea  and I hope we will try, still try to make a plea  that there should be a significant Roman Catholic  er, element within the membership of the World Council of Churches  in the future.
So we were presented, as it were, with a partial membership of the World Church.
As far as I'm concerned two things set the assembly  in context  firstly, the sense of space.
For many Australians the desert which covers much of their country means  a vast emptiness  solitude  and the struggle to survive in hostile surroundings.
But, for the original inhabitants of the lands the desert is the familiar place that provides nature  and gives meaning to life.
It was natural, therefore, that the assembly should take up this kind of understanding.
It was not too late to realise that space should be given in the programme for a proper consideration of the perception of winning in relation to the whole team of the assembly.
Winning space therefore  assumed a significant part of the assembly programme.
Again, as I said, the Gulf war brought the peace question very much into the arena  and accordingly there was always the pressure for prece , reconsideration of the peace  under the general heading of peace space.
And, can I suggest that we need to bring that very much into our discussions and into our prayers constantly in our churches.
Significant that we have been challenged by our master to be peace  makers  how real is that in our churches?
And  tomorrow will be the real test, won't it not?
That we are really praying for peace and identifying ourselves with peace struggle in Ireland.
Secondly, there was also the context of the Aborigines.
We were reminded of their plight at the opening service of the assembly.
One thing I forgot to bring with me this afternoon was a tape of the assembly worship  I'm sorry about that, but I don't think you've got a tape recorder have you?
That upsets me!


We were reminded of their plight  of peace, as I said, at the opening service.
Outside the  marched in  the aborigines had their fire of gum tree branches  to purify the atmosphere  very much like the flames of fire which appeared on the first whit Sunday.
The twenty sixth of January seventeen eighty eight  the British established a small prison community at Sydney Cove on the east coast of Australia   villain read the declaration  and hoisted the Union Jack claiming the east coast of the entire Australian continent  for the British crown.
And that meant  quite a  effect as far as the aborigines were concerned  they had lost their territory!
The aborigines were not consulted or compensated!
European occupation of land gradually extended through most of the continent.
In more remote areas  reserves were set aside for the igi indigenous hab , inhabitants.
They were  sa , put aside, they did not count!
But by the end of the nineteenth century there were six British colonies in Australia!
On the first of January nineteen hundred and one  they formed a federation  and most adult aborigines were  
 
vote  in the process  for deciding on the federation.
The culture of the minorities of indigenous people that  was given providence at the assembly.
And this was expressed in a very imaginative presentation by Professor   a young   in her keynote lecture when she called  for three significant changes.
The first was that for our generation  we must learn how to live with the earth  promoting harmony  sustainability  and diversity  and, therefore, creation, spirituality was the keynote of the address.
Secondly  she said there must be a change from the habit of dualism  to, what she described as  interconnectialism We must see a relationship between things.
In many parts of the earth, she said, the organised life in accordance with a sense of dualism  body, spirit, man, women, black and white, poor and rich  we must try and see  them, in Christ  coming together.
They all make sense.
The third change was from the culture of death  to the culture of life.
What is happening right now in the Persian Gulf, she says, shows the best example of the culture of death!
She urged the assembly to use the energy of the Holy Spirit to tear apart all walks of division and culture of death in separators.
Let us participate in the Holy Spirit of  of life  fighting for our life on this earth in solidarity with all living peace.
Have you noticed  if you listen hard to your radio tomorrow morning  and you will hear so much about suffering and death  and very little  about life!
I think we had better try and influence that as churches  not that we should   about the suffering that goes on  about the death that goes on, but I think we ought to give all this  another dimension in churches.
That one would be  thankful of the fact that Christ  has spoke  and talked about life.
Now, this approach  was criticised by the Orthodox church representatives as merely  criticism  an attempt to unify different faiths.
But many of us saw it as an approach which emphasised the need to allow the faith of Christ to be incarnated within particular culture  and Sir Paul , the former Archbishop of New Zealand took the same stand point as  a Maori, in his own  address  and called delegates present to speak and act as people of hope  and to respond sensitively to economic and environment  progility and isolation, not only in the Pacific but wherever they are.
Now then  who do we assess  with the assembly?
May I make  one or two observations and then I'll finish.
On the whole, the assembly gave us  and understanding  of the worldwide church which was struggling to achieve reconciliation and to promote peace    and justice.
If we belong to the World Church then we must be  in with  part of this worldwide process  and we shall never be ashamed of it.
Secondly, moreover, it was an experience a and an opportunity to meet Christians of other churches.
Differing traditions and those of other cultures and be in constant dialogue with them.
We never have that opportunity  in this country do we?
Unless we ask people to bring in people, for instance, from the Afro- Caribbean churches to join us in our worship and to lead our worship.
Can I also say  that, er  yes, we were badly served by the press  but I think that er  the onus now is on those of us who went to Canberra to be able to share with others and  we have been going round to tell others about Canberra  to share with you and with others  the experience of being present in the World Council of Churches  in Canberra.
I would hope that  by the time we come to the next assembly  where there is going to be  that there will be an opportunity for the churches, er, at home here to take part in preparing for the next assembly.
Also, that the churches at home, of whatever church or denomination we are to be  they also can own, not just in  the World Council of Churches.
At present, I do think that there is that kind of willingness to be  er, engaged in this kind 
 
of preparation.
I think, we ought to be taking time to try and  prepare, well  for the next assembly  and in doing so to own what goes on there and to say, yes  as the previous speaker said  we are the World Church in a very real way.
Now, moderator  I've taken  yes  I'm only five out of 

the programme!
Er, can I say that it's been a great pleasure coming  er, to you and to say that erm  that there's far more to say, of course, about Canberra  er, but I hope that that taster will help you to try and appreciate what went on there.
Thank you very much indeed.


Can I thank you for sharing with us the  the example of the concentration, that you put so much in such a short time.
A good example for the rest of us!
 
We've got the rest !
We're grateful for your taking the time to be with us.
We're grateful to your commitment to the  ecumenical life of churches  in Wales  particularly.
Last week we met as a team, working with  and   next week we will be meeting .
So it'll be Hollywell to get , it's a good way of !
 


And  for your  your time and your energy  and for your fellowship as well.
It's very kind of you all 
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yes.


You're willing to, you're welcome to stay for as long as you wish  or to leave when you wish to leave.
 
to us.
We ought now to  think briefly about .
is never to show any interest in anything


because, if you do you get landed with what I've got to do this afternoon!
And  it was my concern that churches should know  the implication of the children act as it's related to  the life of the church that I'm  landing in front of you.
You should of all  saw the last Synod papers  received this.
How many of you are familiar with it?
There are a few hands.
I've got a red and a blue, I'm sorry I haven't got yellow and green


but I couldn't  get the  political parties.
It's not electioneering  er, they're just in different coloured paper  to please the eye.
Er, if you  have not had a copy of this sent to you  what I have said to them, by what I say afterwards  erm  it will be worth purchasing.
My question ha , again another question, how do you make the Lord interesting?
Shoppers creche  that must  er, registered.
What does registration mean?
It means that when you go along to the social services, register and it's above board  children's work that you are doing.
But they have a right  within the law  to carry out, to check all persons who are offering help in caring.
And registration may be denied anyone who has been convicted of any certain types of offense.
It's the responsibility of the local authority to ensure that all those leading groups  are people of good standing.
The church must make every effort to  achieve the highest standards.
And the church as  bible road to fame  in alerting us to  our responsibilities.
Now there's one thing that I have to alert us all to  the rest may not have been important, perhaps only to some of  the larger churches  but groups are advised  and churches are advised to make sure that in buildings that are used  ah, for many different groups  that young children under the age of eight  do not come into contact with any casual  people who may be using that building.
Now that is quite an implication when you think about it!
There is need to emphasise the importance of  encouraging people to re , receive some sort of training when they come forward and offer to be involved  in the work of our under eights and young people.
I don't think there's any need for me to spell out any more at this point what that may mean  but the  responsibility in  as churches to ensure that we care for the under eights.
I will, in fact erm  answer any questions afterwards.
Thank you Nanette.
An introduction that is important.
There are  a number ar , of areas in the ma state legislation that have been aligned to the church, or will affect the running of the church.
One is the children act  one will be something on  on on the  preparation of food, another will be one affecting the way in which  charities have to keep  registered accounts  er, financial accounts  which means that  an example  erm   is responsible  for registering the accounts of congregations  by law.
And another will be  erm  the responsibility to  er, the minister, the  alterations to listed buildings  which  might be landed on the, on the churches.
What Nanette has said has been an important introduction and if yo , if what sa you have prepared altogether  is legible then perhaps  give it to Eileen and it can go out in the Synod papers  that will be helpful.
Erm, and in the faith and life  department of URC we'd better preparing a pack on the children rights.
Other information on whatever .
We move now   we move now to er, faith and life  is on  we're on page  thirty five.
moderator and friends  of faith and life.
In the very short  space of time that we have  available this afternoon  there are three subjects that I need  simply to bring to the attention of Synod.
The first the little report  under the heading of faith and life, on page five  of your reports  the  second  is the report of the provincial advocate which is on page six  and the third, the report of the Youth Secretary which is on page twenty.
Erm  all those because subjects come under the general umbrella of faith and life, and I think  er, moderator, probably the correct thing is to do  is to be formal and to begin by  er, proposing that these three reports be received for discussion.
Then I'll receive the reports of faith and life  and the  Youth Secretary and  the new secretary for discussion, yes.
Thank you.
Er, to take then  first the report which you will find on page five  you will see that faith and life on this occasion has concentrated on one subject  and that is our  
 
weekend that we are  arranging this summer as we have done annually for a number of years.
Er, there is a  a little orange leaflet which has been placed on the seats  during the day  that many of you, I hope, already have  er, for anyone who hasn't  may I  perhaps place these  on the front table, there's a  the , there's another supply over there and, could I please ask that  some responsible representative from each district would please take a few more of these away with you so that they are distributed in district meetings  in the near future, and attention drawn to them there  er, if there are not enough copies  er, then I'm sure the provincial office on receiving a, a request from you will make sure there's more   that passed on to you.
Now, if you had an opportunity of glancing at the leaflet already you will have seen that the leader  for this July's  er,weekend is is Mr Henry   and, I don't think I can do any better than to spend two minutes of the time that we've got in asking Henry if he would  say a word or two of introduction to the theme  for this year.
Ignatius of Loyal er or    er, more  properly known  to me in church history was the scourge of the wrath of the, of the council of reformation and  inside of  consumism but  I think regards some years ago in  on Ignatius spirituality of  bibles  which I'm delighted to see John has mentioned in his prologue for the er  for his introduction to Holywell the the the association's there  came to discover who  Saint Ignatius  er, helping to sort of tap greater spiritual depths and er  resources  and consequently trained as spiritual director  er  in Ignatian things.
The spiritual exercises of Saint Ignatius of Loyala have once, were once described as a sort of a spiritual  from which people of past   men, put together again.


Erm  that is not the aim of  Trabecca 


Er, to start off with they do the full spiritual exercise of Ignatius Loyal all takes thirty days in silent retreat  with a  with an individual  er  under individual guidance with a, with a, a director  or  it could take anything from nine months to eighteen months to do  in er day da da da living  in open sort of retreat.
What I hope to do is simply  to share with you the life of  Idigo and in experiences  and to walk alongside him  and also to help us reflectively to look  and examine our own journey  where are we with God?
Where's God in our life, where has he been and where is he directing us?
And so it'll be a gentle, I hope and  er, reflective  type of weekend  and er  using some of the tools of Ignatius  and other tools, cos Ignatius was very  er, adaptable  er, you know in  in methods of prayer  and reflection and contemplation.
I,.
Thank you.
And I I, I hope that I, I hope there's a good variety of people will again, as you always have done  will turn up  er, this year to share fellowship  a , on this  theme which er, is  is a refresh theme I think for, for many of us.
Now, the other two subjects I'm really only dealing because the  people responsible are, are not  here in the flesh this afternoon  but Alyd  the provincial advocate and I I think of Bill  that's also gone too, er yes he he has, he has had to leave  this afternoon.
Erm, so what I promised to do in er  er, a moment or two if people are to ask specific questions or comments to make  arising from either of those  printed reports on page six and page twenty  erm, if you would make your point or ask your question  now  er, it will be recorded and transmitted to the officers responsible and they will take any necessary action or give any  reverent replies to those questions.
This doesn't preclude any private questions in conversation with those people at any stage during the life of the church.
So if, if there are any formal concerns that anybody would wish to bring  formally  before Synod and erm to either  Alyd  or Bill  then perhaps  state them.
Right.
Right, yes I shall happy to convey to the moderator that Synod was er  totally satisfied with the reports that are here before me and give them one hundred percent support in the work .
Thank you.
Bill  is  is erm  with the group of young people who are  having a weekend in .
Er, those were the people that  walked in and walked out!


We come now to the final committee report which is on page thirteen  of the  page thirteen.
Did you want to stand up for a minute?
Yes.
While you're stood up  while you're stood up have a second  and  well each  worship, right?
Come on stand up!
Stand up!
Up!
Erm  is Benny here?
No.
Well it's very simple, who knows the Peruvian Glory?
Woops!


Will you please come here with me.
Erm, who else knows it?
 
thank you.
Anybody else know it?
So this is how it goes.
I think so!
I think it goes  I'm not sure.
Have we got an organ in here?
Yes, I think .
 

Okay, sing that.
Glory to God, Glory to God 
Right.
That's glory in the highest.
glory in the highest 
The next line is to God be glory forever.
To God be glory forever 
And then le lastly, line halleluja amen.
halleluja amen, halleluja amen, halleluja amen, halleluja amen 
Are we there?
You know it?
Yeah.
Okay 
 
and for the closing worship  you will be the 
Oh!
and the rest of you will be the people.
Okay?
So the  sings the first line  erm  you know, Glory to God  glory to God in highest  and then you respond  and then you sing  to God be the glory, to God be the glory  and you respond.
And then you sing  halleluja  and we all sing halleluja, halleluja, halleluja  okay?
Glory to God,Glor 
Five seconds.
.Erm 
Glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest 
Right.
Glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest  to God be glory forever, to God be glory forever, halleluja amen, halleluja amen, halleluja amen, halleluja amen .
Once more bit faster.
Glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, Glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, to God be glory forever, to God be glory forever, halleluja amen, halleluja amen, halleluja amen, halleluja amen .
High notes!


Very good!
Well I must admit I'm gonna have to  present a  finance report which is received by an overture.


And  first of all  before we er  we put the reports we , there are a number of er, there's one alteration and a number of er, additions  obviously alteration or I should say a a an amendment is something  an important place on page fifteen  er, at the tope of the page referring to  December nineteen ninety two  I've put, which is agreed by GP committee  with the exception of young  these representatives, that we ask them to bring thirty pounds towards the cost  that should be twenty five.
That's the actual figure.
Erm  one difficulty with with  giving a financial report is so many things seem to  happen quickly  and a erm  apart from the fact that there was a, a major finance resources comes from   we , as well you see  that I have to tell you now  these have been done  on the  red letter assembly side  and you may want to alter one  there  er  according to reform  I see the cost per  erm  person attending  is not a hundred and twelve pounds, but a hundred and fourteen pounds  and that means that we have forty representatives we've got to try and find four thousand five hundred and sixty .
Now, I hope I've got these facts right and I'm sure  that not, that Eileen may correct me that er  we have er forty hundred pounds in the budget,budget  for this  er the erm South Wales congregation  has, has kindly  erm  given us grant of a thousand pounds  and I understand from the secretary of con , Cardiff congregation , and he's also offered a thousand pounds  I don't know whether  we've got that yet?
But then  
That will be, it is thousand so that's er  that's three thousand four hundred  short of a four by sixty.
And what the difference is that  er, we thought that you could have one young person per district  and that they only have to pay thirty two pounds each, but I think these are only purely
Yes, er, I have them  for those who  received that incorrect information from me, I must apologise  erm  young people who are going  as delegates  as representatives of their district must be treated  as adult  representatives and they have to pay full price.
Er  for  , for people who are going to  group  and and, for any young people who are going observers  there are special arrangements to be made which doesn't relate to our official represented district, I'm sorry about that!
So that means that er, in  th the total we do have to pay  in some way or another, is four thousand pounds with sixty  but we'll say  we've already got three thousand four hundred, if all the for , forty people go and they pay twenty five pounds each, that's another thousand, so we've got a  I think I've got it right,a , we're only a hundred and sixty short.
Fairly reasonable!
I hope we get that from somewhere.
So er er that  that is if we're up-to-date on the financial .
Now, the most  er, serious business  the er, Ministry of Mission Fund nineteen ninety two  and the Ministry of Mission Fund nineteen ninety three.
At the meeting  er, of the  Financial Resources Committee that I attended on Wednesday  the first thing we discussed was the  er  the giving so far, up to the end of February  from the various provinces  and we, by the end of February  er, the total was up to thirty thousand pounds less than we required  er  which could mean that  the end of the year  it could be a hundred and eighty thousand pounds less than required  but  er  of all the  
 
all the provinces, bar one  have balances which could be used to make that up, so  the money is fairly short and we're bear  er, for pains, the  
 
ten and a half thousand  from the first of July onwards for this year.
Now  erm  i i in Wales, and I'm sorry to say, our figure  er, we should of produced ninety thousand pounds  and we provi , er, produced  er, eighty three thousand two hundred and nine  that means we are  er, six thousand eight hundred down in two months!
Now, we have a balance as it already tells you  er, in er earlier in the paragraph of this paper that that we had a er balance of sixteen thousand pounds  a , in the  ministry last year  so, if we knock sixteen thousand pounds  
 
what we're likely to  be short of  it seems to me we could end up being twenty four thousand pounds short at the end of the year.
Now, there are quite a number of reasons for this  and the good news, I think, that I bought good news again this morning  is that presentations both about budgets  er, and about what we do wi with the small churches  is, er, could be some of our salvation.
Question of budgets  our   I was almost  said halleluja!


If only, all our churches could do that  we would really be getting somewhere!
The biggest problem of all  is that we can't look forward  and that a lot of the problems, being problems are happening now, and happened since  the er  the first of January  that should of happened  they should of happened in th , in th , in the er at least the three months before the end of last year, if not more!
So, er, we're getting people saying it's impossible to pay this  even though they were asked if they could pay it  at the the the time it was given  sometime last July.
Well that's one  the other reason, of course we have got  a large number of chur , very small churches  in fact, looking at our mai , ministry figures nineteen ninety  there were thirty churches that didn't pay anything to the maintenance  and a lot of these, I think, maybe  
 
that both  Gethwyn and Russell sorted out  er  who up  on on those extremes that  you get in a group  that, that maybe feel they re that they really have nothing to, hardly anything to do with us  they've don't receive ministry  and why should that be, and after be asked each year, has to go up?
And they see  o I just wonder whether they just pile letters in the wastepaper basket!
And therefore, if it can really come to this possibility of ministry  a sort of, Young Farmers Club idea of getting themselves about  that could be  a a a a, a, a marvellous boost.
So, the, the other thing which is er erm, a real problem, partly because of that, is, is when one talks about an increase in  in giving, increase in percentage i , or a contribution of the church is  in er, we were talking about twenty percent la , twenty one percent last year  that would be alright if everybody gave twenty one percent!
Those who did nothing, they can eas , easily increase their giving by twenty one percent, it's still the same!


It means  that the other people have to give more  that's why some of the churches, I think they've found that their  er, requests for their er  er  their er contributions, have gone up enormously!
So, er, those are the pro , those are a lot of the problems that we are, we are facing  now, will we really  er  will we end up at twenty four thousand down at the end of the year?
That i , all I can say is that my, that's my best guess at the moment.
We know there are some churches which er, will probably only pay quarterly, so they haven't paid yet, so that's money that's coming in.
On the other hand we know there are some churches that are finding great difficulty in meeting  er, what they've said they can 
 
and are doing their best to do it.
So that's on the down side.
So  er, at the moment they're saying  all I can see  is that er, we would have to use up the whole of our balance, that's sixteen thousand  and the twenty four thousand arrears.
Now, that as the picture  er, leads me onto the next er, stage which is what in ministry, er what can we do in nineteen ninety three?
Erm  a letter was sent to all district secretaries, who I think in mo , most cases sent these round to churches to see if we could get some idea from you as to what sort of increase in contributions could be possible for nineteen ninety three.
That's quite difficult to do because where there's so many churches not being sure whether they're going to make it this year  how can they say what's going to happen next year?
On the other hand  er, if we did what our friend from Cheltenham is doing  we would have lo , we would be looking forward like that all the time  we would have some idea.
Now, I'm pleased to say we have had quite a number of  of er  replies from churches  on what they think they can d , do.
On the other hand, some of these er  are good  re positive replies and some of them, some are negative!
And, it seemed to me  that when I, as the er  your representative on Provincial Finance Committee is asked to make a co , commitment for this, for this   for  er  for nineteen ninety three I could say no better than what we had as out target this year and  that was hard!
Cos clearly we've only er  reached something like five hundred, three thousand, four thousand  er  then it's gonna be a  a big jump to get to the five hundred and forty!
Now, nobody er  er,a at this stage at the er  Financial Resources Committee er, challenge us on this figure, I think we will just  stage of  of doing arith arithmetic of adding it up, but no doubt that the staff will be  comparing what going to be, er what within a  but have prepared  for next year with what we're supposed to do this year  and ours is an increase of another percent.
We look at all the other conferences, the lowest after that was the Northern Provence which is in a very similar position to ourselves  and they were offering a five percent increase.
Er, a few others were offering seven to nine  and most of the others were offering between ten and fifteen percent.
So we're way down on all the others!so, that then falls three hundred thousand pound short  of what is required to  er, give ministers an increase to twelve thousand next year.
There seem to be  our two groups er, in one of our provinces  and they say that the rich and poor but the rich  er er are not so rich and others  .
That, in fact, er  there are three provinces who are already now contributing more than anyone else  that, they feel that the churches should go forward to try and raise the minister's  to what was proposedly that the  assembly last year, they should be paid thirteen thousand two hundred  but in order to do that  see another six hundred thousand pound raised  and it is likely that this will be put as a challenge to the churches  at assembly.
Now  if I could just remind you of what's happened at the  Lyndford Haven er  er, Synod, last March  erm, the Financial Committee have suggested that we should go for a target of five hundred and ten thousand  but  er, this is  we are not gonna be able to  even start looking at the eleven and a half thousand if if er  all the provinces do it for months and more  and we, I think very bravely or foolishly whatever way you li , look at it, proposed that we should got to five hundred and forty thousand  and it looks as thought we're gonna end up  certainly nearer to five ten than five forty.
Erm, but if we er are are going to  en ensure that ministers can get  er, at least twelve a  of twelve thousand next year then we have to er  erm  there has to be further offers from provinces.
As I say, there are three provinces who'd like to go further  and than that be even  er, more increases.
Now, I have  put down reports  about the finance committee  er  as it were but I think the responses from the churches and districts   sort of calculator will be there, we think that it would seem as though we should only offer the same amount as last year.
But, I think if we have further discussions with churches and districts that we might see that we can break that  a bit further  for that reason when we come to  er, come to the resolutions I would advise you  er er propose a minor amendment with the second thing.
But I think that  er .
We can now receive this report for the .
Any questions or comments on  paragraphs that are not erm  relating to those ?
So any questions or comments on paragraph one  on page thirteen?
Or paragraph two  or paragraph three  or paragraph five  or paragraph  that's it!
Yes.
So, if there are no questions or comments on those paragraphs  erm we move to the other resolutions.
be amended ?
I think so, yes.
Yes.
Er, what I would like to propose  the erm  a a that resolution two of course, was put down  at the time it had to be put down er, and is clearly going to be affected by, that it happened at the  th the financial services  in March  and what I have suggested  is that you might prefer this be a a a second resolution  it is or  and turn to the  to add on the end of that resolution  thus urging local churches to through their consultations with district treasurers and finance committee  to increase their contributions to the Ministry of Mission Fund in nineteen ninety three in such a way that provincial commi , commitment may be increased by at least five percent over the nineteen ninety two .
But th , the thing is that it looks as though it is going to be a fairly ongoing thing that's going to  it may be well on  certainly  er a  beyond assembly when we have to come to a conclusion, and therefore we ought to know the picture er, of, within reform churches far more clearly in giving more time.
But, clearly we need to have the authority that the  that er  to having discussed  to  a form of .
And, If I understand this now
Mm.
er, we have a choice  the resolution before us,endorse the action taken by the provincial treasurer  in the level of commitment he has made to the MMF fund in nineteen ninety three on behalf of the .
And that commitment which Alan has made, I'm right Alan?
Yes.
Is a nought percent increase
It's nought percent.
over our commitment.
Erm  would you like to take that resolution first  and make this a sort of a, an extra resolution 
 
Right, okay then.
I think that will be  that will be clearer.
First of all if we debate now whether or not the Synod endorses the action taken by judicial moderator
Treasurer.
in the level of commitment he has made to the MMF fund of nineteen ninety three on behalf of the provence  and we now know  that that's  a commitment, was a commitment of a nought percent increase.
We'll debate that first.
It's gotta be done first.
Mm?
David?
Can I just clarify
Stand up please!
David , can I just clarify that this resolution now supersedes  what is said in the report?
No, er   we're proposing  that we just do, take this reso , in other words, if you endorse the fact that I say I I sa committed the
But what do you say about 
Yes.
the ones you've written down?
Yeah, that's right, yes.
The, because  this report has been written 
 
three or four weeks ago  before Alan was able to vet all the information.
And in view of the information he had when he went to London for a meeting last Wednesday  and that was when he  consulted with other people  deciding that he should offer a nought percent increase.
Okay?
So  that's right.
Erm, one can then
.
perhaps cure  the provincial credit   brought to us .
And following that recommendation  we accepted a rash  amendment on the floor  of .
Increasing the commitment with the treasurer     and  not to be rash with it  but the people understand   people who are mostly killed in churches and   and either way    should not pass to amend a resolution for the Council .
You're not with it !
at the er   the ministry  but maybe the ministry er  will be .
Could we not have er  I think procedure is  could we not have the er er  resolution for the  at first and now that a ministry is in motion?
Erm  I think we need to endorse the action taken by the judicial treasurer  and then  if we was then to go onto  second bits, which is urging the churches to give  five percent more than that in the past  you could debate that se separately.
Investigative procedure will follow  and we keep the two things clear  we're making  the  the treasurer is erm  suggesting that this provence of the URC makes no , makes   not to increase.
There's no  to increase over this year 's commitment.
That's what we've proposed.
 
Er  Bob?
I've got a question on 
Bob!
does that mean that  the assessment for each church will remain the same  for a couple of years?
Is that the  er, is that the implication?
Erm
But does it still need, somehow 
No, I can't 
or other if the assessment will increase?
It will vary because er  erm  er we we ac remember that we have a formula which will expose to what your  er erm, nominated income was in previous years  what the membership, you know, these have all changed  so it could be  i I wouldn't like to say it's exactly the same  could be a bit of a problem!
But also there you can  ministers  because minis er churches they count for more than two years  stop being central funds  and therefore, if we had too many 
 
churches that  entered 
 
a third year of vacancy  next year that puts 
 
more of a burden on churches with ministers.
Mm.
So i i it just depends on
Thank you.
May I  ask one more thing?
By, by very special 
Oh!
!


Erm  in order to meet a commitment which is the same as this year commitment  then last   here increasing last year  because this year's commitment we will not reach this year  therefore, we'll be into deficit!
Therefore, to pay  that commitment again the churches must be asked to give more  and ask the treasurer to make a further commitment  and the churches must  find more again!
So it can't be the same as in churches  even if it stays in the profit?
Any other comments?
 
Keep them coming!
to say  from what we .
Right.
Cos I don't mind taking this action  erm, I think the  the thought is that I would like to propose that we have a word with the government.


Because I think that they  and that we can only say   the same again next year when our own , everything goes up  and, I think it's very sad  that the church can't !
Is that a formal  amendment?
Yes it is.
Is there a seconder to that formal amendment.
Does anybody want to speak for that amendments now?
That we add the words with sadness  to the resolution?
Could I, say also with sadness that in that that, yes things are going up but one thing isn't going up and tha , that's our membership.
Yes.
Mm.
And that is  as  one of the members of, we have a  I think we can afford to have member on the finance of churches  who are called at the assembly of the URC  who er 
Good, yes!
in fact, erm anybody that says a lot of sensible things and says look  if people are asked to  er, to er  increase their giving by nought percent that me , it probably means the church might have to be  
 
cos the membership has gone down!
Mm  mm.
Thanks.
Mm mm.
The amendment to add the word with sadness  to this resolution number two on page sixteen is before you  those in support of the amendment that we add the words with sadness to the resolution please show.
And those against the amendment please show.
The amendment is carried.
So the resolution before us now  is that the Synod endorses  english grammar writing !


Synod endorses with sadness the action taken by the provincial treasurer  in the level of commitments  he has made to MMF in nineteen ninety three.
We'll be making that resolution.
If there are no other further comments  or  questions set before you  would you show if you're in favour of resolution two of page sixteen ?
 
In favour?
Those against?
We now move to the  erm  sort of, two A which I will now as   and this will be that Synod urges local churches  through their consultations with district treasurers and the finance committee  to incrus , increase their contribution to MMF in nineteen ninety three  in such a way that the provincial commitment may be increased by at least five percent over the nineteen ninety two budgets  targets sorry!
Targets!
I'll read it again  that we, that Synod urges local congregations through their consultations with district treasurers and finance committee  to  increase their contributions to MMF in nineteen ninety three  in such a way that the provincial commitment may be increased by fi , by at least five percent  over the nineteen ninety two targets.
If anybody would like to speak.
Could I just say a ?
Yes.
I think I should while you're putting the words in such a way so it wasn't a  er, it wasn't thought that everybody just increased everything by five percent.
But as I say the  the people who did not  five five percent  er, therefore, others may not have given more!


Others may give less because they've got a lot of members  so that therefore it's  so that the provence as a whole  could be advised.
And I would have thought us giving five percent and, and there are other provinces that are giving more will ensure at least the  the  on twelve thousand we pay next year  and therefore, starting with eleven and half thousand we paid this year  and that   provinces  and in ourselves went further than that it is possible .
Not very good!
Surely, John   erm, at home  would like today off fishing!


.
How much longer moderator  can we in the Welsh provence accept  being the poor relationship  within the denominations?
Indeed, how much longer can we expect the other provinces to continue carrying us?
We are no poorer than some of the
Mm.
noble provinces!
No.
Because we hear great  erm  shouts, cackulations of joy from those provinces that can afford to increase their giving  shouldn't allow us to sit on our morals!
I think it's a great tragedy that Wales  considers itself to be the poor relation  within the United Reform Church  and the answer can only lie within Wales!
I can't come en , elsewhere  we have to support this motion too!
Any other comments?
The motion is before that Synod urges local churches  through their consultations with district treasurers and the finance committee  to increase their contribution to MMF in nineteen ninety three  in such a way that th , that the provincial commitment  may be increased by at least five percent over the nineteen ninety two targets.
For those in favour please show?
And those against please show?
And that's carried.
So we move to resolution three on page  sixteen.
I think erm  er  I know there has been some discussion of  I I  about   er  and I put  er, in this report I think all the documentation that the ministers and  ministers that had already seen it  and  I've explained that the big issue is that er  the URC, I think  a weekly account o ah of all other informations  has er, worked out very  on the basis of five thousand and I was  been tugging  you pay your car off to get that   and  .
The church in Wales  er   and  and from a  a survey of  one church in Church of England  in Hemel Hempstead, I discovered that their rate seemed to be about thirty two P per mile.
You've got to work it out on the basis of ten miles  not on the basis of five miles.
I think also  er, and this  er, it may be that the er  er URC does not want to be pushed round   er, we got up  er, to how many ministers this applies  but I do know there are quite a number of ministers  which  who need their own cars  a and  a a  at the church that pays the  er, insurance, the road license and even something for the maintenance.
Now, clearly if you were paid say  six hundred pounds for that  and you only did twelve hundred miles, you're getting fifty P a mile anyway!
And they've got, I think the odds are that people are  giving more perhaps  er    and that er, if they were paid at fifty four P per mile  and  and got  how that would affect the churches  er  contributions they make?
And therefore, er our proposal is that we should adopt the figures at the bottom of the page which are actually those which the  the er  er, Inland Revenue have recognised in ones where you don't have to  er, put in a tax return for.. for .
So resolution three isbefore you  for discussion .


Peter?
I know I'm a !
Reading for our , I mean er, I supply my own car, my church  has recognised that  whether I'm   probably if I pay the tax and the insurance   erm  and I just  thirty two, thirty five  that's   but  when I'm in  business or I'm in provinces and I'm allowed to pay what, ten fifteen 
Fifteen.
pence a mile?
Fifteen.
And I do not


or be subsidised, you know a a I mean I think that's  consistency.
Well I I shall leave you to go through the questions for a few minutes.
from from , erm I'm rather concerned about what  the  er, provence here is intending to do!
Erm, I've worked for ten and a half years within this county of Clwyd as a  social worker, regarded as an extensional   and every year my employers  er, who are based in London would like the county to know what were the remec recommended mileage  rates  for the reimbursel to a business car mileage?
Now, if Clwyd or Gwynedd or any other county for that matter, within Wales or in England  er, decided that in themselves that they would not implement the national recommendation  er, then there duly would be  all hell to pay, and rightly so!
And certainly now that of course, ministers don't have a union  unfortunately!
Er 
No.
they would allow me half   now erm I've been looking at one particular church, one denomination  er, which is the Methodist Church, although it has been said already here this afternoon, or this morning rather  there are an overall erm  joint  style with Methodist and with United Reform Church  and  erm  I have personally the Methodist  of last year, last September  where it gives  and also  erm, mileage recommendations.
I'll be viewing the Methodist Church in quite a different way, but I think it's very important for us to be  made aware of how they do it  erm  for example, if you have  erm  a a  or or and I don't think any church has, are provided  within that   and gets  alike.
In addition to that you get depreciation  of one thousand one hundred and forty four pound per year  which, by my reckoning is ninety five pound a month  in addition to that, as a Methodist Minister you get a standing charge of five hundred and twenty eight pound per year which is  forty four pound  pe er, per month  and then  you also through i in the year if you have a major repair needed on your car you get a hundred and eight pound  now, if in fact, I had , I have a Vauxhall Nova, and let me take these figures as you are   at twenty four P  a mile, or twenty four point  five P a mile  and if that's all we are recommended, recommending, in other words, there's no lump sum at all er, that would mean that I would be getting forty nine pound  but   Methodist , this colleague in Llandudno if he did
Perhaps I shouldn't do this yet cos we haven't agreed it!
But we have a new secretary.
Er, if you agree it an and  report.
And I'm gonna ask Catherine to stand up so that you can all see who she is.


We're involved in  bringing things together, we're involved lots of things and 
At the back in black.
there are lots of things  
At the back in black.
committee, if you go downstairs you will see on the notice there a display of various things that we do, and on the windowsills there are  various pieces of information  free  sheets that you can pick up and take away it will tell you about all sorts of issues!
The way in which society  imposes an agenda on us  asks us questions in the churches.
I think we're not too bad in doing that.
But what we  need to do  as well, is to listen wha to what the churches are saying as they address these issues.
And I want to  erm  ask you please  if you have any comments about the work of The Old Church and Society Committee, the work we do fo fo for Synod and in the provence  please make those comments known  to Catherine or to your district representative!
We need to hear from the local churches, from the district councils what's going on  wha what the issues that concern you are  so let's  as well the ones that you see downstairs, we may already be addressing so have a look down there  have a look at the, the information  but if there are any issues you feel we ought to be addressing then please let us know so that we can put them on our agenda.
That's all I want to say  except to er, who, that Synod received the report of the Church and Society committee?
I'm assuming you've read that report?
Have you received it?
Yeah.
Yes.
Does anybody wish to make any comments or  ask any questions about this particular section?
Don't think that's a lack of interest, I think it's matter of discipline!


Oh Good!


Okay then..
Thank you Peter and thank you Catherine  erm  we will give the view  in due course.
We move to the DP committee report which is on page seventeen.
I'm gonna go very speedily and ask that we receive this report for debate.
Good!
Yes.
Any comments on any section that is not pertaining to the resolution that was on page nineteen?
Erm  one from Mike    Mike?
and  is that  , I always feel threatened  or paranoid  I just want to make a point on  on paragraph seven  the rule in which to review the  is that  my understanding that  review will be about  the role and   of the rule in which the  .


We will note that in a minute.
Right.


Er
I just wanna refer to item one which is to do with the Synod .
That's actually  a different resolution.
Is it?
So we come back to that.
Well 


Do you wannit   
Ah! ah!
Right  I would say 
Sorry!
Sorry!


Any other comments about any other questions not pertaining to the resolution there?
We therefore come to resolution two  in which   to make it to paragraph one  


You're so gracious John!


So  it's just simply to er  comment about the  the future work that's gonna be done by  Glanmole er, the work of investigation as I understand it at the end of that first section.
Really, two things brought up investigation to consider  the first is with  trusts  the very important piece of work that's done by trusts on behalf of the provence  another provence may or may not know that there are the trusts have now been  er, between trusts  erm  South Wales trusts  erm
 Monmouthshire 
North Wales trust and  Monmouthshire have now all been amalgamated into one  and we're working through the implications of that.
And we have had the trust secretary who has been working on our behalf voluntarily  for some time now.
I don't think anybody appreciates just how much, and I would like to put it on record, how much George  does  on behalf of the provence  a very considerable piece of work!
If you  were part of the trust meetings and saw the degree of work that he does do regularly on our behalf it is quite considerable  he doesn't do it for nothing!
I can't imagine that George is gonna continuing  doing that forever  and it may well be that we'll be faced with a possibility of, of what we do in the future  to have that piece of administration done  will we be able to assume that it could done voluntary in the future?
Or will it be part of the administrative task of the church?
So I'd, I'd like that to be  er  considered  er, when this whole investigation is carried on.
And the second point too, is to say  is to ask, at least to consider, whether then in some centres the work of the Synod ought to be trimmed down to match  the particular work  that is being done.
I mean tha , is it all, you know, do we need all the time to have  erm  extra administrative help and in in, and in terms of which we've been talking about before, I know they might sound like two conflicting issues  but one of the ways of ensuring we get the work done  is  do we trying too much at the Synod?
Should we be thrusting more work down to districts  and th , and they'll  to do the job rather than always assume it should be done at this level?
I think, I'm not going to encourage debate on that  I think we've heard what Kenneth said  particularly about the trusts  the working done by the trust  and would  suggest that we ask Granville to take that on board as well and be within the  presentations too.
And I think some would be  the less about the  too much work perhaps being done by Synod  and not enough by districts.
I think it is something that we should  encourage churches to talk about, the districts to talk about  speaking of the district secretary  I !


But  there we are  I I think we'll just take that on board like that.
Erm, resolution that Synod appoints Jo , John  as Synod clerk for a period of up to three years  to commence at a date mutually convenient to him  and the present Synod clerk.
Those in favour of that resolution?
Any against?
Right,.
I think  erm  we are not going to say thank you to Eileen now  because  she is not finishing as Synod clerk and that's a conscious decision.
It may be that  er, Eileen will be Synod clerk this time  next year as well we don't know.


Synod will divulge a degree of flex no, quite seriously, a degree of flexibility  and we're grateful both to Eileen and er, to John  for allowing that degree of flexibility to take place.
And Synod will of course will be informed  er,


when, when Synod clerk has changed.
But we're grateful to Eileen for what she is doing  and will continue to do  and we're grateful to John for what he intends to do  erm  for three years at any stage  wha at any stage in which they choose.
thank you.
Then  resolution three that Synod appoints the Reverend David , Henry  and Nanette  as the rep , as representatives on the Mission Council  and this pertaining to paragraph two.
Firstly, I think I should say that  straight away one hopes that these three   erm, and that's regrettable!
But the background is that of fifty letters were sent out to a variety of people  er, lay and ordained  whatever that means!


Erm  asking for permission to put their names forward  and from the, the few letters we had  the, this was  that we thought was the whitest knights  in terms of Geography  in terms of sex  in terms of I wouldn't say intelligence, perhaps I should try to impress them!


Erm  are there any comments or questions ?
Those, those supporting that please show?
Against?
Erm  now this present report is no longer necessary  erm  because paragraph three is now no longer accurate  erm, because a change that took place in the General Assembly Executive Committee  last  the week before last.
My feeling is  that it wouldn't have  when there's a been a change  perhaps  there could be no  from the  
 
the secretary  and as semi-executive now does not apply to this  I would suggest that somebody, unconstitutionally, intervenes the Synod advocate  and ignore this resolution  and continue with the second Saturday of March  and the second Saturday in April.
Can you agree?
Yo 
Yes.
Agreed.
Yes,.
Does Synod accept the nominations in section ten?
These nominations are  do , clearly written.
Yes, if we could make a comment please the thing about  in July?
Yes.
Could it be looked at?
Well it's erm    and  the  see if you could another appointment  erm  for when he has got  .
That's okay.
Those in agreement with  resolution five please show?
And when we come to resolution six  er, there is only one district council  which has a made a nomination for the  erm  moderator for general assembly for ninety  three, ninety four?
And that was Mid-Wales district council.
You will all find yellow sheets of paper  if   wondering why we're reading about  the .
Mid-Wales district council  erm  I think unanimously  wish to put this nomination of reverence in the past  erm  and  the  nomination  for moderator of general assembly  from ninety three  to ninety four.
They have read  it was proposed and seconded by the Reverends  erm Mike  and Gethwyn   and if  there any questions  I am sure that they are  to answer questions  rather than ask them to speak to us.
, thank you.
There was quite  a lot of discussion in the Mid-Wales District Council about this nomination  erm  it wasn't , that reminds me  yes it was  
 
all members  votes  voted in favour of it.


Erm  so it had been thought about quite seriously.
Is Synod willing to take this  for the general assembly as a nomination  for  erm  if she agrees to nomination for  moderator general assembly.
Yeah.
Could I, could I just ask what particular element she has for Wales to nominate, why why, why was Wales nominated ?
Any, you know particular reason for that, having got David here  ah I I  I've decided to go through actually.
But how?
But I I of course felt the  of giving me something that he would be known by everybody in Wales.
Er  a and therefore, I would of thought that was a  everyone   but I'm just wondering why it is that now  what   of Wales?
Are there any other questions  to refer to district council?
No.
Can you answer?
Well I felt one of two ways, firstly when we're looking for a moderator of the URC we're looking for a moderator for the whole church.
And secondly, in terms of Liz   Liz  is someone I know extremely well and have worked with  in various functions and committees over the past.
We have someone always there  for those  who have  er, society  those who are poor  er, women  er, many of the issues that we feel  very strongly  and here, here  She had no  sort of cultural  historic resonance  with the nation of Wales  but I'm sure her   and the way she approaches her whole ministry would mean that she'd have a lot of  than those of us here  in the URC  in Wales.
The resolution is, comes before you from Mid-Wales district council, those in favour of sending  er, Elizabeth's nomination forward, if she agrees to that  please show?
Those against?
That is carried.
We've come, I think to the end of our business, which is good!
You will have tea at half past four which is  which is  er splendid!
There are a couple of things I would like to say  one is that you will find  people have asked regards  the paper which David mentioned in Northern Ireland  that has been distributed  it was pinned to another sheet of paper  erm, headed The Last Attempt  and there are more copies available  it's simply to know  where to find that .
We must have three minutes of relaxation before beginning Synod.


Before beginning .
Thank you for  before yo , before you start   the  please  please  we haven't quite finished!
Before we actually have that three minute break  erm, I think we should formally thank the Church of England of Holywell  for its hospitality laid down .


Ooh!
Ooh!
Erm
Would like a cup of this er
Mm.
Sorry, now that's ?
No, no I didn't!
.


I knew these pews were hard!
Ooh, I didn't realise they were that bad!
I feel sorry for my poor congregation!
Hello!
There's a cup of tea there.
Ooh how kind!
Thank you 
You 
very much.
you're standing in the door.
Thank you  
What have we got here?
Thank you .
Well it's the  
Hello Arthur!
Erm  Owen was told we'd got to  .
John!
He's upstairs.
Is he?
Oh!
Oh sorry!
Day before it.
Shall we  settle down!
Shall we settle down!
you have to say.
Who?
Steven.
And could you please put your hand up  if you haven't got
Oh I say!
an order of service.
Yeah  and they've been given out?
Erm.
And we begin our worship
and begin our worship with a period of silence.
So even if you're standing  could you stand quietly!
Can we keep quiet please!
We all stand.
You are the comfort.
Blessed by God  the eternal mystery  creator of the universe  heavens of human kind  the almighty who loves us with a mother's love  the everlasting one who holds us  as children to his cheeks   Glory
to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest  to God be glory forever, to God be glory forever, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen .
Blessed by Jesus Christ  the only begotten son of God  word of life  contradicter of expectations  the revived redeemer  with the common touch  the risen and  saviour  with holed hands  and haloed head.
Glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, to God be glory forever, to God be glory forever, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen .
Blessed by the Holy Spirits  the Lord and giver of life  midwife of change  catalyst inspiration  the carpenter pregnant with a piece of God  a distributor revealing the truth we abhor.
Glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, glory to God, glory to God, glory in the highest, to God be glory forever, to God be glory forever, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen, hallelujah amen .
Blessed be God  the trinity  the divine community  by the church in earth and heaven.
Praise be God forever.
We sing Christ be the time.
Praise be to ,before me,behind me, take off my   Christ be within me,, Christ be above me, never to part.
Christ shall light burn, Christ on my , Christ all our love thee,, Christ if I'm sleeping, rise in my , Christ in my , light of my life.
Christ be in all my thinking about me, Christ be in all , Christ be the  with eyes that see me, with ears that hear me, Christ ever be .
Oh Lord our God, how glorious is your name in all the earth?
Your majesty is praised above the heavens.
On the life, children and babes, you have found praise to follow your enemy, to silence the foe and the .
When I see the heavens  the work of your hand  the moon and stars which you arranged  what are human beings that you should be mindful of them?
Mere mortals  but you should care for them.
You created the image of yourself  and  them with glory and honour.
You gave them rule over the works of your hand  and put all things under their dominion.
All of them  sheep and cattle  yes, even the savage beasts  birds of the air and fish  that make their way through the water.
Oh Lord our God, how glorious is your name in all the earths?
After the letter and before  sixty.
So poor  apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God  whose prodigal life is fulfilled in Christ Jesus.
To Timothy his dear dad  great mercy and peace to you from God the father and Christ Jesus our Lord  I give thanks to the God of my forefathers who I worship with a clear conscience  when I mention you in my prayers  as I do constantly night and day.
When I remember the tears you shed  I long to see you again  and so make my happiness complete.
I am reminded of the sincerity of your faith  a faith which was the light in your  your grandmother and Eunice your mother before you  and which I am confident  now lives in you.
Very simple.
Pouring out of thanks  for the young Timothy  who spent the time in prayer  if you wish to say a short simple prayer of thanks  do so  end it thank you God  and we'll all join in  thank you God.
For our Christian brothers and sisters in Romania  and a few more   we say  thank you God.
Thank you God.
And the joy of wonder  of the  here  worship in you  thank you God.
Thank you God.
For all those who made it possible for us to be here  thank you God.
Thank you God.
Bow down 
may God be true, Bow down  may God in you .
For church leaders  community leaders and ordinary people working for peace in Ireland  thank you God.
Thank you God.
For exciting us  with  visions of the many ways  of church ministers  thank you God.
Thank you God.
For the faithful witness of our small rural churches  thank you God.
Thank you God.
Bow down  may God be true, Bow down  may God in you .
For all the young people who  have shared  not just today but  shared together  in this weekend  thank you God.
Thank you God.
For the people we are  going home to live with and worship with this Sunday  thank you God.
Thank you God.
For a day off from all the electioneering  and yet, also  for leading us back to the very issues  that will be challenging  our country  thank you God.
Thank you God.
Bow down  may God in you, bow down  may God in you .
We know we are part of a great community  and so we now stand Lord as we  remember those people  who have been a part a part of this particular community  to give thanks for their life  and to give thanks for  them.
And remember before you the names of
Mr Conway   elder at  Mount Piscod URC,
For these and all your saints past, present and to come  we thank you God  thank you God.
Amen.
Amen.
gracious spirits  heavenly dowsed with life and comfort  from the .
Long may the spirit carry on in all  all our lives.
He's now our guardian all our lives, for every  and .
God his name and if  thy name  for carry him in every heart and .
he has  bless my Lord and we must .
We must  and we may share forever  forever   he turned to God, our  to he  .
Part of a letter from Jesus to the church.
Blessed are the poor   the kingdom of heaven is theirs.
Blessed are disciples  they shall find conservation.
Blessed are the gentleman  they shall have the earth for their possessions.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst to see   they shall be satisfied.
Blessed are those who show mercy  mercy shall be shown to them.
Blessed are those whose hearts are pure  they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers  they should be called  God's children.
Blessed are those  who are persecuted in holy right  the kingdom of heaven is theirs.
Blessed are you  when you suffer insults and persecution  and cowardliness of every kind from my face  exult and be glad  for you have a rich reward in heaven  in the same way as they persecuted the prophets who bore you.
Lord we commit our speaking and our thinking  our fearing and our hoping  into your hands.
Bless our work  bless us  that all we do and say  may be to your glory  and for the sake of your kingdom  guide us
and  with us oh God and according to you we are   to one church  a church which opens doors and large windows  a church which takes the world seriously  ready to work and to suffer  and even to  for it  and we follow and witness to him  who is the saviour of the world  Jesus Christ our Lord  amen.
There are habits  and sometimes there are bad habits  and sometimes  assume they can't  hymn composer  and our next hymn  What is ?
Written by , not in eighteen ninety four, but in ninety eighty four!


As saying to Abraham and Sarah  the call of God was here.
Through Abraham and Sarah the call of God was here  through God and I will show you and .
We  and you shall be my hero and guide us in our life.
Through Abraham and Sarah the   in  our God  and in  I  say his prayer and you shall be my hero and guide us in our life.
In  all through my  prayer and  in God house I pray  he guides me in my  and carries me  and you shall be my hero and guide us in our life .
And so this  on our pilgrimage is end.
May the everlasting God shield you  East and West and South and wherever you go  and the blessing of God be upon us.
The blessing of God of life.
The blessing of Christ be upon us.
The blessing of the Christ of love.
The blessing of the spirits be upon us.
The blessing of the spirit of grace.
The blessing of the trinity be upon us  now and forever more.
Amen.
They wanna  the key
I thought they said they put it in the back bit.
It could be anywhere by now.
Who's the fair lady ?
That was all.
Oh yeah, this Linda's one !
I dunno, it was a big .
You could always borrow mine.
I suppose .
You could borrow  mine.
I dare say somebody's already said it to you but  the family were very  comforted and grateful for your service .
Well that's .
Just once, and then we're going.
I mean, I mean they must be  you know 
Yes.
and er
Okay, thank you, thank you.
I'll pop in and see you sometime when I'm  down at the RAF  
 
erm  I want to get to the homes  you know the old er  
Oh yes.
Because  because I, I didn't really say goodbye to some of those people.
Mm.
I popped in not long before Christmas, popped in carol singing  but that wasn't really a visit to say 
No, no.
cheerio  in, in a proper way so I said I  I'd go back, I didn't tell but I I, I will go back.
Cos  you're doing it to yourself not to them.
You said it to yourself 
I did it to myself yes.
I I  I thought to myself, I think you are a damn fool you know!
It's graceful really .
Well  you know there's a  there's one, one thing about talking to yourself  you sometimes get more sensible answers than talking to anybody else!
Well you do!
When you talk to them and yo ge ge get a load of rubbish!
Talk to yourself, and you think my God that's brilliant!
That's right.
Yeah, yeah.
There's a clever fellow!
Oh yeah, I says what a clever fellow I am I say!
And when I'm talking to myself I say what a clever fellow you are !
That's right.
Yeah.
Mm .
Yes.
Anyway er  the whole thing's, the thing's er
I should be having it anyway
Yeah.
.
Oh I'll be popping in from time to time.
Yeah.
I'm be glad to see you this time.
Popping in for a coffee morning some time.
You alright for Sunday night are you?
Will you be at
Yes,ye yes I'm  I'm not preaching anywhere tomorrow so
Oh.
Why are you speaking in stereo?
Because somebody's asked me  to collect people's conversations  because it's to , to do with a firm that's making a new dictionary.
Oh yes.
And so, I'm asked to record all the conversations I make this week.
I see!
Oh well I'm sorry I didn't know I was on record and er I withdraw all the remarks and I shall deny everything in court.
And anything you say may be taken down they say!
Yes , oh yes.
Yeah I know  .
We , we're assured that it's all anonymous.
Oh we 
But I've  but I've got write to your na , but I've got to write your name in the book.
erm  what are you doing?
Yeah.
When you gonna find your way up around my way?
But you know I've been terribly busy lately!
Yeah.
Oh it's
Anyway, you know er  give us a tinkle first
Yes, I'll do that.
You can catch me on the phone.
Yes, I  I think I 
 
I think I've got your number.
Good!
Erm
And I seem likely to be busy for a little while unfortunately!
How's the erm  Roman going?
Is it ?
Yes, slow.
I've started but it's going rather slowly.
Oh!
I've done about  twenty or thirty pages but that's 
Oh!
that's all.
Yeah.
Well it's not  
Mind you tha mind you that is type written pages, not handwritten.
That's right, yes.
Yes.
I er  I'll get a cup of tea now.
You'll get one early.
I'll get one earlier.
Alright .
Right.
Did  show you the photographs I gave you?
No, I don't think 
Oh 
so.
well ask him cos I I   she gave me the pho , the photographs I took on the, on that Friday night.
Oh
when we did the farewell .
Yes.
have you got those photographs to show  he hasn't seen them either.
Oh!
 
We're very .
Oh!
I never thought, I saw him  but I've, I can get you  copies if you want them.
Erm  I get you  he only did twelve.
I'm sure Mr  is not listening!
Yes.
You're gonna get  so let me have a look while you er
That's right.
Picking all the young ladies  
Yes I can see her, down there.
I know!
Are they like that?
Yes, yes .
I think it's  all good !
Mm.
So er  ?
Yes, I've used about three tapes today.
Well let's hope it's all repeatable, repeatable 
Good!
and er
Goodness!
We were down there.
You went well on the young ladies!
I did indeed!
Yeah, he did very well!
I always do, every Sunday morning that's what I'm gonna miss you know!
I know.
Could I have some of you amongst .
Sorry about cutting the top of your head off  but, never mind, you know!
You've still got your best features on.
Unfortunately I ruined the film I I thought the film had erm  wound on  finished and it had and it  the batteries had gone flat so it hadn't, so I opened it and I lost all the .
Oh yes I  I did that once.
erm but
The only thing you done, it was lucky in that  it was only the outer ones.
Yeah, well there's only two or three of the  that I lost.
You know, cos I don't think I er, the outer ones 
Well 
on the er 
Yeah.
actual spool.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Oh very good!
What do you mean you had more  altogether.
Well I didn't know when I'd see you see so I thought I can always leave them at  Dorothy's for you.
I mean that  that
Yeah.
thing .
Thinking I might  might see you today but not knowing whether you would be coming 
No.
or not.
Well anyway  George did tell me when I popped in after the funeral  erm  that you were hoping you'd be here today, I said, oh well I said I'll leave this here then you can .
Yeah.
Because erm  er  I didn't know whether I was gonna make it altogether, you know, I mean, you don't do you?
No.
I suppose  I needn't have quite so many but er  I quite like doing it.
Oh yeah!
Oh yes!
Yes.
There is quite a lot on at the moment cos I've got  a church meeting this evening at  Flint about er  ministry
Mhm  mhm.
and an elders meeting at er   Kevenmour tomorrow
Mm.
about  ministry !
Mm.
Oh!
Have either of them got erm  anyone in view?
Erm  well   Kevinmour well no, the Wrexham group have got  have, had a minister came last week and this week
Mhm.
with a view.
Oh yeah.
Aha.
But whether they're going to  you know  get him 
talk about 
or not I don't know.
How many are there in the group?
Four.
Oh yeah.
One is very very weak!
It was er  I think I'll try a bit of your  cake if I may?
Yes i take it at your peril I'm afraid!
Well if I get home safely I'll be alright!
But the other thr three are a reasonable size are they?
Erm  well Salisbury Park's got  sixty odd members  erm   Kevenmour twenty odd  Wre er so  Johnstown ooh a dozen or fifteen something like that  and there's a se , and the fourth one, Bareala he's down to next to nothing!
So er
In fact, we're wondering whether it's going to be  possible to keep it up but the trouble is it's in an area  where in the last  ooh, over  over recent years  forty chapels have closed!
Really!
And we sort of, don't want that to be the forty  first !
No!
No!
Gosh!
It's  and it's quite near the  Brumrose steelworks  which means of course there's a lot of unemployment there!closed.
Mm.
There, are there, is this a  a rural area on the whole or  that so many have closed, chapels?
Er  well  it  there's  you see we've got  Wrexham is a good sized town!
Mhm  mm.
Erm  and  from Wrexham down to  Cherk is sort of almost an urban development.
Mhm.
That, as soon as you get a  a bit to the west  country.
Oh!
And that's the area where the  chapels have closed?
Well  no, you see  erm  across  where actually Songs of Praise is coming from this evening
Mm!
is a  is a place where  ooh there, there used to be any number of Welsh chapels
Mm.
that I er, now  well there's hardly any now!
Really?
Yeah.
Excuse me a sec I just want to  I was just letting the water  er, the radiator was a little bit 
Oh by all means.
low and I just want to make sure that  it's erm
Yes I know her.
Oh well  so er  she's coming  with Nigel .
I I haven't contacted   only from what who  er Granville said  so I picked up the communion  the  straight away and then I couldn't  and she's coming on the   or that Sunday  the first 
Mm.
Sunday in November  and er  she's doing one  evening  in ninety three.
Oh good!
So erm  when er  but I hasten to  I I didn't know about those people  I knew that the  the two 
Mm.
Mr   and Mrs .
Mm.
Er  and that they are  so  he asked Mrs  to do the reading  which she, came out  it's,, but so er  there we are!
Mm.
Yes she's taking the lay 
 
preacher's course.
Miss 
Mrs 
 

Yeah.
She's erm
And, and this Catherine 
She's also I 
She's not quite erm   
I think, I think she al 
she's almost finished!
She 
Yes.
do  on on the  the work 
Yes.
her own  .
And and one that I  you know, I've  in a way  but er  I thought well it's er 
!
they want someone to  and 
Mm.
and she does   and er  it's a  I can feel that there  when someone's .
I've put mine .
I haven't  
She's out quite a bit.
no 
Yes.
because it was 
I thought it was Ronnie?
.
Over there 
Yeah er 
er 
Well who's stopped here then?
You might have a meal on the, the Thursday   but er 
Yes , I'll let you have it.
John said you were there.
interrupt my speech,
I can't come next Sunday I've got to go to Wrexham.
But you'll be here next, oh!
Yes, I
Yeah, will you be here or or 
 
er at a , Sally 
Yes, yes yes!
if er
Excuse me!
.
I've got .
Cos I'm gonna ask her to erm  speak about the .
I think it might be .
Herbert's in the way!
Yes, alright I'll move now!
I've got her address, whether I've got her phone number?
I don't know whether I've got her phone number.
I'll I'll I'll see if I've got it then.
Yes.
Yes.
Well
I don't know whether you can get out yet.
I think 
I've, I 
Herbert's  blocking 
I 
everybody in!
I had to park at The Three Pigeons I couldn't get in!
Oh !
If you remember the .
Yes, yes, and I .
Oh you won't need sixteen megabytes even if you decide to  improve the  let's unpack that  thing and then we'll see how much space we're talking about  how much of that's padding and how of that is  real thing,.
I was taught that  when I worked in the grocery warehouse.
If you open a box with a penknife always do that.
So that you have to  
So get it to go all the way.
Cut the  end that's for .
Do the contents the world of good!
Mm.
Oh!
What's happened to this .
Yeah.
Yep!get it out.
Whatever!
Right we're on to this roll now  .
Oh!
Right!
Right!
Can you pull that off?
That one.
Right!
Before I realised I've got mine.
Okay !
It is slightly bigger than the other one isn't it?
Quite a lot bigger actually.
Mm.
Oh dear!
Yes, it's got more back to it.
Oh the screen  mm, about the same size.
It's a little bit bigger  I think you'll find  if you put the tape measure on it you'll find it's a little bit bigger.
Right.
Right.
Presumably this is the power supply for it?
Yeah.
Woops!
The main colour monitor  operating instructions in here.
How many spare points you got?
Erm  one at the moment, but I can pull out the radio without any problem.
Oh fine.
It's a 
No, one of these spools   
Full wear  
If I can crawl under here  I
Yes, I just wanna have a look at  yes you can crawl under there to your hearts content!
You can unplug that for the moment.
I'm not really worried about it.
No, I just, thinking it's easier if I take it down this way.
Oh alright.
Then I pull it  .
Now,.
Ultimately  er  they might change the lead on the end of that monitor.
What's the matter?
I was wondering  where the socket is.
Oh I see where it's gone!
Right!
I should have .
Oh there's plenty of wire.
Oh yes.
Right.
Now if I'd have been sensible
Yes.
which I really am  I'd have brought over  my
Oh!
what's his name?
My monitor.
Why?
Well  if I'd swapped monitors with you can pro and I don't suppose you'll wanna get rid of your Amstrad today
No.
and you'll probably want to keep it for a little while?
Yes.
Oh hang on, moving leads and things  don't stand up!
Not just yet anyway.
Right.
Erm  I could of taken the black and white one
Mm.
and then I could have shown mine to this lady, cos I mean the only difference is is the  black and white isn't it?
Er, yes.
Er  I'll have another lead for you in just a sec I'm afraid.
Hang on a mo just screw this in.
Right  straight under there    there is actually a power outpoint on this  so if we can get the right kind of plug
Yes.
we could actually drive the monitor off the box and you'd only need one socket.
Well it doesn't really matter because I got  and unused socket here.
Yeah but I mean  if you i in some ways it's easier  cos then when you turn it off, you turn everything off.
You see what I mean?
Yes.
Er erm  there's a white  plug  have a seen a mucky grey, a white  plug?
I'll lower it down here.
I've got, yes.
Got it?
Yes.
Fine.
It's here.
Right, it's in!
That's in?
We need the keyboard now.
I got a  er  find out where that plugs in.
At the back somewhere usually.
Then  we can turn it on and see if it all works.
Can you hold that for a mo ?
While 
Yes.
I hold the lead.
Yes.
There's a   Oh !
That's got the  vacuum  on the top.
Ah!
Anything down that hole?
Have you found it?
Aha.
Oh  
Just seeing 
it's twelve  I didn't realise that went in there.
No, and somewhere or other I  have got for you  a copy of the  long string  the long  you know?
The erm  the long  trip card  to work gently.
Oh I see!
Right  there you go!
Have you got a ruler?
Yes.
Yes, that's fine.
Yes, you see that screen's  twelve inches  and that's screen's over  over an inch bigger, nearly fourteen.
Mm.
Do you want to turn it on?
Is that the on button?
Aha.
It's, just rock it.
Don't push it properly.
Oh good, it's the go , it's the good DOS!
Yeah.
It's a good do , that's a very good  erm  files   
Oh!
put out.
Mm.
Oh that's interesting!
Let's have a look.
Has it got a DOS directory?
Two DOS directories!
Old Do , DOS and old DOS.
I got version five.
Well that's the latest isn't it?
Yeah, except I haven't got all the  things.
Well if it's on this hard disc could we copy it over?
We could , we could  we could keep it.
An E 
Cos it's 
I R  C  and that's  that's like  oh no, we can have it, it's all set up this will save us a ag , ages of time!
Good!
DOS.
Goodness, a lot of files on there!
It would of been better
If you'd done a P.
No, sub-directory  slash P  Oh marvellous!
I think we'll call it that.
.Let's ring .
Erm  how do we get it to load high that's what I want to know?.
Mm.
just  erm 
erm 
I haven't got his work number on the memory so I'll 
Right.
have to look it up.
Er  I should know it but
No handbook, but I suppose we can buy some DOS five handbooks?
Well I was thinking that.
It would be worth  copying all that off.
Yes.
Before we lose any of it!
Er   perhaps it's not !
I know, work .
I wonder if we'll get him?
Ah, well if not we'll try the car.
No.
Oh right.
.
this one goes straight through to his office doesn't it?
Ya.
Good morning!
How are you?
Ooh fine thanks!
We just want a bit of information about setting up a computer.
Da , er David'll talk to you.
Hiya Rob!
Erm  these things have come with DOS five on them  er but no books or anything!
But never mind.
Erm  in the  ah  or to accept dot that, no,config si , how do you get it to load high?
Have you got a pencil and paper  ?
Er
Oh right.
I'll get you some .
I mean you got, I mean I've got the rest  config sys sorted out.
Will do.
Aha.
Yes.
I mean, I've put files equals twenty  yeah but I'm  DOS  equals high with a  H I G H, yes.
Right!
That's all I really needed to know.
I don't need much else.
Apart from busy sitting there thinking erm  yeah, well I usually leave command dot com in the root directory.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It should give  yeah, I just need  country  yeah.
Do , does it help if DOS is high is near the beginning?
Oh well it doesn't matter.
Fine, that's alright.
I'll just add it to the end, that's all I was thinking.
Sometimes the  they make a fuss if you put them in the wrong place.
No  not at the moment.
Yeah.
Yeah, ultimately they might wanna  end up with erm  a mouse driver high but  it's alright.
Yes, I mean it does it for you doesn't it?
Basically.
Yeah.
Oh.
Yeah.
I used to always load anti sys but I, then I found out there's nothing I ever I really needed it, so I took it out!
But I suppose you've got more complicated setups than me?
What?
Yeah.
Mm.
Okay, thanks very much Rob!
Bye   Yes, right.
Now let's find out something!
Just check that that boots properly.
Control alt  it's deleted  segment but we don't really  need that.
We'll let it just  setup isn't really that e erm  you can do fancy things!
Er  that's a  I think what we'll do is we'll get used to it.
Mm.
So I'll just  put that there.
Would you be turning that round there ?
I can do that sometimes but I don't
Erm  no, soon as you get an ordinary chip dot bat  file
Mm.
erm  it will  it reads the clock   automatically.
We'll just have to set it once but it hasn't done it.
It's no good setting now because if there's no alt  dot bat
I it won't keep it?
Yeah.
Mm mm.
Oh!
Right.
Er, I need a copy of Xtree
Er
I want to have a look at the
Erm, my  is
I'm always carrying it.
Here it is.
I'm always sorting out people's computers for them.
Ah?
I said I always carry Xtree, I'm always sorting out  people's computers for them.
I see!
A chair would help wouldn't it?
Yes, why not have one?
Er  would you prefer the chair or the stool?
Have what you like.
It doesn't matter  one can have one.
Ah, interesting!
Aha!
I wonder what's in old DOS?
Read me now!
View.
Oh I understand!
That's fine, you can delete that.
Aha!
That's fine.
Now then  er  I wanna get back onto your computer.
Right.
Cos  I want to  that you need to put somewhere safe  that's  the disc driver for the  card.
Oh!
This is a 
So that's backup is it?
Yeah  write protected if you wouldn't mind?
Oh.
Before you get anywhere else done.
Erm
Right.
Mhm.
Right.
Where did I, where did I put that piece of paper I had?
Here you are.
DOS equals high  that's high.
Drive five, one one  that's   There we are !
Right!
Ooh!
Take the Xtree out  there  what's that's ?
Oh that's funny!
What's that?
It goes the other way.
That'll take a bit of getting used to that!.
How do you mean, it goes the other way?
You turn it  it's on the other side.
Feels funny!
Oh  it's done!
Do anything different, you still turn it the same way to lock it down it's just
Oh it's just the shape of the thing?
Just feels different!
You can get used 
Mm.
to it quick enough.
Er  and that one  and that one  how's that one ?
Er  control copy all eight files as they are to the   and that should  do it!say on there.
Actually 
Doesn't take long does it?
No.
Right!
Let's have a look, look see.
There are!
That's  assist  what's this?
Six.
How do you get in this one?
In there, oh you don't!
Yeah, this is a windows thing.
You don't need it.
Lovely!
Oh that
Here?
Win eight twenty is?
Yeah, so if you'd have been running windows on it.
I'll check it.
Files read only.
Oh well it doesn't matter.
Oh!
I wouldn't worry.
Okay.
Oh, by the way you'll only have one det well it  you've got the whole lot on this thing.
Right.
You mean  I don't need a C and a D?
No.
It runs the whole the lot!
Oh!
Don't matter.
Well that's more what I'm used to.
Xtree's more pretty in this isn't it?
Where's the directory?
There's  er  what's sub-directory known as?
Handle?and then  sub-directory in D-base!
I think the sub dire , we don't want the Gem.
No.
Cos I haven't sorted them out yet!
Mm.
Er  I'm gonna sit down quietly and do it one day  erm  it's  and make a sub-directory.
That's for storing.
Can you scroll that down a bit?
Oh!
Hang on!
Further?
No, just as  bit more, yeah.
Leave your sub- directory as   utils.
Yeah, and I want to make the sub-directories so that can .
Make a sub- directory as  .
Make as sub-directory as WP   papers.
It's gonna take as long as I thought cos I have to format it and install it.
Make a sub-directory as Wordperfect fifty one.
Actually that  is that a sub-directory or a main one?
It's a sub-directory of the root directory  it's alright.
I see!
And that's it!
And you've got a sub-directory which says DOCS.
Yes, what?
Have you ever used that?
I don't think I have used it.
Well you can always make  no I don't need to make the rest because erm  oh yes  graphics!
Make a sub- directory as  graphics.
Macros?
Do I need one for that?
Oh yeah!
You have macros don't you?
Yes.
Just wanna call them the same things as you're used to.
Printers  no print , yes printer will be the same won't it?
Speller.
You call yours speller.
It's now 
Yes.
on.
Right!
Yes, that's the end by the look of it.
Pardon me!
Oh well !
Right!
Let's take that out.
No, that one was brown that was.
No, and that one was brown.
I tend to keep them in the originals cos then I  if I need to .
Mm.
Now let's   boot it and see what happens.
No  is it switched on  .
Take that out  otherwise it'll boot all the disc drive.
Okay.
Should be alright.
Good!
Er  Right  can I have your  erm  all your bible ones?
There's some  .
We've had those!
They're all
Ah!
over there I think.
Yes, here they are.
Oh  don't really need this!
Never mind!
Is this the order you put them up in?
Yes.
Oh, so you'd like those in order, put back in there?.
The only thing is, I did wonder whether the  two 
What?
there's two files at the end which I thought  maybe ought to be at the beginning.
Where are they?
In there.
Er
They're all in one big directory, DOS 
These two
doesn't care!
You see those two are right at the end, and those  I don't know whether those ought to be together  before XX.
Well it, they're 
So 
all in one directory.
It doesn't matter?
It doesn't care!
I see!
It's called Bible isn't it?
Yes.
Copy  mm  perhaps it doesn't like  Oh, that's the only thing!
You're gonna get  used to that.
The se there's no second  star.
In  that er, Bible.
Oh!
That's cos I made a mistake!if I  did I forget to do a word there?
No.
Star
Oh!
So that's drive B is it?
Yeah.
Star  .
I haven't  bothered to make   a label.
No, I don't blame you.


Take them long enough wouldn't it?


Alright?
Mm.
Right!
I will get used this drive sooner or later!
Boring this innit?
Yes.
Still  it has go , got to be done.
Well you could leave those  couldn't you?
No, it's alright!
I like to check that it all works  you know?
Get a few things on it and check that it works .
It won't take long.
Right you are!
How many discs did you say this was?
Twenty one of them.
Mm.
Er  this one, yes I think we'll put that .
Yeah, no  I'm putting them that way on top of each other.
That's right!
Hopefully another coffee?
I've  just put the kettle on.
Oh!
I thought you might be ready for one.
Actually they spend more time  changing discs probably than the
Than the actual copying, yes.
Well you can't help it when you copy 
Well look at the speed it takes a disc onto the hard disc!
Watch!
Now is that a file?
That's a whole file!
Oh yes, it takes long , spends longer reading than it is  !
Oh yeah!
Much longer!
Yeah.
Well it's longer, it's about ten times as long!
Ha!
Oh because that's the er
That's a slow floppy innit?
Mm.
Floppies are, that is terrible!
I'm up to book fourteen .
You what?
I'm up to book fifteen!
Oh!
Oh I'm more than half way through!
Only nine left.
Good!
Suppose I could of put this  out there  ?
What are doing?
It should be going down.
Fortunately this'll be the biggest job of all!
I suppose actually loading Wordperfect will be the slowest job of all.
Always takes a bit longer  doesn't it?
Mm.
It's er  there's not so many discs to load though.
No?
There's not so many discs.
No, but er  I can't just do this with it!
No.
Where are you going?
Just wanna look at those.
.I mean Autoroute's only about three files.
Only got 
Yeah.
three discs so that won't take very long.
D-base is what?
Five at the moment.
You know it says book forty, do you have to know which books you want to go into?
Yes  erm  er, it's on a file somewhere.
Oh!
No, is it?
It's not the easiest thing to
No, that's one of the 
 
reasons why I've made little use of it.
Erm
Never mind!
I could probably re-name them?
To make it easier to remember, except it  maybe it refers to it, maybe it uses book something to refer to them.
You might have to write the whole programme again to do that.
Oh well, maybe I'd better not try then!
There's some coffee here.
Sorry, I've nearly finished this.
I'd like to get it done before I
Yes for the, you know printing the leaflet 
How much notice do you require?
 

How quickly do they do it?
The same day.
Ah.
Only, I could take it to work, you know,
Mm.
Er now then  bring it on Friday and show it to G to Granville.
I'll  I'll get another copy.
I'll leave that with Kenneth for now
Mm.
and I'll bring one on Friday with me.
I did ask, I did mention it to Granville on Saturday.
Aha.
Because, you know, he said what it was gonna cost him in the future.
So if we can save some cost
Mm.
But it's  once you get more than twenty copies 
Yes.
and that  makes the copying quite reasonable.
Oh I see, it's not an ordinary photocopier?
It, it 
Oh yeah.
But they've got two.
This one's called an, an offset
Mm.
printer.
You you've got an ordinary photocopier and an offset.
The ordinary photocopier works out a bit more expensive.
Mm.
But you see, using the offset   that case be I don't know what's  
Well he'll generally want about seventy copies.
Yeah.
In that way it works out much better.
Mm.
Because there's an example there, you know, hundred  two hundred, whatever you want.
There's an example there.
Mm.
Like, I just  really that  we could reduce the scale of costing.
A little bit.
Well why not?
You know?
It's gonna help my school and it will help us as well.
It will do two things won't it?
Oh it's the school do does it?
It's the school does it.
Erm because we've got a printing system for the school  th they're, they're now letting out their printing services to others in the community.
Mm.
Erm  so i if you like it's, it's officially done because therefore they're advertising it  in our last newsletter we send to every parent
Mm.
this advert went on the back of it.
So if anybody locally wanted .
So basically all I would have to do is take them with me and  I'd bring them home on the same day.
Mm.
So it's done there and then.
Apart from that I've got all the information we want here 
Certainly you can.
We have an open door.
Well yes.
the  the whole of the 
I thought  but I thought it was erm  I mean you haven't
Er no it's, it's  no we haven't had two sides 
If you have two sides it'll be quite a few won't it?
And sixty copies will be three pound.
Cos some of these places  in town, people have to charge you VAT as well don't they?
Which is 
Oh yes, yes.
what pushes  well if you go to somebody it pushes the cost up doesn't it?
Mm.
And a lot of the commercial ones charge you about ten pence a
Oh some of them charge you ten plus VAT don't they?
Mm.
Which is what adds it up you know, really.
So it would
Well  run out now because I've got all the information I want.
Oh  well
You wanna leave it with me Alan do you?
For Friday.
Er  I doubt if I, I doubt if I'll see Granville before Friday.
At least no if I do it will only be Friday morning.
And I've got a funeral Friday morning I think.
typing letters and that  minutes  a new typewriter  
 
No she's learning how to use it  
Oh yes.
Erm they've  there's all the different amount of things you've gotta learn  I mean  it's even different from a  from a computer isn't it?
You know it's 
And a computer you've got a spellchecker.
Well she's got a spellchecker on this one.
got two capital letters 
 
It's what?
it's got one small letter and two capitals.
?
No.
Oh it's a, it's a, it's a good one.
We bought it from Smith's on Saturday, it's a Brother.
But they were making an offer, if you brought your old machine in they'd offer you thirty pound off.
So we thought we may as well take it.
Mm.
Yes I  I've been busy today.
David's been helping me set up the  I've, I've just bought myself a three eight six.
Oh.
 

Well I've got er an electric typewriter.
Originally my son had it and he went over to a printer.
Mm.
A computer and a printer, mm.
A wordprocessor?
A wordprocessor, yeah 
Mm.
You see the beauty of  the beauty of the  computer or wordprocessor compared to an electronic typewriter is you can finish your document and then do your spellcheck.
Yes.
Whereas with the electronic typewriter you've got to do it er 
Oh yeah.
Yes .
It's really a better, faster ty ordinary typewriter in a way.
Mm.
.
Otherwise they're pretty well the same as an ordinary typewriter.
But er with a wordprocessor of course you can alter things.
Mm.
You can er 
Mm.
And of course you can shift er  a block.
Move it that way or some sort of thing.
Do you take sugar Alan?
No I don't, thanks.
Yes this was really rather extravagant getting this new one, it was an 
Does anybody want to buy an Amstrad?
Are you giving it away?
Selling it.
Oh yes I know that.
Thank you.
Who else are we expecting?
Erm
I think it's just Maria 
I think it's only Maria not represented isn't it?
I wonder if 
Don't let me stop people finishing their teas.
Anybody want a second cup of tea?
Er
There's some more tea there I think.
I'm alright thankyou.
Can we begin?
Yes indeed.
Sorry Alan.
Erm I  I think the only person missing i is Idris, so  I don't 
Yes I have an apology from Idris.
He rang me up last night  to say that he is more or less confined to barracks now in the evening now that Phil is home.
Mm.
He can't leave her.
And he erm sends his apologies.
Apology from Mrs , she's not too well tonight.
Right.
Erm Mrs erm Eileen , one of our elderlies, she's tied up with her husband who's in hospital.
Mm.
 
 
And Mrs  is ill as you know, Rhoda is ill.
And an apology from Merle from Salisbury Park.
Right.
Erm  from the eighth chapter of the letter to the Romans   For we are saved by hope.
But hope that is seen is not hope.
For what a man seeth, why does he yet hope for?
But if we hope for that we see not  then do we with patience wait for it.
Likewise the spirit also helpeth our infirmities.
For we know not to what we should pray for as we ought.
But the spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.
And he that searches the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the spirit because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of god.
And we know that in all things god works for good for them that love him.
To them who are called according to his purpose .
Let us pray.
Father we pray  that you will work for good with us.
Help us as we look to the future.
May we be guided by your spirit.
May ou your spirit guide our prayers and our thoughts  and our hopes.
And father we pray that our hope may not be in vain  but  may lead us  to sharing again in your kingdom.
And father we pray too for those who are not well and unable to come.
May they be sustained and kept according to their need.
And father we pray for ourselves.
And we pray too for those whom we represent.
That we may work together according to your will so that you may work for good in us.
Amen.
Er  Sadly, although I sent you a letter with suggestions for discussion I forgot to keep a copy of it for myself.
So, but I hope  if I stray too far from the path somebody will remind me.
I suggest that the first thing is erm  comments on  what recommendation you will be thinking of making to the church  in regard to the visit of er Mr and Mrs .
Has anybody anything to say?
No, and do you want this?
Oh, maybe I should have it.
Thank you.
Erm
Well I think er  several points should be ventilated and er I, I think the, while you're doing the agenda this evening you could add something to each item in turn
Mm.
Erm
The only thing one would say though whilst agreeing with   some of the, the matters perhaps that may be aired have a bearing on the other matters in the agenda.
Perhaps number one  the one that's in the first paragraph
Yes.
I'll be in a position tonight, perhaps after some discussion, to make a recommendation one way or the other.
Yes.
Well  well er  yes well   from what I've already learnt, and I've got to be rather blunt in this matter, I'm afraid that  Carol  's  expectations
John .
John  rather's expectations regarding the amounts, they're very ambitious indeed and  I can't speak for Salisbury Park but if we're expected to pay a share of  any alterations and so forth erm it would be very difficult for us to meet that commitment.
Mm.
Because we  er if, if his erm  if his er desires were carried out we'd, well we'd be talking about thousands of pounds.
Literally.
And the 
Mm.
I don't know whether I've spoken out of place because I'm not a member of Salisbury park but on the assumption that erm  that we would have to share in the
Mm.
expense you see.. of any changes.
Are there any other comments on his visit?
Er 
Well ju just to keep the ball rolling, my first impressions were good and he seemed to  be er  there was some drive about them.
His sermon er  well it was erm a reasonable sermon.
We're not going to get a good preacher.
The good preacher can get a much better church than this set up.
So we're er  we're sort of well down the list as far as that's concerned.
Erm  at first I was slightly put off by his choosing Cain and Abel as er


certainly yeah.
the start the sermon but it, it seemed to er develop reasonably.
Erm  but I was er that was my own impression.
I rather admired what he's doing for Margaret because, as far as I can see, he's taking  er as she's not able, as far as I can see, to er exist, to  live on her own and he seems to be taking over from elderly parents.
But erm  I was er  somewhat put off altogether by comments I heard from people who had been in much closer contact than I was because I, I saw him  very little of him really.
So I think other people have er  a contribution to make which is, well it would be important.
Anybody else with a comment?
Well personally I mean  erm  Margaret impressed me greatly but I think  John was  inclined to be full of his own importance for one thing.
He was exceptionally demanding and  my  fairly long conversation was that he almost lead me to believe that he had got the job because when he started making comments about putting his grandfather clocks in the church  er thirty of them.
And building a  
Thirty grandfather clocks?
Yes.
Oh goodness!
What, thirty?
Thirty, yes.
Or or one ?
He said he was a collector of antiques so I said I'd better keep out of the way.


Three O he said.
But the other thing that worried me, he was inclined to be  erm  mind you I felt aggression in his sermon a little, but he did incline to be very uptight.
Nervous.
And I feel that erm coming to a good pastorate, I think he would  with his history of having had trouble, trouble  I think possibly he, he  he would be ill
Mm.
Because he was, he was a bundle of nerves, he couldn't keep still.
And er  you know he was  I mean for instance at Salisbury Park he probably didn't mean anything but on Saturday when I was saying goodbye to him he said  now I hope there'll be somebody here at ten past ten to open this church tomorrow.
I like to be here half an hour before the service.
So I said well I said, I usually try to get here quarter past ten or soon after  but it all depends on traffic because I live the other end of the town.
Er however, I got there at quarter past ten and he followed me in.
And then, no sooner got in he said by the way, two glasses of water for me.
I'm a two glass water man.


So I said it's quite alright Mr , we're not very well off in Salisbury Park but we do possess a carafe and that holds three.


And then he said here's the hymns, put those hymns up now.
I said that's not my job, it's the organist.
But I thought oh dear me.
That was  my feeling and I feel  that er
Not conducive to a  
Not, not for Salisbury Park.
Not for me.
No.
I'll, I can endorse that by saying that we shouldn't, as I noticed a certain offhandedness with him that I didn't like at all.
Mhm.
I, I, I don't know why he talks that  of attitude but there we are.
Mr chairman as a colleague I  felt he was alright.
Mm.
We had a  quite good fellowship together.
I heard him here  and I think our people was  well impressed in some respect.
We endorse what you said.
There was a terrible nervousness which you don't expect from a man of that age, and of that standing in the ministry.
And then it was further endorsed because I went to hear him at  Johnstown and I thought to myself well  I felt sorry that he was erm  what's the word I want?
Well he was erm, oh I can't think of the word I want now but er he, he was glued to his notes  
Mhm.
You know?
There was no freedom.
No freedom.
Erm  not really and it was a, a different type of sermon.
Yes.
Er  I felt another thing which I, I wasn't too happy about but then again one can  soon change these things.
For instance the, the hymns that he all had, I presume at Salisbury Park  er certainly with us  and at Johnstown and at the  Rio where there's no alternative, was all from the congregation  
Yes  yes.
Now   he knew beforehand because we told him when he came, first came here that we also use Mission Praise, and you do.
And we do.
I, I would have thought, personally, I would have thought he would at least have chosen one from Mission Praise for the benefit of the be for the people who, who like 
Mm.
that sort of thing, you see.
And I think  
Well you do get more modern hymns in that don't you?
Beg your pardon?
You get more modern hymns in that.
More modern hymns and I should have thought, you know, er  I would have liked him being a little more up to date 
Mm.
in that respect.
Personally.
I liked him as a man and I thought er Mrs  was a delightful lady.
She was a very sweet person.
Oh she was delightful.
Yes, yeah.
Erm  but I think I can  agree with what Norah has said  er er er regarding the possibility of aggressiveness there.
Mm.
If I may just add one other thought.
Whoever the minister that comes to us, I think that they should accept the manse without question.
That's what we like to do brethren.
Mm.
All down through the years.
Haven't we?
Yes.
Some of them being too large.
But we've had to bear with it.
Too cold  but we've had to bear with it.
And why there should be such a change these days in that line I, I, I can't quite agree with it.
Er for two persons, two people, that manse was adequate I would say.
I was delightfully surprised with it myself.
A reasonable 
Well I know you were all seemed to be s you were all amazed when you went in.
I could tell by the expression on your faces when  only I felt 
Yes I was amazed.
it was only fair to take them in and then they know 
I think,ye 
what we were talking about.
Well  
Yes you did right.
But each one said ooh it's not as small as we thought it was you see.
Mm.
But erm  it's just having that one room with a kitchen I think for  if someone calls probably you see.
Mm.
Nice little room though.
It could be.
True.
Table and a couple of chairs and  portable television if you want it.
Mm.
Quite nice.
And adequate.
But er you know reasonable demands are all well and good.
Perhaps if he, if he, if he could ask a thing like this then I'm sure  Salisbury Park would oblige.
But you know, if he's saying, well we do, we would like the house  redecorated all well and good.
Oh well yes those are those are normal things.
No but as erm  Mrs  has mentioned to me, when it comes to er converting an existing garage into a den or a study and then asking for another garage to be built.
Well  you know, it's not good enough is it?
I would think that's out because it would destroy the value of the house er that, that has got to be sold some time.
House, of course, and it wouldn't suit another person would it?
Yeah.
But er I wouldn't agree that that er manse i that house is suitable for a manse.
Mm.
It wants at least one more room downstairs.
It would be very unfair to er Margaret that every time somebody called she's got, she's banished to the kitchen.
And er  he, he could use the er  h his vestry or another room at the, the church but somebody calling in the evening, he's not going to take them over to a  a cold room for an interview.
But, but if he knew, if he knew Ken that they were coming.
You know?
Ah but then he wouldn't necessarily.
Mm.
But most people duly come surely make an appointment?
But I, I think
No, some do some don't.
I  think in some way here, with this particular situation  as okay we, we go into the question of the house now  the house shouldn't be the issue here.
No.
Oh no, not  not  
 
Wi with this situation the
The question has been raised, that's right
Erm obviously the er  and  as Alan's asked us few weeks ago, permission to explore  maybe looking for the finances, if and when it became the situation.
That's right.
But if er John  came last week and to all of us  we were of a like mind that yes, he fitted the calling here  everything else  I, I see then that the manse would be the issue but  basically now we're talking in many ways  other issues are affecting the call here  than the manse so therefore the manse goes down the, the pecking order.
Erm
But basically the matter we consider  is John  the suitable man for the ministry?
Yes I I think  I think that is the proper order to do things.
Yes.
I think first of all we want to know  er as far as it's possible, which of course is always er  within the limitations of our abilities whether we think he's a man that we can recommend to the church, that they should call him.
Now the people I've heard speaking so far  don't seem to think so.
Is there anybody who disagrees with that assessment?
Just to complete the picture.
Well  we had him for the weekend and er  looking back on the weekend  we were reasonably impressed with the man and his wife.
And er from his conversation  he appeared  to be a homely sort of a chap and er  he was outspoken but he would call a spade a spade.
Er  in church his diction was clear for all to hear.
He spoke well to the children  and er his sermon message did have a, a reasonable amount of substance in it.
But under the circumstances of being there on trial, I did feel that he was  very nervous.
Er the Saturday evening we  were in the lounge and  chatting away for two or three hours and he, he could not keep still.
He was 
Mm that's right yeah.
moving to the left and to the right and sliding down.
Down and moving his seat  
He, he 
He's uncomfortable.
He was uncomfortable.
And when he was in the pulpit I felt that he was  there was tension  there was tension there
Mm.
Er whether  he did say in a conversation that he, he knows when this nervousness er er and depression is coming on and he takes medication and it's alright.
But er  that's to be seen  
I might add that Idris rang me up last night, I was on the telephone for about three quarters of an hour with him.
That's typical Idris.
But he did ring up.
He  he said  you're one person I can talk to, you listen to me and I can talk to you and er he didn't want to worry you at that time but  for him, he didn't think he was suitable.
Even Idris who er they're desperate for  but he Idris didn't think  you know, he could cope with the four churches.
Well Idris rang me up last night which is not unusual because he often rings, you know
Yeah.
once a week to me and I ring him occasionally, and er  his first remark which was quite erm natural he said well you know Ernest, he said  I've heard many ministers.
Yes  
 
Like we all have, haven't we?
And we're, we're all  guilty of being critics.
Mm.
Mm.
But erm Idris said, in effect, which is an expression which we've all used at some time or another, he did nothing for me.
That's right, yes.
In inverted commas.
He did nothing for me.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
You see?
And er  I knew what Idris was referring to you see.
I thought  
Somehow or another erm  Idris and I have clicked, somehow or another  and erm I understand him and he understands me.
Mm.
And that's how we've er been able to get on so well together 
Yes, same here.
Same here.
you know?
Yeah.
Er  but I would add this to you know  please do not depend in any way upon  Beria 
No cos he
Because it's  it's folding up, it's dying quickly.
Yes.
I'm, I'm afraid that is so.
That is so.
I, I don't  I honestly don't know what we're going to do about  Beria 
No I don't, but  So it's more or less a threesome if anything at all.
Mm.
Really.
I thought his nervousness was because of the ordeal of  you know er being before us as a 
But it shouldn't be after all that time.
you know?
 
This was one of the one of the things I asked him wasn't it?
When we were when we were 
Yes.
talking afterwards about the team ministry and working together and the problems and  his experiences.
You're not nervous are you Peter ?
  
No but u under the circumstances a man that  a man who 
take the biscuits .
yeah, who has  er had nerv you know
Yeah.
a nervous problem
Mm.
perhaps it was because of the situation.
Mm.
You know, and perhaps  if he came, he would overcome it.
Yes.
I agree but I think that anybody who speaks in public, you have nervousness beforehand and the moment you go to talk to the people  you know what you're going to say, you have a few notes in front of you and you talk to the people, if that is your job.
Absolutely.
It's what you do.
Yes.
No matter how much your knees tremble  underneath, underneath the table.
But you talk to people with the fervour of what you want to tell them.
That's true.
 
Er I, I think I would agree with you there that I mean it's natural to be nervous
Absolutely, yes.
in a situation like that 
Yes.
but  usually once one gets sort of started it  it gets better.
 
And  he, he possibly had done it at least a half a dozen times 
Oh must have done.
Yes.
Mm.
Even even if he wasn't accepted on a first occasion he's probably had another two or three attempts elsewhere.
Yeah.
So he's done it before.
And and lots of churches that he was telling us that he'd been in contact with.
And he must have gone to those churches for the first time.
And I don't suppose that, you know, a new ministry is so very different from meeting people in a new church.
That's right.
People are the same everywhere.
Well yes.
And they are all there willing you to do well.
Yes, yes.
Whatever, you know, audience you're speaking in front of.
I mean of course you're going to be judged  adversely perhaps, but i in a church you are being  listened to by people who are of like mind, and therefore willing you to have something of  value and interest to say to them.
Er  yes that, that is important because qu I mean when you feel that people are sympathetic
Mm.
then it's easier to speak.
Mm.
Oh yes.
And we wouldn't have invited him if we weren't sympathetic would we?
Hardly .
You know.
Oh well if he's a nervous person he wouldn't think like that would he?
Well exactly.
No I feel that this ties in with his nervous breakdown.
Mm.
We had a somewhat similar experience at a previous church  I was at where we were looking for a minister  and the, the man er who was, who came to us was again very nervous and excitable and so on.
Fortunately we had a doctor in our congregation who er was s had some knowledge of psychiatry  and he had a fairly long session with him, just the two of them.
And he strongly recommended us not to accept this man.
And this man went to another church not so very far away so we knew what happened  and certainly we were very glad we accepted our doctor's opinion.
Mm.
Mm.
Well it looks as though er  there's a fairly clear majority against  er making a call as far as I read it.
I don't, do you want a show er do you want to vote?
Oh, does anybody  know the  of the y the younger people  the younger members of the churches?
Did he appeal to the younger members?
Or
No.
Not  not as far 
oh well 
Er
if we send a recommendation to  
a recommendation to the church you see, so I
Erm
You must know the feeling of this meeting first mustn't you?
Yes.
But one, one would say no, I mean, I don't disagree with what you said about  er the children's address, well I do  personally.
Yes.
Erm  he  the same children's address here as he did in Salisbury Park.
Did he?
Mm.
I would think so, about the elephants?
That's right.
Yeah.
Right.
And in, in  er
Our children weren't 
the children didn't even know he was talking to them.
Mm.
He stayed up on the pulpit or whatever didn't he?
Erm  you see if this the pulpit, he didn't come s 
Yeah.
And what I was gonna say Alan was, perhaps like Mr  you know we had one of the ones sitting here that did go up to two services.
I also went to Johnstown yesterday.
So I heard him in Salisbury Park last week and in Johnstown yesterday.
I felt a, a degree of obligation because of my commitment with Johnstown now
Mm.
so I went to Johnstown yesterday afternoon.
Well I, I've gotta be honest in what I'm saying, I sat through two services yesterday  the morning service did a lot for me.
But the afternoon service did nothing.
Mm.
The morning service in fact I would, I've gotta say it Norah.
Mm.
The minister we had taking the service yesterday morning I think felt as much on trial in Salisbury Park 
I'm sure he did.
Yes he did.
Yes, yes.
because he was a student with us   
It was .
Mm.
Yeah.
Mhm!
And  had come back yesterday 
He was nervous wasn't he?
He was.
Yeah.
after his first appointment was as much on trial as Kenneth .
Yeah.
And, but  yesterday
Hasn't he improved?
relaxed
Definitely improved.
unwound himself and you could tell his two years, what it had done for him.
Hadn't it just?
Marvellous.
But 
yes, incredible.
 
a number of people said to me how much they enjoyed yesterday's service.
Mm.
Yeah.
He also took a communion service again which was   
yeah.
But I came home and feeling I could relate all I'd 
Yeah.
But I sat in  yesterday afternoon  and I felt sorry for the man's daughter who'd been given a hymn  the service.
 
Who was put on a spot.
Erm and as you said he, he couldn't leave his notes.
Cos I'll have to confess to you, I saw him diligently once looking below the pulpit
at his, at his notes
Yeah.
of what he was gonna do next.
Yeah.
Erm there was the whole time a sense of anxiety about him.
Alright  he knew he had to go to  afterwards, half past three, but he couldn't unwind one bit there.
And there are occasions, I think we all agree, alright we have to have notes, but you must unwind a little bit to get near to the people.
And I would not feel that Kenneth  would ge could get near to any one of us.
Mm.
But I hate to say it because obviously he wants to find, to go somewhere.
But I don't think this is the place .
And heart to heart, having sat through two, I went home  it was heavy.
Mm.
Well a lot of our people said they liked him didn't they?
Yes, oh yes.
Yes.
Yes erm  you see we're in a different, different situation than what you are at Salisbury Park.
We haven't had to make a demand upon our congregation to make such a decision for twenty two or twenty five years you see?
Mm.
Whereas you've had to do that at Salisbury Park you see?
May I just say I went to erm Johnstown yesterday because  I had half promised our friends here that I would go to support them.
Mm.
It wasn't actually my Sunday.
I, I'd forego'd that Sunday afternoon for agreeing to come there.
That's why I went.
But I, I also wanted an endorsement
Mm.
of what I heard the previous week.
Mm.
And I think naturally we would all like that.
Erm
Well  going back to the very first meeting that we had
Mm?
I did come away that er  really wasn't struck.
But I didn't like at all  the er  excuses he made for his wife.
 
er that we weren't employing her.
Mm.
Well right-oh  we er  I don't think we ever do expect that much.
But all the same, at the same time, we do expect them to mix.
Mm.
If they're going to mix with the church then they'll be only too happy to  take some part in it.
Mm.
But then in the sermons  when he came here to preach  er I didn't see any sign of nervousness myself.
Couldn't see any sign of nervousness myself  but er I'm very happy with his sermons, quite good.
But er at the same time the further I go on, the more apprehensive I get about it.
Whether  coming here or not and I don't really think that, you know, coming back to it  I don't think he would fit in.
Mm.
Er  well
We are rather an old congregation, there's no doubt about it, apart from the  here.


But er  you can, I mean we've got, of course I'm not too young myself  but er we are set in our ways.
Mm.
And that takes up with the .
Can't alter that.
What bothered me most was the fact that he 
Mm?
What bothered me mo well wha one of the things that bothers me is the fact that he said that he wouldn't like to do hospital chaplaincy because he wouldn't like to go visiting because he's got no small talk.
And I'm just wondering what the  the knock on effect of that is in the visiting of the, the members who can't get into church and who can't receive communion in church, and who may like to receive it in their home, or in the home, where they live.
Because you don't just suddenly go in  give communion to someone and walk away again do you?
Mm.
You, you ha you establish a rapport of listening for a little while to whatever it is that they've got to say, and their troubles and their anxieties  and I wasn't happy that 
Mm.
there would be that sympathy.
I'm certain that the sympathy is there with his wife.
Yes.
Yes.
Absolutely.
But I don't how much that compassion and love for fellow  people goes beyond his wife to the congregation.
Mm.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Mm.
And if, if he says to us in meeting that he's got no small talk and no  erm ability for visiting  in a hospital situation where you can ask people how they are, and then can move to the next person you've got to see  I'm not sure how he would be visiting someone in their home.
Mm.
 
It's also a question isn't it, of whether you appoint a man because he's a good preacher or secondly because he's a good pastor.
That's really the question isn't it?
Mm.
You never get the two?
You can't get the two.
You're very lucky if you do aren't you?
I would say the second is the more important.
The more important being a good pastor.
Yeah but you must, that, that, that your congregation, that all the people in the pastorate must know that they can go to you and that you will listen.
Yes that's 
And that you, they, they  that they will have, for the time that they are in your company, your whole attention.
And your whole mind concentrated on what happens to be  concerning them.
Whatever else you've left behind at home.
Mm.
But for that moment  you are there for them.
I in their service.
You know?
Mm.
In other words, the skills of a counsellor?
Yes.
Yes.
Definitely.
Definitely.
Er well as far as I can see erm  with, with a few minor reservations, the  the elders would prefer not to recommend to the church that a call be issued.
Ha have I got it right?
Mm.
Yes.
I think you are right.
I think  
Well you've got to have a unanimous decision haven't you?
Mm.
And I mean yo you know, there's three to one isn't it?
Erm  oh you mean in favour 
In favour, yeah.
of a call?
Yeah.
Yes.
Well  certainly I mean, one would want to have a substantial majority in favour of a call to issue it.
Now whether in fact the church meeting would come to a different conclusion from us I've no means of knowing but  probably not because most of you know something about the church that you're working with.
Well  impressed with  
That's what I'm saying.
Our, our people seemed  
They all liked him  
our congregation yesterday and erm  the feeling I got was that erm  we couldn't support a minister ourselves, and we're  and, well at least the congregation think that they're there entirely to help Salisbury Park.
Erm and I think I go with them o on these lines.
And we're hoping to get something out of that sale
Mm.
and what we're trying to do is plough whatever we get back into the group
Mm.
so that erm  more or less Salisbury Park are the people who really  Th they said that whatever the decision, decision they make, they would fall in with them.
Mm.
So er it looks as if the decision's against, so  I'm almost sure that the decision at Johnstown will be against.
Well