

George  George.
Want a scratch?
Mm  do you want a scratch?
Come on then, there, I can't reach, come on then, that's a good boy  there you are  you like that?
Gonna give us a kiss, give us a kiss then, come on.
Give us it, give us a kiss, that's a good boy.
There you are
Oh, oh, oh 
ah 
There she blows, it's your mama  hello, yeah we've been up half er, since half past, about eight o'clock  yeah, we'll be round at nine o'clock, okay, bye .
You don't look very well this morning ma.
We just had to stop half way.
Well we're not as far this way.
You should of said, I could've borrowed a chair.
yes love, come on then ma, can you manage?
We almost there?
We're only just walking in here.
Yeah.
In here, don't run.
I know.
That's why you can't
there you go  ooh  it's lower than what I thought it were.
Eh?
I said it's lower than what I thought it were 
 

 

hello
well I think it would be easier to go straight down here and walk out other door, one of other doors, it's not as far I don't think, the way I've come it's not, it's quite a way like what er
it's twenty past nine, appointment's at half past innit?
Nah, not being papered till next week  never know, well it can't be any worse than any other time really can it?
I don't know, they've sold out a dozen at Broadway this week, well int last fortnight, so White Gates were telling me, so, well if we do, we do, if the bungalow goes before we sell well, we'll have to come and live with me mum  until we find another one .
I saw Johnny yesterday, he started coming to manor for his petrol  he went to Gateway, Kwik Save whatever you call it 
Tesco.
one o'clock int morning, ah yeah, what, what you, what time do you go, five o'clock?
I used to like that shift, oh innit alright for some?
Aye, can me mum borrow your single bed?
Well it, it's been stupid this laid on this settee falling down back, it's blinking ridiculous, yeah, we've just got back from hospital and they'll send her a letter for er, to make an appointment for her to go back, to see what the treatment they're gonna give her, so, will it go in Pete's car?
No, I'll have to ring our Carl then, see if he can shift it, I mean she might as well be laid down here watching telly as upstairs laid in bed uncomfortable, you know  yeah 
once you get in bed you'll be like 
well it's hard lines she's having .
Okay I'll ring our Colin anyway and see what he's doing, yeah okay, tarrah then .
 

Mm, he didn't wanna go to work.
Shut door.
I can't I'm going to er
What, what's our ?
No  
Oh, oh   God they're never in, they're not.
I told you they wouldn't be in.
Came 
June now rang him only  all day Tuesday 
started school when Sasha   have to ring him later.
I don't know, I rang from what time, weren't it?
Yeah.
When I got that letter June and, were it Tuesday?
And I rang that on and off right to ten to four and they weren't in.
Cos usually never in when I ring.
Mind you, I don't I, I think it were yesterday morning I  oh no it were Monday morning.
No it were Monday when in here cos I was  oh I were, Gavin were wanting some toast with jam on and I'd only got a little bit like that, I says oh you'll have to wait while your Aunty Margaret brings some more tomorrow.
Is it tea you're after?
I walked out.
Do you want tea June?
No I'd rather have coffee.
 
I mean I'd rather have tea, sorry, yeah.
I wished you'd make up your mind.
Shut the door.
I can't shut door 
I will.
Which teapot is it?
Does it matter what teapot you make it in?
in the metal one 
Oh  what's up with this?
when I'm watching it.
What?
That settee.
The chairs are not so bad cos they don't lean as far back as settee back 
No.
but the back of the settee goes right back  I know it looks nice, that's about all I'll say for it.
Mm, it's not bad.
still on me right across here and 
It's not that bad.
right, right round here.
You can feel it, it's 
Yeah I know it's cold.
Told ya, I know when I were in hospital I had that stuff on me you know it were terrible  even though it was 
That's right 
even though it's about seventy degrees all time it still felt cold 
That's how I were on Monday when I were full of cold, I went to bed in end, cos it were warmer.
Do you want the settee pulling up a bit?
Yeah, it'll be warmer.
Er sit down I can manage with it
further up here.
Probably set fire.
It'll not set fire.
Er come, come in middle of day, she says I wondered wh , why you were coming to 
It's a hell of a long wire on that phone int it?
Oh  your teapot's like my arse  how much sugar want, one ma?
Eh?
I thought you said three  that er, them teabags are not very good are they?
That what?
Them tea bags.
What do you want then for ninety nine P?
A cup of tea ma.
 

I've shut the door now I've finished running about 
With door instead of handle
You know no matter what I do it's always bloody wrong.
I'm glad, he reminds me of me dad, you  put door handles on doors to open em you don't use 'em for shutting 
Says er last night who went and got a bath and left every door in the house open 
It's alright.
Yeah, it's alright for you, you were in a nice warm bath, I was downstairs.
You're in a, you're in a permanently heated house love.
No that's right, it's small coal like, what they fetch last lot like
Mm.
and it all sticks together like that when you put it on 
Mm 
in a big clump.
I can't say I'm looking forward to going back to bloody coal central heating either.
Oh it's nice.
I know it's nice to see it isn't that it's 
It's nice.
cleaning a mucky fire out again.
Well I don't have to do that, that's the er 
I'll probably go gas, when they get gas down there  the only thing that
you want to see me, I get up three times to rake ashes er out and then I go int the kitchen in that cupboard, gerra newspaper and I'm here screwing it up and throwing it on fireplace.
What for?
Cos er they're still in bag and I'm very  
Do they go out every night like?
Yeah, they're only in because they  two big logs on 
What happened to the other fire grate with electric?
Give it our Colin, I never liked it Albert, I didn't want that one.
It were a damn sight better bloody thing than that.
It was a novelty to 
No it weren't ma, it were, it were it did its job, that was keep your heating up, cos you could blow it up and it 
I know.
ten minutes and you couldn't breath in here, but that 
Bloody big bedroom like freeze  
Mother we've got our heating on all times.
yeah but look at
Extremely cold outside you know
you've got to buy your coal now June and loo and  I mean 
I'm not complaining I'm just saying 
where I used to put two, two bags on a day, and have it up at number five and six we've got it on one bag a day and it's on nu less than number one.
I'm not complaining duck, I'm just telling you now it's extremely cold outside, that's why it's cold up there.
They must of been mad.
I've seen I've seen it been down sub zeros outside and it's been eighty degrees in our house.
well they've got three bloody cars in there  there
I said to 'em over there I says er have you er moved in then?
Got settled?
He says not quite he says but, we're, we're nearly there.
Want some new windows in.
He says  to me  he says to me  he's, I've been two or three time while he been int garden he says every time you come in here you lock your car, he says why you're only int garden, I says well I've lived round here for a lot of years, ha,I says  and when you've lived here long enough I says you'll be locking your car every time you get it out.
He says why?
I says because things go missing.
It's more force of habit though 
You, it's a habit I've got into.
He's been out the car and locked me in it.
Yes, even if I go anywhere, if I go to, go into a shop I always lock the car  always.
You're supposed to, that's how they get pinched.
The point, the point is you know it, it is a deterrent 
pinch our Colin's.
There's nothing wrong with Colin's.
Oh  it'll stop him moaning won't it?
I'll have a look at it today  I don't think it's anything, from what she told me yesterday, I think it's electrical.
Ooh that firm's gone bad with Jess.
What firm?
You know Sure Start
Yeah.
They've had his car three times to repair it
Yeah.
and the last time he said take it away for a week and see if it's any better, so he took it away and it were no better so he took it down to Paul  and somebody from  come and had a look at it and said it's injector problems
Mm.
so Sure Start rang him up and said how's your car er Mr , he said it's no better now than when I fetched it to you, three oil changes since and two months since and they said well what you gonna do about it?
He said I'm not gonna do nowt about it, he says well, we've put a part on it that cost us a hundred and forty pound he says.
Where's me cigs then?
He says well I'm not paying you for it, he says you put it on and it don't work, he says well we want it back, he says well you take it back and put my parts on that you took off, he says we can't, he says well I'm not paying you hundred and forty pound for a part that don't work  and he says, anyway he says er, are you sure it's a hundred and forty pound he said, an oil filter cost ten pound at some places but they're actually only two so if you di divide it by five that's forty pounds, he says I'll pay you forty pound, but I'm not paying you no hundred and forty he said.
Can you pass me me  June 
find me bills.
You should, we told you you should of had a little dog like ours and it could of ripped them up for ya.
We don't get bills.
Oh well mine  
Well they've sent you a letter from hospital.
Oh.
Open it and see what it says.
Don't bother coming this week.
Cancelled your appointment.
Cancel your appointment 
 

Oh not another one.
What's the matter?
You've gotta go back again.
Why?
Tuesday fourth of February, what's a C T examination?
Don't know.
It's to where we've just been.
That is 
Department of medical 
Yeah.
C T scan examination, that's what you've just had.
Yeah.
Will you please attend for your C T examination on Tuesday the fourth of February nine o'clock, if you cannot attend at this time please ring extension  
Oh well 
Aye, I'll ring now.
This is a painless examination which would take bet er, hang on,this is a painless examination which will take between thirty and sixty minutes, there may be some waiting time at the start of the examination depending on whether we have to fit in an emergency, be prepared for this.
Preparation, do not eat or drink four hours before your appointment .
Ah.
If you are  it's, it's a chest scan, you'd better ring and see what they have to say, I know.
Well that's what I thought I was going for this morning as well as that one.
Who's it from?
Doctor .
Well.
Er fag
I'm not touching you with your 
You were, you were gonna set bloody fire to me
Well move then.
you bugger 
Extension what was it?
Tell them we've just come back from that .
Were it ?
I don't know the number on there int it 
that 
Can I have ex extension  please?
She said to me when they find out what it is she could soon have you on your feet, but she thought it were that shadow on me lung.
Yeah.
She said if it's that shadow on your lung we'll soon have you on your feet  
Hello er, I'm phoning on behalf of Mrs Ada  er she's got to come in for a scan on the fourth of February, nine o'clock, now we've only just got back from the hospital today, cos she oh, she had to go today for one, yeah, and we've just 
 
got back home and the post's been in between time and we've just got this letter for her to attend on February, I wonder if there's, if you've had a mix up?
Or if it's a different one.
Pardon?
Ultra radio scan or something, yeah  oh yeah, so she's, she will, we've gotta keep that appointment, okay then love  yeah, okay bye, bye love .
No you attend that one ma.
I don't know why they don't just keep the   to- bloody-gether .
It's a different type.
No.
It's a different type of scan altogether.
Yeah.
What a carry on.
So er
Not as long as the kids have their sandwiches 
Them other buggers there's er 
er jammy eh?
there's er
Do you get a free meal like?
No, eh, I've had them sandwiches when I had that other 
Wednesday the fourth of February.
Oh .
That's another week again innit?
Will be  on Tuesday?
Yeah.
Coming what .
No mother, no no.
Er June here here.
No.
no ma will
Don't have to drop me, you're not me taxi, don't matter how many times you have to take me, here.
No, no, you're not, no I'm not, well pay us next time.
Well just take that, here, I haven't 
No.
just took it out me pension now.
Well save it 
No listen 
in case one of us wants cigs 
save it in case we run 
if we, if we need, if we're desperate 
if we, if we 
and we need some cigs some time.
I'll get it next time.
I've still got that and twenty besides.
That's alright.
If we run short of cigs some time we will 
Told Albert it don't run on fresh air.
It's alright.
Well, it doesn't do so bad.
It's usually cigs we run out of not petrol.
Well get, get some cigs with it then.
Look we'll get 'em 
We will mum when we need 'em
we've got enough money for the time being, if ever we get desperate like last time.
Bloody hell I might have pools up and win a million pound this week, what the hell I wanna take your money for?
You're the same as me
I'm not.
as long as you've got two hands and you can work for money you'll never bloody win any.
Mm.
There's a draught, it must of come from that window there I think.
Keep that door shut then.
Eh?
Door shut.
Are you working today did you say?
Yeah.
I'll give Albert 
Oh it don't shut because of that thing.
No I know, that's what she said, she'd wondered where that were coming from cos it were right up here.
I thought it come out that window.
She were laughing when I showed her that letter I got, cos she got one the same morning,, she said, and it said, and you can go round and talk to him.
Ha.
So they mustn't put, you know, their full name or whatever
Yeah.
first name 
Oh.
said you want to put 'em in a bag and shake 'em up.
Ah well 
 

Oh I don't mind paying you, it'd cost me that for a bloody taxi.
That's what we're here for ma, that's what we're here for  don't need paying 
When you run out of cigs erm
Aye 
No they were out all day Tuesday, I don't know where they were, I rang right from phoning our June when I got that letter twenty five past ten and so ten to four were ringing on and off and there were nobody so I don't know where they were.
Well, mind you June don't know what the hell she's ringing me half the time, because she bloody rings and, half of time it's
Well I rang 'em and they weren't in Albert, our Colin  
Don't they go to er, school today?
Not Tuesday that's where I thought they were er Tuesday 
Oh.
but when I kept ringing, you know, because they generally call here
Mm.
they didn't come and I thought, I tell ya I kept ringing right up till ten to four on and off  
I don't know where they are because
Unless he's gotta job  
I shouldn't I shouldn't, even so doesn't go with him  well it don't look like there's anybody in.
I wonder if Margaret's had to work  she'd come home Friday dinner, with that sickness and diarrhoea.
Yeah 
Has she started?
I don't know our, our, very rare we'll ring em  John was down well the same day as she dropped that little potty off for our Kay
Yeah.
and he said she was poorly.
He didn't stop here Albert, he just dropped them things off.
Yeah
He says I'll go and drop this potty off at our June's, I'll take 
No 
our Colin's car and he said and I'll  shop and that's when he told me about Margaret.
They'll be round er father's or somewhere daft like that  or at their Geoff's  mm 
what's Pete coming round  for?
Mm, probably got some work to do, on car  mm, puts  cos he don't like Friday night.
Oh he goes on at five, he leaves house at five Al, and he must be in at one 
It all depends what he's doing ma.
Mm.
I mean er, I didn't like er that Friday night it were hor horrible shift, cos half the time you used to turn up, only half a team would turn up and you'd be expected to do
Job.
er job with half a team and  and it couldn't get done properly.
No, I'll have to get that bed up, put this across here and that chair beside that window.
Oh I don't think you'll get it all in mother.
You will 
You'd be better with settee along that wall and leave chair there, and you'll have more room.
leave chair where it is, just to give it 
If you put that that way you'll have chair stuck out.
We'll sort it out when we get to it.
I'll put chair round here, beside bed, can't ya?
Before we beep we'll go down in our car, bloody hell it's three times smaller than Pete's so I'll get it in our bloody car 
Where's your dish cloth mum?
Eh?
Where's your dish cloth?
The big what?
Dish cloth.
Dish cloth.
There ain't one, there's that sponge.
Did you have this in new one int room as you go other side of fire place in that big polythene bag June 
No I've never felt as rotten as what I did this morning.
No, well
Mm, why did Steven kidnap?
Or why did Stef kidnap   well I, you know I can't understand this girl, because she's been in er, I mean she must of seen him when, when he's approached her to buy the house
Yeah that's what I 
so surely she must be able to give him 
D'ya, d'ya know what I think Al, I think he's from Barnsley cos that Bob lots of money he's had dropped there at Barnsley
Yeah but, I mean but it's right on
where he's kidnapped her.
motorway link so 
where's he's kidnapped her, it's hundred mile from Barnsley  so I think he belongs Barnsley  out the bloody area.
Well he's not, he's not forced to do, he just might know the area, I mean, all he's doing is sticking to er places just off the motorways int he?
Yes.
But er  I mean he's come from Birmingham up to Barnsley it's only what a hundred mi well is it hundred about ninety odd mile?
Yeah, he's  there from Barnsley up Birmingham it says that were a hundred miles away where we got 'em to drop the money off 
But the thing is she must've seen him.
Of course she has but day time, now they're getting two, if there's two women, they're getting two women out of show, did you see it on telly?
Yeah, but I mean even, even so, she, she has met him once before and she must of seen him when she's gone to the house for him to kidnap her.
Yeah he must've been following her about.
Alright he's probably blindfolded her after that, but at least she should have some kind of er
Yeah whether he were dark hair or light hair or tall or short.
you know I mean it's not just one of them  surely she could give the police some indication of what he's like 
Oh Thomas must be still be Tottenham 
Mm, mm I'm sure, has he still got car in garage like?
No they must of took it er, at, his son must of took it because they've put that girder back in.
What girder?
Oh that big one.
Yeah they took key with 'em  our Thomas must of.
But what the hell did they took that?
It, I thought they gonna leave the key.
Ooh, our Tommy took that mat key, but he took it down home,
I mean it's alright, but nobody else can get in damn garage
Yeah I know.
I'll have to tell him when he comes.
I didn't know he took car Al tell you truth until I saw girder in 
He still should of left the key here I mean there's no 
He didn't, no 
you know, I mean even if 
I know 
if they're leaving it one, just for one night, there's not, it's, it's easy enough to just say I'll, I'll put key on windowsill and 
He'll have ya, Barney.
You grot bag.
George.
last year.
I know, that's what he were after.
Wants to chew the basket, 'cos when he , I think he started chewing photo.
You bugger, George.
George.
George.
What you doing?
George.
What you doing, you bald headed bugger.
He'll come out with it, you know.
I don't think he will.
The only thing he's picked up since we've had him, is me name.
And how long we had 'im.
We 'ad 'im a good six months, ain't we?
Aye.
Georgie babes.
Georgie, look at  look.
He won't pick the names, he he picks up, it's the ones he already knows.
Oi,basket,look.
Oi
Where's your tissue for your nose?
Oh yeah.
Chock-a-block.
Have you see her ear, it's by her ear as well.
the other day, and it's all black, all gunge coming out of it.
So I'll take her to the doctor.
You're bloody full of it, you, aren't ya.
Yeah.
Yeah.
 

No, it's only a  checked it,I don't think it's contagious, really.
this morning.
Oh, Bert, oh, Bert, your dog's  
Blow.
put it back .
Okay, you give it 
Thank you.
Oh, Bert, your dog's gonna whip me teddy.
He won't.
has fire up there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Oh, he'll go out the door, one day.
He's just had a fright.
He's just had a fright.
Tried to sit on basket.
He he wanted he wants to chew it, and he didn't realise it swings.
When he jumped on it, it startling swivelling.
oh
We're staying here today.
He's getting a sod for biting.
Aren't ya.
Ma,
Yeah, he went for  nose other day,
Arrr.
Why's he up there for?
I think what it is, 'cos I'm out so much at time now.
And they don't have much time for him.
uh oh.
Where before 
there for?
Scratching him and playing with 'im, you know.
You know when the eyes kept itching,last time, and I said I wondered if it were 'cos of birds,
No, your eyes.
Yeah, you know two times I've been, and me eyes are going right mad.
Just a minute while your mum tells me.
 
'cos of bird, you've always had Bobbie.
 
Always had 'im.
started again today.
Mind you, he does chuck a lot of stuff about, 'cos you can see.
Yeah.
You're always dusting with him, 'cos he's right dusty.
Right er, maybe that's what it is then.
seems funny though, it's only started.
Albert says I've got to sell 'im.
Shall we sell you?
Mm.
Who's gonna make you, scratching his bloody head, and he's made his head bleed.
would you have Colin  about him.
Well.
Colin.
I ended up paying for him.
She's not bothered, she never goes near him.
Never goes near him.
She never goes near him.
She's frightened to death of 'im
isn't it.
I know.
But I don't think Geoff would be very pleased.
Well, if you say to him, that just say that  and that, that's you know, oh, just say something like, just say something like  I can't keep up with him Dennis, he's throwing loads of dust about, just say to him,think about selling, to you want to buy him back or, you know.
Well, they won't, I don't think they'd have him back.
No and that's  a 
I don't think, I don't think sell him.
Has he got to wait.
A.
I don't think you'd get what you paid for him.
Probably not, but I mean, cage is worth a hundred and fifty quid.
That's what Russell paid for the cage.
Oh, look.
Mm
Oh, look.
What.
Look,
that he's into,
Well, I mean, he's no problem to me.
I'm not bothered about him.
You know, I'd rather keep him than sell him, but
It's like everything else, you've always summat else to bloody feed.
Mm.
By the way, when we had that pair, that were driving me mad, and then that one died, when we were in bungalow.
Other one would learnt how to open a crack, and it were in that cage, and it could hear birds outside.
Anyway in the end we let er Kenny's grandad have 'im, I mean, 'cos they got me mum's bird.
They've got two of his own, he ended up with four birds.
Yeah.
But at least they were happy, you know what I mean.
'Cos they were with other birds.
But I never missed, I never missed him.
I don't think you get attached to birds like you do animals.
I don't think you get attached to birds like dogs.
Not like dogs and cats.
No.
I mean Albert said,if we do get that bungalow, we are  'cos the owner, he said she'll disappear.
She'll disappear.
I mean I'll be upset about our Whisky, 'cos we're, I mean, we've had a long time, although she's not a pet  pet, you know what I mean.
What  feel like.
Well, they they just, they go away when you take them somewhere fresh.
and they don't know where they are.
That one.
They're very very 
Sometimes, you're lucky, and you know, if if you keep them in long enough
We've always had cats, always had cats, when we lived at  and we moved into  and we'd had this one cat years, it were old cat.
I wouldn't say it was ready for popping off, you know what I mean.
Yeah
It were always fit and we were only there a fortnight, three weeks disappeared.
I mean, if our Whisky died, I wouldn't be as upset about it, as I would about these.
But if she disappeared I'd be worried all time.
And yet 
Aye.
You know, like when our Dawn's kittens disappeared.
It, they weren't bothered, I think Mick took them away meself.
Yeah.
I'm convinced he did.
I think he did.
But I were I were upset about that, you know.
without a break. 
No, it's a can't be in the garden, can he.
Yeah.
Same as with these next door.
I get right upset about Paddy.
I mean she's give his kennel away now, and he's got no kennel again.
Ar.
And he's running streets, and you know how cold it was last week, and he's running streets.
What she give kennel away for, then.
I don't bloody know.
I think she'd give the dog away as well.
Saw him coming.
Don't lick, don't let him lick her, Karen.
Don't lick.
You mutt
all right.
I've been round me mums this morning.
I expect I'll go.
Yeah.
any better or.
She said, when I went round she was sat doing crossword on bed.
And then, er, I said I've just come to see if you want any cigs.
She said, well our John's coming down tonight, she said, just get me twenty.
I said, you might as well get forty, I said, because if he's late coming down
Yeah, right.
And he can't round shop after, you'd be stuck, and I mean, he.
I don't  Albert don't mind going for her cigs, but it's just that we don't get up early in the morning, you know, and if me mum's ringing at eight o'clock in the morning, 'cos she got no cigs.
It's a bit unfair like, when when she could at  
I said  she said after my job at  
Margaret's not very well.
she hadn't seen Margaret since Christmas Eve.
Yeah, but she ain't been bad since Christmas Eve.
Oh, no.
no.
But she 
Ov over a month ago.
When they came on Sunday, when it were your anniversary, she'd got diarrhoea and sickness, Margaret.
I think she were off work last week.
Yeah.
I I mean, you're anything like that, but not not for a month, I mean.
I got two toilet papers on .
Oh yeah.
Well, put one in your pocket then,
I  Margaret  last night.
Oh I I bet  if you look at it,
I don't Pete's been to me mum's for about six months.
Because I can't remembering him going.
He never goes without Margaret.
She always goes herself, she were down there last night, by herself.
He were at pub.
Mm.
Well, I said to her, told her about not having nowt to eat from that Wednesday morning, er Wednesday dinner time, till Thursday when they went 
Well she took away fish last night for her supper.
Oh.
And that she she looked shocked, you know, she didn't didn't know me like, and er, well she was shocked, and then I said I said, right  well we'll have to get together and sort something out about stopping with her, and Pete said straight away.
Margaret's there every day, she goes out every morning.
Right.
Not that he actually asked her.
years ago about Beryl.
I told you that's what he said.
And I said, aye up, I don't mean in day-time.
I says on a night-time, I said, you know, she can't leave her home now, I said, she can't manage to put coal on fire, and she can't manage to get up up to eat and drink and that, I said, I don't mind dropping off and taking me turn on the night-time but I mean, but it's hard, it's hard with me with kids every night.
It's  for you with kids.
But I don't, certainly don't mind taking her down once a week or twice a week and taking me turn.
Karen there's no need, no need, you're needed at bloody home.
I mean, there's only you got kids.
There's no reason your Margaret can't stop when he's on nights.
Or  afters.
No.
I mean, 'cos we can all  down.
Only days really what's difficult for him.
Yeah.
I don't think Pete'd stop.
really.
I mean, he only got to get his clothes on and go to work, the same.
I don't think he'd go stop.
Our Margaret might go stop herself, but I don't think he'll go.
Ah.
You're bending
Watching ya.
Will you settle down.
No.
I don't think  Margaret would want to stop, actually.
No, I don't think they would.
None of em will
But er, I don't think 
If no one will go down there at all and and sit with their mother for a for a couple of hours.
No.
I mean, I can't talk, because I never go.
Er, to say 'cos I mean, I closest, and I don't go.
Yeah, but I was your 
But er, me and me mum's never got on like our Margaret and me mum have.
No.
It's same as, what  ow she's gone into hospital with her, you know, and I'd actually been that day, you know what I mean, I don't mind, don't get me wrong, I'm not cross, 'cos I don't mind.
But it annoys you  they they they think they're doing a lot for her 'cos they go in ev every morning.
Yeah, they're more thought of.
Yeah.
More thought of.
Has he.
Yeah.
I mean, I know, but Colin ain't been down much this week, because Colin's been working, he's been working every day  and that, you know what I mean, it's been a bit hard for us to get down but we tried.
Yeah.
who should try and pick kids up and then have an hour down there.
Well, he spends more time there than me.
'Cos I've been this morning and I've cleared fireplace out, washed  
No, you're not wearing your shoes in here.
and I've 'oovered up, 
and dusted and polished.
That kitchen floor could do with washing, I saw a mop, but didn't see no bucket.
I don't whether she's got one, but I thought, I didn't have time to do it this morning.
Mm.
So I just run round with 'oover and dusted and polished, then I made a cup of tea.
Who's doing the washing?
Our Margaret.
Ah.
I can't, our Margaret's drying it on radiators, and I says to Albert, what me mum doing with the dryer.
He says, I don't know.
It's still there.
So I'm gonna ask her if I can borrow it 
It's  
and then now I'll do her dryer washing for her.
Yeah.
I mean, I only really wanted to dry me towels, because I hate having to run out laun launderette while I'm drying all me other clothes on radiators.
It's more expensive to use.
Yes.
I know it's more expensive.
Sasha.
but it's really only for towels.
Come in, and shut that door.
What you got.
Get, shout Barney in.
Shout Barney.
Barney 
I don't whether she doing ironing, I know she's doing washing.
Oh, alright.
'Cos she's, well, that day Albert took me 
Barney 
mum to 'ospital, and I, er she give me a lift.
She dropped her washing off.
I thought she'd dried it, and she said, oh, I'm just gonna put this washing on radiators, and then it, it were then that er it made me think, well, what  done with her dryer.
Yeah, I know.
Well, 'cos I mean, she can't be paying much electric.
It's not that  that your Margaret ain't got time to stop there and dry it for her, you know what I mean.
Oh, all you got to do is put it in, somebody'll take it out.
Yeah.
Go over there, no don't, she won't go outside, keep them on there.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I mean, your Margaret sent a dinner down last night
you know what I mean, the
Yeah, she she said she might.
she's took er fish and that, and she's tried in ways like that.
Yeah.
I mean I can't afford to take care  
We tried to  
We can afford to keep afford to  dog.
And Margaret's dad, when they, when my kids were little would never take our kids anywhere but they 
It were me dad, it were me dad that didn't take up  
And always relied on one or the other, I don't 
Me dad wouldn't me dad didn't mind taking  
I don't care which one.
But they would never take 'em out for day
No, I know.
But they would fetch 'em and pay for them, and I even today, you cannot buy love.
No.
And it's proven my point, our Dawn wouldn't even think about  there.
Our our Corinne goes round when she got to.
Don't think about what.
Our Corinne don't only go round when she got to.
She goes round 
Goes round  weeks ago.
Well, she won't go and stop.
Said she won't go and stop again.
Who's gonna stop then.
When we were all on about stopping 
 
I don't mind going and doing her shopping and bits, she says, I'm not stopping.
Yeah.
When you were on about that love, what pa was saying about, you know, like every night, that our kids, when, they had their pyjamas on, and they're like, to get hold,I'm lying watching television, I'm usually falling asleep, but I put the kids,you know.
And er, last time I I get in touch, me mum told me,turned round and says to me, I don't want  any more mum, I says why, he says, oh she won't let me have pillow  and then I then I think if summat else  brought to light, I  kill her
Yeah.
if she had come in
Yeah.
and that, I know it's a filthy old thing, but it it's comfort ain't it.
Yeah.
And when they start  let them have the pillow down, they don't feel, they can't get comfortable.
I know it's a little bit trivial like, but it's just, it's still 
She has queer ways me mother.
Karen I I'm forty-seven and I can't work me mother out, so, no chance for you working her out, few years you've known her.
No no, I I, I mean, she's always been alright with me really, I mean,y you know, she's not  not at all mother-in-law, she's not  
Well, me and me mum's, me and me me mum's never been close.
It were always like, me and our Colin were more or less with me dad, and our Margaret and John were more or less for me mum.
Then when they got older, me dad sort of took our John on, because our John were mechanical minded, and our Colin got pushed out a bit, 'cos our Colin weren't interested in cars.
I found this.
Oh yeah, oh that's what that bird.
Yuk.
And our Colin was to be off t' fair, and that, so, me dad sort of went on to our John and pushed our Colin out a little bit.
Yeah.
But er, me and our Colin's never been me mum's favourite.
It's always been our Margaret.
Mind you, did you see that photo that 
Yeah.
You are, I mean, I could just work out,I said, your Margaret and John are a lot like you.
She is  'cos she's got Margaret's lips and your nose, but out of all of you, I think your your Jo you can see your John in it, can't you, more than anybody.
I always think our John looks more like a Prescott, 'cos he al every time I see him, I see me Uncle Bill more and more.
Yeah, John  used to say, years ago about how much that you're, John looks like your Brian, and I don't think he looks anything like it.
No, I don't.
And she  again now, she says like somebody  your John look like that bloke next door.
What a load of rubbish, I thought well.
No.
He looks more and more
Aye.
our Colin's getting more and more like me dad.
 
Well, Brian  ain't it.
Brian , Brian I think don't like, er,
they are, they're all like that.
All of them.
And I think our John looks like me Uncle Bill.
Yeah, I think he does.
But then again, he did look like that photo, I think he does look like that photo, but you were younger then,
Yeah.
but he does look like Uncle Bill.
Mind you  Colin's getting more like your dad every day.
I know he is.
black welding glasses on, and he turned round and he made me jump.
Like oh, Colin, and then he go like this, you know,isn't it.
You know, he'll come running  glasses.
Yeah.
I can't do it.
And right, he made me heart jump, 'cos he looked just like your dad, and then a few days later, he's in garage again, and Johnny come in and he said, God he said, he gave me a flaming heart attack out there.
I said, why, and he said, he turned round with these glasses on, then he said it was just like John's stood there.
I says, don't tell me, I said, he did the same thing to me the other day, and it were only within a couple of days of each other.
When he puts those glasses on, honestly he's his double.
I think it's the way he looks, like, if you know what I mean, you know like  pull his face and like, look over glasses, I mean,he did it to me when  did it to Johnny.
He probably thought  like.
He's like me dad, er me dad, he never had no patience, and our Colin's just like him.
Mind you, I'm like our Colin as well in a lot of ways.
I haven't got a lot of patience.
But where  where we're better off 'cos Albert, he's calm, where you and our Colin are both fiery tempered
Yeah.
Where, when I start, Albert's
He, I tell you want he doesn't do, I shouldn't let you hear, but, when he, when him and me are arguing when we were younger, and me dad used to wind Colin up, and wind me up, and I'd get madder and madder, and me dad used to love it.
But looking back, you know, and now, that's what Colin does to me, he winds me bloody up,but I can't help it, because he gets me that wild, I should just, I should, I mean, how can you change his temperament.
I mean, I should just turn round and tell him where to go, but.
I think Colin winds you up summat chronic
I know.
And instead of just
Ignoring him.
Ignoring him.
You don't, he  and he  going through bloody 
Yeah, I know.
What
A  where
No.
Bird pooh on window.
But,I mean, er,
Where the birds have poohed on me window flying past.
Oh God.
I know aren't they dirty.
He thinks a lot about ya 
Yeah.
Right duck.
You know, I  he mustn't pushed me, that man, who that keeps asking me out.
I mean, I sometimes, I mean, I admit I'm not most passionate person in the world but I then again I'm not
You're not by your bloody self.
I'm not frigid or owt
I can't see,are neither of you passionate?
No.
I keep saying to him, look Colin, I said, I know a couple of times a week's enough for me, but that's worth waiting for, but when you're doing it three times and then get sick of it.
and he can't understand that.
Yeah.
You think  got 'er.
Aye.
No.
No, don't do any more.
any more.
You've got enough.
Don't rip 'em.
They're to blow your nose on.
I tried to get one.
I know, but you're wasting 'em.
I tried to make a 
It's alright like that.
Oh yeah.
You're wasting 'em  That back door shut!
It scared me.
Go and tell Auntie June to shut the back door.
Else she'll be missing a bird.
June.
June.
That was close, wasn't it?
It was.
Did it frighten ya?
Yeah.
Aye.
Flies round your head, you know.
Oh aye, gets stuck in your hair.
Well, he's not going out.
I  in a minute
He will get on your head an' all 
I will get on his head in a minute, again.
Aren't we   He's got 
He's got what?
Got, your 
A bogie.
Mm.
Said this looks dodgy.
that's a funny talk, i'n't it it Albert.
Yeah.
talk.
talk, don't ya.
Don't get scared of her now.
She's scared of me, ain't she, Albert.
Yeah.
Wait a minute, Albert.
Behave, bloody scratching.
Bloody big, stupid sod.
I'm making a bed for for Barney.
And Barney's in bed.
I need a blanket  Gotta blanket for 'im.
told you now, make your pillow,fellow, Is Barney got little little legs?
He he's in bed.
Has Barney got little little legs 
Mm.
a little bit bigger don't ya.
Look at that flaming dog.
Come on, come on, throw them over there.
I wonder if there's any way you can actually check, you know, where he is, is there any way that  
Watch me tea, now.
straight out, or,
Well, what what do you think erm,
Are you worried about how much money it's gonna cost ya.
No, because money's cost us less.
Er, you know when they said we had to pay two hundred and fifty one for er, administration and search and survey.
It's come back, and it's under two hundred.
Can I have a cup of tea, please.
Then they said I've got to pay five hundred pounds for
Do what, love.
 
I don't think Allied Dunbar will deal with anybody that's dodgy.
No.
Er,
Now, watch that tea.
Yeah.
That's what he said.
Are you ready.
I don't think they'd deal with anybody that dodgy.
Er.
Bert.
Are you doing alright, are ya.
What they do, they look they look around and they weigh up up pros and cons up, and it it's like these insurance brokers, they ring all over to buy cheapest insurance for you, well, that's what Allied Dunbar are doing.
Well, well, this is a broker, but it's a  broker, so that's 
Yeah.
You see, what it is, it's where they've been behind with their mortgage, we will pay a slightly higher rate, but it's only
Yeah.
a matter of about, er, I think I think the mortgage now is ten point nine, and we'll be paying eleven point something,
Yeah.
So it's only a matter of a
Yeah, but one per cent 's a hell of a lot you know.
It's a penny in the pound.
Yeah, but I mean it, it will drop, it will drop again.
But the thing is, also what I thought of once we gotta us a mortgage and got established, you could always remortgage and go into er like Bradford and Bingley, and come out like that  
Yeah, once you get it back up to 
Yeah.
Yeah, well that's
Well, I thought once we get
It'll not be a dodgy one.
Put it in there, then.
It won't be, it's not forced to be a building society.
No, it isn't.
It gonna  to be a building society.
Oh, well, it might be Abbey National.
No, it's come back, it's got Target Finance on it.
Ah.
Well that's o that is a finance company  and not a building society.
If it says finance, it doesn't mean a building society.
Nine times out of ten, it's a finance company.
Same as er, Mercantile, and
Well, 'cos I mean, we dealt with Mercantile, we dealt with Key Finance,
Yeah.
Er 
We've dealt with summat Wagon.
Key, that, when we first bo when we first bought our car through that Scottis that bloody bank.
Scottish Amicable.
Scottish Amicable.
Like Widows.
They're always ringing up.
They ring up at seven and eight o'clock at night.
Yeah.
Asking us whether we want to borrow some money.
Er, asking if there's anything we co , look at him walking about with that 
Everything, everything, what oh, papers have got, has got Legal and General on it.
Mm.
So, I thought, well 
Yeah.
it can't be a a dodgy 
I don't think it'll be anything dodgy.
It won't be dodgy.
Oh.
But you can always, easily find out
What usually happens, though.
All you do, is pick the phone up and and get, oh now, what place do you ring.
I forgot what place you ring, but we're find out, and you ring up to see what they're, what the company's like.
You know, if it's a variable company.
Yeah.
Things like that, you could do that.
Different companies take over, I remember that time we borrowed that four thousand pound.
We started out with Key Finance and we ended up with Mercantile Credit, didn't we?
Yeah.
Changed companies three times, that time we had that four thousand pounds.
You told me about that, yeah.
Well  said that it will be a sm a really small building society.
He says, that, 'cos er, it's not 
Well.
Big building societies are not prepared to give you rates, and small building societies are wanting to get going
You see, the only trouble with building societies is, it's the same when you buy a pigging house , they put the money on what you've actually borrowed every year.
Yeah.
Well, finance companies only, you only get the interest on what is left.
On the money that you owe.
Yeah.
That's the difference.
And between them both, you can, you could  I mean you take a ten thousand pound out with a mortgage, mortgage, and you could end up paying what, twenty thousand, twenty four thousand  back.
Yeah.
Well, finance company.
You, you borrow ten grand or twenty grand whatever you like to, and you get a certain amount put on that, and that's it, it's fixed.
No.
You don't pay no more.
Say you'll, you'll you'll get twenty thousand five hundred, that, if you buy, if you borrow twenty thousand just for er round figures.
You borrow twenty thousand, and the interest payments works out
Benji
very high
He's alright.
It's very high, you know, the interest payments are very high, but for that money you've borrowed you'll only pay say, just for a a figure, five hundred pound back for that twenty thousand, five you know,
Yeah.
five thousand pound, not.
Not paying it for years and years all the time.
But if you borrow it from a in er mortgage company, you're gonna, you're gonna borrow twice that, you gonna have to pay twice that much back.
Forty grand, you kn that's the only difference, and
I don't mind that so much though, 'cos they say we are paying a lot less back a month than other way.
But I just got one thing that I want, that they gonna send me owt dodgy like a loan shark bloke or owt like that, I mean you, you're bound to be a bit nervous, you know.
No, they won't send a loan shark.
You you can tell loan sharks, straight away, because the A P R's about twenty seven per cent .
Ma maybe twenty nine, even thirty, depending, but if it er, mind you I don't know, because it's a long time since I had a look at 'em.
But, you know, when you when you borrow money, you get er, an interest rate, don't you, over so many,yo you've got to figure out ho how many years you're gonna pay it back.
You know.
If you say, oh, we'll take it over ten years.
Well you've got ten years interest to pay, ain't ya.
So you pay the interest for for nine years, and they start paying your loan off.
We're still having trouble getting insurance, and er, anyway I phoned, and I wrote him again yesterday, and he's given this number, who er, who he's with.
'Cos he had a right job,got plastic, 'cos he even  plastics, I mean that's
Yeah.
Inflammable, ain't it.
Anyway, er, the bloke who managed to get him insurance, this this, the premises are insured with him,
Yeah.
so I thought, well, if he's already got, er, part of his insurance without having 
Yeah, because he was in, paper, waste paper, and the fire insurance on that must have been colossal.
That's where  cardboard and paper.
Yeah.
Sasha come in here, shut door.
He's not coming in.
But er, I can't understand why, because I mean, let's face it,he he's only using fibre-glass and they're not that flammable
No, what they're saying is.
Not the flammable, it's the er indemnity, nobody can breathing it in who's in  
Oh, yeah, yeah.
They're frightened like, in years to come, like, they're gonna try and make a claim against them 'cos their er, been on the chest, is summat like that.
Yeah.
I, it's health and safety, yeah.
er.
Through the health and safety, but.
Eighty four we had this extension put up.
Yeah.
Sasha come in here.
But, after saying that,
There's a draught in 
what you gotta do, is make up your mind, what chemicals you're gonna use
Yeah.
and then find out all about
What ya got?
Don't know.
them particular chemicals and then submit it to the, the insurance company, what them's the only chemicals you use, and the company said this and that.
they told him that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And they still
See he's off again,I bet it is.
Just started itching.
Well, he has just flown about.
I say, he's just flown round bloody house,
He has.
Yeah.
Oh.
I bet 
'cos I thought I'd look.
Aye.
I couldn't 
It might be dust out of his wings.
Yeah  I  every time I come here.
Nineteen ninety one, ninety two.
I must have sensitive eyes
Eighteen hundred and fifty two.
Dear me.
We've had that pebble-dash nearly, nearly, it's nearly two years since they did that pebble-dash.
Cost us two thousand nine hundred, and in two years, we've only paid, eight hundred, nine hundred 
A hundred
A hundred and forty pound,
 
we've paid off in two years, Karen.
How much.
A hundred and forty pound.
In two years.
In two years.
Now, if that had been a finance company, I would have paid a damn sight more.
But it cost us  thirty seven pound a month.
But, last year, we put, no wait a minute, last year, we paid 'em four hundred and eight pound fifty two, and they put two hundred and seventy two pound fifty interest on.
So actually all we paid, was
Thirty seven, per cent 
Thirty odd, thirty 
That's round about thirty-seven per cent, innit, somewhere around there.
Yeah, we paid thirty eight pound off it last year.
Makes more.
It's ridiculous, you know, mortgage payments.
When you think of it.
I know.
and on 'ouse, they put eight hundred and ninety eight pound, you could say, nine hundred pound interest on 'ouse.
Oi.
I don't know how they get away with mortgage payments like they are, because, you know,it it's totally unfair,
They are.
I mean, alright, we know you're handling large lumps of money, but when you think of it, if you, if you, borrowed it at a different rate, you know, same rate as you could do finance, 'cos which I think the government could do it and make a profit at it.
Yeah.
You know what I mean.
Instead of having all these different mortgage companies, Abbey National and that, the government have er, have er, a whatsname to do it, they're wouldn't be half and a quarter.
I mean, it happens all over the world, you know, in in the in the especially in the whatsname countries.
I know.
Communist countries.
Everything's owned by the by the government and er, I know it's not a right good thing, like, but if it could work properly, it would be a damn good thing.
Watch she don't bite ya.
I mean, communism in England,
in it's  in it's proper form would be a wonderful thing, but er, it's on because er, it's only the rich people what make people poor.
I know.
The say as with damn education, like, at bloody Tory sods, they took all blinking, we gi for al for all these people what's going to college, every time they drop on holidays they've got nothing to keep 'em.
No.
So I my opinion, what this government's doing is stopping stopping the lower class, well I say lower classes, the lo the the
isn't it.
poorer people, they stop 'em getting educated.
That I'm I'm almost convinced.
Yeah.
It says, everything they're doing, it says, is going back to the eighteenth century, when you hear about these Kath Catherine Cookson days, working for pennies and you can't get educated 
 
un cutting back,
They're cutting back on education.
Oh, you're telling me  
They're making it so only the rich can be educated.
Yeah, trying to turn it back into  
at the end of the day.
I mean, our Colin's there waiting for a grant and what's happening.
Sweet nothing.
Now we're, it were in bloody paper last  on Thursday, they don't get nothing when they're on holiday.
No, they don't,
I mean, how the hell they supposed at eighteen year old without a job.
Mm.
If they have a job, they don't get no grants.
And how can you have, hold a  a job down
I don't think 
And do education at same time.
I'm not sure, but  I think I don't got my family allowance until I were eighteen, I think, I think they used to give us  
let me keep our Karen's 
Oh.
So I've got a form to fill in, actually.
It should have gone back last week, and I 
It'll all stop when she gets her grant through.
Don't knock me.
She said not necessarily.
I think it will stop them  thought shit I'm not bloody going to declare it,
Yeah.
She applied for a grant, and in, er in career, it says like,
Sasha  
you'll, like you you  
No, you'll rip it.
Left home, you know, we are, like, say our Karen to leave home.
Aye.
Yeah.
And she were living in the parks.
Get up here.
Yeah.
They used to give 'em subsidies to help 'em pay the rent, they've stopped that, so they've either to gerra job, to help put supplement to pay in the, you know, their housing accommodation, or they've got to stop school.
In summer holidays, er, the grant don't  they take that six weeks
Off the grant.
off the grant, so that actually they get six weeks money less, through the year, than they should do, where they're used to paying all through year
For twelve months, now they don't.
Now, they don't get anything for that six weeks that they're not at school.
No.
So, you know, any girl that's not living at 'ome.
She got to go out and work for that six weeks, to, to earn the money  feed the 
And where can you get that bloody kind of money, only  corner.
Yeah, but where can you get a job.
Well, that's it.
Where can you job.
Well, it's forcing the girls on to streets, ain't it.
Yeah.
corner.
I mean, they're begging 'em you to ke they're begging you to keep 'em on at school, and yet you can't get no help to keep 'em on.
It's like other day,we were talking to this bloke like, and he were on about businesses, says you can't underst , oh he said something about finances,how difficult it is to get finance to start a business up  and er, he said, I know, he said you can't me, he said.
You seen all these adverts about starting your own business, you know, governments like, you know, doing all these courses and making it out as though it's it's dead easy to get fi , you know  hitting your head against a brick wall
Yeah.
The only way you can start a business, is by starting it without insurance
straight off your own back, and then, you know, after it's running, get insurance.
Yeah.
That ho ninety five per cent of firms do that.
regulate.
I mean it's  
I mean, look at laddo round there what's been broke into.
He's no insurance  no insurance whatsoever, 'cos he couldn't afford it.
I know.
Ours is gonna us about a thousand pound for insurance.
Oh.
Well, a thousand pounds not a lot, Karen, but er  it all depends what the, what what you gonna be insured for?
It's not.
I mean, even that, you're gonna you you gonna be insured for breaking in and break-ins and
Yeah, I think it's everything.
I think it's  
That's what I mean, so what you're actually getting for your, thousand pound isn't a lot of money.
No.
I think it's covered for like, like you say, like for some reason, say you had a fire, and you had to stop work.
Yeah.
I think it's covered for that.
Covered for personal injury, er, covered for hundred thousand, for like, that's what trailers,they've got  trailers in.
It's covered for everything.
I mean, you imagine somebody breaking in and setting fire to a trailer.
I mean, it's a lot of money when you think Norma's paying nine hundred pound just for her car.
For that Cabriolet.
To me, you think phew a thousand pound, but cer I mean, it's it ain't really very much, no.
It's a high insurance for a car.
What for car?
yeah.
Right 
What how how comes that, then?
Because, well, Cabriolet's are classed as dangerous, aren't they, because they're  soft roofed.
Oh, aye.
It's not got no 
Aye, this 
Yeah,she's only been driving a year, two years.
Soft top, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, look at our Connie's.
Yeah.
Three hundred and eighty for third 
Our Connie's were five hundred and seventy.
Now it's gone up to five hundred and seventy because that accident.
I mean, when you look at it, it's for a third party fire and theft.
Christ, that's gonna be a thousand pounds on a full comprehensive, just about.
I know.
I'm still 
Are ya.
Well, I I I'll promise not to fondle.
need to tell her.
Connie  get in touch with me again, I told her that.
I don't know.
Tell the truth innit.
Aye.
How it goes.
He wouldn't be be able to keep that promise if he'd tried.
He won't promise.
Who 
No, I don't.
I be  You get to walk by yourself 
See that piece in free press about 
No.
It's a big piece.
Give ya mummy that that free press.
What.
Give mummy that free press 
That paper.
one.
Yeah 
Er  for me eyes.
It's only one like you had for  
He does make a lot of dust.
I thought, when, last time I were here, I kept thinking, well, why's he only doing it, 'cos I know he never done it before.
When I thought, he says to Colin, I said,bird, you know, like, when something started to 
Wet your fingers 
Mind, er 
Might be dust.
Mm.
I'm not worn no make-up for ages, 'cos me eyes seem to be like, itching all of a sudden.
Aye.
So whether it's just that as well.
Well, it can't be 'im, 'cos we always had  
Yeah.
it's gotta be 'im.
Yeah.
You bald headed mutt, aren't ya  George.
Old baldy.
He's  can he talk?
Yeah.
He says 
He's baldy.
He's says 
Baldy.
Baldy George.
You know Margaret, she's got that new suite round there.
You seen it?
No.
I ain't been round.
Oh.
It's it's er,
Benji.
Benji, come off.
I didn't, I mean, I don't like small  the right brightly coloured or what, but it looked like it were coloured like this, like this kind of colouring.
Yeah.
It it's blue.
I'm sure, she said it's blue.
It's got some cream in it as well ain't it.
Well,more, so I couldn't see, but I just, to me it was just like er, thought it was like minky coloured.
But mind ya,more like a, but what I was gonna say is,
Suppose to be a  but I mean 
On back of it, on back of it, she's got like all them tapestry pictures laid over back of it.
Yeah.
She got, same on chairs, all, you can hardly see the suite, 'cos she's got, she says, and er, I says to her, I says to her, oh it's nice your suite, innit.
She says yeah, if I can keep it clean, she got all cushions covered up, well like er, er  
Keep it clean, there's only them two buggers.
I know, but what's the point of having a new suite, and having old covers on it like that.
They make me laugh, when they sit in 'ouse with blanket round them, so they don't have to turn 'eating up.
I don't 
Aye, you go in there and it's empty that other 
That's empty.
I know, I see it.
I tell you what, you  to make mistakes in your life, I mean and, I just, well one of those things that  that I'm pleased about, is that I just  George when 
Don't work.
Aye.
When what?
When I stopped with Colin.
 
Oh well.
You don't know how green, how green the grass is until you actually stand
You can't go till your dad comes.
Why, I'm going home all by myself, then.
Well, get off there.
get on with it.
We do 
You'll end up with a smack bum.
Benjy, will you leave her alone.
Are you  have you told her to leave me alone?
Yeah.
No.
get on ya  Benj 
Do you always smack him, when he plays 
Yeah, I smack his bum.
Does he play with dad.
No.
Why he plays  Does he play with toilet paper?
No, he eats it.
No, Look ain't that 'orse  going back 
Where?
You've missed it, it's gone now.
I mean, when you think of what he started with, Karen,
Yeah.
He borrowed money from his father-in-law.
Yeah.
Is that  which one?
It's gone.
Which.
Me dad, if if me dad had done what 
What's that, that that young girl here says they won't have nowt do with them at all.
Any relations.
Well, well Richard won't.
I know.
Er.
She's is his cousin.
Is that  maybe the other side, but I don't  be Wendy's side.
She's his cousin.
'Cos I says to her one day, well why don't you ask yer, your relation, if he'll er, if he'll give yer a job.
Give us a job, she said, he won't even pass the time of day with us.
I said, well, I, there must be summat there, out there, she said no, he said, she said it goes back a long time.
But er, she says, never even  speaks to us.
And if we if if we ring up, he puts he just puts the phone straight down, soon as you tell him who it is.
Probably goes back from when they went 
He said, I, she said I can live without him anyhow.
It'll drop off, that.
It won't.
It will.
Come on,yella.
I found some Mighty Muscle in garage, you know.
How much.
You know that big round tin.
I, not how much is in it, but it'll probably be about that much in bottom.
I know  wanting  to do this room, really, 'cos it would be too cold.
Get away with one.
I wish we'd just  too cold.
You won't, as far as  we're having to buy coal at that price.
No, I know.
Every time we have any spare money, it has to go on pigging coal.
how much.
You know that big round tin?
Yeah.
I don't know how much is in it, but probably be about that much in bottom.
might be  really, couldn't  too cold.
Get away with one.
I wish we'd afford some  I mean, it's cold.
You won't  while we're having the buy coal, at that price.
No, I know.
Every time we have any spare money, it has to go on pigging coal.
We'll probably just buy some, and that lad'll ring up.
He probably will.
Especially if this mild weather stops.
But it is mild today, ain't it.
Yeah.
 

That's not a moo cow.
Get down.
It is.
It is.
It isn't.
Mooo.
That's it.
That's what moo cows do.
You're crackers.
It is.
It is a moo cow.
I mean like er, Eileen was saying summat yesterday, she said, she said I don't er, have  at home, she said, I decided to  I said I'm frightened, and sometimes  knows I'm not frightened.
I said, I'm frightened someone's in the 'ouse, I'm frightened not waking everybody  well, well what do you do, I says, you don't, unless you have a go, you don't, I mean, if I'd turned out  you know, you don't really know.
I know.
I mean, that
You might, and then again, you might be a millionaire inside three months.
Yes, I said to her, think about it, I I was that frightened, I frightened meself to death, and I I wouldn't I wouldn't.
I hated it.
That's what I used to do every time I thought about selling 'ouse 
You just got to do it.
Yeah.
I thought about it, and thought about it, and then then changed my mind.
But this time I decided it's what I want to do and bugger it.
If we don't sell it, we we haven't lost anything.
Oh well.
sell it till we move.
I honestly think myself  
As long as we're not worse off than what we were before we moved.
I honestly think meself, that I might have a have a couple of hard months, maybe three, first three months might be a bit difficult for me.
Oh, it probably will be.
Well, I think, once he gets established, and once he starts getting work in, I think meself, that work will start, won't say rolling in, but I think the work'll start coming in after about three months and I can get established.
Oh we can always lend you a couple of ten pences.
I know.
I know we're hard up, but you can ten pence.
You never know, might be  to make enough money to take you out somewhere for a decent Christmas do.
Oh  
Yeah, Christmas party.
Yeah.
Yeah, might.
You might.
want to come work for him, did I tell ya.
Who?
Him that used to work with our Colin.
Yeah.
You know, er, well,
Aye, the 
It, he would  
It's gotta be better than being on dole, innit.
No, I don't know.
Oh, is that 
No he's, no he's got a good job.
He works at  with plenty of overtime.
Benjy.
Colin phoned him up, and er, it it  he mentioned, how he was starting up, and he said he might be interested, anyway Colin phoned him a couple of weeks ago to see if he was still interested in.
Anyway he says he'd pay him the same money as what he's on there, 'cos he'd have to really, wouldn't just say, say 
You've, you've got to, but how the hell get it, if he don't get paid up front.
What do ya mean?
Well, wages,
Got to  
Well, it have to come out of capital, at first.
Yeah.
put by ten or eleven thousand, or whatever it is, just come out of that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So we got money coming in.
Mm.
our Karen.
But er, I mean, I says, can't we manage without him, can't you manage by yourself, but Colin says he can't really, because
He needs somebody.
Yeah.
Well, Colin's gotta be able to do a lot of office work, he's gonna be out doing quotes, you know what I mean, so he's going have to have somebody there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or I would apply for er, family credit straight away.
get coming in, I'm gonna say, yeah, we've got ten thousand pounds.
But we don't know how long it'll be, before get any money coming in, and if you go on to family credit, you get it for six months, so that'll be our wages.
So then, what what comes out of business we'll pay him anyway.
Yeah.
You might have too much in bank for family credit, that ten thousand, it's only eight, innit?
It's got, it's gotta know what  increase, when you running a business.
Yeah.
Oh, I don't know.
If you apply for it straight away, could you say you don't know how much monies coming in.
How much money your gonna coming in.
His dad's in a new business, anyway,bec so you should get forty quid a week at least, anyway.
Thirty-five now,
Is it thirty-five,
Yeah.
Bloody hell.
Yeah.
It's like everything else
I mean, that's seventy pound, you wouldn't have had, anyway, ain't it.
No.
Oh.
I ju I mean, it, now it's just getting me, more depressed than nowt else, I mean, I just wish that they'd phone and say yeah, we've got you a insured.
 
And then, I mean, 'cos we daren't say that to accountant know, to have 'ouse valued, 'cos what's point in, I mean, anybody said to us, er, get it sent off, you'll find, you're, somebody will insure ya.
But what if they don't.
You've lost all your  ain't ya.
Ya, so that's  the end of the world.
Even if you find out they won't.
No.
Why don't you get a free  put on market.
No, the on the company's, that's coming up with all the money got to 
Oh aye.
do the valuation.
And they ought to form  value of what, so they know how much it's worth, what the company that's gonna earn them the money want the money for the valuation.
It's just another way of making a bit more money out it.
That's it.
Well, it's same as when you buying and selling 'ouses.
You  when it comes out, when, the people that's, mind me cigarette, darling, the people that's gonna buy your 'ouse, who, mortgage company comes out and values it, they've got that to pay as well haven't they.
Yeah.
The same as, I, them that buys our 'ouse, they'll have to pay whatever it cost for 'em to value our 'ouse, see if it's worth lending money, we'll have the same thing with er bungalow, down there.
Yeah.
It's only money  I mean, how long are they 'ere.
Yeah.
Ten minutes.
Mean, that woman come out, when when we had this done, didn't she,
Mm.
To to see if it were satisfac she weren't here three minutes.
No.
What was that for, for 
You know when we had extension put up.
Oh yeah, yeah,
Well,
Did it  value.
They sent they sent 'em out from er, Abbey National and we had to pay, well we did pay 'im fifty pound, people that put the building on paid.
she keeps getting up.
She's not.
She is.
She'll bite you, and our Whisky can 
She scratched him outside, didn't she.
And, if she were here three and a half minutes, that's all she were 'ere, and it and it 'em fifty quid.
Yeah.
Bloody ridiculous.
It's all a bloody money making racket.
Another thing is, I'll tell why we don't want er, they always having valuations, they are, they come and value it, and then they give us money.
That means we're gonna be paying extra eleven thousand with money we ain't got.
Yeah.
That's another reason we're daren't send it off.
Yeah.
Yeah, because if ya, if ya, get it before ya start your business.
You've still got it to pay as soon as you get it.
Yeah.
Trust them, because it's in their  at the moment.
Well, I still believe in  and I don't pushed around and say, no you can't have money, no you can't get insured, and so that means  others.
You haven't lost anything have ya?
Well, just er disappointment, I suppose.
For what
Well, yeah,
Then again, I mean, I  
There's always summat else you can go and do.
You know that, doing that, fabricating, and things like that, you know like actual welding and that type of  Er, we wouldn't make as much money out of that as you probably would
No.
No, you'll be, you'll be stuck to it, all time, and it's not good for 'im.
No.
And it kills your eyes welding.
Benjy.
But as he said to me, why don't you go  welding.
I says, the point is I've got bad eyes as it is,
Yeah.
what's the point in making them worse.
I know.
So, jump in me box, and I ain't jumping in me box blind, for the last ten years.
I'll manage the way I am.
You see, that works where I
Benjy
Aye,
Benjy, look at 'im.
Benjy 
Where are you, when it's gonna be, he said corner, then we'll make an office and a little canteen in that anyway.
Then there's another long unit right at side of it, just enough to get one trailer in.
I said, I said, if we do get going, and we do start finding out that it's going alright, he'll turn that, into like er, shop er, blasting shop.
And like,
Yeah.
A spray area, then
Yeah.
Employ a sprayer.
So, I mean, we know what we want, but  it's them and not us, I mean, it is frightening to start a business up, 'cos we don't know how much work we'll be getting, but, I mean,
Well, it's same for anybody starting any business, ain't it, you don't know if it's gonna work  as well.
It might go well for the first three or four months, and then all of a sudden we might have a lapse in a few months ,
Yeah.
you could be struggling to keep it above 
Yeah.
and especially, you know, these bloody big firms, they do not like paying bloody bills.
No.
I mean, you could have as as much as two or three thousand pound owed to ya, but your business will still go under.
Yeah, because of it.
Because of it.
Yeah.
They don't look on them things, how much you've got owed out to ya.
I know.
When you look you see everything's a bloody risk,
Let's hope he gets off the floor.
walking across roads a risk, ain't it.
Yeah.
It's ju just if you've got the nerve to do it.
It's a risk with these buggers, what's in power, aye, it's no matter what whose in power.
I got 
I think if labour gets in, you'll not get it tough at all.
I can tell you that, now.
Oohh.
What?
Oohh.
You feel like  er, that's whose, like ex soldiers  throughout the company, and he said to Colin er, he said, how many people are you thinking about employ , our Colin seems to think there'd be enough work to keep 'im going, like, he says, he says, well how many people are you thinking about employing, he says, only only me and me  like, it's oh, oh, he says, there's plenty of work to keep two of going, he said, I thought you employed about six.
So if he thinks that Colin do have six working for him, and he's got enough work for six, then surely there's gonna be plenty of work for two of 'em.
Yeah, but what he means by six is, he gets the jobs done quicker 
Yeah, but then you still got six wages to pay out, haven't ya.
Yeah.
That's it.
He probably will have six later on, if he gets it off, but  the thing is, I mean, he'll need somebody to drive wagons round yard, and half the time,y you know, he'll be sat doing nothing, scratching his nose.
Them's the people he's got to be wary of, the people that want a job, but don't wanna work for it.
There's a hell of a lot in Broadway and Stainford,
Yeah.
round about here.
Mind Lee's a, Lee's a good worker, he says that, he wants, you know, best worker what he can 
Yeah, but I mean, working for a mate, is different to working for a firm.
Yeah.
You know, I mean
Well, he's not a mate, he won't, he's working with him when he were at er  over in Brad oh, here's Richard now.
Aye, you'd better jump in bed with him,
Oh dear, no but he is, Richard is the one with the  comical magazine,laughing bursts two incomes.
I think that's part of 
Yes.
Look, slow down, or you're driving me mad.
Oh yuk.
weekend, aren't we?
Get settled.
Pity she can't go as well, you could have had a quiet weekend.
Where's Gavin like, is he with Colin?
No, in the barn, 'cos they went yesterday morning, and er, they end up sleeping last night,due back today 
I was  I was 
Don't make sense.
Mmoo
If I don't 'ave 'im, I'll be having 'im for a, you know, two days at a time.
Mmoo.
Well, if you 'ave 'im two days at a time, it's better than nowt at all innit.
How's that came and stop 'ere.
How long she's got to go for other one.
Twelve,, he's got her ten days.
Ten days.
Yeah,could it 
 
Could be ten, between ten and twelve days, couldn't it.
George, your birthday's not twenty-first ain't it,
No.
I thought it were twenty sixth.
That's true.
Well, you'll have to wait while 
A week before 
Oh, I said George,bed with ya, I said, that's worse  
Oh Benjy lie down, what matter with ya.
He's worse than your father ain't he.
lie down now.
Look.
He's coming in.
Lie down.
Snuggled up on that blanket, little un.
Lie down .
You'd do it for for Bert.
He's he's like that with everybody.
He's like with everybody, ah, give us a cuddle.
Yeah, but he won't keep bloody still.
If you're cuddling me, you won't move 
What were you saying about er,
two hours old.
look in me dad's then.
maybe in February after this worst month of year.
But, after  everybody's birthdays and anniversaries in bloody February.
Aye.
It must be the summer what does it.
 
Aye, it's always 
It's Linda's anniversary tomorrow.
It's her birthday on on Wednesday, it's our  on twelfth, and whenever our Dawn has this baby, that's gonna be in February.
Yeah.
It's your birthday, me mum's birthday.
Have we got any buggers in March?
It won't matter whether it's born on your Margaret's birthday or not, it still won't get nowt.
It won't get nowt.
It were born on,Yvon Yvon hang on, get it  Yvonne's birthday is the first of February, and mine's the twenty first, but she'll be a year older than me, so she's like a year and twenty days
Yeah.
exactly older than me.
First and twenty-first.
You want to do what she's doing now.
Who's it for.
Oh.
I thought it was that  wife.
Oh, Norma.
Oh no.
Oh no, not 'er.
Norma.
Pack  one, her.
I know, I call that, but I mean, I don't  down the town,but her.
But I, I didn't think I like that.
Mum, mum watch this, are you watching.
You have to lose a race now and again.
Yeah, but she ain't even,
Are you watching,
er, what was was I saying, the  I don't know what George has  all the customers, I mean, she's isn't even particularly 
isn't she, she's not what you call really bonny, she ain't got a right bonny face.
I know she's got a nice figure.
She's as thick as two short planks, she's got a dirty mouth.
I mean, I, you know, maybe
I can't understand  your cross.
I know.
Cannot understand  or something.
Their as different as chalk and bloody cheese.
Plenty of different people  cheap, er,the other people who have different likes to you, but what, what you might think's attrac attractive, somebody else'll
Yeah.
won't be, you know.
 

To be quite honest, without talking like a school  on a fence.
They're not very happy, they ain't been happy for a while, but it's getting worse,wh is, what is them now is, you know I say things to Colin, and Co I mean, Colin'll tell me like, you know, you know,over there, and er, he's latest thing is, they built this little office.
You know when you go into  on the right, er a coal-house and a wash- house ain't there.
Yeah.
The coal-house part it's is quite wide now we've done it, big coal-house, but altered 
And then it twists, and like a small office, and when when I were there, after Michael had shown it me and Colin, he says oh, he says, er I'm come in here to get get out of way, and you know, he was like telling me, I thought I don't want to be a fiddle, because it's alright telling Colin, the boys
telling yeah,
Yeah.
ain't it, yeah, it's not like a woman telling you problems.
Don't knock my dusters off.
Anyway, I just said, well, summat about  about what I said, I says, yeah,nice to get away from it all, ain't it, to be by yourself, and that's all I said, and I think he knew that I I didn't want to 
but, and he said to Colin
oh shit.
said, he said, yeah, he said, it'll be ideal in here, he said, I can put, he said, put a full lock on door, and he said, I can come in here, he said,and so I thought, ah.
Yeah but, there's not many people that you can 
Sasha, behave.
I don't think I know anybody that hundred per cent 'appy.
Well, I think it's got a lot to do with the climate we're living in, you know,
Rushing about
There's that much, there's that many people out of work, there's and 
you know, there's that many pressures on people.
I mean, it's like like Colin and I, I mean, like we're happy but then, no were not hundred per cent happy at all,But like, er, like some people I can't  if you get upset, some people eat more, some people eat less, or you know, some go into recluse, some get  and like Colin,
he's when he's depressed, he's goes like a raving sex mania, he
I'm bloody glad Albert don't, he'll drive me  out of a bed.
He takes all, takes all his  
Why didn't you stop 
No I think every 
I think everybody's got themselves summat some faults.
Nobody's hundred per cent perfect.
I mean, I don't think Colin's unhappy where he wants to do, then an offers an offer, like either they go in and make  share, but if they work all day.
No, it's not er, it's so much  I mean, he's at work all day,and he works all bloody hours that God sent, when they want, when they got down,
Yeah.
and what happens.
He's got to build an office where he can go and let, sit in it, can't abide  
That's right.
Summat wrong somewhere.
Now look at our Margaret and Peter.
They've got no family, so they've got no pressures like that, they haven't got any money problems  well they're not 'appy.
They live two entirely separate lives.
Yeah, I know.
There's is just a marriage of er convenience.
Convenience.
Innit it.
Yeah, it's convenient 
It's a way of life, they've lived together that long, like, they don't want to 
If when you and Pete had that trouble, if our Margaret had er been working, I honestly think she would have left Pete.
I know.
But the only thing that our Margaret could come up with, was why should I, why should I leave me home and sell up, she said, when all my life, he's had money from the house.
He'll have the money from the house, plus a wage every week.
She said, and what will I have, she said, just the money from the house.
She said, and where do I live.
You know, he can move back home with his mum, she said, I suppose I can go back home to me mum, well then I've got to look for a job, you know.
Mm.
And I honestly think that was the only reason that she stopped for Pete.
Yes.
Because, she's she, he he were gonna get a wage every week.
Yeah.
You know, and she worked all them years, and then when she weren't working, she have no money coming in every week.
Yeah, but she's got all the shares.
She hasn't, she got rid of them all.
Aye, not with Bl not with 
Yeah, but you could see, you could see, that, I mean Pete were getting about hundred and twenty pound a week.
Yeah.
We'll he had his money he won't have to touch, he could live on that hundred and twenty pound a week.
Oh, aye,
And he could start again.
Find another woman and buy another house and start again.
Mm.
I mean like Jeremy and Kay, I mean, they're not happy.
They pretend they are, but I mean like, he's he's 
They've got to do, aren't they, I mean, after all bloody  harm they caused.
Yeah, you know, you know how flaming miserable and mardy he is.
Yeah.
He's another one.
But you see when he living with Ange, maybe he were younger then, but I mean like, when he were living with Ange, he had all the women as you know, plus he had Kay, plus he had, you know, Ange, he had everything, there was Kay,as well, weren't he, now he can't.
No.
But then again, if, even Kay over there with  she said something about er, oh we've been out, but, I told you I went to a  last Monday.
Yeah.
and she said something about, oh we've been to that new pub, she said, mind, she said, we had to come home at half past nine, she said, he'd had enough, she said, he were ready for bed, God, she said he's turning into a right old man, and you know what I mean, she didn't, she wouldn't,
Exactly.
She didn't realise what she was saying as such, but I thought, and I thought, yeah I know.
Yeah, well he is, what ten years.
Thirteen you got from 'er.
Thirteen years difference.
She's, how old am I, twenty-two, so she's twenty-nine.
Same age as our Kim
Yeah.
Oh she'll be coming at thirty this year, won't she?
You see, she's just coming into her prime, and now he's he's just leaving it.
yeah.
He's really forty-three this year.
Don't work.
He'll be forty-three this year, and she'll be thirty this year.
The only thing, time that happens is, that is you hear about,
Look George  
if yo if one's fifty over sixty,
He's plucking his feathers out.
then it works.
But when your younger it, or even when you're young, you know, it does.
But when you get into your forties 
Well, it's like, I mean like,
It works.
I'm  me and Colin are settling down a lot compared to what we were five year ago.
I mean, like, like now, we were a, say even two and three years ago and  somebody'd said to me, are you going to Spain, and I would have said, yeah, we'll go to Majorca, lovely, we could stop out all night, do what you want.
Now only three or four years later I'd say of yeah we're go to somewhere a bit quieter, so that kids can go to bed of a night time, we could have a  apartment.
Yeah, that's right, yeah.
Yeah.
And that, I'm changing that way, but, if our kids have to be home with the, a group, when I went to see Squeeze.
And it were a good group, I wanted to go see.
Our think nowt about going and watching 'em.
Johnny won't go anywhere like that.
Kay's wanted to do what we do, and Johnny's not interested.
Yeah.
Like went to fair, she went to the riding, he .
He said, that's  ya like a big kid, going up fair.
I mean, look at  
I mean, that's all she is, yet, she's she's only a bloody  
Yeah, twenty nine.
Well, I like to go on rides.
I go on rides, June won't  go on.
I know.
Yeah, well, that's what I mean,
Go on, shit.
The thing is, like he is even apart apart from 'im being a lot older than 'er, he acts older.
I mean, he acts like his always, er forty three, he acts like he's like, fifty sometime, well you you're older than, you know what I mean, he acts older than you, because as you say, you'll go on fair rides and  
 
Aye.
Mind you, we're we're getting on  
No, but you know what I mean, I mean,
Yeah, I know what you mean.
Fifty,
Fifty-three.
Four.
Fifty-three,
Fifty-four.
I'm fifty-three 
Your fifty-four next birthday  you're only a couple of months off.
Well, I'm fifty-three.
He's fifty-three.
'Cos you probably do more things.
You know younger things, than what he does.
And he gotta 
Yeah.
He should be keeping himself young for 'er.
Mm.
Instead of 'er keeping him young, she's, he's making her old.
That's it, yeah.
I think Chris  on about moving to blinking Gainsborough, now.
Gainsborough.
Colin were telling me today.
Yeah.
He said they've had twelve 'ouses them, since they've been married.
God.
I were talking to him on Friday, and er, I mean, they've not been down there five minutes.
Oh no, Road.
Yeah.
Mind, I never been there 'fore, oh I can't remember, a few years, can't re , last time I've been there.
Mm.
Well la , last year, when you were doing that painting for er, Derek.
Mum.
Wait a minute.
Er, Derek, paid him off,
Yeah.
and got Johnny  to finish it.
Mummy.
and er, I I saw Chris quite a lot, then, but I mean, they're not living how they used to do, I mean, they they were always boozing and that,
Yeah, I know.
she said they'd they'd cut down on boozing and everything.
But er,
Give up, Sasha.
I says to Tommy, why don't they buy one of them big caravans, I said, because every time they get 
Mum.
it must be costing them a fortune, when every time they move, they alter 'ouse, they decorate and put new carpets down and  furniture 
My God, we'll have to  
Yeah, well, I mean, I mean not  
Yeah but I mean, twelve times, Karen.
I know.
You're saying like us, I mean, we wouldn't want to move again, I mean, if we move again, it's 'cos something's gonna happen with his business, ain't it,
Yeah.
Yeah.
But, or because same thing like it were a couple of years ago, with finances.
I mean, how how olds their oldest , is it eighteen or seventeen.
Is it Mandy whose older,
Yeah.
I mean, I thought Mandy's er, eighteen, nearly nineteen.
So.
Oh no, she must be older because er, Vicky's twenty  she must be about eighteen.
No, she's same age a Treena, twenty.
So in twenty years, they've had twelve 'ouses
Yeah.
And you've been married how long?
Twelve.
Twelve years, and you've had three.
Three.
Christ, you better not be married twenty years, Karen, you might end up with another twelve.
I know, but how many's your Pete and Margaret have, they had er,
Er, they moved, they went on to 
One, two, three.
didn't they.
Yeah, then t' 
Yeah, then, now they went to  aye, they went to Oval, went to bungalow 
yeah some four times.
four, yeah, four or five times, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's only us who never moved.
Oh yeah.
Angie  how long's me mother been in there.
I'm forty-eight this year, me mum must have been in there nearly fifty year.
And we've only moved into here.
In actual fact your Pete and Margaret have moved more, in the twelve years that they were married, I know they've been married longer now, but when,th they been married twelve years and they moved four times,
Yeah.
we've been married twelve years, and we've moved three times, so we haven't moved as much as them, really.
No.
No.
I couldn't keep moving and  
I couldn't move like that.
I mean, a couple of moves, is fair enough, yeah, but bloody twelve.
No.
And it's not as if they made money every time they moved, 'cos they haven't, 'cos they lost money on that 'ouse, there.
Yes.
I  won't it.
Well, Chris said they moved because er,
Give up.
er, transport, you know.
It would be difficult for 'er to get back'ards and for'ards, and she were on her own all the time.
Yeah.
That's why they moved.
But they moved down, they moved from 'ere because he says, er,
Too noisy, weren't it.
Too too noisy and dogs were keeping them up all night.
Oh.
So I don't what the excuse is for moving from   Road.
Same thing, 'cos it's noisy down there.
Yeah.
I could scare you, Auntie June.
Could ya.
Yeah.
Go on then.
Why people think it's noisy for us on a double main road, but it ain't really.
Well, you get used it in don't ya.
When our Norma come and stop here, she she was,
Used to sleep 
I don't know how you sleep all night with all that traffic going up and down.
No.
But we never hear it.
You don't hear it.
No, we didn't.
I remember one  first night we stopped there, buses were coming at crack of dawn,
Yeah.
it must have been about four or five o'clock in morning, and now we never hear any traffic.
No.
No.
Perhaps you get used to.
Yeah.
But we don't hear many people, on a road like that.
No.
I were thinking about that bungalow, and, well actually it's as far from  our road, nearly as far from our road to there, as what is it from bungalow window to road.
Where to  yeah.
it really is 
Know, thinking about people walking back as far as t' shopping my point.
There nowt much difference in, from t' garden 
I think the only trouble over there, is your to gonna have people parking in front of ya gate, like when they go to the chip shop.
They won't 
Yeah.
They won't 'cos 'cos er, I'm afraid if they do, I shall be out straight away at 'em.
Well, it's only a matter of parking at, parking your own car as well 
I'll clamp the bugger, I'll buy a wheel clamp and wheel clamp it.
Park here at your risk.
It'll be awkward getting cars in and out, when you know, with one more to be out and, all these cars in road, like, but.
That's the only difficulty.
You'll probably end up say, leaving one on road all night.
Yeah.
Don't hurt  I mean,
Oh, not leaving one on bloody road  
Well, we could put 'em at night time, it's just through time, if one backs in, comes in behind other.
Yeah.
It's a one way street and all ain't it, that makes it worse.
Why does it make it worse?
Well, we don't have to have a problem, do we?
No, but I mean.
It's like barbed wire, I mean that's, Sasha come in 'ere.
What backs onto that bungalow, Karen.
Another 'ouse.
Another 'ouse.
Another 'ouse.
Er, I told you what backs onto it, you know the right small on , what you were going to see that time, but on the side.
Yeah.
We went to see that,
Oh.
That's what backs onto it.
Oh.
well, at least they won't be looking int' bungalow will they, with it all being down,
No.
and that.
Yeah, that's straight behind it.
Oh.
Not like them, I mean, they can see straight into our 
I'm not sure, but I think it was Mr  that had that bungalow built.
You know Mr 
Yeah.
Somebody told me that he had that built.
Oh.
Years ago before he had that 'ouse built on  Road.
Oh.
What you doing with the  a cup of tea.
Sasha.
She's there.
She's there.
Come 'ere.
Georgie babes.
Them  can be  about, I mean, that's what it probably is.
That's what it is.
Dust, yeah.
Oh.
It's not so much now, it's so much that,
It's not his feathers, it's dust 
when he 
when he does that, and he flaps, the dust off his body,
Oh.
You know like they're always picking their feathers.
Yeah.
Well, they have right tiny little scales, coming off their feathers,
Oh.
for the feathers to open out, like it's like wax.
Wax.
Oh, yeah,li like like birds have.
Yeah, like birds have,
Yeah, like what they have on the crest.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, that's that's what they're doing.
The problem is, it's dry.
They're pulling it off, and when he's shed, he, all floated 
Is that what causes that parrot to 
Yeah.
Yeah.
To er, what call it.
Yeah.
We were 
No.
Took us an age to cut it.
on there.
Yeah.
Oh,, or summat daft like that, they call it.
but, it's like sum , it's like some people of being allergic to different things, you know.
No, he wants to stay out, he pulls his feathers out when he's in cage.
How do you  off feathers, and not off birds.
You do, you get it off any bird.
Yeah but some are not, not so much 'im 'cos he don't shed his feathers as much as 'im.
'e's not half, 'e's not half as dirty as 'im.
I mean, you only have to look at top of that cupboard, and it were don't yesterday.
Yeah.
That's what I say.
Everywhere's white, everywhere white.
June, I did I did all dusting and polishing one day
He's upside down.
And this silly bugger's out, playing about.
heard that again.
and when she came in, she said, you haven't done dusting.
I said, I have, but I bloody have.
But she wouldn't 'ave it.
You old grot bag.
But, I mean, she's done it today, and what she's saying now.
I haven't done it today, luv.
Well, you should have done.
I haven't got round to it yet.
I tell you, within an hour of you doing it, it's just as bad.
Yeah.
Dust.
Come in.
I probably saw it,
Hello.
I mean, before, before we got 'im, we could dust and it used to stay all right.
Actually dust off 'im, you, some of it you can't even see.
The only time you'd see it, as if be in the light 
When it settles, I think.
You know, you see it then.
When it settles on summat dark.
I know, I pulled  I told you, I'm having  deliver milk round, didn't I, they're ever so good.
I'd only had it round about ten minutes and I thought  
Aren't you beautiful.
Yeah.
up there.
I was into  
Yeah, it's cold outside.
He ain't.
He won't
He's watching.
He's watching, ain't ya, George.
Oh, that Vick that Vick cough syrup's better than that bloody Veno's.
Yeah.
Yeah.
better than Veno's, 'cos Veno's like water.
I'm watching you.
But that's good.
I'm watching him flying about.
I watch him flying about.
You 
Last time he flew out, you were frightened.
Our Tom don't like it when he flies and yet, they're not bothered about him, that one, that's the one that bites.
He's more frightened of you than what you are of him, actually.
I know.
I know.
Georgie.
Hello chuck.
Georgie 
No, you'll deafen 'im.
Georgie.
Come out.
Hello bubby 
Bubby 
Our Bubbs.
Bubby.
What you're doing.
George.
Mind you, I think they were, going back to George and Norma again, I mean like, how she cuts his hair,style, and Colin'll say to me,
Oh, aye.
I mean, that, maybe that's the way they do it, ain't it, you know what I mean, they'll say, he sometimes  when you think of some of the things he does like that.
Yeah.
Mind you I'll tell you
That mohican cut.
I'll tell you summat.
On a  were it last Sunday, yeah it were last Sunday when I took  off, er Lisa always goes down to 'elp 'er, when, like what, you know when Eileen cut her finger, what did she do to her finger?
She did have it all bandaged up, she were she were cleaning toilet at bottom, and er, apparently there was a piece out of it and she didn't know, and she wiped round it, it sliced it, and it were bleeding like mad, well she came across to our 'ouse, and we weren't in, and then she went to Kevin's and she had she had it, but it, now it's just like a line now,
Yeah.
Yeah.
but should think it had gone deep.
Well, Lynn did her shift last Sunday morning, and when I went home, Lisa were home.
Yeah,
And she says to Lisa, er, when you get to end of shift, you you rule off, what you have sold, everything you've sold, but next shift starting  here's your daddy.
She said to Lisa, rule off when you've finished,
for June to starting, and then she said, did you rule off when I told ya.
Well, she went, like balling and shouting at the top of her voice, I mean, she talks to Terry like shit.
I mean, I shout and our  
Let your dad in Sasha.
But it's it's like, I don't think 
I don't think she can.
she'll be able to open it, Karen.
If I spoke to 'im, like Lisa spoke to Terry, I'd I'd gerra clip round bloody  
You would that.
She talks, she talks to him like 
Told me how she  talk to Terry.
I'm bloody authorised and no second thoughts.
No second thought at all.
cage.
Sh she shouts at the top of her voice at 'im.
Aye.
Is that the one 
Aye, he's on top of the cage.
They're right.
She's right.
Can I come in.
No wonder she's bundle of nerves.
She makes  and she's as green as them shelves.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mind you he is useless, Terry.
tell the truth, give you that.
My knees  I tell you what you can't, you know  
Yeah.
Oh deary me.
Terry's a good bit older than 'er.
Oh deary me.
I think he's twelve year older than 'er.
Do you know what's up with 'er.
It'll be on in a bit, Col.
You can't.
Oh.
Yeah, he does look old, don't her.
Yeah.
You should see what he's done to his hair.
Talking about George.
She's made 'im have.
He's had, skin head.
His hair's only about that long, all over.
What you mean, Col. 
Terry's
Yeah.
It don't look bad, actually.
Mind you, it were falling out that much everywhere else, he wouldn't know the difference, would he.
No.
But you know, but she talks to him like like, nobody.
Well, she'll say to him, put kettle on and butter some bread, and he'll sit there, and he's smoking, and he's continuing what he's doing, you know, and she'll go and do what she's doing, and she, have you flicking  arse-hole you to do, and, you know, any, it just goes in that ear, comes out 'ther ear, and just sallies on, and don't take blind bit of notice.
I mean, she's got a right squawky voice,
Oh, horrible.
'cos I always  when she talks she's squawking.
Oh, when she squeaks,
Yeah.
When she when she does get up a few octaves, I cringe.
 
And because it, she screeches don't she.
Yeah.
Come on,voice is like.
High pitch.
Yeah.
Well we're done for next week.
What the 
Oh saw.
What's saw young lad.
Chain saw I got.
Colin, you know anybody's that's got any white elusion at all.
We've er, just give two gallon away.
Oh.
Mind you, honestly, I wouldn't have put it on a dog kennel.
Honestly.
I only wanted it for a 
Yeah, honestly, I wouldn't put it on, if you were stopping a week.
She did all our garage round it, she's said it worth it, well, it's been there twelve months, she wouldn't put it on anywhere else.
She says it  
It probably wanted stirring.
Na, it was cheap.
What a load of rubbish.
What.
That priest trying to to take a curse off that   I've heard a lot of excuses, half are bloody mad.
Has he bought  as well.
Mm.
Oh he's showing he cares.
There's a big piece in there about  ain't there.
Ah, yeah.
Yeah, 'cos she's just altered it.
It's opening to public.
Yeah.
To civvies.
I mean, I couldn't  anyway.
Well, you can go, it's not er, it's
Well go up there for our Christmas Dinner,
Yeah, when you get your  
no rules on the general public, there wasn't a general public,
it was only collar and 
Tie.
Tie.
But now it's casual.
But now he's put a casual bar in as well.
He's opened another bar, he  when they went bust.
They 
Aye.
Doesn't want 
Said the menu w ,
 
the menu was second to none.
The meals were second to none, Albert.
Mm.
What.
Always on about it.
paper.
What you want paper for.
it's in middle.
No Peter wants  about them  finally closing his business down.
He's still obliged to 
No, I mean, the C G Whittakers.
I was working there other day.
Ha.
I said  people you.
I went to put back what he had somebody take out.
He were that  as well.
Well, you know, I didn't mean exactly the middle, go back 
Well, I don't bloody know, alright if you can say middle, you mean middle.
papers.
Stop shouting.
Shut up, you.
No.
Go on.
You shut up.
There's a picture of it going,
Many pictures in the  opposite.
There's a picture of it.
Your worse than Albert, but why don't you go to front of bloody paper.
You got your finger in it nearly.
Well, turn it over.
Wow,
Go on.
No, that's not it, not yet  ain't ya.
There it is.
Now why don't ya, why don't ya go to middle.
Page twenty-one.
Well, it's not far from middle.
Aye.
Sixty pages.
Well, it's only nine,blo stop flipping chopping hairs.
There now, you women.
You're women.
Nice boys don't holler.
It looks nice.
Where's the  paper of your 'ouse.
That's where  it can probably be next week or week after, I don't know.
I don't think, he he said, he said 
Lie down,lie down 
I don't think they've been to take the photographs yet 
He said, when he come, he said, he can't take a photograph just yet, 'cos it's erm, weather's not good enough.
What I'll do I'll send our Coleen in to pick 'er, er thingie up, you know.
They usually send it to ya.
Do they,
Yes.
Oh.
Mind, it is from  er,what they do is send them through the post, just check 'em, make sure everything's alright, ain't it.
Did they ask you what you were leaving, and things like that.
No.
No.
Oh. 
I I forget to ask him, to make it  
What.
I don't whether they do  or not.
What.
See a man about a dog.
Oh.
Time he got his scruffy 
If anybody comes June, just say, I have you been in touch with yet, and they'll say no, well, say well,
Sasha, do you mind.
You'll have to go with 
Mind you can always say to  you caught me at a bad time, you say, it's supposed to have appointment only, but just say, can you, is there any chance of you coming back.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You put appointment only on board.
But if you're not too bad, I mean, it don't really matter, does it.
No, don't say it on board, does it.
Yeah, they put it on board, if you if you having them by by appointment 
By appointment.
only, they put it on board.
Stick come in front of that.
Right, well.
Oh, shit, we're having 
It's nowt shit.
Take us as we find us,
Yeah.
if they don't, that's it.
They don't come and look at your 'ouse, they come have a look at what they can do with it, you now, have a look like, why you got extension and,
I don't mind beds being untidy and things like that.
No.
I mean, you don't look at, your not, who's sleeping in your bed.
When ours were, it was a right state when we looked at ours, but we still said we'd have it.
Mind, it's just that, it's worth nowt as we've  name it.
We'll get it right one day.
One day, Karen, one day.
When the moon comes up and it's in two.
When the 
You got two moons.
Yeah, all I wanted was go in and, now we're bankrupt and we're nowt where we are.
If we were well off we could get it done.
You'd be employing, you'd be employing builders to come in and do it for you.
Yeah, that's what I said, it'd be nice, wannit.
It would.
your half of next door to get some 
Remember, remember, if you want taking anywhere, it's er, is it four pound ten an hour  chauffeurs.
Yeah.
What I mean you have to put petrol in, I mean, it doesn't  
No, you have to put petrol in.
Do you hell, not at four pound an hour.
Walk.
One fifty an hour, driving.
Ain't it four fifty an hour  chauffeuring, and he puts petrol in, and taxes and insures car.
Bugger off.
Back of the bloody van.
You can't go in van with ya, with ya suit on, and  
Oh, you've got to, you go play your part.
You got to have a chauffeur, you'll have to buy me a hat  you'll have to buy me a hat  you'll have to make it worth me while coming off dole at forty pound a week.
Yeah.
You paying me in 'and, and Dennis is paying me in 'and and I'll a er, thousand pound a week, the way that  I keep getting these job offers.
Back-handers.
Anticipation obligations.
The only trouble is they're only offers.
What's happening down here, then, didn't you hear no more about when you finish then, down here at 
No.
Only some bad  things, what I've supposed to have done, or what I'm not supposed to have done.
But 
Who cares over it.
some money out of it, I took him to court.
proven.
Oh.
But you can't do it without money.
No, that legal aid don't go far 
Legal aid, won't enter enter entertain it.
Not for owt like that.
No, I'm afraid 
You see, 'cos you weren't actually employed, you see, 'cos you say,
No.
you couldn't really take him to a tribunal could you, 'cos ya 
No, I weren't employed.
any money to take him to a tribunal.
Well, I made my, I made it plain that er, at the training centre, you know, I says, I says to em, I said er, in my opinion, I says, he doesn't want, he don't want to kn , he he don't want to know.
Oy, you.
He says any anything what goes wrong, he says, you automatically get blamed for.
I told you.
He says, well, it's your job not to let it go wrong, I said, I didn't let it go wrong.
I said, but other people let it go wrong and they got away with it.
Look what I found.
I've just called for her money.
Corrinne's money.
I've,ju I paid her last, yesterday.
Did you?
Yeah.
Well she never bloody said nowt!
Yeah.
Oh!
Paid her yesterday Albert.
That means we can't bloody get no cough mixture while she gets home.
You ain't give her  
No.
Well  well I'll look down our house.
Yeah.
Never mind.
I'll have to, I'll have to go home and see where she's put it.
Yeah.
I give it to her last night she, when she left here.
Oh she's really poorly is June!
She's been up erm, with it at night.
She were bad on Friday.
She was!
She were coughing like mad!
I wanted her to have  complete weekend in bed.
Well I, I took bad yesterday, I were, I were in bed nearly all day yesterday.
And I was worse  
I couldn't move!
last night.
Bloody woke the dog when I went past!
Who?
Oh!
Da 
Here.
dogs outside?
Yeah.
Yes.
But er  I sa I said look I said, you're not doing yourself any favours by going to work, and I says, and I don't  mind you having day off.
No you can't when you're bad.
You bloody can't!
No, no, she we but she were te Friday she was terrible!
Looked ill 
Well she's 
like as well, you know.
she's worse this morning.
She's worse.
She's not been  asleep a minute all night!
No, that's it.
So she'll to stay in bed for a  
Course, I were ba I weren't very well yesterday so I said  I'm not very well, but I had  pains as well, back pain and all  all 
Yeah.
all kinds of pains this is.
I says, no, I said I'm gonna stop in bed today.
So I stopped in bed now I, I'm better, well
No, that's only way you'll throw it off.
Yeah.
I'm a bit better but I've had to get out this morning to let  June stay in !
Yeah.
Well I say, she were terrible on Friday, I know.
Right then, I'll get off home and er  see what's what.
Alright.
But she never said.
She never bloody said!
Cos she always does bugger you know!
The tight bugger!
No, she's in bed.
Is she bad?
Oh dear!
Yep!
Can you lend me a fiver while our Corrinne comes home?
Mm.
I suppose so.
She's er  no we lent our Corrinne our money
Yeah.
to get her tax  she got paid yesterday
Mm.
and she didn't, she hasn't paid us it back.
So, we're, we're skint and I want to go and get some
Yeah.
stuff for her.
I were in bed yesterday.
I know!
Oh dear!
She said.
I couldn't, I had pains all over place!
I couldn't speak!
Couldn't  do erm, anything, I was surprised.
Just give her some, bit of these.
No I've got some, I've got some better than them.
Well they're ever so good if you've got 
Ah!
It, they're only  Solphadeine them.
Mine's Cocod Cocodamol.
Mm.
They're a bit stronger than them.
Well I thought there must be something, because I thought oh, she must have had to go in early with her not coming in.
No.
No.
She's in bed.
I told her to stay in there as well.
Yes.
Mm mm.
You alright?
I know she were coughing her guts out here!
I know!
Er,gi I've done that you know, when I were younger and I'd  strained a heart muscle!
Oh!
Mm.
I couldn't lie down for five weeks!
I started coughing yesterday and I, that were it!
You should have got her a drop of brandy, brandy or whisky Albert.
Ah!
It's no good them grandma.
You don't know.
A little drop of whisky does you good.
 
I can manage without it.
I don't drink.
I like a bit of brandy!
I'm still coughing like, but not as bad.
Cos I said to her get some of that cough stuff  cos I've only took about three times this .
What Venos?
Ah!
But it's 
Yeah.
not a tickly cough she's got  it's a chesty cough.
And it's dear!
It were one 
I know!
sixty five!
Well I'm gonna get some for her.
Well I paid er  seventy five pence for twelve of them er  Anadin!
Well what you buying Anadin for when you've got  Solphadeines 
I know, that was before I'd started those.
Oh!
That same.
They're about the same.
And they keep telling me it's cheaper to buy it.
It looks like it dunnit?
It isn't them.
No.
If you went to buy them 
don't have on prescription now.
Yeah, you can buy any tablet off  off prescription.
Yeah you're right.
Any tablet.
There's only the  the really
Mm mm.
you know.
All pain killers you can get  cheap.
Well, they're not cheap, they're more e sometimes they're more expensive  to buy.
But them Cocodamol things what I take
She  cigs though, but it's them bloody cigs she's smoking!
She smokes blue ones!
I thought you both smoked the red?
No.
No, blue.
I don't smoke.
She only smokes red when she's got none.
It's .
She smokes mine.
I get a cough sometimes I'll  to them as well.
She went through nearly forty fags yesterday!
Oh eh!
On her own.
Cos I had three all day.
But I was saying, but it's, when she used to lie in here Albert.
Mm.
I've smoked more while I've been like this 
Ah but 
than ever I've done!
That's all 
Oh!
I'm doing is smoking and eating.
Well you shouldn't!
I know.
Should watch that clock and say I'll have one every two hours.
And cut them down by twenty a day.
Yeah.
Ooh!
I don't know what I'd do if I smoked as many as them!
Cor!
Have you a smoke now?
Oh yeah, I've got some.
I don't carry them about with me though.
Like you!
That's right.
Yeah.
Well I never used to take mine down 
Oh!
town .
Yeah.
Only if it's nice, you know, it's summer, I used to go and sit in garden  with dog.
But when 
And it 
and cos of like this haven't had, took them down, I'd been down there three or 
 
hours.
Lot better with se bed than it is settee.
Yeah.
Cos you go down that way Albert.
Yeah.
Mm.
Never were any good for sleeping on that!
Now you kno if my arm touched the back it would start it off.
Yeah.
Least little thing, even if 
You shouldn't be lifting it up and putting it at back of your head!
Even the  I crumple it up like that
Mm.
and it irritates.
You shouldn't have the arm up, you should have it down!
No.
Resting it.
Yeah, you're going to your hospital tomorrow are you ?
Yes.
The appointment's for nine.
It says it could be thirty minutes or half an hour on that one.
Well thirty minutes is half an hour ma!
Er,thi thirty or sixty I mean.
Yeah, don't worry about it.
Half an hour or an hour.
Yeah.
Appointment's usually half an hour.
So as you can 
Well 
wait.
You can wait.
if you get straight in.
The er , injection.
Ah!
He's not  
That, so that it's painless.
I shouldn't think they'll give you an injection.
No.
They didn't last time did they?
No I was saying to Carol  I hope tomorrow's the last.
She, you don't know there might be a letter, you need .
Yeah.
No wonder he's pushing it through doors he don't want to come within gate.
I hope they get to bottom of it.
Well 
I'm fed up with lying .
I can get up now, even to go to bunker and upstairs and
Aye.
It'll be right.
wash pots with my one hand!
Then I'll, probably have to end up  and wash up .
Mm.
Right, I'll get off to shop and get her the stuff what she wants, and make her her dinner.
She wants a tin of soup she says.
Well      Right.
I'll see you later!
See you Albert.
Nowt you want is there?
No
While I'm here.
Margaret's just doing some shopping for .
Fair enough.
See you later then!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Ta-ta!
Ta-ta!
Any cough mixture?
Coffee?
Cough mixture?
Oh!
It's over here love.
Oh!
We don't have it .
Don't you?
Eh up!
You alright?
Are you alri yes.
Are you?
Ooh!
Champion!
Champion!
Ta love!
And er  some cough mixture then.
Which one do you want?
Have you, have you got Venos?
Yes.
For dry or chesty cough?
Er, not Ven not Veno , er  Vic?
Vic, yeah.
Yes we have.
Chesty.
And I'm in bed yesterday, and she's in bed today!
Oh dear!
Going through it!
Tall size that one?
That'll do it, yeah.
Tammy's not well.
Is she got it and all?
Mm!
Yeah.
Yeah, she, she's down at Bath.
Ooh!
She's full of it!
She's been like it all weekend I think.
Two pounds forty one love.
It er  it comes on you all at once!
Oh it does!
Just hits you.
You know , you
Yeah.
whoop!
And yo 
I was right as rain other day, and then
And then  
yesterday I were in bed all day I couldn't move!
Yeah?
And yet today I'm
Yeah.
hundred percent better.
Yeah.
Queer int it?
Mm.
Mm.
That's how it goes though.
See you later!
Tarrah love!
Tarrah!
I thought you were asleep love.
I'll leave you alone, let you get some sleep.
Do you want  yeah I'll leave you alone while you can get sleep if you want.
Or do you want some company?
Come and sit up here now.
I'll sit up here now.
Sit up and keep you company, no problem.
I'll take my shoes off.
What you watching?
Nothing really.
I'm just staring .
Mm.
Are they going and er
I didn't go in June with being full of cold, I just  knocked on door and that  got him out.
I rang him up before I went down and said I wouldn't be going in, I said I'll just  drop it off for you I says, cos er  there's me and June full of cold, it's no good letting Ben get it is it?
So  I didn't stop.
Mm.
Yeah.
Her mother's in hospital.
And Terry's took her dad  through to hospital cos they put her on oxygen because .
And his other  won't go.
But she was all  Terry's Liz were going mad cos she'd through to garage.
And then, cos they've got car but  well nobody took after Alan.
And I said, and what's up with me he said?
She said, well what's up with me?
He, she said I daren't leave them together two minutes she said our Liza'll play hell out of our Alan!
She said, she was standing on her face yesterday!
So  it's like   .
You troubles!
What does Val want?
Eh?
What did Val want?
Well?
Oh he's a   Oh!
D'ya owt  she got nowt else to say then?
No.
Colin dropped a card off.
And it's Eileen's anniversary as well today.
Oh bugger Eileen!
I said there's no, no way I can get out and get her card or a card or erm
By the time you've finished buying cards for everybody June, you may as well buy one every day of week!
And I , it's better than them round there, they even sent one another a frigging Christmas card!
Who?
Laura and Matt.
Oh!
Well, aye.
You're not on her Christmas list yet that were all.
Aha.
I didn't get one, anything for her.
They probably don't believe in it June!
And it's  What's ?
Mm mm!
What's those?
Oh!
Is it  young, oh  Young Doctors?
Fourth of February  eight thirty  A M.
I'll give you some milk cat, but that's all you're having  till I get back.
I'm in a hurry.
Here.
Here!
There!
Make that do!
It's gonna really pour!
You what?
I'm not going yet to
Oh oh !
Oh ah !
I'll have today off.
You're not going today are you not?
No.
I'm gonna  have today off to make sure it
And get yourself back to bed then for the day.
then maybe
I could've gone to hospital
No!
on my own if you 
You'd be there an hour love, it's a long time to sit by yourself.
Mm.
I know what it's like in hospital, it's boring!
As I said it could be a thirty or a sixty minute job.
Yeah, but given owt
It's either that one, but I'd have thought they would have .
I don't think so.
It's only a scab.
Cos  that's whatsername's erm  Kenny  said  that they might give you an injection.
They probably put  dye or something through to  send it aro cos it's three dimensional.
Oh!
Is it?
Yeah.
Oh well.
It's done by computer.
Have they put dye in when they want to sca find the
Ah!
He said 
the blood
well you see 
if your blood's circulating.
whatsername said  he  they're not supposed to be looking for a tumour, although that's what they could be looking for.
Well she said  this scan'll tell whether it's something like rheumatoid arthritis  fibrositis, or whether it's pulled muscles or anything like that.
I wonder if they'll give me one on my back while I'm there?
Mm mm!
Mm.
Hello Bobby!
Hello Bobby!
Hello June!
Bugger June!
Hello Bobby!
Come on then!
Hello!
I can see you!
Hello!
Have you been a ?
Bob!
You little scraggy little !
Hello Bob!
Got a scrawny neck!
Come on then.
Hello Bobby!
Don't squawk!
No!
No!
Hello George!
That's enough Bob!
That's enough!
I've set him off now ain't I?
Well you done summat to him!
Come on Benjy!
Outside!
Before I, we go out.
Come on!
Come on!
Benjy!
Are you going out?
Come on then!
Come on Benny!
Come on!
Come on!
Come on!
Mm.
Oh dear!
It's a lot clearer out there this morning.
Yeah.
Bit of a wind blowing and all!
Oh I hate this!
What you doing?
We're going out!
I'll have them tools out now.
Oh!
Only a .
Ah!
But where, the big'un?
Oh I dunno.
Well you int outside.
Oh he's here!
Can't see him.
He's upstairs waiting.
Right!
I'll go and get the car and then you  are you ready, or what?
No, but the cat's coming in.
It's only twenty past.
It's no good waiting too long cos you know how your mam panics.
She'll be there a couple of minutes before.
Aye.
It's clear today.
Not foggy.
Hello Bobby!
Come on!
Hello Bobby!
Hello Bobby!
Bobby !
Morning Bobby!
Give me a kiss then!
Give us a kiss!
You're off again aren't you?
Eh?
You're off again!
Pack it in!
Hello!
Hello!
Hello!
Hello!
Shut up George!
You'll have that soft bugger doing it!
Give over!
That's enough Bob!
Ooh!
Heck!
Goes through you dunnit?
Yeah.
Excited.
Hello George.
Give us a kiss.
Blow June a kiss.
George!
Bobby!
George!
Oh!
George.
D'ya want your head scratching do you?
Ah!
Have you got some money on you love?
Yeah I've  I fetched it all in case we we we remembered summat.
Right, I'll go and get the car.
Better fix them up hadn't I?
I know it's
Ah!
Are you ready?
That's why he'll join you over  I mean, he'll be leaving it on to get ready to go
Yeah.
It'll be out if we  when we get back.
Can I take paper with me?
Yeah.
It'll give me summat to read.
I'll fetch it back.
Fergie's amazing letter!
With this bloke.
Yeah.
Hmm!
She don't write very well does she?
No.
Aye.
Bloody !
They got more in there than bloody Blackpool tower!
In tha hasn't the outhouse next door?
What you mean them  security lights?
No.
That white  .
They've got erm  they've got like  wall lights like ours but with white balls on
You know like .
and there's three on then they've got a light on outside of outhouse.
When I come  Sunday night they were all lit up!
It were 
Mm.
like Blackpool tower!
I would have known .
Cor!
I think they're moving again there.
Are they?
Well, I saw them talking to her  they were on about moving away.
Oh!
To another  place?
Yes.
You know, to that, that big  about sixty pounds!
Yeah, but they do get moved about a bit.
Yeah.
You know.
I bet they do.
I mean, many years when I 
 
applied for it  they wanted er, they said are you prepared to go to any prison at er  at any notice?
One of the reason you get took on, I mean, it were only a borstal when he went weren't it?
Yeah.
Hello!
Jack is having forecourt painted.
Oh!
He's having it pa mind you  I wouldn't have bothered.
That dirty red, white and blue!
They ain't ha 
they're not three D colours are they?
Well he's got a three D station.
Or are they?
Oh yeah!
Thing is, no,yo you're determined on Saturday.
Oh!
Look at traffic here!
Maybe you should have gone other bloody way!
Can understand these houses going quick, they're a lot nicer aren't they?
Look at this one.
Yeah.
These are only single.
They're not popular are they?
No.
Dining room too.
Well Raymond  bought one up Myrtle Road, and he only paid twenty three quid for it and she left all furniture and everything!
Mm mm!
Twenty three quid?
Er er, twenty three thousand.
I were gonna say!
Twenty three thousand, and she left all carpets, furniture  curtains and everything and all he had to do was just move in.
 

I suppose it's lot of money when you reckon it up into today's value.
Anyway, when I first wanted to buy us own house when we first got married we were talking twelve  how much?
Five thousand.
Five thousand.
And that's for these up here.
And that was a lot of money.
Mind you, it was when you only got fifteen quid a week.
Hard labour.
Okay?
Right.
We're off to see the wizard !
Mm!
petrol.
Eh?
The petrol exploded 
What?
into that .
It was  by petrol you get a ticket somebody was .
Oh!
It's same as Michael?
They've got it on haven't they?
No, it .
Well 
There goes .
Well he's out.
Is that Mr  ?
I, dee da dee dee da dee  dee da dee dee dee .
Nowt in, nowt good in paper.
Ah?
La da dee dee .
There's some traffic on this road int there?
Yeah.
Crikey!
Just look at it!
Well I
La da dee dee da dee .
Must have been raining last night.
It was pouring.
Chucking it down ma!
Was it?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It were raining at five o'clock this morning.
And I went to bed about twenty past ten .
It were raining last night at  what time did we go?
Won't 
About 
walk to them .
Oh God!
Look at this!
Another fine mess he's got into.
Ha!
Then there's  fog speeders.
It weren't late when our Corrinne come upstairs and she said it was belting down.
Must have been about  half past nine.
It's either broke down or it's been an accident because there's three cars there not just one or two.
One at either side of road!
They had bonnet up though.
We'll have to get some plaster June for that wall.
Yeah.
Where's best place to get some from?
Mind you, we'll go buy some and your Corrinne'll be down with half a bag or summat daft like that!
That's what I call  an idle  woman!
Just getting paid for nowt!
there with your table.
Bloody  how they, what the hell do they want a lollipop lady on  a zebra co 
Yeah.
pelican crossing though!
Yeah, but with all the  kids crossing to other side like.
It's a total waste of money!
And there int one on this one here and it's nearest to school!
No, but they're bloody grown up children in there.
All go to 
 
same school don't they?
No!
That's  Hill, that's the equivalent to Hatfield High that one.
Is it?
A they're all fourteen to eighteen year olds in that school.
Hunger Hill.
I wonder why they call it Hunger Hill ma?
Eh?
I wonder why they call  Hunger Hill?
Oh!
Oh!
 
They're doing it on there look!
Eh?
on there.
I said .
It'll probably be whatsername's June!
What they call him?
Him who's er  
Mm.
It wouldn't surprise me now you know !
It wouldn't surprise me at all.
Cos you do you've not been anywhere unless you've been made bankrupt in this place round here.
Come on!
Where you going mate?
Bloody hell!
The traffic!
That's what I say it's er  bad time int it between 
Mm.
half past eight and nine?
Especially when it's that foggy.
La la tee tee !
Rover club.
Reading Bailey
It's who?
Reading Bailey.
This time they're out in, in town int they?
Selling bloody second hand motor bikes!
The Baileys.
They're hopeless!
La la da dee dee da dee .
Eight fifty one.
I can't understand  why this part of Doncaster is forty mile an hour!
Can you?
Mm mm.
Well you're taking it across there.
This is a built up area int it?
Houses on both sides of 
It's wide.
road.
It's a wide road.
These houses, they really ought to be there.
But that don't make it, and it's  it's still a built up area.
I mean, they make it thirty and people will travel at forty anyhow.
Nine times out of ten.
Is it X-Ray department scan department?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I'm not wrong.
I'm right.
Yeah.
Probably be about fi five foot seven won't you, or summat?
That's 
Eh?
You're probably about five foot seven aren't you?
What does Sarah like?
Said it's between thirty and six minutes.
Eh?
Thirty minutes !
Between thirty and sixty minutes.
Oh that's good!
And nothing to eat or drink four hours before your appointment tonight.
If you are coming from home wear loose clothing.
Well what do they expect you to do?
Put down bloody !
You may have an injection normally.
Eh?
You may have an injection .
Yeah,tha I think that's er  the  whatsername pre type
Yeah, but it says 
them 
you may have a  you may have to have injection but it's painless.
Oh!
I don't think it'll it be painful.
They all are aren't they?
Eh?
This one was saying, it'll be quicker to go in front they say now or
Yeah but    if you get in there yo you won't get out  I'll drop you in there.
I'll see if I can straight back into it there.
I would have co thought it'd be better here.
Squeeze in there.
Come on!
Oh heck!
I know.
Horrible!
And  when he gets the other stuff they give you that big bloody beaker full of it!
Our Dawn told me he's had to go and wait for that bloody pregnancy scan.
Meant to have  that water.
It took her ages!
She had to drink a pint of water.
I thought she were never gonna, I said to her for goodness sake, drink it!
Our Dawn thinks she's at a tea party !
Eh?
Our Dawn thinks she's going just for a tea party  when they to ask her to drink owt she just takes her time and drinks it.
How d'ya do this?
Pull i hold the other end and pull it.
Is that Margaret  and er
Yeah.
Well
Oh all you gotta do is to hold that white, hold both ends of it and pull it, it'll come out.
No, I haven't got bloody strength Albert!
It is, to join it to that.
I feel as if they're gonna put me in a bag and shake me up.
And just I went and got  cup of tea and I were a lot better.
Think you bloody would!
That's probably what it is lifting glass up  too much.
Oh!
See what my stars say.
, they're all bugger all Albert!
Any time you get any money is when you work for it!
Ha!
It says  no doubt employers  employers  or other individuals will keep on pestering you, and probably add insult to injury, take heart.
Your ruler Venus is  also sparkling away in the heavens today .
Look what you're doing!
Never mind reading the bloody paper while you hold the cup!
What?
If you held the cup and let me get hold of handle I'd have been alright.
Go back to bed.
I bet you run up and down stairs for all the day.
Mhm.
Do you like the nice biscuits?
I get them all the 
Yeah!
time just,
They're lovely!
just like that.
They're very nice!
They're only ninety nine P them June!
When I saw them, I thought I might get one every week.
And if you want them with chocolate on one side they're one thirty nine.
Mm!
I said 
Big deal!
about  five .
Mm.
And er, the doctors were giving me them tablets.
I were going through one of them a week!
Shall we wander down and get one?
Eh?
I says,
Mm!
go down and get one.
Well, she fetched me another one on Monday.
So I've took them in  now.
They're quite crispy and
Yeah!
They are nice!
Lesley's found them sli er too sweet for her.
Mm.
Because 
I think they've got a bloody cheek, you know, asking for a car park fee when yo si from the  you've got 
All it is is to go towards the infirmary you know.
Nobody's benefiting er, benefiting 
No.
by it.
Could do for some charity.
It's not for council.
Yeah, but, I mean to say  if you don't pay it they clamp you.
Then you've got a twenty 
That's  
pound fine to pay if they 
Yeah.
clamp you.
Well that's if they clamp you that's what they do 
The thing is 
isn't it?
people go in and park in there all day  and you're not supposed to.
It's to save people going in and out.
Well we know.
But unawares  you could, they can put on, same as they've done  yo with your mam  er, up to an hour.
That hour can go into two and three bloody 
Yeah!
hours!
Well I heard what that bloke said to you last time when I went before, don't worry, once you've paid for it  once you've paid it  they'll sort it out from there.
Ooh!
The thing is June  if it puts you to some inconvenience then don't it?
Of going and saying you've clamped my car and who do you 
Ah!
That's it.
and that chap's never there!
If we had a perfect world we'd be all alright.
And they're always collecting for babies  unit.
Oh aye!
Just like now.
Well they are on baby unit.
Yes.
They are  
That'll be that's all that's collecting for that er  what do they call it?
Them that come round and give you exercises.
Yeah.
Physio?
Mm.
Yeah.
They're always coming, that's right.
Well I don't mind owt like that for a good cause June.
Mother, mind you don't fall off edge of that bed!
No.
It's the way I can get ease June, I'm eased when this .
In that room where my mam were getting changed there were one of them machines, you know what you blow into Alb?
Yeah, but I didn't.
Mm.
Yeah.
There were two o there's always two no matter where you go, there was two in that room they had to fetch me out.
There were another 
Yeah.
one in there.
Bloody heck!
I'm gonna have another day off work and then I'll have to have bath tonight.
Eh?
Er, I'm gonna have another day off work.
I don't blame you.
If you can afford it.
Well I can't afford it mother!
But, if I go back  and it's not cleared up  it might ruddy come back again!
You might get it .
I don't think so.
It's more my chest than  than if it's anything else.
That's why  June.
done about a month ago where it comes up.
Oh!
Urgh!
I've stopped smoking I have like.
Eh?
I don't suppose the smoking helps!
She kept getting a bad throat.
Yeah.
Said don't it bother you?
She said, no, Des smokes and  you should have one as well.
Well I mean, it's not the warmest of places.
I if I'd have been at Jacksons I, I'd have gone back today.
Excuse me.
But I'm not going out  with a bloody cold like this!
I never have no time off anyway.
He can manage.
He can manage .
taking dog for a walk.
Yeah, he works for er  what do you call them?
Three D Lines.
There's 
June 
about five of them all with the same name?
Yeah.
Him and er
Ian  works at place.
Mm.
June.
The joke here  little girl on a beach says, mum, if I eat enough silicone chips will it increase  my bust size ?
Shh shoo shoo, sha sha.
Our Betty were looking for biscuits and thought when they come the other day  but I didn't buy any.
I'd opened the fridge door and our Corrinne had got about that much in bottom of bottle and she spotted it.
Should have said no,Ju I had three in there  but  our Corrinne had got some.
Claire had fetched one and then our Corrinne fetched the other two and there's that much in.
She'd not seen them.
In between drier and
Ha!
fridge.
Cos I got some last night.
Tried to make, but I threw it out  there were none of that sparkle left in it.
Yeah.
It loses it's fizz dunnit?
Mm!
I must have thought  this morning.
It were only his .
I wonder they don't want him cos they paying for their own won't they?
Yeah.
They don't seem to be doing owt to it, do they?
Well, what you buy is a little cleared out don't they?
And, they do get used to one bloke.
Who?
Next door's?
Yes.
Mm.
Been taking it  for a week or so now!
Mm.
Rubbish.
Wanna read it?
Well it were lovely bike erm, Joanna sold!
I know.
His mam had run it out from top to 
It was.
bottom.
It was Maggie's.
Hello.
And , you couldn't blame her June cos they were only there two years.
She were pregnant when she came down  she'd nothing when .
 
So I mean, you can't blame her.
And, he used to lean over bloody fence while she were digging garden and she were pregnant.
He's a big fat lump!
Typical her like.
Oh!
I saw him looking at her, you know, when  
 
He had a petrol account at Jacksons.
He has?
Yeah.
He gives him a petrol account and then he sa he's started  in the building.
Well that's a better way int it?
I wouldn't call that lo I wouldn't call that a petrol account.
That's paying for his petrol before he gets it.
A good idea.
That's the time we go to  time 
Well 
of the week innit?
Only wanted a couple weeks.
What?
What?
He keeps getting two hundred pound to pay for his petrol.
He must do some motoring then!
He   
No, and you're not always sure if you're gonna get bloody 
What yo 
wages or not?
What you talking about, fifty gallon?
Cos he's  
As near as damn it!
Well, about forty eight.
Forty eight, yeah.
His other brother drives for them er, can't remember what they're called.
Oh!
Oh!
I know who you mean.
Cleaners.
Yeah.
Be awful if 
I should say forty 
Yes!
nine.
i=If Jacksons, or, for here though.
How much is Jacksons?
Two pound
Two six.
Two pound six pence.
Yeah, two sixty nine.
And  
It's near enough fifty gallon June as damn it int it?
Yeah.
We're alright for, to have petrol they haven't had to put it up for  
Yes.
It'll go up again when budget comes in as
Oh aye!
It'll go up with a bang I think!
When's that?
Next month?
No.
April int it?
No I think it's March time.
They were on about March.
Never!
Mm.
They always budget for April.
Not unless he's putting a mini-budget in.
Before election.
To see how good he is to the people.
Mm.
Grand job!
Ha!
You can bet he puts another two and half percent on V A T.
As daft as hell!
I wanted her to get me some chocolate.
I know, they're horrible!
Cos our Corrinne must have fetched me some drinking chocolate she fetched me.
Mind, I'm not bothered but  if you get them little'uns they last no time do they?
No.
And our Margaret fetched me a big tin of Ovaltine.
You're using too much water ma.
I know.
I like a lot.
Cos I don't drink a lot of water like.
Mm.
The only time I'll drink water is owt like this  or if I've  one of them Mister Softee cornets.
You're only supposed to use a small amount of 
Yes.
water.
But I'll  .
Yeah.
We've not been long here really have we?
You were only half an hour.
Eh?
You were only half an hour.
I know.
Cos she says er  she fetched the blanket cos it were cold in there she says I'll cover you up
It always is.
and I'll go and see doctor see  we want to .
And she came back about five minutes after she went and you can call me .
He hadn't fetched that key back for garage has he?
No, I told her.
I see her over at Corrinne's.
Oh dear !
What's shift's  what shift's Pete on this week then?
Eh?
What shift's Pete on?
I think he's on early.
I think you told me.
Oh!
He were on er, he were on evenings last week weren't he?
He would be.
Yeah, well she went back to school then.
He is now it's .
To that thing last week, first day.
Well that week I phoned him.
Week before.
Course, he wanted to know if we'd got a video we could lend him.
Eh?
He wanted to know if we vi borrow one of our videos.
Well she's had another  and that's not very nice will they?
She will when they do.
Yeah.
I'm not sure.
Well, somebody said she were having  again, I thought she were having them like .
Mind you, Corrinne had hers removed.
Has she?
The only trouble with plastic 
Well she is like mine but just the one window opens down side, you know.
only trouble with plastic it sweats like hell!
Mm mm!
That's what they're putting in council bungalows now Ale houses.
With them keys on.
Oh!
If you're gonna have double glazing going to that exte that expense, you may as well get the aluminium and
I know, council's put them up with the  
There's no problem with them then.
Cos them  plastic things, they do split.
And the nature goes out of plastic.
Cos that's what Margaret  stopped paying her  paying for them didn't she June?
Don't know.
She wouldn't pay for them because th the plastic and all that started splitting and
Well, you could go in to shop to buy them don't you?
Yeah.
A glazing shop.
Yeah.
Could go in some time or other.
Our John never come down you know!
It's a good job we're at church 
No?
this, this Sunday.
Well he, if he co if he'd have come down my wa he come down at eight or nine o'clock  the shops would have been shut.
And he goes to that beer up at er   Cross Brampt Chase 
Mm.
That's where he gets all his beer from.
He spends, all, all his money on .
Well ta tha that little shop?
Yeah.
Across from Chase.
You know, at  Ashfield Lane 
Yeah.
just round the Ashfield Common.
Yeah.
He always goes there.
Oh well .
I want a little loaf.
Mm?
I say, I want a little loaf  .
What, brown?
No white.
I've  that .
Always .
D'ya want it for your dinner love?
That Frenchy stuff.
If they've not got soft .
No mat if you want it for your dinner here  better he goes now the  
Yeah.
I know.
Yeah.
I wonder if they've got a house, Alan?
Have you seen him to ask him, like, June?
He's got one down Old Road.
Has he?
Mm.
It's only a single one.
Oh!
It'll do him for now.
Eh?
It'll do him for now.
Yeah.
But somebody with four bloody kids in a  in a so 
In a single house.
single house!
Yeah.
Then they give somebody like her  that single parent girl, Vera, a bloody big double house!
Oh!
That's it isn't it?
Well that's typical council that int it?
All they, all they know is it's an house.
Is there four kids there or five?
Er  four.
Four.
But she's not that old is she?
No.
No.
Three lads  one lass.
Cos when he had that  first kid, you know, when he moved here  and I were asking    be nice if you'd had a  a girl.
How many kids did he have when moved here?
Two.
Cos she were pregnant when she moved here.
Mm.
She says, I'm not bothered what it is as long as it's got  all its fingers there.
Mind you, they're hardy.
I mean  
He said , if I have a football team, I'm not bothered.
No  especially when you're a dole.
It pays when you're on dole ma.
And it's cheaper by the dozen.
And, I mean, if if he's working and he gets a low wage he'll be able to get Family Income Support.
Yeah, he would.
I don't think it's worth the hassle though.
Well  just don't  
Having house full of kids and  being on dole.
I said, well some people don't bother.
Don't have kids.
Well, yeah, some people thrive on it.
I mean, look at them next door, twelve of the buggers!
Old Ted!
But they're all  well mannered kids and 
Yeah.
and they're all 
Oh!
Aye.
Yeah, they're brought up right.
you know .
One thing that was missing   !
I hope it's like they bloody said!
Cos, Claire was saying when  they went, they went, they'd been to Wales, France, and Scotland while they've been here  he said,.
They were having a right ding-dong other day!
 
Weren't they?
You know, I were saying  
Somebody were a having a right ding-dong other day when we were here.
They were a having a right ding-dong other day!
I know.
I couldn't hear them.
that's why I locked that door cos I don't know 
Mm.
that anybody's coming in until this come from.
Cos I thought about getting a glass and sitting here with glass at  the front door !
Well I told you it was her, that daughter.
Were it his daughter?
The one from Australia.
Yeah.
She weren't half giving it him!
And I thought they called her   er  he's from Scotland June, cos 
Yeah.
his parents.
They've been twice to Scotland, but no well they went there when they come from Australia, instead of coming straight here.
These three  just come and then they went to Wales.
And  they went to France for holiday.
They go back a month today.
Is it seventh, they're going back?
No, it's fourth today.
Mind you, that's what our Brian did weren't it?
They came here.
That's what Brian did.
And they went to America, then came back.
It's Tuesday!
I'm thinking it's Friday.
It's Tuesday today.
Mm.
They said it were cheaper to come here, then fly from here to, to America than what it was to go from America, from Australia to America!
It surprised me that!
I think , there's the  there's five of them.
She's three lasses June, there's him and her, that's five.
Well there's only been  and when we will get  
What's  tired all week then?
It were that black i er  Capri.
And one that come from abroad.
Is it  or not?
It's  went to Australia.
Mm.
He's always trying to get our Terry to go out with us.
Stanley's the one that married   daughter..
Mm.
It wants to stay and get that 
There's an awful lot it were a windy night!
I prefer wind to blinking fog!
Any day of week.
I think it's the fog what gives you all chest complaints on quiet.
Terrible this smog innit?
Cor!
We've had some this last  few week.
Mind, got your .
Been using  that thing  that we bought.
Saunas are no good!
They only get your skin clean ma.
That's all they're designed to do.
Well one of them Whirlpools with water spilling out.
We've got one.
Yeah, but  it's .
You're not getting owt till I get a new suit!
New what?
Suit .
A suit?
You'll have to wait while our Corrinne gets paid now.
 
Bloody hell!
I'll say!
I don't think she's gonna get a job and get herself a flat.
You've no chance!
You're not going to push her out are you?
Mother!
You don't have to live with her!
And she nearly got her bloody marching 
But you never know 
last night!
you never know, when I do, yous will be left on your own.
Well  so what!
If we're left on our own, we're left on our own and that's it!
We've kept her for bloody eighteen years!
And what, what, what 
Well you'll be saying you can keep her for another eighteen.
and what bloody 
Right!
thanks do you get!
She pigged off, left us with no bloody money!
She rang me up to say she'd be home.
I said to her you've left wi with no money, your dad can't get no bread or anything.
I'll be home in a bit.
She did, she come home at pigging eight o'clock!
She went and picked our Kia up and went back to Bill's.
Then she's wondering 
She's so thoughtless!
then she's saying where is everybody 
 
when she comes and we're both in pigging bed!
Yeah I know, but .
I know, but we shouldn't have to borrow mother when  I had to get back, to borrow my wages off Jes to get her tax for her car  which left us with no money!
Jes  paid her on Sunday and instead of telling us how they went round for her wages yesterday  and he'd already paid her, and she'd gone to school with money in her car!
I mean, what if her car had of been broke into.
Yeah!
You know, I mean
Well, it's same as me lately, I've got my pension book laid on there with my money in and my purse in there.
Yeah but you're already here ma.
You know, I mean, you  but I mean  Ford Escorts  are easiest thing in the world to drive 
Oh yeah!
away.
She just don't think, our Corrinne.
I'll be getting rise.
Ooh!
I get two pounds from work, rise.
I've just had a rise on mine.
Just about.
Where?
On my pension!
Oh!
On your pension.
You should be getting 
Your state pension.
rise on your social.
Ha!
Yeah, cos I've got one on my pension 
If I get as much as I get 
June
on social,as what I do on blinking pension 
Yeah it does, I bet that'll mean mine .
It'll, it'll make us very rich that!
My pension's made up with social security and I've 
I mean 
got two pounds, two pounds .
what did I get, a couple of quid?
Mm.
Better than, you're better than nothing.
Oh aye!
It's better than kick int arse!
When they put the pension up,wha they sent me a letter there other day and I can't remember what I've done with it.
No.
Albert got one.
It's just to say that it's not going up as much as they thought.
Yeah.
Cos I just opened it and when I were just  
Oh!
From Coal Board?
I couldn't pu yeah, I couldn't .
Ah!
But, it's a different pension scheme 
Eh?
that.
Mm.
Dad working to 
I got my rise and couldn't  the last one.
I could never understand that because  I thought  dad was in  in the whatsername?
I thought he were, I always thought he were in superannuation.
No, that's with the, ah, that's dad's Coal Board that one.
Mm.
That's what  I get .
Yeah, but  ma ma ma dad should have er  in superannuation.
I can't understand why he wasn't.
I don't know Alb.
You know, what your dad's  
He probably agreed not to go into it like, you know, or  didn't want to go into it.
He probably 
But he'd have been, he'd have been better, well  well he wouldn't have done.
Yeah, the only the time he'd been paid 
You'd have been better off.
is when he has no money.
And  he had.
If he said he had no money he had.
He'd always got, he always put his hand in his pocket wou couldn't he?
Are you gonna nip down shop for me?
Yeah .
What do you want?
Small  white  thick loaf?
Why are you eating white bread instead of brown?
I like it for toast June.
Well you can toast brown.
I like it  brown  you know, if I go to a party.
Ooh!
I can't  be doing with white bread now!
It's too bloody  pastry!
It's doughy!
Mm.
What do you want?
Forty fags
Yeah.
And er
 Walkingtons small loaf.
D'ya want thick or thin?
Thick.
That's if I can get on .
If you can't get it .
Alright.
See you later.
bloody drag it!
I try to keep  
Where did you want that food putting mother?
Eh?
Where did you want that food putting?
Outside June.
Oh aye!
Cos if it rains that won't come on outside.
Oh!
Them 
Why won't it come on?
It just won't come on.
I bet he's not tightened it up properly to  seal it.
But it  you want none of them  on 
Yo 
things?
And you want me to do  
And that's your lot for today!
go in there?
Yeah.
This one here.
Sorry?
 

I'm not 
Don't kick you out.
I was saying I'm not buying no more!
Can you .
No, it we 
Over there.
I'm keeping them down.
Which one?
This one.
And you're gonna have to get a chair.
I like the other people  fixing them because I like having to come round here.
Mm mm.
Get the bulb June.
Is that awkward ?
No.
No.
Cos it's them bloody things we've got!
They're bloody working though!
I know.
Our John spent the rest of the time .
That's why they've gone brown.
Are they?
You sure?
Yeah, cos they were too dear others weren't they Albert?
Yeah.
These are a lot cheaper.
And they only, they o they only do same  job don't they?
Yeah.
Try it.
See what  what.
There you are!
last night.
Oh aye.
And the other one's for outside.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That one you fetched, you know.
Mm.
Because you put it in to, the other time .
I put the one what we had in our house.
At least it's
it's only last night, I didn't know if you could hear, it come on three times and they were nobody there!
Probably rain  dripping down in front of it.
I were right here  and I'd got that light out  
You never know somebody might have just
and er
come in dark yard.
And I thought and it's light out there.
And three times it come on  on and off!
You see, if somebody just come to that corner
Yeah.
it picks it up.
Yeah.
And they go and  walk back and you wouldn't know they were there.
Yeah.
I mean, that's what it's for.
I think we'll have one when I get ours  other house.
Why?
Haven't they got one outside like er that one?
Don't think so.
It's got a burglar alarm on.
Mm!
As such anyway.
We don't know if it works.
Alright then?
We'll see you.
If you need owt  you better give us a ring.
Well I've all for today Albert.
Right.
Well we'll go to ta 
Alright.
go get to shop.
And
You're going?
Mm.
See you later!
We're going, yeah.
Bye-bye!
Mm!
Thought I'd put that alarm on.
Can't weigh your mother up!
Why?
She come out of here and she couldn't walk.
She bloody ran to car when I, when she got out of chair!
And when I asked yo and when I said to her, you were in toilet  she got up and she ran across there!
Can't weigh her up at all!
I've give up trying!
I don't know what's real and what's not real.
I think she puts a lot on for you, for your benefit.
Who's that?
Oh dear!in a wheelchair now.
Who?
Pat .
That'll be another scam for her to get money!
What's Radio Intel?
Builders' merchants  I think.
Your bi oh they're putting a  into pigeons!
Yeah, you've got to admit it's the best pigeon  outfit !
Right!
Better than other one innit?
Aye.
A lot better.
Look at state of ours!
I know but Corrinne never cleans it!
What are you doing?
Hello!
Hello!
No mail?
Wow!
Don't look like it.
No bits of letters?
Eh?
No bits of letters?
Well what we gonna do?
Are we going to go down?
Oh!
Now that's bloody stupid that!
You've let us get in, take me coat off, and now are gonna go to shop!
Wait till our Corrinne comes in.
Well,.
Well what we ha we have those chips for dinner anyhow.
I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll  yeah.
It's a bit early yet anyhow.
It's only eleven o'clock.
Hello Bobby!
No!
What's up with you?
June's upstairs.
Hello Bobby!
Hello Bobby!
Who's a clever boy?
Alb.
What?
I don't think I could eat chips.
I feel bloody sick!
What d'ya want, toast?
Yeah.
I think I'm better off just having  .
Well it's too early yet!
I mean it's only eleven o'clock.
What do  want?
No I don't want   
See that  looks a bit iffy!
Oh!
It do dunnit?
Yeah.
Get down boy!
I'll have a cup of tea though Alb.
I know.
La dee dee da .
What's the matter then?
What's the matter?
Eh?
What's the matter?
Ah.
Where can I put this?
Alright!
Alright!
Just settle there.
Settle there.
Come on boys.
Oh!
It's a Walkman.
George!
What you doing?
Er, it's in the other magazine I fetched from work after the  I'd left them at work.
Oh!
That's the one I found out what mine was .
Mm.
Oh!
Look at black hair on that hooker!
We've seen that, haven't we?
No.
Well I've not.
We've seen this one.
You can't!
Cos it's a completely new series with him innit?
Well he's never been on before.
Big baby!
It must have been two month old.
Where did you ge get this from?
Er, whatsername bought it for her.
What they call her?
Leigh.
Go Albert will you stop pratting with that!
You're turning sound up and down like a yo-yo!
Says about mine.
The Ox is strong and reliable, a practical person with a head for business .
She gets one every year.
But bloody hell!
I'm sure she's picking out .
Cos you know he's sitting there!
She's, saw her in town today.
Yeah.
They walk from Bentley into town for all John's .
You can try and put them  
I thought it must have been  .
She says they've got a student teacher, she's only about twenty three .
Anyway, is John alright?
I mean, where do you see at the beginning ?
Will you geroff my back!
lucky he's not feeling up it, he's feeling everything else!
keeps biting me!
He tried to grope up back of my thing!
He's doing it again!
Oh!
He's in a playful mood int he?
You're cheeky!
Do you want one Corrinne?
Go on then.
I bought a packet of these    and  he opened them, took one out, and put them back, and put them in his pocket.
And he said to me, I said, that's, do you want one June?
And I said no.
Geoff said  look at him!
He's putting them back in his pocket, he don't ask anybody if they want any does he?
And he goes, I can't see you buying any!
I couldn't get over Des asking me if I wanted a bottle of beer!
I nearly passed out on floor!
Not very often you get owt off a businessman June.
Er, Corrinne.
Er, has he  fetched you that letter yet ?
It's Des what's sorting it out.
I forgot 
Oh!
to ask him for it.
Don't push it!
Bloody hell!too much anyway.
Oh it were Julie's birthday yesterday and she didn't tell us.
She didn't tell us till today.
The miserable bugger!
Mm.
How old was she?
Thirty four.
Thirty four?
Oh no!
That's why she  didn't tell you !
No, she must be thirty seven.
Bloody hell!
Summat like that anyway.
Helen's older than her!
Cos hers is today.
Terry sent her a card and wrote on back, all my love Terry.
Can you lend me a fiver ?
And what Liz say ?
She di 
She knows what Terry's like.
she didn't get the hint.
It's the thought what 
He went and bought her a sherbet 
it's 
flying saucer!
Ah!
Ah!
Ha ha!
What did Liz say to that?
I'm surprised erm  people round corner didn't buy her a blinking  blow up doll  doll without the wedding tackle.
Well I'm not kidding you, you know when we went in fish shop last time we were there?
That  Pakistani, or Indian, whatever he is, that's got a fish shop, he's bought, we were in there five minutes and before we came she knew  his whole life history!
Was he living in flat by himself?
Did his mum and dad live round here?
Who was that?
Er where was his girlfriend?
Who were this?
Liz to this, to this, in the  bought fish shop up there.
Oh!
Cos they, when I went in that shop  it's, he'd tell me he hadn't, he'd failed his driving test.
No.
Oh that, to go to top of Broadway.
It's nearer  this one.
Been for my test today he say, and I failed.
I says, what a what as, a shopkeeper?
He says, no my driving test !
I says, oh!
Well he come into garage the other day and told me his wife had kicked him out!
 
 
Eh?
He told me his wife had kicked him out!
I were killing myself with laughter!
Oh they got some funny ideas some of them!
These are not as hot as they usually are are they?
No.
I thought they were right mild.
I mean you used to be able to go ah!
Ha!
Ha!
Ha!
Mm.
He's toned them down a hell of a lot.
You're not supposed to eat more than four packets in twenty four hours.
That reminds me, I've got that box and all, the  you know when you took that bo that  box of Twix back  that time  what do you do when you take them back?
Go to  whatsername.
What?
Go to that counter.
That square place where you don't 
Mm.
normally go in?
And do they take them off you?
No.
They give you a, a credit note  and you, you go put them back.
Why, are they outdated like?
No.
I fetched double Twix instead of single, you picked wrong ones up.
Ah!
Oh it would be me!
You picked them up love!
I said to you, are these right ones?
You said, yeah.
No!
You just said Milky Way?
I said, yeah, and you picked them up and looked at dates and chucked them on cart.
Cos you were checking dates.
And they won't sell will they not?
No.
Derek hardly sold any.
Hadn't he opened them like?
No.
It were me that realized we'd fetched wrong ones, not Des.
Did you get any money back when you took that box of crisps back that time?
No, he we, he was credited with it wasn't he?
How d'ya mean credited with it?
He got a credit note.
Oh!
I wonder what he's done with that?
We've got them Milky Ways to take back yet.
Have you   today?
It's only Wednesday innit?
It's only Wednesday today .
It's Thursday tomorrow cock!
Yeah.
Are you working  two tomorrow?
Is it two?
No.
On 
Oh!
Friday.
Friday is it?
And then most of Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning.
Mm mm.
I'm on Saturday afternoon and all day Sunday.
I might do this car Saturday morning.
That's the only time I'm gonna get to do it innit?
All depends if you're gonna leave it there while you do it.
Oh yeah.
Oh!
You mean, while he's at work?
No I mean we ain't got much choice.
Unless he decides to go away and leave me again!
Does he pay you extra for doing car like?
Well they give me a tenner for hoovering it out.
For hoovering it out?
Bloody hell!
Hoovering it inside.
I hope you're not taking my One-Step?
I'm not as it goes!
Got her own stuff!
Oh!
You've got all that  stuff.
Nearly up to there innit?
What?
That One-Step.
That son of a gun.
Er  .
Put it into soak.
I've not done that car out for ages.
I've done this.
I did it last time.
Yeah, but you haven't done mine.
Why?
Th they're on their own.
Mind you, it's not  cutting out now.
Not at all.
Good job you haven't got Liz's, hers broke down  yesterday!
It's not cutting out at all now?
It stalls, I stalled it tonight  but  well I just caught it.
Don't get settled cos I have to go toilet.
You know, I told you that day Ju I saw Julie walking down top of Broadway?
Mm.
Her car had broke down.
Oh oh!
That's what I got now.
They've just had it brought back from  whatsername's?haven't they?
Who?
Who?
Julie!
Well they got a Sierra  she's on about a Fiat.
I were gonna say it, it's checking Fiats .
Which Fiat?
She's got a , and she's got a Fiat.
She's got a Fiat Strada.
Did she?
She's had it ages!
But her dad's got  well  Stu's dad's got a Sierra ain't he?
Mm.
Mm.
And Sierra's are  if something jerks it cuts the fuel line dunnit?
Mm.
It stops it and you've got a button somewhere on your dash what you press to release it.
Well they didn't know  and they to it were towing Julie's car and the tow belt snapped, and of course when it jerked this car forward it cut the petrol off.
Or what 
Shouldn't have done.
Well it did.
And he couldn't get no petrol for it and he had to call A A out.
So she  had to walk home  and he  walked home !
It shouldn't have done that.
Not on, not when they're, when they're already in motion.
Set off with the  towing Julie's car and the tow rope just snapped in two, and it jerked both cars and it cut off the fuel.
Well he should have just zoomed off!
It shouldn't have jerked his, should it?
Yeah, but you've got your feet down and you're towing summat, and then suddenly it releases, it just  goes er forward a bit dunnit?
See that bit in 
That doesn't 
paper about that Robin Reliant and he's done it all up and it does hundred mile an hour!
Hundred and eight!
I wouldn't fancy going down no bloody motorway, hundred eight in one of them!
I tell you some of them Robi 
I bet , I bet it's  
I know!
he had a  Honda Civic engine in it!
Oh, oh dear !
I shouldn't think anybody'd insure it!
I'm surprised!
Then that bloody prat towing down motorway at hundred mile an hour!
Towing?
Yeah!
Towing a
Car!
towing somebody down motorway.
And they're going hundred mile an hour!
He had a new Fiat er  what were it?
Don't know.
I just know that it 
The next one up from ours.
Oh!
The one that er  oh!
Oh!
The Corona?
Corona.
Coroma?
Coroma?
He had a new Coroma  two litre   and he's towing this bloke on motorway at hundred mile an hour !
Have you seen ?
Well Terry came down last night.
Well 
Will you have any exams this year?
Got loads!
I've got about twelve.
For what?
Everything.
I've got  I've got one in March  for definite.
What exams?
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think I've got one in April.
You don't pay for them though do you?
I hope not.
Ah!
I hope not and all !
I have one in April  two in May
And what are they all on like?
three in June  or two in June  and then when we go back we've got  about three in September
and we'll have some more at Christmas.
They're not mock exams are they?
No.
Proper exams.
I've got my Red Cross in stage one, my R S A  part one and two, stage two.
I've got shorthand Pitman  not Pitman, R S A, shorthand Teeline  shorthand Teeline again at end of one, end of year.
And I've got another one in  word processing, hopefully.
I've got my audio.
My audio o transcription  medical  and I've got my Teeline medical.
Oh!
Mhm.
And then after that I've got er that thing in for my  exams.
My proper  diploma exams.
None of them, there's only two of them that are to do with my diploma.
All the rest are at   fortunately.
How long will you finish this?
Middle of next year or end of next year?
It'll be July when we take the exams.
That's when the course will actually finish.
What, this July?
No!
No.
That's right.
But I don't know how long it is before I get my results back.
But  you can get a post  as a medical secretary in a hospital or a G P without  having your full diploma.
If yous let it, cos  to get the full diploma you've got to get your two skills which is medical  audio, and medical shorthand, you've got to have them two skills  to get the diploma.
And you've also got four papers  ethics and  etiquette  you got an English one, a medical aspects one, and a clerical skills one.
Not a clerical skills one, but, office procedures.
And you've got to pass all them, plus your two skills  to get the diploma.
But you can resit any what you fail the following year.
Mm.
Mm!
Teresa says, the only one what presents any difficulty is usually the medical aspects one.
Well why should that present anything different?
Because it covers such a wide area.
It says the English paper you only need, you only need seventy five percent  for your  erm  it's seventy five percent pass rate.
You've got to get above seventy five to pass.
Yeah, it's 
That's quite high that, you know, seventy five percent!
Well it's got to be ain't it?
The office procedures, she said, is simple anyway, and yet, ethics and etiquette is a, she said, and your teacher works you that hard and it just drills in anyway!
No, but, seventy five percent is a high pass rate.
Well I don't know  who she is that sends letters out to your nana, but she's bloody useless!
She misses more words out than she gets in!
And she just writes over them in, in pen!
If it's her computer though, they might just  erm, thingy it and change it to suit them.
Well it wouldn't be on  word processor.
You don't know.
Cos it's,the you're supposed to  that's what it's for so you can check all your spellings.
A lot of them letters that come out are already done and you just delete
Gonna say that's  they're all on word processor that's what I'm saying.
Eh!
I got a pass, oh I got a distinction for, we did er  like mock exam for  word processing, I got a pass.
Whatsername 
 
her in, her  the launderette were asking me  er  she was, she were on about I, ain't you got a job yet?
I said, I think I'm too qualified to get a job!
She said we she said, well aye, you might be.
She says, int your  daughter  i er  a nice girl?
I said, well aye  sometimes!
?
She's seen you in there.
She says what's sh what's she do?
I said, oh she's at college.
Oh!
Really?
I says, she says er  what she's studying?
I said, well she's er  she's going in for medical secretary.
She said, well where does she get her brains from?
I sa I said well who do you think?
I says, I'm over- qualified for work, I says, and it looks like she's gonna end up that way if you're not careful!
She says, oh!
So  she said, I think she's ever so pretty!
I says, aye.
Said, pity her manners don't blink er mannerisms don't match her   looks !
Teresa's on about  erm  a she were asking me if anybody'd be interested into going on to higher er education after this?
And I 
college yet!
Yeah, but you get, you don't get no grant for that.
What college?
. But if it's only a part-time so you can actually work part-time that's the difference.
Yeah.
Fantastic salary if you get qualified!
It's alright if you can get day release from your 
 
work  to do it.
That's what you want to be after, day release.
Yeah.
They're trying to make our course into a three day a week.
Erm, nine till six at night.
It's a long day though.
That's what I said.
I mean,
 
you get  we get a mental block after three   three o'clock us !
You do.
I mean, doing shorthand for four hours a day, it's  too much!
It's far too much!
Well, just think, when you're working full-time you'd be working nine till five.
I know, but it's different when you're concentrating 
Mind you 
on studying and when you're concentrating on working.
Billy , er Billy  's  one of Billy  's daughter-in-laws, she, she does it part-time.
What, medical secretary?
Yeah.
She's er
Good money at part-time!
I know.
That's what erm  that's  which one of them, who were it telling me?
Er  I don't know whether it  were the young lad that comes in, or whether it was Jes that were telling me.
Mhm.
I can't imagine it being Jes.
I think it were Jes what were telling you .
Well it might have been Jes  cos  I don't know tha well they've got, I think they've got two children.
And she were doing it full-time and then she went  she had children and then she went part-time.
But I don't think she's working .
That's one advantage of being medical secretary 
I think she's just had another baby or summat.
cos if you get in a big organization like N H S, they provide a creche.
Mm.
And thi I mean, you don't have to pay for the creche cos it comes in the, it's part of your
Well
thingy.
part of your job innit?
It's like nurses at hospital innit?
And they've got a hospital.
Mm.
Well that's the creche what you get into.
.
That's why a lot of people will go into medical secretary who have children.
Has Sue  got a job at all?
 
I don't know.
She's not interested.
No.
I think she'll be married shortly.
I can see her marrying him.
Yeah.
But he's one of them lads where she'll never have owt, cos he don't do, he won't bloody work will he?
Well he's doing taxis.
Yeah but 
Ah!
It's only a pound a 
it's not .
pigging hour!
He's on dole!
Well I'm gonna report him!
Mm!
And he, he's getting one parent benefit!
He'll be getting all sorts for that young girl!
As soon as he gets a house  she will leave home.
Yeah.
He's not so sure of that.
What's happened between other one?
Have they had an argument like?
No.
I just don't know.
She's got two men.
I know, but  always nice to know.
Bit of scandal now and again.
You're getting worse than a woman you, now you're at home!
I know, there's nowt from men though is there?
They say women are bitchy but have you ever heard a conversation betwe 
No.
conducted by men?
They beat us easy.
That back door wants rubbing down I think don't it, before you  paint it dunnit?
Yeah.
Yeah
Oh!
Oh!
You are listening then?
I am listening!
Are you?
I were just thinking where my sander were.
It's, Mick's got it.
I must fe 
Mick's got it.
Mm.
Did you clean that cupboard out I asked you to do?
No, I forgot.
Which cupboard?
That one where oil's kept cos it  I, the last time, I cleaned it out last time and put a  some kitchen roll in in a plastic bag on top but it's all over again.
What it wants
Have you see how that  unit's all cracked under sink?
Mm.
I can't understand why it's cracked like that.
It's what?
I ca 
It's all cracked!
Mhm.
I, you don't know why it's cracked?
That one where we used to keep rubbish bin.
I cracked it when I put it in.
Oh!
I knelt on it if you remember.
And broke it.
I can't get over that ruddy idiot in !
That what?
That idiot in .
Moving all that stuff into, a washer, a cooker, in middle of floor like that!
The cupboards are nice!
I didn't like them.
Well they're fairly nice tha 
They're alright.
They're alright, they're passable.
It don't matter if they were .
Yeah.
Nice aren't they?
Yeah.
I think they're too alike but  after saying that, they're quite nice  and he made such a bugger of them ain't he?
By putting 
Put them in the wrong places ain't he?
I mean  what he's do I, I know why he's done it.
They didn't  what he's done, he's thought well I'll just do that  and incorporate the sink in it.
Yeah, but fancy putting sink up in corner like that!
Well
They can't put a worktop along that wall under window cos it cuts the unit off.
If it'd been me and I were gonna put it there, I would have put a window there  to look out of.
Or a door there.
Yeah I know.
Well I can't understand why he wanted to move the sink from where it were!
No I can't.
I think it was in a lovely position.
They could have had cupboards right round there, rate along there if they'd left 
Rate?
the sink.
Mm.
You say worse words!
Rate round there!
Rate round there !
Ah.
One of lasses are getting married, at college is getting married in July.
Is she?
Registry.
Mm mm.
Always say we got married in registry office.
What's that gotta do with owt?
Have you seen that picture of my nana?
Our Margaret says our  my mam lo I look like my mam looks there.
Do you know  yo a we where the hell did your Margaret look?
I think that Aunty Margaret looks more like her.
I were gonna say,yo yo she looks more like your mam than any of them.
I think she does.
Cos on that photo, my nan's got a right sort of face hasn't she?
And gifted.
Cos Aunty Margaret used didn't she?
Yeah.
All the time.
Your Aunty Margaret's thinner now than when she got married.
And just as bloody tight!
Ooh!
I can't cough and I can't  move.
Don't start again!
I can't afford to have any more time off.
You're not having any more time off, I've made my mind up!
Jes said, I thought you'd have been off rest of week.
You know, you can't weigh him up.
I gets on telephone, I says June's not coming into work today .
I thought you'd told him I were having a couple of days 
No.
off.
I didn't realize you'd o you hadn't said that  I'd be off a couple 
I said 
of days.
she's poorly in bed
Yo you didn't.
Jes said, I can't let June come to work today.
That's right, she's in bed  poorly.
He says, I thought  aye!
Aye!
What's gone off?
After I'd  been talking to him about leaving.
He says that's a  when, he said I can't let June come to work he said I was  he said first things that went through my mind were  someone's decided to finish, what's gone off?
Well you ain't that .
I told him you were poorly.
Said she's poorly.
Well it was, he had to go to er   Heldon yesterday.
What for?
He said  Dawn rang up  er, oh!
He said Dawn was swimming on a Tuesday  he says, but because you hadn't rang up, he said, I thought oh, she must be coming to work.
So he said, our Dawn rang up and said  I wonder if she did my shift on Monday.
Er  he'd, and she said er  she says to him  what you doing today?
What you doing about today?
He says well June must be coming in cos she hadn't rang up.
She says, oh well I'm going swimming then.
He said, well I, I, I won't need you anyway.
He said, then  half an hour after  Albert rung up to say that you weren't coming to work, so I were right in shit!
For some reason Jes was out there, why can't he get Jes to do it.
Well he and Jes were doing summat.
Oh he were washing windows other day.
Which windows?
The shop.
He had to,i th he was up on ladders  and they were washing o you know sign up on top?
Yeah.
He cle he scrubbed all that!
And did all windows !
Must have been about Monday, or Tuesday.
Well the Jehovah's Witnesses come in last week before I come off work, must have been Thursday, they said  you haven't seen window cleaner lately have you?
I said no.
I says, I had to clean them myself last time.
He said, I'll get onto them and I'll tell him he has to come and clean your windows he's been a bit busy.
I don't think he'd been for about six month.
No, well it's not that long.
Look at this bugger, eating Victory V's!
He'll eat shit on bloody shovel if you give it him!
He won't eat them Hacks!
Mm.
Are you surprised?
Them menthol ones you bo you bought me, God, they were burning my throat!
They're good though aren't they?
Yeah!
Mm.
And my throat were on fire!
I didn't dare breathe out!
He likes them.
I bet he does.
He don't.
Cos it hit bottom of cage.
No, I've hoovered it up.
Well I took it out, a load of it out this morning  in my hand cos he were nearly sitting on it!
Mhm.
Like , they gotta  haven't they?
Oh God!
Th they're different.
I said to Jes he, the only bird I know that can shit through side of a bloody cage bars and, and get it through!
He says, I know, Carmen used to go crackers that's why she went and fetch him here.
I know, you'll have a carpet  have to do it, do that again.
I know.
We done that tonight.
And Benjy likes them!
You stroppy bloody parrot!
You stroppy parrot!
Put you on your chain and take you out!
You bugger!
I can't see how that chain fits on him!
How does he put it on him.
He  he lifts it through and pulls it till it goes on his leg.
What you doing you bald headed bugger!
It's alright.
He, he can't see that  a dog!
Daft!
Mm mm mm.
They're both at it now.
You daft buggers!
Are you gonna sort her out Barney?
Mm?
Benjy?
Georgey!
Ee!
You're not having any more!
No!
keep trying to reach that picture.
You straggly little thing!
Have you seen mess on that floor in back of that, in  office?
What, or what?
All bloody mud and stuff they've got all over it!
My pumps were a mess!
Mind you, somebody had cleaned all toilet out, I don't know who.
Or sink, cos sink were clean, and toilet 
You 
were clean.
two want a bath.
Well I put bleach down it on Saturday.
Yeah, that's disappeared.
The Domestos bottle?
Tomorrow morning
Disappeared.
I bet whoever did toilet out used 
Tomorrow morning 
rest of bleach  
bath.
Probably.
Wanna bath?
There weren't a lot of bleach in it.
I was actually gonna open it put some bleach round the edge.
Well somebody had cleaned all sink cos  sink were  there weren't a mark on sink when I went today.
Dawn must have done it then.
But  all the  wash cloths had gone.
No wash cloths were there.
Well I washed owt what was  in the toilet again  on Sunday.
It's a waste of time cos they just splatter it all back up again!
I know 
 
but I forgot to take my typewriter hadn't I?
Got all this stuff to type up and I'd forgotten my typewriter.
You should put a notice up, if you make the mess, clean it up!
Oh!
They'd not even washed 
Or it'll stay!
all stuff off the 
What?
the taps.
They'd bloody take notice down and push it down toilet!
No they won't flush it !
Mind you, I don't know.
Well they wi I'll tell you now 
bloody toilet!
if I worked there  and they didn't do it, I'd just turn round and say, no you're not having the bloody key until you can learn to keep it clean.
It's not so bad now because tap's working again.
They're not washing in  like they were before.
Have they got it fixed?
They must have done.
It weren't running today.
I just bi I went outside, I mean, I was gonna go outside five minutes before and not notice anything, and I went out five minutes later and I heard this water running.
And I looked up at tap and this water were pouring out of tap, I thought oh!
Must have run  defrosted.
I went to turn tap off cos that's what I thought it were.
Yeah, it were that.
And it were running out!
And it were coming down to tap.
So I got out the car and I went over and I, turned it down, as it were turning down I saw it wasn't pouring just out the tap, it was also pouring from the 
Yeah.
pipe in the place!
I don't know who fixed it.
He said he were gonna get in touch with somebody.
Oh!
He's always gonna!
Oh!
Then this bloke came in  how long's your tap 
That's enough Barney!
been running?
I says, I don't know I've just rung him about it.
It's wasting precious water!
as if we have enough droughts without we it, people like 
Ooh!
yous lot wasting water from !
Who's this?
You should have said, the tap's nowt to do with us it belongs to him that has the garage!
If I had my own way, I shall tell him where to shove his petrol!
Right 
Who's that?
I don't know who he were!
Got nowt to do with him how much water you use at the garage, it's pa you should turn round and ta 
Yeah, but it was pouring all over the forecourt.
You should have told him  that we pay for it by the gallon  not by the year!
Geroff!
It's nowt to do with you!
You get some  funny buggers coming to garages you know!
You get some folk who .
Bloody do!
I bet .
My wo is that one at garage?
I mean, with frost and whatsername we've had just lately  they can expect bust pipes anywhere where they're  where they're not protected.
Did you see that top of Broadway?
No.
They've blocked off Broadway tonight!
Oh!
Down here?
Yeah.
Yeah I know.
Made a right mess!
Been like that a couple of days.
Yeah I know, but it weren't that , now it's got it all wheels to top.
That is the bottom.
Yeah.
That's the top.
 
You're going up the hill.
Oh!
It's .
You don't go down a hill.
And you don't go down, up the hill.
You go that way.
Eh?
Go up hill that way then.
No.
You do.
It's down hill all the way.
But, it's not.
Especially at top  
Well it's only that little bit of rise there.
Not like going up there.
Did I tell you Chris's wife were pregnant?
Yeah.
Claire made it on the Sunday, I said innit about time you took your wife out?
He says why?
I says, oh, she were right depressed when she came in.
He says, why?
What's up with her?
I says, she wanted to go out Saturday and you'd  gone to work.
Cos me and my brother had been working on wagon again.
And with it being a nice day.
He says, oh no!
He says, I feel awful we were making plans that being the week to go out  so they had trouble with wagon  so we had to spend some time on wagon.
And he says, it weren't bad enough me  not going out that day, but with it being nice weather and all.
Aye.
It is in June.
Get the door shut.
It's shut .
It can't,ho he can't hook it.
Oh!
We'll have to learn you George.
Have you seen her hair yet?
Mum?
She's had it permed 
What's the matter with you?
she's had it cut into bob and permed.
Oh!
Had it cut right back.
Oh!
She's had it cut short then?
Well it  er, about that long, about my length weren't it?
Cos she always used to have it in a pony tail.
D'ya know her?
Yeah.
Mum?
Cos her hair's ginger 
Yeah.
innit?
Yeah.
She had it cut to there and permed.
I, I can't remember if she's had it done straight or not.
Cos underneath  it, I mean it didn't look nice but when she lifted it up  it's how mine was, like it is now, flat underneath.
Mm.
It's gone like that straight away.
She said, well if it's like this after one night, what's it gonna  look like  when I wash it?
So,sh I mean, it cost her thirty five pounds!
What?
For a perm?
A perm!
And there were fiver off it.
I tell you summat, I'd a, go back!
I remember Kerry, quite a few years going to er  to
 Bins in town and it cost her twenty quid!
And that's a few years ago.
This is Geoffrey  's.
Oh well.
I you know, his ordinary name's 
Oh!
Geoffrey  's?
Geoffrey .
I remember once me and your Aunty June going have our hair done there and when we come out it was snowing!
And it just went poof!
And it cost us a bomb!
She paid thirty five pounds for a perm, and  she got a fiver, she'd got a coupon for a fiver off.
Lee's er  paid for  Liz to go and have her nails manicured tomorrow.
Cos, er, that Angeliques at  Thorne.
You know where 
They must be bloody crackers!
you know where that whatsername is?
Er  er, Fox that barb er that hairdressers
Oh, oh yeah!
on corner of 
Yeah.
Bridge Street there?
Mhm.
Well Angeliques next door.
She did my make up 
Oh yeah.
when we,ma when my mum had been married twenty five years that time.
Well, she  she waxes Lee's legs  but  she goes
she goes to  part-time  so they get it at a reduced rate.
Not having my legs waxed!
Just about Epilady, but I couldn't stand them waxed!
You think you can't neither!
What women put up with!
At least with Epilady you take a rest if  
Have you seen that new  technique they have with honey and  warm thingy?
What's an Epilady?
It pulls them out.
Oh!
That thing, that roller thing?
Yeah.
Why have you got one?
Yeah I no it don't hurt.
I'm just wondering what waxing does though.
They've got  er
The only time it hurts is when it nips your skin!
a, a new thing 
Mm.
out now and it's like erm  it's like tre er, it's like soft toffee.
And they roll it over like that 
Like with wax?
and do it like that.
Ah!
Little bit at a time.
Just looks like just looks like toffee  and they just  roll it like that and then  do it like that.
It's only a little bit and they take it off your lip with it as well.
With wax?
Lip and 
 
No, it's a new
It's summat else  
a new thing it were on Tomorrow's World other day.
Same as the, as the wax though innit?
It were like a  it were like a  a toffee.
They mix these two things together and it went like a 
It looked like soft toffee.
Summat gel they call it don't it June?
Mm.
Summat gel?
And they just put it on leg and just put a little bit on like that  and just went ee ooh!
Ee ooh!
Ee ooh!
But it were so quick it were untrue!
That's how they were doing it.
It's like that 
It's more relaxing at home.
Oh aye!
Oh aye.
Takes ages!
that electrolysis, that's the best way but it takes ages.
Well, it'll cost you
Yeah, even that you've 
good week's 
got to keep your feet up for so long before 
Yeah.
it kills the
Er i takes them out 
What with all the advertisements on, bloody
You are recording other side?
It's Sky , oh!
It's Sky Movies.
Was gonna say.
They do have them on now and again.
They have them on a lot now.
What a waste of a good car!
They'll have a parachute on it I expect.
I don't think so.
Yeah, but you do for a programme.
Can't see no bloody parachute on there!
I think it'll be a cardboard unit.
Could be superimposed.
I suppose they could do it, yeah.
Superimpose.
  

I did a lot of revision on my spellings yester for a spelling test, Claire didn't turn up.
We had a medical aspects test.
She don't half have some time off them bloody, that teaching staff!
So we had an extra hour for dinner.
So we had a walk round town.
The dinner hour was spent revising for a test we're supposed to be having on.
We've got some  you've got to learn these terms
I wished you'd know, you could have took them Milky Way for
She give us all these, like  diseases and we had to learn  parrot learn them  the definition for them cos she were giving us a test on them.
She said, not to bother.
Spent an hour  revising these things!
And, she said oh, we're not having the test today.
Yeah.
She'll probably drop it out onto you  tomorrow !
No, we don't have her till Friday now.
She give us th 
Oh!
even I couldn't do them.
Ha!
Bloody Road House were on other night!
Right!
It had it's last play blinking months ago that!
Total Recall's on at the Savoy isn't it?
Mm.
Should do some typing but I can't be bothered.
Have we seen this?
Yep.
Benjy!
Stop biting your toes.
We've still got that tape for a couple of a weeks.
Haven't we?
No, I'll ring her.
I'll ring her on Fri on Friday night.
Ring her mother, not her, cos it costs you extra money when you ring her on that bloody  telephone!
I don't envy whoever marries Janine.
Not very nice thing to say.
She's a funny girl is Janine!
She has her ways like everybody else.
And you say Janine's moody, there's nobody worse than me!
No, I know that.
I don't know.
According to Janine's mam.
Ah!
How much of that can you take then?
Yes!
One thing she told me  I mean, Janine will tell you herself.
I mean, actually lots of things her mother had told me Janine had already told me.
Mm.
And that
Mind you, I think she were a bit frugal with truth when she said that first lad she'd gone with  and she got pregnant.
Is that what she told you like?
Yeah!
Tell you summat else.
It wasn't the bloody last night that 
That thing on her neck well it weren't a bite, cos it'd have gone by now.
No.
She's got one on her face now.
Yeah.
Yeah, I don't know.
I think it's this month that Lee goes back to see the specialist at  whatsername, Bradford.
Who?
Lee.
Oh aye!
God!
You're looking awful.
Lee can't breathe  Liz has got psoriasis  and Lee's got  whatever it is  she's got !
Their bairn's always being sick!
So 
Claire's got God knows what!
Gerry's got idle-itis!
As long as it ain't got work attached to it he's alright.
Oh!
His hair!
It's awful innit?
No, I think it's alright.
I think it's awfully 
It suits him.
short!
It suits him.
No, I don't think it does.
It suits him, aye.
Bill upstairs calls him a pillock Corrinne!
Yeah.
Oh!
Make a cup of tea love.
stew  you know like  it is a beef  ah, but it weren't mince meat, but it weren't stew.
It were.
It might have been mince meat just ti cooked in tins.
But we shoved some veg in it.
Where did you get that from?
Tracy.
Cos she thinks she was asleep.
What, when I went down for , so I called back later, about half an hour later and she was awake so I just took her then.
Who, Kia?
Yeah.
She were asleep when I went down.
She's always asleep!
No.
She don't sleep at night.
That's it!
I mean, she'd been asleep  
 
What?
Well it were two o'clock when I were 
 
down there  half past one.
It were one o'clock Monday I went to pick her up.
It were twelve o'clock when you went today, when you dropped me off at work.
Ah!
There were nobody in, I went back.
I we I got down there and there were no bugger in!
They did that to me one day.
She sa Mick said fetch tape down, so I says alright, I'll be down in a bit.
I got down there and there were nobody in!
So I went back later on, I says, why weren't yous in?
And she said we were in!
I says, you weren't in, there were no telly on, and I  brayed the door down!
Oh!
The telly was on.
But the door were locked.
 
And I  brayed on window.
I went back in the .
So I thought, oh!
have you done owt on  Choleacs disease Corrinne?
Any what?
Done owt on  Choleacs disease?
On what?
 Choleacs 
What are they?
Well they spell it  it's not spelt as i if you, if you were talking it really, you'd probably, you'd probably
 Choleacs disease  cos it's spelt
Ah!
C H O L E   oh we've done
 Choleitis or something.
Yeah.
Summat to do with gallstones innit?
Not  not  Choleacs 
The gall bladder.
disease.
It's it's  they're allergic to gluten  and it makes the inner bowel  inflamed  so it gives him
Oh!
Like Margaret had?
In they've got to have a certain 
Our Mervin's wife had it.
Yeah.
Have they got to eat certain things?
They have to eat gluten free, they can't eat
So you're not allowed to eat bread or owt like that 
No.
Because  
Yeah, they make special without yeast or something
Yeah.
don't they?
It's gotta be gluten free.
Mm.
Erm
But more women suffer  from it, than men.
We're not , we're not on dietician foods.
And it says  it's connected to something  and that's why more women suffer from it than men.
I can't rem I were reading about when I were in hospital on  er  Tuesday while waiting
D'ya know more women su suffer from multiple sclerosis than men?
Yeah.
I think they suffer 
 
from most diseases than men.
It's same with rheumatoid arthritis, more women  suffer from that than men.
And that's got something  that's conne this bloke's come up with something
Something about moving their bottom jaw or summat innit?
and i it's  something to do with the hormones that women produce
that can er, and it's got to cope with this thing.
I keep writing dates on calendar and forgetting to look!
I say to our Corrinne every year, write all dates upon new calendar and then  I forget all about them.
It's like many of us though June, they don't know
What d'ya mean?
In other places 
 
only two of us, and neither one of us sends Christmas cards.
Thank you.
Cheers!
Yeah.
Dawn, you're dead pleasant!
See you!
Bye love!
Who'd waste a card on her!
Well they go up to I ought to remember that again.
Never.
Before wait till you get to your fifties Dawn.
No.
I don't know when 
Have a par we'll have party.
I'm not doing my  or my fortune.
Who?
She were blotto!
She was legless!
Anyway, I'm gonna have to go.
Yeah.
See you!
See you tomorrow.
What time is it?
Oh!
Oh I've left my lights on!
Half three.
Three.
Tarrah.
You'll have to wait till tomorrow .
I've come to get my shoes for .
at my shoes !
No!
Oh!
in fact, I took it for a taxi up here   from there  went to pit club, we had one in pit club and a game of bingo, went to Peacock  we had one in Peacock and eat our sandwich.
So, we got a taxi, I says  look here Jack  I'm not getting a taxi it's my birthday.
Don't be such a .
We'll go to Fox, we had one in Fox, went to   asked for   for Alan and Lynn and Lisa.
We're not taking you home .
And told her.
So I went to you and I said  June.
Just coming out!
I'm down  like this!
I'd got my shoes on and I were, I just went  flung my shoes and flung my handbag, I went  oh!like that to Linda.
 
Linda's.
And I thought ooh!
I wanna be sick!
And I missed kitchen and went all over flo over kitchen, I went urgh!
Then he's saying go on Corrinne have a look!
I said, I'm going to be sick!
And I were in, took me un got me undressed, put me in bed I can't remember!
I enjoyed it though.
And that were on a Wednesday and then on Saturday when I went and asked him  come home, got changed, and went down to the club .
Oh !
Then I remember 
 
walking down with a 
 
lovely bouquet of flowers for me.
Well that's it 
Ah!
Ah!
I were crying again!
Oh!
Oh!
I were .
Mm.
Never do when I'm on.
Never!
No, it's nearly always nine o'clock when someone .
I tell you, I bet she's really narky!
Oh God!
She'll be in a right nark!
  

Oh!
I wished I'd known he were going, he could have swapped them Milky Ways for me!
Yeah, if I'd have known he were going there.
He could of .
Yeah.
I wanted to swap some Milky Ways.
Oh!
I've picked double up instead of single.
 
Put them up.
Eh?
Put them out.
You can't really can you?
Are they wrapped?
They're not wrapped together?
They're all in
They're not wrapped.
No.
No.
The double wrap .
Get it picked then you  Kit-Kat.
What's that with new top on?
Mm?
There, in orange .
Bulbs.
Lucozade.
Oh!
Ah?
It's Lucozade is it?
Got a new top on.
It's only Lucozade dear.
Oh!
Could do with some of that.
So could I.
Right!
We're away!
Right.
We're fibbing.
Ba Bye!
Bye!
What's that ?
Fifty four.
No that's not right.
Oh!
Terry!
Oh!
D'ya know
Look!
You'll have to slim down.
He keeps telling me he's gonna put me on that Micro Diet again.
I'm gonna put her on that er
I said I'd put her on that Slim, that Slim diet.
Tha what, what they call it?
Not Micro Diet.
Slimfast.
Is that where you get  blow up things from?
Yeah.
I've not seen these.
Oh!
Come on!
What you doing?
Switching it off.
Oh!
Is that June's boyfriend then?
Well  that Phil, he's a  screw I think.
Ah ah !
Or a, he's either a security bloke or a screw, I don't know which.
I think he is security cos he's been in a couple of times hasn't he?
Yeah.
Used to come in with his uniform on didn't he?
Yeah but you can't tell screws from security can you?
Well, I think he's just security.
Whoops!
Bit of wind.
La, la la dee .
Oh!
Eh up!
Bloody hell!
Whose dustbin is it?
Bin's have spilt out.
There's.
I had to move 
 
it other week.
Don't worry.
Leave it where it is.
I'll manage.
Hello cocker!
What you doing?
You gonna need bath?
Getting tired of this box around here.
Six foot ten.
Who?
What's more, he'll knock him out end of this round.
shock of your life!
You having a nice time?
Where's granddad's?
You giving granddad one?
Where's granddad's kiss?
Not, I'm not buying you no more then!
Oh!
I'll get you no more Buttons!
Say thank you to granddad.
Don't I get a kiss for them sweeties?
Do I?
No!
Come on then Mick!
Get kettle on, don't blinking sit there like one o'clock half struck!
It's not very often we come.
And you, you come even less to our house.
I know.
You don't often  go our house.
Where's my kiss?
Oh!
You're shoving them in.
You're putting them in too many!
Now!
No more.
Oi!
No more.
Slow down!
Did  drop her other little people off Mick?
Yeah.
That's somebody else innit, we've  we've er  we've not seen all bloody week!
No.
Not had it yet 
What's that?
Not had it yet then cocker?
You look like you're getting taller!
Do I?
Mm.
It's, Micky's hanging her up!
Put the kettle on then.
No!
Now, how dare you say that!
Where's my kiss?
Come on!
Come and give him love!
No!
Oh well!
Did you bring them pyjamas down?
Not friends then?
Are you been in bath?
Watch the cup!
Been in bath have you?
I'm not friends then!
it wants cutting, she can't see!
What you doing?
Well I pushed  to play with that er  he don't like the  
And what happened with that?
one of them.
Eh?
It's shut it.
Never touched it.
What's that?
What's them?
Changed channels on it's own.
It's on there.
And go, where's the ?
There.
Nana couldn't buy you one last time 
 
she were at  
Were you?
cash and carry next time.
On there.
Yeah.
Cos they didn't have none last time.
Not them!
No!
One of my 
Are they nice?
mushrooms?
Are they nice?
Ouch!
A sort of zip.
Albert.
Come and give us a kiss!
They're nice!
Yep!
Urgh!
Urgh!
We've got ants.
What do you call that stuff that you put down?
That they take back to nest that kills 
Ant powder.
them off?
 
No it does, doesn't it?
It's not ant powder.
Oh!
That sugar stuff what they take back to nest?
It's like sugar but it kills them.
That's right.
They take it back to nest to like feed the others so that kills them off.
It's dead sweet so they take it, they feed to others
Yeah?
and it kills them off.
Oh!
I'll have to get some.
The only thing what you can get them to 
I don't know what it's called.
to get to nest.
And that only kills when they come out.
Yeah.
No!
They're hundreds in nest, but this stuff  
Aargh!
Aargh!
Aargh!
like little sugar bits and they pick it up and take it back to nest  
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Give me a kiss!
Urgh!
Urgh!
Did you like that?
Mm.
Eh?
Did you like it?
Mum, mum.
But it's just like you, ah well, you see an ants' nest in the room .
Watch .
There's millions of them.
Listen.
Whoa!
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
I don't know where they're where putting 
Yeah.
the , so
Look at that little fat tum!
Or in this one.
Why have you got ants now?
No.
In the morning there's  it's usually 
One 
then like.
shoe.
She always says one, then two 
Do they fly out when you 
she never gets any further.
Three.
One.
Well  not really.
Not really.
What you could really do with is leaving 
Two 
it out for a 
Three 
couple of days when it's gone really cold 
three 
and kill them.
We've not had any today ha we didn't have on till later on today have we?
No.
We went out last night.
What time did you light it?
When?
Today?
Did you go out before you were coming to bed?
No, it was still in, but not much.
I mean, they shouldn't be out at this time of year cos the  you know,the 
They get in all the chairs!
they hibernate don't they?
I
Yeah but
Oh!
yeah but, yeah but, they're not 
Oh are they?
like in all the 
They must be 
time.
When it's cold.
They must be nesting in here somewhere.
  

What behind bricks.
 
fall off ain't 
Yeah.
it?
There's gotta be a brick somewhere under here.
Yeah!
Well they run 
There's a 
most of the time.
Er er er er!
Or in between 
Well can't you find out where the
Well I'm not digging pigging floor up!
No.
But is there no holes where they go 
Yeah.
through?
You daft!
You, go on!
Not really.
You see in this 
We, usually they see them round there don't we?
Wah!
Yeah.
You see them down here 
 
But, we've seen them on this side as well!
So they might 
But we seen them over here as well!
So we don't know whether they're in that wall and all.
they might have even gone and made a nest.
Yeah!
What you want is that sugar stuff what they'll take back to nest.
Ee ee!
Yeah!
Mm.
Just can't think what they call it.
Ooh!
Ooh!
Ooh!
Well there was some  and  this morning  
Ooh!
Ooh!
 
I know Ben!
Let the fire go out last night and we've had it out all day haven't we?
Yeah.
Since what, five o'clock.
Tic a tic a tic tic a tic a tic a tic!
Aye.
You'll probably get them tomorrow then.
Tic a tic a tic a tic a tic ee!
But we had them this morning.
It's in the morning when you see them.
If you've left cups out they're usually in cups and all.
Have you eat them all now?
Oh!
Have they all gone?
No.
One left?
The trouble is if you get her boxfuls she won't stop until you eat the lot!
Ah!
Don't put too many in.
Two in at once.
Don't put two in.
She's had five in her mouth at once!
Thank you!
Oh!
Bang!
She likes them friendship rings you know.
Like jelly things?
Like a, they're like a jelly.
There's one look.
This bloke looks like Len .
Put it in  pot and everything.
Yes.
Thank you!
Got a broken .
Yeah.
I wish we'd had.
Have they all gone now?
Ah?
Have they all gone?
They have!
Have they all gone?
No, we've got one left.
Your nana's got one.
Are you ready?
Catch!
Catch it!
Catch!
Wee ee ee ee 
Ach!
ee ee ee ee!
It fell.
Oh aye.
She never does.
I don't think she wants it.
No, she's had enough.
Whoop!
Whoop!
I'm surprised .
Wee ee ee ee!
Oh!
Lovely paper!
No, I was  for today and I've gotta go back  the week after I'm due.
D'ya want a cup of Dawn?
What time do you go hospital?
That week af 
When are you due?
The sixth, you'll be flipping hoping you've had it before week after you're due!
Yeah.
Well I went back  
No!
Da!
How long did you go over with her?
Da!
I think  I had appointment for week after she were due
and I, and then, and then I ended up going to that
Didn't they say owt to you when you think they'd have it?
No.
Well it's only guesswork isn't it?
Ye well I thought, haven't you had a scan or owt?
She's had two haven't you?
Yeah, right at  yeah.
Eh?
Right at the beginning I did.
Oh!
You don't have any more then?
 
No.
No.
Not unless they think there's something wrong.
Mm.
Perhaps I've not forget it then cos that's, that's  there's about !
I'd have thought 
Well, that's alright.
you'd be going ou finding out what it is.
They'll only tell you if they're doing it anyway.
They'll not do it
They er
Oh!
If you wan they had to tell you when
Ooh!
they're actually doing it?
Not unless you have to an amniocentesis and then they'll tell you if you want?
We're alright with another one like you lady!
There's nothing wrong with her!
She's a little angel when she's out of 
Aren't we?
house.
Where's that 
Is she?
baby?
Yeah.
She is a little angel.
Tell granddad.
Where's that baby?
She knows you've got it there.
Ah lovely!
Is it there?
Took her out other day and she played all day.
You getting a little sister?
She goes to sleep now, she tells me when she's tired and she gets in pushchair and that.
When she gets 
Yeah when 
in her sort of chair and whatever.
she started playing, she just playing up cos she banged her head at Tracy's.
She's alright.
She started crying  
The thing is she gets tired.
Yeah that 
See you Mick.
She gets tired.
She started doing that funny face when we had her last time!
What?
They've all gone?
What when she's tired?
Yeah.
She does.
She doesn't cry.
And a bloke come in garage yesterday, he's just one of them hoovers like yours.
So I says, I, I were telling him though, I'm going ten o'clock my car needs done!
Not bad are they?
No.
No the er  I think there as good as Vax but they're not as cheap 
There.
as Vax.
There.
They are!
Cheaper!
Yeah.
Are they?
Yeah.
That's why I've got it.
Could have had a Vax.
It's the cheaper one.
Th th the cheapest one like.
Aha.
They said it well it
like, and he said were as good 
Do 
as what a Vax were.
Yeah.
You know.
They are because a th the in the good feature about it is  that and the Vax, that doesn't bloody fall over.
It's drawback  if, it's doesn't hold as much  fluid.
Yeah.
Yeah I know.
I re I, I, I've  it got a monotonous filling it up.
Yeah, to have it filled up.
But you don't have to empty it every time do you?
Yeah Kia  what you done to your leg Kia?
I usually  I usually fill that 
 
you know that thing what you fill up  with liquid?
Yeah.
Kia!
Er the  fill that up twice 
You have to keep chasing that.
and then empty it.
That's what I were doing, twice.
Yeah.
Every two goes.
We did kitchen when we bought some carpet cleaner didn't we?
I like the idea of the pipe going up the er  up the inside d'ya know what I mean?
Ready!
Steady!
Yeah.
In your
Cos you haven't got all  pipe
Yeah.
switched all 
No!
over place.
Kia!
Yeah.
Don't!
Kia!
Get Kia!
Then all you've got to do is take the 
I'll get Kia!
take the bag out.
It's gone!
I bet she's had it.
Well I've got to  change the complete unit.
Cos 
Yeah.
one's a dry unit and one's a wet unit.
You're supposed to use bag in that when you do it like, but ?
What, paper bags?
Yeah!
Yeah, you know, you know when you put your filter 
When you're drying  
in, you're supposed to be a bag in first and then your filter.
But when you put your filter in it won't run because by time your bag's filling up  it's pushing your filter in.
That's what this one's like.
But then.
Until we get the bags.
What you mean?
It's a 
Come in here.
I'll show you.
When you're do it dry.
You noisy little bugger!
Then put the top on.
Oh!
Alright..
Put your filter like that.
 
You put your bag  on that.
Oh!
I see.
Yeah.
See what I mean?
Yeah.
But when your filter's in  it's
Er, well it's only to protect that.
Well this is really to protect this, mostly.
No, I mean, it's prot it's to protect the bag.
The bag?
The cloth bag.
Not unless you keep 
Oh yeah!
taking that out and keep it clean.
You've got to keep washing that.
You'll have to keep washing that to er
What this?
Yeah.
What about your dummy?
Cos the dust'll deteriorate it.
want to bring it up?
And my shampoo.
Well, they told us not to wet it.
That's why they told us to keep it out when you were cleaning.
Oh aye.
They told us not to wet it.
Yeah, that.
While it's 
That.
wet.
Well while it's dry, it won't wet will it?
Yeah.
I think .
I know we never used it.
But you put that, you put a bag in 
 
now put your filter in, it just  it lids your bag but your bag splits because there's no room for your bag.
There!
Yeah.
They should be dome-shaped bags shouldn't they?
Yeah.
Then  they'd work !
They'd go down bottom wouldn't they?
They'd cost a fortune and 
No!
all won't they?
No!
No mother!
I'm only doing  
Oh!
She needs it Corrinne!
Well th well that  that filter's mainly to protect your motoring.
Yeah.
You know, so it don't get covered in dust.
This is what I'm saying whe with it, with it being
Where's your other  go?
There's no er  wet filter in.
What 
!
you call a wet filter to 
Yeah.
I know.
Benjy likes you in you when you feed him don't he?
to stop the water going up into motor.
Yeah.
He always runs after thee!
And I thought it  you know
Yeah.
Yeah.
Our Corrinne brought the car home didn't she?
Yeah!
We'll get it back.
Well like, only bit of piping you mess about is that
That little  mind you, it is a bit of a 
What that?
Yeah.
It takes ages!
It could have been ma I tell you what happened to me.
I backed up onto it  I backed up onto it, you know, when I was do ta and  I were hoovering away, I thought  aye aye!
Water's gone out of bag.
I turned round and it were all right at back of my jeans!
D'ya know, I thought she said that I weren't coming 
I knocked the pipe off 
back.
and it comes out of hoover.
Yeah.
And it's squirting all over my pigging leg !
I thought, oh!
.
He, don't she, she keeps saying damn?
When she were 
Yes.
at our house the other Saturday, she were playing and she said, I said, what did you say?
And she just went on saying it.
Bit like your parrot  don't repeat nowt!
I don't know where she's got it from!
Yeah.
I sa we thought maybe she were saying 
Well I don't say damn.
down instead.
Oh!
I forgot them little green men.
Can you hear her saying it?
I'm wondering if she's saying down  you know, like  cos they fall down  she saying up, and then she's damn.
She might be
Up!
Cos I can't think where she's 
Where are they?
There.
What's these on floor?
I don't think she's saying damn, I think she just .
Yeah, I thought she were saying damn, so maybe she were saying down.
Cos, we've heard her say it but I can't think how she can be.
I don't know where she gets it from.
Nobody uses it.
I think she must be saying down,it just sounds like   Er!
Bom!
Bom!
He's got long hair and all.
she keeps saying it !
That other
gonna be next world champ that Michael .
Are you sleepy then?
You think so?
Yeah.
Are you sleepy now?
Yeah.
Between him and that  Lennox bloke.
Ooh!
Woo!
Woo!
What you doing?
Well did you see that one other night?
Kissing.
Erm  I think we saw somebody  
Are you putting that extra line on this week?
and then we went home before.
Eh?
You putting that extra line on this week?
Who?
Are we putting that extra line on this week?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I'd have done eight more and then move across .
Who were that?
We're gonna have that, we're gonna have that million.
Who were it boxing we were watching  other night, when they were messing about?
Oh!
World champion.
Er  who is it, middle weight?
Were they middle weights?
Oh!
You mean erm
Yeah we do.
Him who knocked Michael Watson out, who's in a coma?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Him.
I thought it were rubbish!
You know
He couldn't have played with him 
Did you see him?
if he'd have wanted to!
Di did you see him though Mick?
He were just messing about!
That's, that's who he boxed  that Michael Watson in first place.
And beat him.
What like that?
Yeah.
That's, that's all he does.
You know how he does like  moved off him then  
He just stands back and looks at them!
Yeah.
Well, I'll tell you something, he's gonna get in ring with one,som with so with a fighter  one day  and they're gonna knock seven colours of shit out of him!
Hope so.
That Michael Watson give him some stick.
In fact, if he hadn't have knocked him and out and put him in a coma in last round  that Michael Watson would have won it.
Yeah.
He did half batter him!
And he just gave him one in last round and that were it!
He's in a coma.
Is he out of of hospital or is he still in?
No, he's still in.
Still in, but he's  I think come off 
He's recovered.
he, he's recovered, he's come off that life support machine  but he's still
Well
I thought they said it were over?
They said he even thought about giving it up didn't he?
After he
Oh!
Has he, replay.
It's just his way to talk to them, that's how he, that's how he boxes.
Dead funny boxer!
But I  I was, I was bored to tears!
I thought they were gonna play some music and let them dance!
Int it terrible!
Oh!
But then again, that's the first time he's been in ring since 
all day.
Yeah.
him and Michael Watson, and he won.
And then it upset him  
Well I'll tell you know  for my money  he didn't deserve to win.
No, I'd have thought he'd have put up a better show than that.
You know, because i it was absolute, I was bored to tears!
Then you, the way they spoke about him they thought he were brilliant!
They were thought he were brilliant, but he wasn't!
Well in some of  he boxes like that  and once he hits them, and he knows he's hurt them, then they 
Oh yeah!
get stuck into them!
He's a heavy hitter, admitted.
Yeah.
What's happening in 
But er 
Tyson case?
Has anyone been on telly?
Well he's 
Well they're trying to set this trial aren't they?
They said Tyson admitted it.
Yeah.
It's er, admitted something with a ho hotel .
Oh!
Whatever 
The what?
the jurors were saying.
They wanted to bring  they wanted to bring some 
And he had.
Tyson's lawyer wanted to bring some women in or summat, these three women  what would say  what other, like go against her to say erm  that she wou just wanted him   
Yeah.
Oh!
I read it in paper about it.
They wouldn't have it.
They, they says no.
E evidence is no good if  dismissible or summat, admissible whatever.
Insu not ins admissible.
Inadmissible.
Inadmissible.
Yeah.
And er 
They've got to tell the hearsay innit?
Although, saying th at this big do what they were having that  when Tyson walked in this one woman says that  that beauty queen and this other woman were singing that Money, Money, Money by Abba.
Yeah.
And somebody had said to her  erm  said something about him and her, and she says well, she said he  he's, he's  I've got the brains, he hasn't got nowt, she said, he can just give money and I'll be sitting and spending it.
Yeah, well trouble is, if he gets found guilty 
Oh yeah!
than guilty.
Yeah.
But then again, he'd have had a  he don't go that
He's, no.
Well 
He's 
like that
can go up to sixty three years!
Th they'll go in back in  in America with judge and he'll a he'll agree on th you know they'll say okay 
The 