

The two companies concerned are trying to record the spoken word.
We don't want you on tape.
So the thing, the thing to do is to sort of dot around in the conversation things like pre antidisestablishmentarianism.
And hopefully  
This will get modern usage of words.
Of, one of the words that she was talking about, people have started using wicked for  a normal phrase.
I mean, it doesn't mean what it says in the dictionary any more.
That's a really wicked thing to say, he went, no it's not it's bad, it's not wicked.
He thinks of wicked as being good, he doesn't, cause Mandy says wicked.
Yeah.
Well that's the idea anyway.
He goes round saying wicked, it's his favourite word.
Are you going to go to sleep, eh?
Please   That doesn't mean much, does it?
She's just looking over there to see which one she wants to throw up on.
Who do you want to go and gurgle at?
Eh?
Oh not Uncle Brian, no no no.
No?
Have you had enough grub for a little while?
There you are, go and see somebody.
she's got a ginormous one.
She had it .
Well don't  to me I've only just you
Come on, give Auntie Pauline a nice smile.
Go on, you do lovely smiles.
 

If she smiles it will be at your hairline.
Pardon?
She won't be able to see that far, will she?
She might be able to see a blurred shape.
she's just looked this way now.
She kept looking over there.
Don't know what she was looking at.
What were you looking at?
Well she definitely looks at her mobile.
Yeah?
I know it drives you mad, the music but er 
I wouldn't mind if those blasted  slightly longer life in terms of the music they played.
But unfortunately, you know, it's  or whatever.
But it's  over again.
Well, yes.
Well I mean that's what's nice for them, isn't it?
Yeah.
You see they've got a short concentration.
Do you think  music in the background  sort of, do all the lyrics as well .
Oh of course Oh well done.
the last half hour.
a little bit wasn't it?
She's had a lot of that today.
Have you?
Well don't put it on too loud, will you?
why babies have a suck there.
You say they're having milk, he went, what do you mean?
Milk?
What do you mean milk comes out there?
So I said well it's only when you've just had a baby like, you know, like cows.
Love him.
O K.
You will speak to me.
Eh?
You will speak to, I'm very relaxed.
I wouldn't like to go for a week in silence.
You know, I can't stay for a week in silence.
I didn't think you could.
Oh!
Where'd you come from?
Oh dear, I thought you were a , there, oh there.
What's  like?
He doesn't know his middle name, does he?her name.
 

It's nearly ready.
.Five minutes, oh we're late aren't we?
Never mind.
I spoke to  today.
Oh, right.
How is he?
Well, that's the name of the company isn't it?
He's busy.
Oh, that's what he wants to be isn't it?
Bad news.
It's bad news being busy?
Why?
He, who?
His wife's laid up in bed
Why, what's wrong?
with back pain.
She's not allowed to move
Oh dear.
at all.
Well she works with him, doesn't she?
accounts department.
He's got to go and deal with the children, take them to and from work, then run a business.
Then he's got to go home at lunchtime and give her some food.
Aha.
Now that kind of busy is  not the right sort of busy is it?
Not pleasant.
Are you hungry Charlotte?
Are you?
No.
No?
You don't want anything to eat?
Oh right.
I'll eat your dinner.
We'll eat your dinner for you.
I'll go and eat your dinner.
She's going to go and eat your dinner.
You have .
What have you been doing?
Have you been buying naughty things again Joelle?
Naughty girl.
eaten my dinner?
I haven't eaten your dinner, it's not ready yet.
.Nearly ready.
Oh, you're doing it in English are you?
I hate this in English.
This, this video.
Oh  it's the voices I can't stand.
Bonk.
Did it go bonk?
Listen, go away  She doesn't say go away very much now.
Go away.
Does she?
Well she's just heard it, that's why, but she doesn't  she doesn't say it very much does she?
No?
I've only heard it once or twice in the last few 
When I change her nappy?
Well, that's normal.
She doesn't want you to change her nappy does she?
Water please.
Right, let's go and see if these chicken things are ready.
Right, right, would you like to sort of start getting yourselves into the other room.
Now the baby's waking up, dinner's ready.
Is baby waking up?
She keeps kicking her legs and going, ah, ah.
Is the  ready ?
No, it's not.
I said try and start thinking about getting in there because 
How soon?
About two minutes.
Shall we start ?
After dinner, yeah.
Yeah.
Brian and Pauline probably won't arrive till it's virtually over.
Probably not.
Do you think Charlotte will eat a turkey steak with garlic and herbs?
What?
I said do you think Charlotte will eat a turkey steak with garlic and herbs?
We'll see, won't we.
You hungry?
Miss?
What's happening,water please, water, water.
Ah, that's that done.
Oh, it smells good.
They do don't they?
I thought we'd try them for a change.
They look really nice.
Like chicken Kiev without a load of sloppy butter.
Bit smaller than normal ones.
There's a lot of banging and crashing on this tape.
What else do I need?
A plate for Charlotte.
Brian said, we'll make it tomorrow night, eight to eight thirty.
So, cos he had an early, erm, what do you call it, early estimate.
Oh Charlotte, look what .
Don't be naughty.
Can you sort erm, madame out?
Off you go Jess, go and be fed.
Is that nice?
Is that a nice cake?
Mm.
Mm.
Pardon?
Oh you're colouring Postman Pat.
You've got a black crayon again.
It's Charlotte choosing.
Pardon?
It's Charlotte choosing.
Chose what?
The cake!
Oh, right.
Did you know what you were choosing?
Did you walk around Tesco's?
Did you walk, or did you sit in your pushchair?
Tell the truth.
Did you walk, or did you walk in your pushchair?
Sit in the pushchair.
You went in a car didn't you?
Have you told Daddy what you did?
Erm?
Go on, you tell Daddy what you did in front of erm
We went, we went to Tesco
Mhm
and after Tesco, just next to the door there's some little car
Oh yeah.
for you to go 
Yeah, one of these things you sit in, put twenty P in or whatever it is, and  have a ride for two minutes.
So she said, mm.
So I said, you can go in there when we are, when we done the shopping.
So I said, if you are a good girl you can choose a cake.
So went to Tesco, and we walk around, the cake, erm, cake thing
Aisle?
and er, I said 
Oh Charlotte, don't talk with your mouth full.
We went to Tesco to buy some milk.
To buy some milk?
Because Sainsbury didn't have any yesterday.
Did they have any today?
I don't know, I didn't go today .
What did I do today?
I made beans, when I'd finished sorting out this one I .
Charlotte don't play with that lovey.
That's a good girl.
Then I went to the bank.
Then I went to Tesco.
That take me nearly all the er
All morning.
And erm
Then this afternoon we went to Croydon.
Exciting.
I went to Tesco.
You went to Tesco?
We are very tired.
We are.
Absolutely.
Who's we?
Me.
We.
All of us?
You're not tired.
Why not?
You shouldn't be tired.
I'm happy.
Oh I'm so glad you're happy.
She's a poor old lady at the moment.
Is she?
Poor old lady.
Charlotte please don't talk with your mouth full, there's a good girl.
Keep your mouth closed when you've got something in it or we'll take something away.
It's not, it's not very nice darling, to do that.
It's not good manners.
We want to bring up a nice girl, not a little pig.
Alright?
pig.
No, nice girl, not a little pig.
pig.
Yes, nice girl.
Are you a nice girl?
What?
Not the way you stuff your cake in your mouth like that.
Dear oh dear.
I wouldn't bounce at the same time  
Don't bounce when you're eating please.
And shut your mouth.
Good girl.
trampoline now.
You're going on the trampoline.
Well finish your mouthful first, please.
Or 
Ah that wasn't her fault.
Have you finished?
Have you finished eating?
No.
No?
No 
calls for you.
Swansea.
Right hand side.
Oh right.
I couldn't work out what you were talking about.
It only takes one at a time.
No it's not  now.
It's bath time really.
Be bath time in about fifteen minutes.
I thought you'd finished your cake, haven't you finished?
Catch it, one two three  catch it, one two three.
I said catch it, you didn't catch it,.
What?
It's Top Of The Pops.
Top Of The Pops, oh
I haven't watched Top of the Pops.
will sit there cringing, said I can't believe they put this rubbish on  terrible.
Who was on it?
Don't know who was on it actually.
Well she doesn't like M C Hammer, he was on, and then there was one week with Germans on it and it was, erm, it's a German group that used to be popular and haven't done a song for ages.
It wasn't the Robots was it?
Yeah, the Robots.
I mean, it was just  the words they were using, I mean oh  It makes you cringe, oh and then that er girl  oh she's done quite a few things recently.
She sings much better than she talks.
back to my diet today.
Thank you very much, yes I will actually.
No, it's not my day to diet, been, been naughty today.
Oh dear.
Pop him on the shoulder.
. So did you enjoy Paul Simon?
Yeah.
She was about to but she found a sticker on book  
 
She comes out well on tape doesn't she?
Who Charlotte?
Mm.
I didn't realise how clear her speech was until I heard it on the tape.
It's really quite good actually.
Not bad.
Oh we'll do this one again.
drop off  
Cos it's lights and things isn't it?
She was looking at er lights in Sainsbury's the other day.
It looked like that, didn't it?
Carol was swaying at her.
You missed that.
I just swayed at her, and she   
It's Conway Twitty isn't it?
Is it?
Oh no.
How far back does this go, I suppose early fifties?
Er nineteen fifty six.
I remember Conway Twitty.
Oh yes.
You were in your cradle.
Elvis, didn't he?
I don't think he ever recorded it, I think he just used to sing it at his, er sort of cabaret.
Well so many of these songs have been done by so many people that you would be forgiven for thinking that, that.
Because there's one there, one on one of these that er either Paul Simon or Art Garfunkel or someone, can't remember which one, probably Art Garfunkel as Paul Simon does all his own doesn't he?
Well he has done other people's.
Well there's one on there, I can't remember
Like for instance the, er, what do they call those two?
Oh  the two brothers.
In the
Everley Brothers?
The Everley Brothers, that's it.
You know, Wake up Little Suzie?
Oh yeah.
Well Simon and Garfunkel did that 
Wicked  far out.
it's a groovy record this.
Shut up.
Can't remember which one it is but I'll recognise it when I hear it.
He's doing very well, isn't he.
He is.
Have to employ him full time.
He's always quite good.
I just can't believe how daft he is.
I suppose you like that film.
Yes.
Forget it.
You're not having cake.
Does she like cake?
Well she's looking at it.
So how's things down at the ?
Not too bad.
Quite good actually.
Yeah?
Keeping him busy out on estimates and
Yeah he's out  all this week.
Well, my dad won't pass them on to Terry.
Me dad said he's had enough  Well, we were debating whether to give it to you or not.
But I thought, well if Terry notices he might .
Well in fact two really big estimates 
Who, Terry?
Yeah.
And one wanted re-estimating, the other one wanted a few more prices cos everything like marble tops which are going to cost a fortune to get done.
We give them a provisional kind of price and not really gone into it in detail.
So she had a list of about five things she wanted sorted out and she said so far we were the cheapest.
But she's got about six different firms on the computer and was comparing notes.
So I worked out  and the other two were really fitting and electrics and it was all down to Terry to sort those out.
And they're both, about two to three thousand pounds worth of sanitary ware or more but two to three thousand pounds worth of work.
Well you can't afford to lose them, can you?
No.
So what's going to happen then?
God knows.
He said, I asked, asked, well I left a message on Saturday for him to sort them out didn't I?
He already knew about that.
And then I asked my father on Tuesday to remind him and he said, he'd already said he'd fetch them in on Tuesday.
And he, my father reminded him last night and he said yeah he would have them by tomorrow morning.
But he's , he just really has to get in touch with one of them  and tell them the prices.
So I don't know.
Well, I mean he'd done, he's done this first estimate, these are all just polishing touches cos people are obviously interested in, you know they're well keen on our prices.
they can't pursue it till we come back to them.
They're not pursuing it until we put these things out.
My father just turned round  I've had enough of it if Terry's not going to do the estimate he passes them on to Brian.
I said yeah then I get into trouble with them for not passing estimates to Terry and then there's an argument.
If he, if he says anything to me I'll just have to tell him.
But he's not doing the estimates he's been given and he can't afford to throw money away.
It's cos he's working for him at the moment  money.
He always gets like that and then he forgets after like a month or two when he hasn't worked for him.
He forgets how annoying he can be and you know he swings the other way.
I mean Brian's pulled in a lot of work.
lot of people kind of saying come back again on Thursday  So he's, he's .
If we got Terry to do that we'd be well away.
They, they would love him I mean one of them  it was annoying really cos Terry's just not pulling his weight.
I don't understand it, if I live to be a hundred I won't understand it.
And also, it's cos that, you know after we had that row about Terry, after Bank Holiday expecting not to have to do a day in the shop, and er he's already owing Brian a day?
Guess who's doing the extra day?got my dad to cover a day.
And then he takes a day off Bank Holidays.
and he can't do it because my dad .
But then tomorrow he's actually doing his own work.
So he could easily have .
And on Monday 
So who's covering tomorrow?
Well my brother's covered practically all week and Brian's doing tomorrow.
Terry phoned up asking what, Tuesday morning about quarter past eight said who was covering.
And he said well my father is doing today I can't do today I'll do it Friday and I shouted down the stairs but he owes you a day you shouldn't be going in.
I mean he hasn't been in the shop once this week.
Somebody's got to tell him to   
So do Dave and Terry  in the shop .
They have the records.
And it hasn't been sorted yet?
Oh no.
He's got the gall to phone up on Tuesday and say Eileen can't do a day, we're going to be short of Eileen.
So the answer is to just phone them.
I can't do it.
I'm not doing it.
What's the point of carrying on like that?
Well he's going to carry on like that isn't he?
Not unless someone puts their foot down.
And if your father is currently taking your side of things  worth sounding him out as to how far he'll take 
Ah 
whilst he's in the mood?
Yeah.
He's not being that much 
You sure?
Mmm.
He's probably only in the mood cos he's probably upsetting them on his night out cos they go out in the evenings.
On a Wednesday evening, don't they.
Cos Terry 
I mean , wouldn't he rather have Terry as a sort of permanent worker anyway?
It's not being fair 
do any work.
Oh what, your dad?
Pauline's dad  er  
too expensive I think.
Terry uses the shop to get extra money every so often, uses my dad  ticking over running when he 
Why .
He does get the offer, I mean  
two months and she phoned up and I kind of made out it got lost in the post.
I erm  got, check you've got two days, you've got give me the estimate, it's got to be on because she's expecting it to be done straight away on the computer and sent.
And he actually got that one done.
Do you know it was only five lines.
I mean I could have made it up it was that easy.
So I sent that off.
She was in first thing, I mean I sent it off that evening she was in first thing the next morning yes that's fine .
So he's got that job and another one .
She's trying isn't she?
I don't understand why it surprises you, that's what gets me.
I mean  
It's normal behaviour .
Charlotte's done it too.
Can you pass me that er, sheet?
This?
Is that your reading?
That's not your regulations you have to read is it?
Oh no, that's a 
I was going to say that doesn't seem very thick 
No, that's to do with this tape.
Oh I tell you what is quite funny these, the act.
Mmm.
Oh.
hereby enacted  her gracious majesty, you know, etcetera etcetera.
What was it, the Lords temporal and spiritual, that's what they call themselves.
Now that is, that's 
Yes.
Yeah I realise and I hope  I don't come into contact with too many acts of parliament.
Oh, we had someone round to see the house yesterday.
Oh yeah?
They came twenty minutes early, there's Brian up in the shower, there's me stuffing things in the cupboard under the stairs.
That's an old trick.
I said to Danny, don't open the door.
Don't open the door!
So as I'm still trying to stuff things away, she opened the door and everything fell out.
look round the front room, then they looked round the, the garden.
While they were looking round the garden I  you've got to get out the shower quick.
I don't know.
They'd come down from, they'd come down from,erm, somewhere or other.
They're just doing a kind of tour of loads and loads of houses cos they keep moving with his job.
Oh, right.
She quite, I think she liked the area, she was saying about the schools and that.
Mind you, she likes erm  and they're all separate, all the best ones round here are .
She said don't they have any details?
So I said well, no it's not  now is it, it's erm, oh it's that school that the .
Something and School of Arts now it's called  well technical
School of Arts round here?
No it's another, well technical,
performing arts here.
performing arts and that's the technical
It's a monstrosity.
Oh you rotten old pig, you've been sick.
Oh she hasn't?
Oh.
Yeah, it's alright.
is it washable?
Yeah, I think so.
You'll soon find out.
Yes.
Do you feel better now?
Obviously.
I think she thinks she's got some milk now.
I thought you said, one, you had to have somebody involved who is?.
No no no one person that's not right.
Oh, right .
There is no, statutory obligation for the person organizing it
Oh, I know.
Well not the organizer surely oh I know I would have thought you'd have to,shoot it
I'm sure that the social services require psychiatric or 
Mm, I would of thought so
obviously medical  what you're doing.
Mhm but they're to be qualified people involved.
But I would have expected that the whole thing would have to be operated by, somebody who was qualified.
I don't know, because like, you know like the doctors  
I think it sort of depends how big that you want to get involved in.
If you're just somebody who's on the outside providing services, to keep the smooth running of it then you don't really have to know anything about it.
Mm.
But if you're actually involved in it, and you want to be involved in the people, then I think you have to know something about it.
Well the other evening they were showing something on T V, one of these doctors', doctors' practices that are opting out or whatever.
And they got a stockbroker, someone who used to be a stockbroker, actually managing the whole practice.
Yeah.
I mean he's obviously not qualified as a doctor.
Mhm.
So I mean I suppose they'll look at it in the same kind of way, somebody who's got managerial, management qualities rather than I suppose people who are interested in the other side of it, the medical side of it, probably, really be geared up to organizing the money side of it wouldn't they, usually one or the other.
So have you done any more calculations on it?
There's nothing really more  I mean the whole thing is a budget guesstimate.
I've no idea yet, really what, I mean, you know, for instance I don't know how much ratio staff to patients they need, therefore you can't really, you know, follow that up because you've no idea what the costs themselves could be.
Well you don't know, have you, have you found the statutory requirement for space yet?
Per person.
I think the thing is going to come unstuck  in the, I think the biggest thing is, I was thinking, is the fact that you've got to get  I wouldn't get a commitment from Social Services until they see a property actually ready for occupation.
Now I'm not gonna be prepared to go through the whole business and then find them say oh sorry you're wrong.
Property is the biggest bugbear.
Yeah.
Because I don't think
If you're actually sitting on 
I don't think the banks are gonna want to invest.
To be perfectly frank.
You see the only way we can get equity out and put money in ourselves is by selling this place.
Yes.
Therefore if we don't actually want to live in the same place as the residents, which I certainly wouldn't want to do, right.
We'd have to buy two  adjoining.
Yeah.
So that either means  providing it, or something further down the scale .
I mean that's, huge.
That to be honest is, is somebody who's like, been doing this for ten years and has already got themselves like half a million pounds of worth of equity.
You know it's a huge property.
But you would need a large property to do what you want?
I don't think so.
It would be eleven bedrooms and five receptions .
The point is, that  you've got to count, if , you've got to count one bedroom 
Yes, I've got 
you count one bedroom for all the .
You may even have to count two.
You certainly got to count one.
So two bedrooms out of twelve are no longer available.
Sorry?
Say that again in English.
They're coming to collect the stuff next Thursday.
But I don't have to do it every day all day.
It's twenty tapes.
So that's twenty times ninety minutes.
talking about his  estimates.
Very exciting stuff and I've been telling her not to speak so loudly.
Have you had enough now?
and then I'm talking about  right?
It's gonna cost five and a half thousand  mortgage.
At this point  would cost about  just, just about half.
Six bedrooms would pro , six bedrooms would probably cost you two  to buy.
five and six bedroom houses and you won't get anything under two hundred thousand pounds.
How much do you wanna to bet on that?
Mm?
Where?
I've been waiting for  on one.
Where?
You've got to spend as much or twice as much there as you would there as you would anywhere else.
Those other properties, there isn't half the amount of work  need doing there as .
needs a lot of work.
If we moved in then we'd have to spend fifty thousand pound to get it up to scratch.
That's just to live in.
Alright, O K, let's say two hundred grand, O K?
It's still fifty per cent less than one of those properties at Harrow Road, right?
Fifty per cent less on the mortgage means erm about three and a half thousand .
It's effectively eighteen thousand per annum saved, right?
The cost of  and  gain four bedrooms  
the cheaper it should become.
Oh yes it is, I don't doubt it  but the problem is  right?
And you've got to be realistic.
Because no bank is going to give you the money against the costs of the value of the property right?
They're gonna give you the  against equity  equity of some sort.
But the only way you can get the equity, right?
The only way we could get the equity.
We could do it.
The only thing I could do  I mean at the same time I'm saying O K I'll go in to do it this way, would be to actually say, sod this for a lark, instead of doing erm  totally private thing, gonna set up a private limited company  to issue  cheques.
I really couldn't  I would never get the price I'd want for the alphabet.
Shall we go for a stroll?
No .
Fetch the 
No, no, no, no, no.
What do you mean, no?
You've got to take the  with you.
Why?
Why are you .
Why are you going for a walk?
To go and see  What have you bought?
Oh you're not starting again, are you?
Yeah, you're not to smoke any more.
I haven't got any.
You are not to smoke  
You're looking so guilty.
The pair of them.
Really.
Excuse me, excuse me ladies.
Since when do you ask Brian if he wants to go for a walk?
This is nothing to do  
Empty your pockets.
Come on.
This is  going down on the table.
Come on, you're not going to have them in there, are you?
I'm not daft.
Alright?
I wasn't born yesterday.
You might forget them one day and they'll get washed.
That is not for me to contribute to.
I haven't said anything about it.
Amy .
Let go of my neck.
She's a major contributor to these tapes, aren't you?
  

Shall we take her for a walk?
You really must think we're daft.
He's sleeping down here tonight.
It's bad enough being woken up by the baby without going back to bed and then being woken up by .
I've been going to bed at half past one and I was doing the T M A for two nights, then I've been doing his V A T for two nights so I've got to bed really really late and I just and, the thing is, the T M A were all on about my  then I just start to relax    I had to resort to herbal knockout drops.
Oh that's very naughty.
Right.
Definitely smoking .
Well, we were sitting there doing the V A T and I thought, I don't know that's just not  but 
How much is it when you want to go cinema?
Oh,about two seventy five I think but I'm not sure 
Is it as little as that?
it might be more but .
Well I'd either do it that way or pay, erm, credit cards.
I don't really take any notice.
Terrible
Naughty, isn't it?
I don't think it's terrible 
White Fang.
Oh what on earth's that?
It's the latest Disney extravaganza, and a wolf cub in it, oh Kirsty  loves .
Oh isn't it?
No, it says here, the story of a young wolf.
Oh, she'll probably like that 
tomorrow we'll go somewhere and spend my money.
Yes I suppose by the time she's here  look different.
Gonna have your hair done?a perm.
She hasn't got enough to have a perm, has she now?
I think she's gonna grow it out.
She's gonna, perm the top so she can grow it out.
I told you, didn't I say, as soon as she gets it cut she'll be growing it out.
Where are you going to get it done?
Er in 
they normally cut it well.
Bit expensive though.
Twenty one pounds forty five.
Just to have it cut and blow dried?
Regardless of whether it's a restyle or trim.
Bit expensive.
That is.
Mind you, my hair was a lot better when I was having it done .
I must admit though it looked lovely, I'll say that.
I only had a trim, but the blow dry made it sort of Do you remember when I got that, my hair cut really short?
They did that, and that was, that was really nice.
When I look back at the photographs I think  And even when it was long I had, there was one hairdresser there called Paul, whom I'd go and see regularly .
I'd go and see him regularly because he did it really well, once he left 
Well I had one like that, you know when we used to go to that gym up in Chelsea?
Mind you my regular's back and she charges three pounds.
six weeks.
I haven't been since, what  isn't it?
Trouble is now, cos I know a hairdresser  the shop, if I go somewhere else, it looks a bit you know and yet I'm not very satisfied with the way he cuts it, he's done it cheap.
Mind you, he did Mandy's  at Mandy's, I thought that was quite nice.
Have you got a hiccup?
Caught it off Amy.
She's gone to sleep now?
They are aren't they?
But he phoned up to order it and said oh my wife likes these soppy things, he bought it, I didn't.
It had nothing to do with me.
Then he wants me to tape it so he can have it in the car cos it's on C D. 
Hold your breath.
drink some water, concentrate 
Well, if you want to get rid of hiccups, drink
Hold your breath and  push  seems to work on me.
stand on your head.
Run round the block or something.
Why can I, er I can't have hiccup?
Because you don't like them.
You keep complaining every time you get hiccups, you say oh I don't like them.
I'm trying to help get rid of them, sorry.
Supposed to work isn't it?
Once she's gone, once she's gone she's gone.
Oh dear, oh we've come to the end.
Oy, psst, you are a little fidget.
Where is Adam and Brian?
Mm?
Where is Adam and Brian?
They're not having a cigar, they're walking round the block.
They're not having a cigar.
So they keep telling me.
They've gone out for a walk to have a cigar but as far we're concerned they're not having a cigar.
They think we're stupid and we don't realize 
Well, I'm not supposed to tell you but he was smoking on the station when we just caught sight of him.
Well I'm sure he was.
I said how am I not supposed to say anything, I said I don't approve why should I keep this quiet?
Cos it's not good for you.
It's not on.
Brian is, because we've been out a couple of times and he does, I mean if we go out he'll smoke then and then he just normally stops.
Yes, he had one to celebrate, but he didn't just buy one he bought a box.
So of course he had to keep smoking them until he'd finished
Until they'd gone, yes.
And he told me, well quite soon  quite soon after she came along.
I think he actually went for a walk with Brian.
Oh, I assume he brought 
No, no, this was the last one.
I said, you had the last one two days ago.
So the last one of packet number I don't know what.
Well Brian can stop  terrible now, he's really snoring, god .
I've got to the point now, I kick him and tell him to turn over, he turns it over and it's just as bad as before.
Yeah, yeah.
I don't want to be married.
No, don't bother 
Well at least have separate rooms.
I wouldn't mind, but it's normally me that goes and sleeps on the settee and I don't see why I should.
Well, no the other day he said if I'm really that bad you just tell me and I'll go down and sleep on the sofa.
And I went  berserk about two nights later and said for god's sake you're driving me bonkers, go away and sleep on the sofa.
He's turned over and started snoring.
Well he can be lying there sometimes and I'll say, will you roll over please.
Mm.
Go on then.
Mm.
Will you please roll over!
Or some of the time I've been sitting there in the bed feeding the baby, you know
Mm.
and  go shut up!
Shut up!
It's awful.
Well, I've found now I do a combination of  what's that stuff, erm, orbathol that seems to help a bit.
I don't think it helps him, it helps me calm down and go to sleep.
Knock out drops.
put that all over, I keep forgetting to take those herbal tablets, they seem to help with colds or whatever but I haven't got those upstairs at the moment which doesn't help.
And then last night I just took my stuff and knocked myself out instead.
I don't see why I should have to knock myself out 
have to be a man unfortunately.
Trouble is I go into such a deep sleep I can't wake up in the morning if I do, you know, take the herbal stuff, I , I'm flat out in the morning, can't wake up.
I think I got up about half past eight this morning.
Goodness me.
I had to go to work about nine.
Oh what are you doing?
Oh shut up.
Go away.
And he gets hiccups.
He eats too much too quickly.
He gets really violent hiccups though, you know, really  th , they sound  very, very painful.
My baby's ones do.
Mm.
You know when it, you can just hear everything going ckkk ooh.
Is she awake?
No.
I'll have to put you down some time.
I felt so sorry for Christine.
Do you know she's now, she was quite cuddly, she was fat in the pregnancy when I saw her last time.
And in the space of three weeks I think the baby's used up all her  fat because she's now just really, really pregnant.
But, not so much her face, but all the top part of her looks slim, almost, you know I mean, she's got no fat left there, on her arms it's all gone.
Just a bit left on her legs so the baby must have used up all if the baby carries on like this she'll be anaemic I think.
When's she due?
Did you say?
Eleventh, so she's got another, almost two, well  two weeks, ten days.
Mm.
She said she can't sit down, can't stand up.
I was just sitting there for about five minutes then she got up, then she, ooh, sat down, then she got up.
I don't think it can be too long.
Now what about that then?
I can't believe how quickly the time's gone.
Mm.
Do you want to sit down ?
broke today.
Ooh broke?
I mean I was, one minute I was walking round, I hadn't touched anything another minute it was catching my finger.
I looked down to see what was kind of stinging my finger and the ring had snapped and was pinching where it caught my finger.
I can't get mine off.
Well I can't wear a wedding ring now, it, just cos it's so wide, it's a really wide one.
And if I wear  where I had the eternity ring on and the engagement ring and the wedding ring  
 
it just felt like arthritis, it used to get really painful.
So I said oh blow this that's coming off.
I suppose I'll have to get another wedding ring.
It's fashionable to have a kind of  reason 
I don't think so.
So I'm feeling less and less married the more rings I keep breaking.
I can't get my wedding ring off.
No.
Well, my fingers get swelling as well, so I thought it wouldn't do any harm.
Well I have finished 
Well they're all up there.
O K.
Well I could not ask you before.
Well, yeah, if you look, ooh, I can't think where.
I think there's a book-rack up there and I think some of them, the patterns are out of the magazine and they're just, in a rack, I think.
If you go up there just leave them as they are don't leave them all over the place.
put them back.
Are you making something?
Depends how much time I've got.
Yeah.
What are you going to make?
Some 
Yeah?
What the ski , lycra type one?
Little?
Lycra.
Oh that one, no.
fabric .
Do you want the fitted or loose?
You want like, like that, floaty?
Like, like these, or, more like jogging pants?
No, like these.
Well if you want them to stay pretty as opposed to going baggy then you'll need to have a bit of lycra in the fabric.
Keeps the shape better.
Mandy loves her top.
Oh, the body?
The body?
Yeah, she was wearing it flat out when she was 
So you didn't get a look in then?
Oh no, I was wrestling it off to wash it in the end.
She kind of wore it with everything she could think of I think that would go.
Mind you, I don't think it's come out of the washing at the moment, I think it's getting water .
I haven't seen it recently.
Quite versatile really.
Yeah, yes she wore it with a lot of you know trousers and skirts and  The big thing at the moment is a new polo neck that we got from .
It's actually ever such a good one.
An  X Together one, you know Together the label ?
So 
Yeah.
But you also buy it in, er, Alders, they've got them.
. So it's normally quite expensive  and it's, it's lovely material and it comes down to about here.
We got it for four pound fifty.
Ever so cheap.
That's 
Oh, right, yes I've seen it, I've seen it.
Well ever so often what they do they get the ex catalogue stuff.
You know you can get some quite good buys like end of the season.
Who are they?
You get the end of season and it's  if you look at the labels and go for the decent labels then you don't get sort of, quite reasonable quality.
Mm.
I got quite a few things in there.
I'll probably have a stroll round there just to get a tracksuit for, when Michael was  
childrens' tracksuit.
I used to, I bought loads and loads in there.
Joelle?
Could you just take the carrycot up and put it on the floor?
Just so that it's upstairs, for me.
On the floor?bedroom floor?
Well I haven't cleared the cot out, so 
O K.
it's funny cos I just  I thought ooh, I'll buy it for her cos  you know she doesn't  
 
four pound fifty I didn't mind.
. But it actually really suits her, it's a kind of sl almost  maroony red, burgundy type red, not quite and er  it's a really good colour.
Christine got a load of her pregnancy stuff there.
Cos she said I'm not paying a fortune for  stuff that I won't wear afterwards.
So she bought  
Is there maternity clothes then?
Well, if you look, yeah.
Well she got a kind of raincoat, that, I don't think it's supposed to be maternity I think it's just supposed to be 
Oh yes, cos that was the fashion wasn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
So she's, she's got one there.
I think she paid  eight pound for it, and it, it looks  raincoat .
And it still fits, it still fits over the hump.
But she's huge.
I really got away with it, you know.
I, didn't have a coat right the way through.
Mm.
when it rains, that's all.
Really lucky.
she hasn't got a car, or anything.
She's
Oh, dear.
So she has to walk round  well, Chris sold his car didn't he cos they want to save up and get a house.
Even through the snow I survived.
Very lucky.
Cos I refused to go out and buy a coat.
I used to wear one 
I had a jumper that my mum knitted that went wrong and ended up twice the size it should have been.
But that came in useful.
Yeah.
Well, when Mandy was  when I was pregnant with Mandy I used to wear this old, you know those rabbit skin coats  coney coat what they're called?
Fur coat thing.
Mm.
Well it was a kind of fur coat but it was rabbit I think, it was.
I got one, ooh, well it was really fashionable then so it was quite beautiful sixteen years ago.
I'd probably know what you mean if I saw it.
It's just a little jacket kind of thing.
So when I was pregnant that would be, that was fine cos it just 
Sat on top?
Yeah, sat on top really.
And er with Michael I'd gone out in Richard's and bought mys , ever such a full raincoat when it was in fashion.
I still had it in the wardrobe so I just used to .
But I still had more room than I needed in that so that was quite useful.
Actually Christine  normal size twelve dress that happened to be a full dress.
Oh, a baggy one.
And she's, she's quite  it's a kind of cottony, stretchy, you know those ones that you have a V and then they're quite full, like this is full from there?
Oh, I know, yeah.
This is like a V.
Well the V's just kind of gone up.
It actually looked quite nice on her.
She didn't look too bad considering.
I hardly wore any dresses.
Well she's got, she said she just wears the three, I don't think she likes  like the trousers.
Oh it's boring, isn't it, being pregnant?
Because you don't want to go and buy as many clothes as you would have in your wardrobe normally.
The killer is when you've got to go out to a special occasion isn't it?
Yes.
And you know you've got to  
 
Yeah.
I bought this really expensive one, you know I was  can't remember  a wedding or something so I had to buy something.
Finished your discussion?
You enjoyed your non-smoking did you?
Sorry?
You enjoyed your non-smoking did you?
Is it cold out?
No  mild.
. It's a bit, nippy round the gills.
Mm.
Mm
Well I'm going fishing on Saturday.
Do you wanna dozen, a trout, if you, if I 
Oh yes please.
have any success?
Yes.
Yes I enjoyed that trout last time.
He doesn't even like it.
He doesn't like trout?
Well he does, but he won't eat it.
Why won't you eat it?
I suggest having trout for dinner, no.
Don't fancy it.
I like er
we've actually had trout in the freezer for ages, and not used them  fresh the day I got them  I'll use it and 
I'm keen on trout if it's got a sauce.
Mm.
But to be honest I shouldn't be eating that sort of thing anyway, so
I like it best with almonds, flaked almonds on the top.
Mm.
And that's not on my diet either.
Actually onions and mushrooms in garlic butter
How've you been doing?
Oh alright, yeah.
Last, I broke it last night  didn't have enough time cos I was, if I'm doing his books all afternoon.
Mm.
And I didn't have time to cook so he went out, cos I broke it last night , well I was alright up to lunchtime.
It's dinner time again.
I shall start again tomorrow.
Other than that I don't usually break it.
How much have you lost?
I haven't really lost, in weight I haven't lost any more but it's coming, my body's
It's shaping you up?
Yeah, yes.
Cos, kind of, all my clothes 
You look a bit thinner in the face and neck.
Yeah.
I think it's  maybe it's turned to muscle, I don't know.
Redistributing
Yeah, yeah.
I don't know how to describe it.
Cos I'm not actually losing weight, but my clothes all feel, you know I can get into clothes I haven't worn for ages.
Mm.
Well Suzy's going to Weightwatchers again.
Is she?
She doesn't look like she needs to really.
She's put on a little bit of weight.
She has put on a bit, but 
I tell you what Suzy, Suzy's problem is her rump and her  her
Yeah her legs.
and her thighs.
That's where she
Because if you look at the top of her, you you wouldn't think
No, you wouldn't think she was overweight.
Take a picture of her head and shoulders.
Mm.
You'd think she was skinny.
Mm.
Well, she went right down to a size ten when she lost all that weight before.
What is she now?
Fourteen.
Blimey.
Mm.
So she has got a problem then.
It's all round the bottom.
Mind you, cycling should help that.
She's out cycling here and getting the train in the morning.
Keeps her bike in the garage and pops on the train.
So you don't need a lot of  
 
in the garage.
No that's right.
jacket.
Mind you, isn't there some restrictions on what you can do with fridges?
I think you can ask the council to take it away or something or take it to the dump 
you can take it down the tip,
They recycle CFC's don't they?
That's right, yeah.
Really goes against the grain to see .
Mm.
Well we don't really need another one.
We've got a fridge in the  at work, there's one in the kitchen 
Can't you find  
Can't you find what?
or something?
Well it's difficult, isn't it really?
Because it's, it's er under, under worktop  
Well, if, if they enquire they're only enquiring .
That's true.
Just ask for a fiver.
Cos if you say nothing they probably  think there's something wrong 
not working so they don't want to take it.
have to get somebody to take it away.
Well I think it's going to be a case of phone the council and ask them to 
Do they take them?
I don't think I'll get it in the car anyway.
Who's asleep proper now?
now isn't she?
Pardon?
She gone?
I'm not sure.
Well how much does it cost to get in the cinema ?
About four quid isn't it.
Is it?
I'll have to buy the tickets occasionally.
I think it's about three, three seventy five.
Something like that.
Oh, cos Joelle was trying to, trying to work out if she can afford to have her hair done and go to the cinema.
What does she wanna go and see?
White Fang.
White what?
It's the latest Walt Disney.
It's a story about a wolf.
Oh that one.
Fantasia.
What'd you say?
We want to go and see that 
Fantasia's coming out 
It's a last, last ditch attempt to get some money out of it, is it?
And what was the other one?
I was told, wasn't I?
Fantasia and 
It wasn't one we wanted
Hundred and One Dalmatians?
No, no, we would have wanted that.
Oh yeah that's it.
Yes it was, yeah
latest one, it made a massive, massive loss apparently.
I shouldn't bother about it .
It's so boring.
I'd like Fantasia.
I'd probably be sad and disappointed.
My memory of it would probably be .
Yeah, of course you saw it as a kid, didn't you?
fifteen I think.
Fifteen, sixteen.
Oh no I saw it when I was about eight.
And I saw it before that, about, yeah about eight as well.
But I still enjoyed it the second time.
Well I don't think actually, I mean I can remember  and I don't quite understand what's going on here, keeps swapping and changing and I don't understand it.
I remember I didn't like the orchestra bit.
weird psychedelic bits.
That's right, yeah.
The Nutcracker Suite's my favourite.
Hippos and things doing ballet dances.
asleep.
No, she's not asleep.
I thought you said she was asleep.
She was.
She's just woken up.
Well.
What do you want to do?
Shall I put you in your chair?
Shall I?
Oh you do make funny faces little girl.
Do you remember  provisional driving licence?
Now how long has she left that sitting there?
Ages isn't it I thought I'd tidy up in his desk and I was just going through the mound of papers, and I said here you are here's your licence, finish it off, fill it in, and I'll give you the cheque.
Oh right, I'll  and then she's moaning at him cos she wants to go and post it and you were mucking about with your C D thing or something and you were saying wait for me I'll do this  then  I'll miss the post.
It's been sitting there for about three months.
On the desk and she hasn't bothered  probably with the cheque.
How are you going to afford a driving licence?
Totally ignored me.
Oh, of course,expecting us to pay.
 

Oh, that's a nice choccy.
She sounded really cheesed off about  I said how's your revision going, cos I knew she was doing revision, she went cccckkk I try a maths paper and I can't do that, and I  a chemistry paper and I can't do that and I really .
I said I think you need a break.
I think you need to go and do something else for a little while  I said cos if you keep looking over thinking you can't do it, have a break and go back to it afterwards you just get really despondent
Yeah.
and fed up and think you can't do it and you go blank and then you can't touch anything you  and you know it's hard.
Mm.
Yeah.
You know, you can see it ticking over .
What am I doing.
She was fine tonight, wasn't she?
What was she doing?
I dunno, I think she just, probably gone down and played some records or something .
She's got to do some  trigs and she just doesn't fancy trying, doesn't understand enough of it to do it.
And the science paper she's only got the  the kind of practice one, it's a very basic one.
She's got no practice ones for the two, the other two she's got to do which are obviously going to be harder and she's got no idea, not, well she's got the guidelines but no real paper to sit and look at.
Mm.
This is for GCSEs isn't it?
Yeah.
Mm.
Well you'd think they'd let her, you know have some old paper  
Does she have  or not?
Yes, she erm 
There aren't any old papers yet though are there?
Well yeah this is done in Croydon last year and the year before so yeah there would be a couple
Oh right.
cos this was Croydon  I'm pretty sure it  yeah because otherwise she couldn't have the basic from last year would she?
She's got last year's basic.
Yes she's done er, both, three?
four 
Well on Tuesday she goes in and goes, she's got till Tuesday, one's about six and one's five.
Course Danielle's in the middle of it all now, isn't she?
We probably know quite a lot of people who are taking exams of one sort or another at the moment.
Gabby's going through A levels.
Mm.
She's decided she's gonna to become a milkwoman.
Bit easier, is it?
Yes.
Doesn't want to be a doctor any more.
She's wanted to be a doctor for six years now she's decided
One of Mandy's friends wants to be a doctor.
It's the one who's had cancer and she wants to kind of, go on and study and help the people with cancer.
Cos she doesn't want to be like depressing, she said er no she doesn't feel like that because she's already gone through the worst so she won't, yeah she wants to help people who've got it.
Which I thought was quite nice.
Mm.
Nice idea.
Mind you, that's what motivated my brother in M S
Mm.
cos he had a, he had it, had it as a  kiddy.
Went through so many operations he felt he wanted to give something back to the Health Service.
Well I think that's the kind of idea this girl's got.
Cos, that's right we took, we took them all skating when Mandy was twelve .
Yeah when she was twelve.
And that's when, that week, well she already knew she had something wrong 
Mm.
and about two weeks after that it was diagnosed that she had cancer of the ovary.
Yeah.
Cos she had all her bits removed, presumably did she?
Yeah I presume so.
She had quite a bit of work done.
She had chemotherapy.
She lost all her hair.
Has it all come back?
Oh yeah.
She's all fine now.
Is she fully  full recovered?
Yeah, I think so, yeah.
From what I can gather.
Very lucky.
Mm.
Yeah because  it was pushing everything.
You know it was taking up so much space.
Wouldn't think there was the room in there for, for women.
I was really worried at the time cos Mandy, Mandy was very worried, wasn't she?
Mhm.
It really seemed to hit her hard.
Actually her friends have gone through a lot.
I mean what with that girl and cancer, and then another good friend, her father died.
Then, it's quite a lot to happen, isn't it?
Really makes her think.
Or worry.
Mm.
Whose father died then?
 Celestian's 
Oh Christ.
He had, er, sickle cell, didn't he?
Oh that funny version of sickle cell, wasn't very nice.
Didn't know there was two versions of .
How's that, er, Phil  getting on with bringing up her, her baby?
We haven't heard anything for  
I think she's alright yes.
I don't think she does anything, well I don't really see her very much.
Well her best friend's 
Well it must be, nearly two by now.
Yeah, she's walking and, she's slow at walking though.
Yeah, she looks alright.
says she's not very well, she's got a thyroid infection, infection in her throat  it's affecting her stomach.
They took her down the hospital.
And, they diagnosed that, and said try and keep, you know, give her fluids, but it's going straight through.
And they've given her something low in glucose and that you know to  kind of try and stabilize it a bit.
Mhm.
But she's not too good by the sounds of it.
Mind you I saw her two day's ago and she looked absolutely fit as a fiddle  so I said I think it strikes quickly and
Mm.
You know she looks a lot more comfortable in there than Charlotte did.
Charlotte always looked sort of 
Scrunched up.
She seems to like it 
It's the longest she's stayed in it.
I wonder what's .
Enough enough, do you want to go buy some Polo?
Mm.
Alright stop it then  keep that 
Come on.
Just a minute love.
Put it on  alright?
Yeah.
Off we go.
Right off we go then.
See you later  
Yep, where are my keys?
Where did you put them, in the dining room?
Found one what?
Polo.
Polos  just one Polo.
No just one packet.
I think we might be able to manage that.
Aha.
Off we go 
Just a minute darling  it's alright I  can afford to buy you a packet of Polos.
Off we go again  I go home.
Pet hold mummy's hand  hold mummy's hand, there's a good girl  off we go.
I give you money.
Bye.
Bye  watch out.
Shut the door  there we are.
Bit chilly, I run round.
A bit chilly is it?
Is it a bit chilly?
Never mind.
Yes that is a bit chilly.
What's a bit chilly?
That's a bit chilly, he's a man.
It's a man, is he a bit chilly, he doesn't look chilly  he's got a coat on.
Pardon?
Look at me when you're talking to me I can't hear you.
a man.
It's a man  there's lots of men.
Can I go on there?
Can you go on where?
Oh oh  thank you.
Oh you want to walk on that, oh Charlotte    come on then, you're pushing me into the road.
Go in the road.
I don't want to go in the road.
No.
No.
You do.
I don't.
I go on there  see.
Mm.
Gonna fall.
Oh dear, I'm sorry.
Who's coming to see you today?
Can you remember?
Grandma.
Pardon?
A train.
Who's coming to see you?
Grandma's coming to see me.
Grandma's coming to see you, that's right and who else?
Pardon?
Grandma and
Granddad.
Granddad that's right.
Granddad.
Or it's Grandpa  Granddad's in American isn't he?
Granddad's a long way away, he's on holiday.
Yeah, on holiday.
On holiday that's right, he sent you a letter didn't he?
He sent you a letter.
Hold me a little bit.
What love?
Hold my hand nicely sweetheart, there's a good girl  we're coming up to a busy road in a minute and it's dangerous  Walk nicely darling, there's a good girl  walk nicely  just stand still a minute sweetheart  hold my hand  Charlotte please hold my hand there's a good girl.
Little bit further.
Little bit further yes, it's not very far  it's not very far 
It's not very far.
to the shop is it?
not very far.
Not very far no.
Oh that's a hole, a hole.
A hole in the road yes there's lots of holes in this road.
Can I go on there?
Can you, oh alright then .
lot's of people dig up the pavement don't they?
Can I go on there?
Can you, yeah go on  no you hold my hand please  no running away, no running away  there's too many cars  alright.
No I'm not  I'm not.
Not what?
We're not going in the car are we?
No we're not going in the car we're walking  aren't we?
Oh Charlotte loo will you pick up your feet.
Pardon?
Oh nearly there.
Pardon?
Right we go across the road now  nicely.
Cross the road.
Cross the road now you stand there  stand still, give me your other hand  good girl right  now is it all clear 
Now you can cross.
O K off we go  off we go.
Off we go.
Off we go  up the step there's a good girl.
Ooh ooh ooh.
Charlotte please, can you walk nicely?
Pardon?
It's here.
We're nearly there yes.
In here.
No we're not going here we'll go a bit further.
No you must hold my hand darling, it's too dangerous  too many cars  alright  too many cars.
What?
I can't hear you sweetheart, speak up.
Charlotte  what did you say?
What did you say?
I can't hear you I'm sorry  wait till we get in the shop  too noisy all these cars isn't it  there we are nearly there now  nearly there.
In you go  good girl  Hello.
Hello  How are you?
Fine thank you.
Hello  about little one.
Pardon?
So what time 
Little boy or girl?
No, no a girl.
A girl.
Yeah .
 

Right is there anything else you want?
Something else you want, I got some Polos.
Oh give it to me.
Want anything else?
Erm
You often get the chance so make the most of it.
Any books 
No you ca not toffees darling, you want some Smarties you can have some Smarties.
That's .
That's Smarties yes, do you want Smarties  yeah?
I want Smarties.
You want Smarties  alright that's all then.
Alright.
We'll get one of those for another day  that's it now, no more  don't touch  You stay there, don't touch them  good girl.
Sixteen pounds please.
Got some.
Put it down  you're not having any more, no  Alright there's good girl you can hold a packet of Polos  that's right.
I want Polos.
You want Polos, I know that's why we came out isn't it  lucky girl.
She likes Polo?
I like Polo.
She's adores them I don't ha , I don't know if this is normal for a child this age to eat Polos, but
Actually I like Polo I don't like other so erm  I'm not really sure what does it  like Polo mint.
I want Polos now.
You want, oh alright you can have one, just one.
I don't know why I mean why I like Polo.
 
They are nice, they're not too strong are they?
There we are  right you have those.
Nice smelling.
Right off we go then, we go home  go on then say bye bye.
Bye bye.
Bye.
See you again.
Hold my hand then  come on hold mummy's hand, there's a good girl  no you've got to pull it  bye.
Alright little one.
Oh this is mummy's hat.
Who?
So what was the problem on the journey then?
Mummy 
Well we got to  and there's  three weeks  well when we came up at the beginning of May there was a notice on the main main twenty one which said
No they're done yet love.
Okay.
The tatties.
long delays expected from May thirteenth for three weeks due to major resurfacing 
Hello.
etcetera etcetera
Hello.
so
You sleepy girl?
we  avoided the area
Until today?
and as we're right up towards the end and now after the bank holiday we've had lovely fine weather anyway, we got off to the main road and turned  at Fibwell traffic lights onto the A twenty one and we got the to end of the dual carriageway onto the tail end of the queue as it started into the road works  so I just went over the central reservation and went back down the dual carriageway to the traffic lights at
 Fibwell and turned right went through Tyse 
 Tysehurst to  Wothurst round the north side of
 Bule reservoir to come out at Lamberhurst in the village  so I sort of circled it
Oh right.
which added another half an hour to the journey
Oh well  you got here
but in the middle of all that of course there were numerous little bits of temporary traffic lights at roadworks which
conspired to change when we approached them and  generally it was a bitch of a journey  Hee hee hee hee hee.
I see your fork  tha I see your fork.
You've seen that before.
Mm.
You've seen that before.
Oh was it upstairs?
Yes.
And it's still still do doing well.
it well it's it's lost some it's style by 
  
by being picked.
Ow.
Some of them have picked been picked.
 
Oh yes you've gotta show Grandpa that 
Grandpa look.
This is flavour of the month.
Oh you've got some Lego bricks.
What real Lego?
Yeah  she had it as a present on 
Lego.
Oh 
Oh Lego basic
It's come a long way 
 
Or or ordinary size, is it?
it's come a long way since we had Lego.
Has it?
You look at the doors and the windows, yeah 
Oh yes of course, yeah.
Look at these blocks.
Oh well that's good I can get the Lego out now then  can't I at home?
It's a little bit advanced.
Is it?
She usually requires 
Yeah but I mean we've got a lot of  
she requires a helper.
Yeah.
I've made a donkey.
You've made a donkey.
A donkey.
  
A donkey.
A donkey.
Is that a donkey?
Joelle's going to the hairdresser in a minute.
Yes, she just said she's  making herself 
 
a sandwich.
Right, what's up?
She's going to the hairdresser, I said she could go seeing
as you would be here.
I hope you don't mind?
No dear  What what time will she be there?
I don't know what does it take an hour or so?
Oh she's only just having 
Appointment's for half past one  she's having  
shampoo and set.
Shampoo and set, oh nobody shampoos and sets  mother!
Blow dry.
That's right.
Yeah, shampoo and blow dry.
Well anyway she's having er  she's having it her hair restyled.
 
Oh.
  
 
Oh well she'll be ba she'll be back before half past 
Is it?
four won't she?
Is that when you're off?
 
We're going back half past four  alright?
I sincerely hope so.
I shall have words to say if she's not  it's a working day today.
 
Mm.
 
It's a working day.
Oh well she sounds as though she's good.
Yeah she has.
Been what?
Working day.
door.
Oh.
Oh they're nice little  windows  well I think we've got some haven't we?
We've got lots of windows, yes.
I think we have got windows.
Oh well windows yes but they're not 
Yeah, but they don't open like that.
No, these  it's it's 
Oh no these are super.
The door is  great  I mean it's bigger actually  the doors and windows are bigger now than they used to be, aren't they?
Oh are they?
Well you can make 
Still 
make  
I can get it out though can't I, to er you know.
You'll have to watch her she's put there's a couple of flowers in there she's put in her mouth.
Oh.
It's there, and the very little bits of roof for example, probably wouldn't 
No I won't 
be a good idea.
No, Jessie  not time yet, no  no Jessie.
Are you going to sleep now?
Oh dear.
Please go to sleep  please.
Doesn't she look nice in that?
Yeah, it's the first time  these actually keep a lot better than the  towelling ones.
Do they?
Mm.
I mean this has been worn and washed many times for Charlotte.
That's not the one I bought is it?
No, what did I what did I buy?
I bought her a thingy.
Did you, oh no this is an old one.
That's an old one is it?
Oh it looks new doesn't it?
Yeah.
Yes,th the velour types do.
Yeah.
No mine was a bit bigger wasn't it?
Yes all the new ones are hanging in the wardrobe
Oh.
cos they're all too big  aren't they?
It might be my fault, perhaps I've been rushing around too much  cos that affects your milk supply of course.
Mm  
Could be me.
It doesn't go on there.
Perhaps it wasn't erm
Does he go on there?
perhaps it's a bit thin, ha.
No, he doesn't no, looks silly on there.
It's going down isn't it  eh?
Getting there.
Oh  not bad.
He might  go in, go on there 
Got some new trousers?
he might.
No, these are old ones.
that goes there 
Are they?
Oh.
and then we put
Oh no I wouldn't wear anything new, not yet.
put that in there 
not yet.
Right.
Not with all the unmentionables that go thrown all over you  at this stage.
Come on then let's have a little bit of wind  a little bit of wind come along.
Oh she's a little spotty soul isn't she?
Well they're going.
Mm.
A lot of them have got them 
What you doing?
Let's hope she can't get the measles.
Poor
Aah.
 
At least she's smiling.
I'm afraid you know why.
Windy smiling.
Yes  ah.
You should
There's a sad  and there's a happy face, look 
Come on then  have it up.
isn't it?
Put on a happy face .
Oh it's awful when they don't  when they won't do that isn't it?
Some babies do and some babies don't  you had a bad night as well?
See you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Good luck.
Bye.
Bon chance.
Thank you.
One of us had a wonderful night, but somebody else decided to disrupt it.
Oh dear.
This one went asleep at eleven  so I thought oh well I'm O K till fiveish, maybe
Mm.
but she was busy busy all evening
What's that for?
Mm.
then somebody appeared in the bed at two o'clock this morning
Nothing.
and I really wasn't quite with it what was going on 
What are you standing on?
before I knew it she was suffocating she was lying across my neck.
Oh.
But erm after I'd choked for half an hour  she went to sleep  I eventually went back to sleep again and 
Use that.
she woke up at quarter to five.
Oh what a shame.
No no, no you can't 
And then she went back  about half past five until nine o'clock.
 
What this one?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So  it would have been a wonderful night.
It would wouldn't it?
Yeah  What about that one  did she go back to her own bed?
Mm she  no she 
Oh.
woke up about quarter to seven, I think I was oblivious  I just about sailed off again about after putting this back.
Mm.
erm
Oh I wonder what got her up then?
Goodness knows  and she came toddling in 
 
with Postman Pat and
Yeah.
various other books 
the dogs  
Cos the trouble is it's a bit light then isn't it?
What two o'clock?
No.
Oh it was two was it?
Perhaps she's gone out   She's gone out  Okay sweetheart, come here love, let's get your jacket on.
Alright, alright I'm coming  I'm coming.
You shouldn't drop your books on the floor darling, cos that's a special book.
That's your muzzy book, you mustn't si look come on watch what you're doing  right  let's do it up, come here!
Come on mum.
Right, there's a good girl.
Ooh you have got a big frame, haven't you?
Goodness me!
Alright?
Yeah.
Let me just check, Oh  Jessie honestly why we stick to one place  careful.
Yes, there's one.
Let's hope there's no right where she's going.
Ooh there's a big girl aren't you?
Ah?
Yeah  I'm a big bear.
You're a big bear are you?
Yeah.
That's awkward isn't it?
Wha well I can't do it.
Getting underneath there.
I think that's the only one, oh more here.
Ready?
Weeee   there.
Grandpa
Come here,don mind where you're walking, sweetie-pops.
Go on you show me.
Climb up and show Grandpa  Charlotte.
Go on love Charlotte 
Charlotte 
come here love, please  Grandpa's coming  where was that I can't remember?
Ornamental thistles?
They're bloody vicious!
They are vicious yes.
Charlotte, come over here and show Grandpa.
Right  don't worry Dad I'll res I'll be spraying them.
Look Grandpa, you've got to watch her.
Grandpa.
Alright Grandpa's looking.
Whey!
Look .
look Grandpa a shade.
Go and find this one now alright  hon.
Oh.
Whey!
One more.
One more?
You coming?
Oh I'm not coming no.
Grandpa can't go up there.
You've go in little houses there are have you?
Ooh look at that isn't that nice!
Ooh.
Dadda !
Hello darling, come on  I said to her when she goes back to Tumbletots I shall expect big things of her.
Mhm.
No more being shy and going up the high one.
Marvellous  Now I've seen all this I don't know about my question, whey!
Question of what?
Sponsoring her.
Cos she awfully loaded, the dice has been loaded against her.
 
Oh no, bear in mind there's twenty others of them.
Oh.
Twenty other, kiddies all doing the same.
Will she be in her little house?
Oh yes, do you want to go in your tent?
Charlotte go in your little tent Mummy come and say hello through the window.
at the window, in you go then.
Okay.
Okay then.
I can reach.
Boo!
I can reach.
Hello.
I can reach.
Where's Charlotte?
I can.
Ooh ooh, Charlotte, hello.
 
Hello.
Don't  ooh.
How long does this last?
Mm 
What sort of  I don't know what life 
wait.
expectancy is, oh.
Up to five I should think, five to six.
Mm, yeah maybe a bit more.
Presumably, you could get new ones?
Wait until we've braced it.
Ready, whey!
It's very well made isn't it?
Look, Grandpa.
Are you 
Yes , it's a good one.
Has she had a go on that?
Yes, and she can't quite work out how to do it yet cos it moves.
Oh, oh actually 
Charlotte love 
Oh dear, she hasn't 
No, because I've put the chair over it.
legs over here do you?
Er, no you hang on it.
Grandpa  Grandpa.
Ooh, it's a bit fresh
Shall we go back inside now?
when the wind blows.
No.
Let's go inside cos Joelle will be back soon  We'll go and say hello Joelle.
Oh no.
Oh put it down, it's all wilderness isn't it?
Ooh.
Oh no.
Never mind.
 
Blowing, blowing I want blowing.
You want blowing?
Ooh, ooh  oh!
Oh.
Must you, she wants to make sure I've got a constant supply  I have Sadie to thank for that.
Mm,wha 
She showed her how to do that.
Mm.
We had a nice day on Monday.
Mm, well it was nice weather wasn't it?
Mm  yes.
Never mind your I'm sure your thing will survive.
Oh you've got a good  there coming along, haven't you?
Yes.
Are they some of the poppies, at the back there or
I don't think these are anything to do with you.
They're not mine are they?
These ones just appeared I think.
Yes er I've got one or two they're sort of 
Another one there
they're wild ones and yet they're  big sort of cultivating wild ones.
Mm Mm.
Oh goodness me!
And there's a lupin that appeared from nowhere.
Oh Goodness me!
Mm.
Oh no!
Oh.
It's not going to do anything though.
Well, it will if you leave it.
One day.
Yes.
What's those things over there on the wall, some of those are alright aren't they?
Yes, some of them  Charlotte don't got over there lovey there's some poo there come on.
Come here  mustn't walk on that.
No.
We'll walk up the path.
Shall we go in?
Let's go inside, and see Amy.
No.
Yes.
Come on darling.
No, no, no.
We'll come out again later.
Come on  there's a good girl, in you go.
Grandpa.
Yeah, Grandpa's coming.
In you come love  good girl  there you go, there we are .
up you come.
What are the big tubs for?
Well I'm going to put these two plants in it together.
Oh the two  oh the two of them?
Yes.
Yeah.
Come in the lounge.
 
Come on then sweetie-pops  mm.
One per loo, mm.
Quick can you pa pass behind me please Charlotte.
There's a good girl  I've got the shopping, don't make a noise.
Oh it's alright we don't have to be silent.
Hey wait a minute love, just a minute.
Charlotte, that's it then you can take yours in there  can't you?
There we are.
There you go.
I just hope she'll sleep for a little while.
Yes, perhaps she will.
Put the kettle on.
I don't think so.
No  no Charlotte don't do 
No don't go in there Charlotte please.
Not out here sweetheart, please.
Come on.
You don't come out here with it normally do you?
You can walk round the kitchen but that's it.
Leg over.
Yeah.
There we'll do, just pulling out the stuff I want.
Smells nice doesn't it?
Tumble.
Mm?
I say I'm just pulling out the stuff I can tumble.
Sheet in here somewhere.
It's warm  you've dropped a sock.
Come here sheet where are you.
Oh , there it is.
That's dreadful sheets and my night clothes  has to be washed daily.
Yes, I bet they do.
Oh you're such a  if I may and some sort of  one of my projects.
Mhm.
And I want to 
What sort of picture do you want?
Well I don't know, what would you suggest?
You can't  erm well if it's a big bit it wants to be something  baby doesn't it?
Oh something baby yes.
Like a teddy or
Yes, well cos we got the teddy on tha 
ducks.
on that  little free freebie.
Well I I'll ask 
I was thinking of doing a teddy but I thought I wanted sort of one, two or three things don't you on the bottom?
Isn't it the latest erm
Ah it's just a monogram of one.
it's the latest embroidery magic thing  sort 
Oh.
Have you had them all?
Yes I have I I've looked through them all.
Charlotte come away lovey  You keep her out here a minute I'll just go and find a couple of books.
Oh you haven't had that much off have you?
My presents.
No said she  
My presents, my presents, my presents 
Cos of the perm.
My present.
You want a present  
Oh dear.
You want to put it in the fridge?
There are.
Oh dear   I'm sure that child wants all this lot.
Well you never know.
Stupid !
You might find something in there actually.
Where?
 
I've already started something.
Oh.
Hello.
doo doo doo doo doo doo.
There,
There's all sorts of possibilities, there's one other book which I think is upstairs somewhere, if you don't find something in there there should be some more.
I said to her when, when he was finished I said it's good enough cos you're sure what you you're doing but I said
It's quite a nice little book actually I think, that one.
Oh is it?
Oh there's one there.
There's a teddy.
Mm.
Not such a nice teddy though is it?
No  I like that tassel .
I don't like the flowers.
, I wonder what green that's done in.
Don't know.
Don't know  it's a mauve, something.
It's flowers of some sort.
posies.
Do you think you could change her nappy for me?
Okay.
I've only just got rid of the baby.
Jacket off.
It's been round my neck all the time.
Jacket off.
Pardon?
  
I say I've only just go been able to put the baby down 
No no no no no .
I had to have her.
It's a shocker.
And she needs a new nappy or  taken off altogether  please.
Aah!
Some flowers here
I've not done a wee.
No I haven't.
Course you have.
No  no no no  
Pardon?
Oh.
Don't hit.
No, darling give us  and you give a kiss love  he we give a kiss  good girl  Now don't forget you do a wee in your potty okay?
Right?
In here.
In there.
Do you want to do one now?
Yeah.
Oh good girl, pull your trousers down then.
Alright?
There's lots of things in here aren't there?
Can you manage?
That's right.
There .
isn't that nice?
There.
Oh look.
Where's Grandpa?
Smoke too much.
No, it's not.
Grandpa's in the garden pulling up thistles.
I've been looking in there.
Did you did you say one in here?
No
Oh.
they're different.
Oh.
 
There's trains and buses an , balloons and things and things.
Don't put that in the bin please.
Run Grandpa.
 
Mm.
They're a bit bleak aren't they?
Hello 
Thank you very much.
Monkeys, sea lions.
Do you not have little nuts and bolts in the garage?
Erm
You've probably got some jars.
Oh dear.
Oh oh oh oh  that's not bad.
I'll er  just go and have a look.
I can see that.
What?
Oh yes, yes I'm covered in white streaks  it's a hazard isn't it?
It's a hazard.
Erm, I don't know whether th , Charlotte where  I don't want you going in the dining room lovey, I'm sorry  baby's asleep.
Are you going.
No  I'm going in the garage.
I come in the garage.
Yes alright you can come.
Will you come in the garage?
Don't touch anything will you.
Out the way then.
No touching.
We have to do this  dee dee da da da dee  
Wait, Charlotte wait!
On the bear 
Shhh!
On the bear.
On the bear .
Onto what?
I've no idea, she's knows what she's talking about.
Oh I thought it was a bicycle   
That's on the bear  That's on the bear.
Oh it's a bear.
A bear.
It's a bear.
That's on the bear.
Oh the bear.
Oh or less.
Swimming pool, mum.
Oh right.
There's a few bits in there  the rest of the stuff like that is in the
where the erm
beer is.
Oh are there other other
I think so  I don't know how much.
Ah alright yes  nothing worth mentioning in there 
 
no nor there.
   
Any likely candidates in there?
I don't think so.
I just did a potty.
You want the potty?
You go inside then please  go on you can take that with you but if you want the potty you g go and sit on it now  cos I don't want any more wet trousers.
No,
No, okay we 
I'll go along to B & Q and get some  there's a little pack.
Might you?
Well because there's no point in putting this window back until I've fixed these onto the thing, I've gotta take the glass out to put this in  then slide the glass back on
Oh right.
because the bolts actually go up between the plate and the glass and there's only that much space so
Oh right, Oh we've gotta have tiny little bumps then?
Yeah, that's right  well we've gotta put them round anyway  but once I've got that on I can  take the st steps in then  no, I shall leave those there  I'll just go and have a look at the other frame.
The key hangs by the door.
What out here?
The back door.
Right.
Come on your potty's in here darling, come on  you'll trip over if you try and walk too far like that, come on  I've got to no come on.
No no no!
Charlotte.
 

Now we'll have enough of that noise, come on.
She doesn't want to.
If you want to sit on your potty you sit on it  I don't want a nonsense.
Don't want to sit on her potty.
Joelle could you come in here please.
How many have you looked at?
Well, that one and that one and that one.
And we're and we're grown up !
Where's Grandpa?
That one.
Where's Grandpa?
You haven't got any of this in yellow have you?
No, only got red.
No , I might have a bit of pink.
Somebody want cup of tea or coffee or?
Oh yeah mm a cup of tea  please.
Cup of coffee.
Do do do do do do do.
Dad'll have a cup of tea.
Oh.
Oh that'll be quite nice for 
do do do do do do do 
I like the pear.
What that pear.
So that's pear.
Mm  not very kiddy-fied is it?
Well what wo , oh that's nice.
What?
That rabbit.
Mm.
Little rabbit.
Little rabbit  erm, yes alternatively I think so
There wh there were no cos there's loads of things for children in the  embroidery magic series  there's no no possibilities in it?
Erm, I didn't fancy them somehow, went through the whole lot, the other day an just didn't sort of take my eye, if you know what I mean.
Oh.
You've got to do all these have you?
Erm, apart from them.
Check them properly.
Whoopsadaisy!
Alright?
You're alright aren't you?
Whoops!
book.
Muscles.
Small writings.
Yes, I better nip down to B & Q.
I must 
You don't have to do it now if you don't want to, but it's very nice of you but
Well he it won't it won't get done for a couple of weeks' time  then you'll say 
It won't get done though  no it won't, you're quite right.
Oh well no I'll do it next time I'm here and it'll be August.
Erm
I don't like elephants.
Yes, I can always put this round the reverse way so that goes in there  well it won't 
Also it won't interfere.
it won't hurt it I mean cos this is  sort of like that anyway  you know i it sort of suppose it does, I'll have to see.
Wha tell you what might save you a journey  out there somewhere there's two automatic vent things 
 
which I bought to fit but never did   but surely they would have bolts and fittings in them.
Well I could maybe yes, that's why we need a few more to last than you possess  I'll go out and have a look and see about these.
They're either in the greenhouse or in the shed.
Oh right.
I think.
Yeah, I'll have a nose round and I'll, yes I could possibly put the window back and shut one of the vents, yes.
 
Well it should have its so and nuts and bolts.
I'll have a look.
A wizard wheeze.
Mm.
A wizard wheeze, yes.
Oh I forgot I had them  Oh that's pretty wha ooh.
Mm  it's rather sweet, perhaps it would have looked nice a bit further down.
Well you could do it where you like couldn't you?
Oh these are little dear little
Oh they're rather dinkish aren't they?
Mm.
Almost any litt I mean you could do anything round the edge  you don't have to
Grandpa !
No.
Grandpa !
He's gone outside darling.
I've I've got a, a piece of this, this stuff  I I bought it a piece  sort of square they were selling it off cheap 
 
Charlotte.
which is enough to do four little little pictures  I thought I might do for the craft thing in September, erm you know our flower festival and erm in which case I'd have had to purchase a few of your little thingies  that's pretty.
Mm.
Are you working from that book?
Not at the moment.
Could I borrow it?
Yep, I'm not working from anywhere at the moment.
These are nice  
Oh no, no it's just a nice book this one.
Mm  mm it is rather nice isn't it?
Pretty flowers.
Right  easy to forget about.
Mm.
What have you got there then?
They're pretty aren't they?
Mm, pretty poppies  Oh well I shall
That's what I was doing.
Mm, that's obviously what you're going to do cos you've got, August colours there.
Yeah, mm  well I was just picking a bit out of it
Yes.
it was for a card
Mm.
It wasn't for
No  yeah well that's the sort of size piece I've got I think or maybe  it's a little bit bigger than that.
Grandma  do you want er skim skimmed milk?
Yes please  I don't want that.
It's Charlotte's.
She's giving you or apple juice is she?
Pardon?
She's only giving me Charlotte's drink.
There's a nice duck.
Oh yes, there's a nice duck  yes that's nice  mm.
I think anything I do in the future is going to be purely from home consumption  or from places 
Yes 
I mean I'd like to do something like that, but you couldn't sell it 
Mm, mm, mm, mm  yes.
No.
well you could but you couldn't sell it for a reasonable price.
Erm, yeah now  pictures you want with I mean there's no panic but 
Oh yes, yeah  when is it?
er it's not till September.
 
You've got to erm, I've got to get  well Dad's got the form I can get another one he can, erm  the forms have got to be in soon so she knows how many  are going to be sort of on the walls you know.
Mm.
Erm, but you can have three  three things 
No.
What are you doing with your pop pole?
I want 
Oh  nice isn't it?
Erm yes three pictures that you might like to sell  if you give me a price for them.
What sort of erm  price do they go for, things like that would you think?
I've got no idea but I mean some pictures are very expensive
Mm.
the painted pictures.
Ha.
I mean what were you going to  hoping to sell them for anyway?
Grandma.
Mm?
Twenty plus five, twenty 
What's that?
twenty five you know depending on the size  If there's a dog out there   
Grandma.
You'd like to think that you 
I was I was tempted to sell it off cheap but I don't want to sell it off too cheap cos it's 
Grandma, Grandma, Grandma, Grandma, Grandma  why's that?
because of the price of the frame is quite expensive in itself.
Yeah.
 
But if that  I mean it doesn't worry me if I don't sell that cos it's quite pretty in poppy.
Grandma, Grandma, Grandma.
So it's the dog and that and the poppy.
Oh  right.
Really  oh excuse me.
Er , so erm
You started yet?
No.
Not at the moment, there you are let's move there.
Well it was but that was a long time ago I started that, it was tucked inside the book  thank you.
Thank you.
Just a minute, cos er we must wait  for tea in the teapot.
Oh, oh that's coffee is it?
Oh 
Oh Adam's given her strict instructions as to how to make tea.
Oh I see, yes, you have to wait a few minutes.
So she puts the pinger on for three minutes.
erm  yes now  the  Beckley  Church, friends of Beckley church
make  a quarter I think of whatever you sell it for.
Cor!
I think it's a quarter 
Twenty five per cent?
Or is it ten per cent?
That's a big commission?
Erm  I'm not sure now.
I'm going to have to up the price considerably then.
No , it wasn't I don't think it was  can't be  can't be twenty five per cent 
Thank you darling.
it's more likely to be ten  ten per cent.
Ten or fifteen.
Yeah, something like that.
No more.
Well whatever.
Well I mean you could put them in for thirty, couldn't you?
Grandma  
Erm, you could try and if they don't go well  they don't go.
They don't go.
Do you want er sweeteners?
No, not for me thank you
sugar for Grandpa please.
Yeah.
Erm, there's no reason why you can't put them in at  that price I mean they're  
Some mug might buy them!
then little dog may be  erm won't go perhaps for that much.
Well no there's no  no mount or anything on that one it's just  as is  that was a, the cheapest frame I could do cos I didn't like it  when I finished it and I begrudged the price of the frame.
Oh  I think he's I think he's quite nice.
Oh well you can buy him if you want.
No I don't want him  but I still think he's quite nice I mean
He's alright but he's
there's no accounting for taste some people you know buy funny things.
Yeah, I wouldn't buy it.
No.
I'll give it height but I wouldn't buy it.
So they're the only ones you want to get rid of or are they the only ones you've got?
Yeah, well I've still got the other two but  I don't know whether Brian and Pauline are going to want them back, I mean they've just, I've had them back for a craft fair.
Oh that's the, the tile
The tile and the alphabet.
Yeah.
But I I really couldn't  I would never get the price I would want for the alphabet.
What would you want for that?
Well I'd want over a hundred for that.
Mm.
 
Cos it's got an expensive frame and it's a lot of work.
 
Mm.
Ha.
What's the matter?
Don't you think you better wait till she comes back?
Save me getting up.
Now the I'm just trying to think of some some of those pictures that are in there  now there was one, it was that size  or in a pair like that lovely looking pictures 
Look at me.
they were done by  Peter , have you heard of Peter ?
Look,rats !
he's we he's well known
well known person  I'd I Dad'll tell you who he is  I'm   erm now those two little pictures were  oh I think they were hundred and something each maybe more.
Well he's a well known artist.
Well yes, I suppose he is.
That helps.
Yes, I suppose he is  but I mean those two those pictures we bought were hundred and twenty  and I mean they're they're only done by somebody in the village.
Well yeah I mean the answer is
But we like them.
you pay what  feel don't you?
Yes.
If you like something enough  you know what you can afford and what you're willing to pay for it and if it's  priced more then you don't buy it.
That's right.
But you see something like that might just appeal to somebody, an embroidered picture.
You never know  we will give it a try.
Well.
Is this in the flower festival?
Yes.
Well  it's in keeping then isn't it?
Yes, in the the .
 

Yeah so  I'll put you down for three then shall I?
Mm.
I don't know whether Dad's going to enter any photographs this year.
Mm  that he doesn't want to sell.
Grandma, you're here.
 
he's old  what what was the percentage the church take on pictures, was it ten per cent or fifteen?
Careful sweetheart.
I think I have forget the sweeteners.
Yes, I think so too.
One.
Erm  I I'm not sure I need to look at the sheet I  I thought it was ten when I looked.
One.
It can't be twenty can it?
 
No, I think that's too much, I thought it was a quarter but it's not.
Oh it's not twenty five per cent, no it's  it's it's around ten or fifteen per cent on the list.
What are you you're thinking of 
Thank you.
the flower festival?
Yes.
Art exhibition?
Yes.
Well it's 
Yeah, that that would be one of them  that little flower up there.
Yes.
And the pop poppies are in the hall aren't they?
Mm.
An and little dog  in the hall.
, what's that?
It's coffee, it's hot.
She probably wouldn't notice much different.
Yeah 
Well it's not a lot it's only really the length which is different isn't it?
Mm.
She take it all of the 
What's this?
All the split bits.
Yeah.
What's what?
This.
That  that's for going in the swimming pool with her 
Oh it's erm  a rubber ring with with  holes.
rubber ring, rubber ring, rubber ring 
It's a sit in type rubber ring.
Oh I see.
Mind the
which
Is she ?
Who?
The lady who cut her hair.
Aha.
She said how long  er it was last time you cut your hair, I said five months and she said aah it's a lot.
I haven't had my cut since last July.
Haven't you?
June , in fact, June.
Ring a roses 
When I went 
Before the wedding 
Yes.
Ring a ring a roses 
Well it might have been July, I can't remember.
a pocket full of posies, tissue, tissue all fall down .
all fall down .
You can sing your songs now, are you going to sing your songs to Grandma?
I didn't realise that that nursery rhyme commemorates the plague, the great plague.
What the posies?
Yeah, tissue, tissue all fall down 
Yes, with all fall down 
is the great plague in sixteen sixty six.
sixteen sixty six.
Sixteen sixty six.
No sixteen sixty five.
Sixteen sixty five, cos it was the great fire the sixteen sixty six, was erm burning  
Got rid of the plague yeah.
Yeah.
So which is the one I'm borrowing then?
Tha that 
That one.
That's the hardback one.
I think so isn't it?
Yes.
Yes it is.
It's funny how these things have got their origin, isn't it?
Yes.
The Black Death.
Yes, that's not Jessie.
Oh no Postman Pat's cat's called Jess.
Yes, that's right.
No, Postman Pat's did  
Oh it's in there  the rabbits are in the medieval tapestry.
There's a mouse in the house  cheese  only cheese.
I must do a sampler for Amy.
I'll  
Mm.
Sometime 
Now then isn't that like  oh dear, time for bed said Zebedee  
Mm  next time I come I'll have a few little  thingies off you 
Oh 
cards
Oh.
Oh you can have some now, if you want.
in dog.
What shape did you want?
It's fun to learn with Thomas the Tank Engine.
Small ones.
I said what shape, not size you don't have a choice of size they're all the same.
Oh are they oh, I don't mind.
You can either have oblong  oval, or round, I think.
And what colour?
Oh 
Pale blue, pale green, red  erm cream  er  pale pink I think.
Oh.
You dream of this  You 
There's a choice.
There's a choice.
this  
We'd better go upstairs and have a look hadn't we?
Yes  alright  Oh I should have bought my work with me, my stump work with me to show you.
Your what?
My stump work.
Stump work?
Mm.
What do you mean?
I went to erm  erm
Charlotte stop climbing on the chairs please love.
went to a craft afternoon a couple of weeks ago in Rye and er stump work is basically padded out embroidery 
 
or or whatever 
Oh yeah, oh look bees 
Erm
ladybirds.
What like quilting?
Shut those eyes.
Mm.
Like quilting?
Not really no, it's 
Flowers 
it's all sorts of things, there's 
Daisies, flowers 
er we did something called
what's it called  can't think of the name of the blooming thing now  but it was  you did a line across, then you learn to do a long stitch 
Yeah  Yeah 
then you did button hole stitch round that
Mm.
then you did another line underneath, then you did button hole stitch round the line and the bottom of the other button hole stitch
 
Good.
and you ended with you had to do little squares and the you put your fing finger through it there's nothing nothing on the you don't catch the material down at all 
Except from side to side.
except from side to side erm
And what do you pad it with then?
Mama.
Well tha no that wasn't padded that was for  don't quite know what they wanted to do with that  erm but there was erm a face that was built up with three different sizes of felt, small, next size, next size up, not not much bigger each time, then you had a piece of calico a little bit bigger, you did a running thread all round the outside and pulled it so that it, lapped over the  felt which you had stitched down first.
 

Are you with me?
No, not really.
Did you hear that noise?
Well imagine three pieces of felt one on top of the other
Are you pushing ?
Yes.
the top one you just tack round not a little way in from the edge
Mm.
right got that  now you have, then you have 
Did you do three different sizes of felt or?
It is three different sizes yes, small, medium and large 
Right, O K. 
larger one on the top
so it's a bit padded  then you put the  calico round the outside with the draw thread 
Oh, I moved the table right there  you hear my voice?
and pull it so that it tucks underneath.
So what shape have you got?
You've got a round like 
Well 
padded shape.
round, slightly oval, whatever.
Padded shape.
Padded shape, yes.
Right and you're making a face on it?
Yes.
Right I'm with you.
 
Then you make a face on that, then you put a 
Would you get down off the table please.
piece of felt, round the outside for his hair
What are you getting up for?
and then you satin stitch all over that, which I'm in the process of doing.
Yet another flower.
Mm, as if we haven't got enough.
It's only really to scoop up all the prizes etcetera.
No it's not I shan't be doing that 
It's not dirty.
in September.
Not dirty.
Then we did loose leaves.
Not dirty.
Alright.
Standing up leaves.
It's gone.
All gone?
Erm, which is we do a 
Nice and clean are they?
You put a needle in the material
It's gone.
and leave it there
it's gone
you do a V shape with the cotton from underneath the needle 
 
and up the other side  a little way away from the needle 
Why don't you do a drawing for Grandpa?
each side
Mm.
Then you do another one 
Show me what you can do.
from right next to the needle down to the point and just go round it and then you weave it in and out like basket stitching and out over the cotton and under the cotton 
Gently 
till you get to the top  little sticky to fasten off the back 
 
pull the needle out and you've got a leaf 
 
a standing up leaf.
Oh right.
Come here, give me it.
So er
You've been having fun then?
Yes, and then she showed us some 
Charlotte!
beads with big holes that you do embroidery silk round and round and cover them.
Thank you.
Thank you, I do it.
What the beads?
The beads, sew them on to fabric 
Anyway, don't do that 
 
like a bunch of grapes 
No, no no no you  
they're sort of purple and a back stranded coloured  you know like you've got there.
Oh Charlotte,don't do that, stop it.
Mm.
Leave it.
And so I've done that
I see
plus two loose leaves up the top.
I will mind Charlotte.
C
Which looks quite good.
H A R
Quite good  can you afford the time to have all these breaks for other pursuits?
Mm, it was only an afternoon, two till four.
O T T E 
Mm.
C H A R L O T T E
Yes, we've had the erm 
It's written, Charlotte.
You are  in English classes.
It says Charlotte.
That's right.
Very good.
You should be doing it in small letters.
No, pronunciation I mean.
Yes, yeah no, I'm saying when you write, for her to see 
Instead of er  
it should be lower case letters.
I dirty fingers  
Dirty fingers you've got.
Really?
Yes they learn, they learn to read lower case before they read capitals.
Lower one.
Oh I see, yeah  that's it that'll do that's it yeah  er erm
You don't need to do that  ah no.
There's only one L.
There's only one L. 
Charlotte.
Right, L O that's it T T 
T T 
T T 
E 
E 
There.
Hang on.
Alright.
What is the  tail.
It's a little you would you be careful and stop moving the table.
We've had the Courage Magazine and it's got a write up of the  er the May, our craft thingy at er 
You're no good, you don't listen.
Somebody's having a go at the .
Yes.
and our 
The what?
erm this Shirley  that's done written this up and she said about our own craft evening and variety of things and all that.
This is W I?
Yes, this is W I.
For our own one  and it's got Miss June  and Mr 
were the judges  Mrs  got the highest number of lots and won the cup  is it
He was judging, he was judging?
he was only judging photographs.
I was judging photographs in fact both 
Well that was badly written then wasn't it?
Yeah, well I think that we ought to get them or somebody to put a retraction, I mean we daren't do it ourselves, but I think in next month's 
No more.
magazine it should be pointed out, that
Mr  was only judging the photos.
tha that erm
Stop  can you give me it back.
Yes, it should be pointed out that I was only judging the photographs 
 
er  and that er  in a
Yes, but I haven't freed this one yet.
Can you give it to me?
I'll get it
I was only judging 
No 
Yes
No, I I did it, I did it, my did it.
in areas .
Alright.
Sounds like you've given them 
Yes.
all the points doesn't it?
I mean I 
shouting at you.
sometimes I think that Shirley thinks she wouldn't understand anyway, what she was writing.
No, I don't I don't think she 
I don't think it wasn't done with malice, she's just 
Oh no.
Oh no.
between the ears  I mean she's a charming woman.
But it's just the way people would read it.
She lives on her own 
Yeah well I was I was accosted yesterday, by Stan  I see he said I see you've got all the marks from Ron 
cos I hadn't read it you see  yeah, he said that's how it reads.
And it does read that way now
Mm, yeah.
we've got the paper.
Oh well.
So I reckon we ought to get Nan or one of these contributors to say, to point out that the
Well I think she's made a mistake with Joan because Joan didn't get the plate for  er the highest number of silver stars, it was gold stars.
Yeah.
That's wrong in the first place.
Yeah.
Where's he gone?
Where's he gone?
Is he 
So you just want that one?
Yes, please.
Thank you, yeah.
That's alright.
I'm sure I'll find something else I want.
Oh I should think so.
Do you want white or cream?
Erm  I suppose  white is best really isn't it?
I was thinking of doing  doing a bib with a cotton lining  which you can place in between do you know what I mean?
Yes.
I'll do a backdrop.
Good.
Oh, I think I should be making things for  Jamie when she comes
Yes I heard about
Oh you told us about that  
Yes.
You're not supposed to throw it on the floor  where's the end  there.
Right how much do you want?
Oh hang on the that a second  big size.
Oh  it's all come undiddled.
Oh is it?
Right.
Well if I
just like that?
Yeah, I should think that's big enough isn't it?
Well then you'd probably make two or three there.
Probably  that's worth quite a lot of money isn't it?
Yeah, probably, yeah.
Would you like me to pay you?
No.
No, you sure?
Yes, I'll have the eggs.
Well you've probably got I've probably got a better deal there.
Oh dear  Well thank you.
A few cards as well, that'll be  that's worth a couple of dozen eggs I reckon.
Oh yes , I'm sure it is dear.
I'm naughty aren't I?
No  you're not naughty  don't you  don't mind anyway.
Is it switched on?
It is.
Oh is it?
Yes.
Oh.
Oh  right that's it.
I don't think I've got many cards up here they're in my bedroom I think  let's have a look  these are all done.
Oh these are all all done ones.
I think these are
Yes, that's all I've got  Ah.
Some here.
Well I don't want many because I'm not going to do that many.
They're not 
Erm 
the colours you want are they?
I suppose not really  erm 
Did what shape did you want?
I was going to have one of each wasn't I?
One of each shape, but what colour?
Yeah  erm well that's quite a pretty colour isn't it?
The green is yeah 
Mm.
well that takes white quite nicely.
Mm.
I don't think I've got green one with a cream, no that's got white in it  Is that all I've got left?
Ha.
Oh, you can have any of those.
Oh right, yes alright I can see those  they're not in the bedroom they're here.
Oh right, I thought  oh yes in the boxful I've got.
Well there's green ones  there's three ovals there, I think  is it ovals?
Ya, yes.
Creamy coloured ovals, clear, is ovals the ones you prefer?
Erm  well I don't really mind  erm, I don't want 
What, what colours have you got?
Mm?
What colours have you got?
Well, this this white.
Oh you're going to use that are you?
Well I've got I've got a bit of that, which I think'll do one or two
Right.
or white  
It's best not to put white in that colour.
Not in green, no  they've got the white 
They've got the white goes alright in there.
Yeah alright, well I'll have a
Probably goes alright in there, it goes alright in there.
Yeah  alright well I'll probably only do about four so  I don't want to take all the cards.
Well look if I give you  well there's two pink ovals with envelopes  and three green ones.
Right.
How's that?
Thank you very much  much obliged.
Are these to sell?
Yes, they will, will be.
Right then, you want some of those won't you?
Oh  I suppose so yes.
One two three four, five 
five  
There you are, they just fold over with a 
Oh right  right have some of those as well.
cos then you just fold it over and er
And stick the thing on, yeah 
stick it down an write the price on.
Oh.
There you are.
Thank you dear
You're all done now 
very much  thank you  What do I stick it with, Pritt?
Did you use Pritt?
No Copydex.
Copydex, ah I'm sure we've got some of that.
Yeah, just a tiny little bit 
Yeah, yeah.
round the edges.
Yes  yes right  I'll see what I can do by September  I should be able to do a fair bit by then  Yeah well I say I've done the doll, that's for August  that's for the  er Beckley fete  but it's for, Friends of Beckley Church and it's guess the doll's birth date  which as you said as you said it should have two
Yeah.
erm  that's done  erm, yes I've cut out the
Just a minute  Oh it's the other side.
I've cut out the dress, so that's  I've got to d start doing thingys on that now  you know, picking up all the points 
Oh right.
erm  I've got to get that done  I've got to alter the christening dress  alter the, cuffs on the little jacket  and make a bib  do you think I'll get all that done in three months?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I should think so.
Might do.
I know what I've got the find, oh god  it's alright, I've just taken a look in here it's like a bomb!
Get him to sign his life away.
Where's the door?
Just in there.
You've got a hole in your wall.
Yeah, permanent fixture.
Do want to put her in the bed now then?
No, I I no it's just the erm 
It's the changing mess.
Yes I put the carrycot in there.
Oh she's here.
Oh yes.
Oh yes there's the poppy, it looks nice.
Yeah.
It's a nice poppy.
Alright?
Yeah, I don't know whether I can do it all  because erm  I need some drills and things to make holes for the fitting.
Oh do you?
Yes.
I didn't know you had to make holes.
Yes  well th the rail  on which you mount the mount the erm  autovent  needs to have holes drilled to take the
Oh right.
plate fitting  erm there is a plate fitted  there is a little bracket, that can sits in behind, that you can screw into but you've gotta make the holes originally  unfortunately.
Oh right.
It's a  I'm hoping that I can make use of the  erm the two holes that are in the  window half 
You never know do you?
in the window half  and I wish I knew which half this is  it's all rather complicated, but I'll see 
No, it's 
what I can do  I'll go as 
Have fun.
far as I can  Have you got a screwdriver?
Yes.
A small one  er is there another size up  or does it get too big then?
Ooh look there's quite a lot of tools there  there was another one of those out  near the this 
Yes, I know.
this'll probably do actually.
Go on take that.
No no no I don't need those.
No?
No, no no  ah?
Oh she's gone to sleep after all.
Yeah.
I don't think there's another, that's smaller isn't it?
No this will be alright.
You don't need the Philips one?
No, no they're  
Oh, I think I think you've probably got it all.
Got these.
Thank you.
It's a thingy  Oh silly  I meant to go to Children's World and buy nappies  have to do it tomorrow now.
That's your freebie.
Oh it's here.
Telling you how to do it.
Oh  do you think 
I haven't 
I need telling?
Ooh I think you might do, don't you?
That's erm
That's a thingy, it's that  that's it.
Oh right  yes, well I shall have to do some.
Mm, you sent sent off for all your
Yes, I have sent it but I haven't got anything back yet.
No  yeah.
That's a tiny little card innit?
Yes.
So that's the small size, yes 
Yes.
these are th the ones you've got on the big ones.
Yeah  dinkey innit?
Mm.
No envelope.
Oh no no envelope, there no.
The first one was a basket of flowers.
Was it?
Oh 
Mm  which I managed to do.
Oh did you?
Well I  you see when I saw this  I thought it was, was quite big holes 
It's not.
but it's not is it  it's easy 
What does it say?
Yeah, it's fourteen, it's the 
Oh.
sand  it's the same she said, it's just the same.
I think you were just frightened off weren't you?
At the thought 
Well I don't know it  the way you two do the work it looks so fine that I didn't think I could see it properly.
Well it is quite fine, I mean it do does make your eyes ache if you do it for too long.
Yeah, I ca I can't do too much at once no well I mean but er
Depends on the colours you're having to use really.
Well yes we've got light colours so 
The the worst possible is working with black fabric, that's that's wicked that is.
Well yes it would be wouldn't it?
It looks lovely though that one, doesn't it?
What th the flowers on the black?
Yeah.
Yes it is nice  it's okay if you can do it in daylight, but artificial light is difficult  and I used to sit in the car when Charlotte was asleep.
Mm.
She was went to sleep in the car I used to sit in the car and do it  cos the light was good out there.
Yeah, it was nice and bright, yeah  Is that what Joanie bought her?
This?
Yes.
Yeah  Isn't it pretty?
It is pretty 
Yeah.
It's just too long  the trousers are too long, that's all.
Oh.
This is what I like  this is my favourite at the moment and she looks wonderful in it  the dungarees.
Oh yes she yes she had those on when you came  didn't she?
Did she, I don't remember.
Yeah, baggy ones aren't they?
They are baggy, yes.
Baggy dungeys.
Yeah, they're lovely.
Yeah she had those on.
She's er she nice in denim actually.
Mm.
Suits her  It's the only thing I've bought from M & S recently.
Mm.
Cos, I haven't been impressed.
No   Is it time?
Mm mm.
Oh  ooh half past three  What time did she go off, half past one?
Oh, she'll she'll probably be asleep until five now.
Oh.
Once she goes, she goes.
Oh  well cos she should really  she should go four hours shouldn't she, she's got good jollop  well she 
Yes.
seemed to have 
Well yes, but I mean it's  she seems to do the opposite thing to Charlotte, cos she used to sleep in the morning and fidget around in the afternoons  and this one fidgets all morning and then sleeps in the afternoon.
Yes, well
Which is which is quite handy I suppose.
And then is she awake in the evening?
Yeah.
Yeah  well that's not so bad as long as you can get her down at a reasonable hour and get to sleep.
Yeah  well she  she sleeps she goes down some time between eight thirty and eleven.
Mm.
But sh I think what she does she confuses her early and late evening  feeds
Mm.
so they merge as as sort of one solid feed 
Yeah.
all da evening  but then like last night see if I know that she's been chomping on and off all night she'll go for four or five hours.
Mm.
Or five or six hours 
Yeah.
at night.
Mm.
So  and there you are.
Mm  Makes you uncomfortable though, presumably does it or?
Ah no, it's a it just lets down every now and again
Mm.
and it's sort of well it's not well they do get full that's if she suddenly does longer than
Mm.
she's been doing.
Yeah.
Then it's overflowing.
Oh is that why you got that out again.
That's right.
You got your pump out again.
Yes  yeah  well I've got two ounces in the freezer.
Oh have you, oh well it's something I suppose.
Yes, well if I can do a few two ounces worth I put them all together and then Adam can give her a little bit.
Mm.
So I can make the dinner or do something useful.
Yeah.
Cos I don't tend to get the opportunity.
No.
Cos she starts fidgeting  go and hang this lot up I suppose  Want to come upstairs?
Yes, I'll come upstairs   That's a nice bread then isn't it?
It is a bit big that's the only problem but the amount of bread we get through I need a big one.
Yes, you couldn't put it all in the at once could you  
Well  no no plus the fact that the lid got broken so that 
Oh  that's a shame.
Yes dropped by a certain clumsy person around this house  unfortunately we've had a lot of breakages.
Oh dear.
Yeah  never mind  So Adam said buy something that doesn't break.
We've lost loads of glasses.
Oh dear.
And the lid of the bread bin.
Yeah.
So  and she ca I don't know whether you noticed or she can't make a cup of coffee without spilling it.
Yeah, she she spilt it when she put yours down.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She just can't  she's incapable of doing that without spilling it.
She's a bit of a Jamie isn't she?
She's a clumsy clogs that's why I won't let her walk around with the baby  if she wants to cuddle her I tell her to sit down and I tell her not to move  well she's always tripping over her feet.
Mm.
I'd rather not take the risk.
No  that's right.
Don't want her to go flying do I?
No.
Charlotte's been playing hangers.
Yeah  there's one with things on   Look at these hangers you've got.
Yeah well they're from all the
All the clothes, yeah  well they're handy aren't they?
Oh yeah  I washed all the well not all of them you know all the stuff we sorted out when you up here
Mm.
did a big wash the other day  so they're all ready  wo won't be long  and the clothes she's wearing now are nought to three months.
Mm.
And some of them are  are a bit short.
A bit small yeah.
Well I could undo the feet and put socks on her.
No  you don't want to do that do you really?
Or you can save some of these for Suzie.
It would save me a few pennies.
Mm  yes it would save you a few pennies wouldn't it, yes?
Well we'll see how we go.
I'm sure you've got quite a lot though.
Yeah, we've got plenty really.
She won't go unclothed that's for sure.
No.
Plus she's got all her new stuff.
Well yes.
Where are you?
Here.
Oh we're up here.
You would would you have such a thing as a hand drill and some drill would you?
Erm
Oh no.
Well all that sort of thing are in are in the erm  where the wine is.
Oh by the in the toolbox thing?
In the in the drawers.
Oh in the drawers right oh yeah.
There's all sorts of bits and pieces out there but 
Right.
I couldn't point you in the right direction immediately you'd have to sort of 
No I'll get a few things.
you'd have to hunt about a bit I'm afraid.
Yeah.
Do you know where the key is for the
Yes, it's alright, it's by the door.
Yeah, that's it.
It's on the wall.
Yes you were going to try and wash some of those  that were stained in something strong.
Oh I haven't done that yet.
You have no  it was that they were a bit big weren't they anyway  I'm sure  we could possibly get it out  you could try I suppose.
Mm.
I was in Woolworths the other day an they've got smocked dresses now, hand smocked dresses.
Have they?
Well it can't be anything else can it, you can't really machine smock can you?
Well I shouldn't have thought so.
So I don't know why they bother to put in it
No  twelve ninety nine they were.
It's like tinned food saying no artificial additives  cos you don't need artificial additives in tinned food they're trying to make you buy it cos
Oh.
it sounds healthy.
Yeah.
Right, that's that lot done, cor it's never ending isn't it?
Yeah, it is isn't it  Thank goodness for washing machines eh?
Absolutely.
Don't know how I managed before I had Nigel.
Obviously did didn't you?
We didn't have a washing machine.
Oh look little old hankies with a C on.
Still around.
Oh dear.
Only one.
Only one.
I got a few flowery ones somewhere.
Aren't they lovely with these flowers?
Pretty aren't they?
Yeah  do you like that one?
Yeah  cor  thank you.
Oh what's that on the floor.
Oh it's Charlotte's.
Oh  
Yes, I leave one in there for her to keep er pulling on and off hangers.
Oh I see  these lovely.
Oh they're mine.
Not really  Charlotte's need is greater than mine.
the rubbish bin  there    it does look as though you had a bomb hit doesn't it?
I know it's awful isn't it?
That's all it takes.
Yes, well  don't have er  so much time for tidying up
No.
when you spend an entire morning just child hanging off you.
Oh, I know  not when she's doing that.
What a horror  they drive you mad though, god  As soon as you've got you get used to stage with just Charlotte where you can get on and do things an 
Yeah.
she'll play beside you or she'll  come and help you or hinder you or whatever.
Mm.
And then when you all of a sudden you can't do it because there's another.
Demanding.
I wouldn't bother sweetheart.
What are you doing?
What are you up to ah?
She's trying to if while you're on your feet there's two albums over there.
Oh
I've got them.
Yes  ha.
We've built up two have we?
Oh no, no no 
We've haven't got erm  got ours back yet.
What do you mean you haven't got them back you haven't taken any have you?
Yeah Dad took
Oh just at the last minute, yes when we were leaving.
at the last minute, yeah.
Charlotte.
Who opened the door?
We did.
Eh?
I did.
There's a 
Careful!
Careful!
ugh!
Don't charge.
Oh well the tail end that's the tail end of the tape.
Tail end yeah.
They start about  half way down tha oh you've you've seen
I've seen I've seen that one.
about half way down, well where you are  is you.
There's me  oh well I wouldn't have seen those would I?
No, mind Charlotte darling.
I've seen that one.
Oh there you are that's where you start.
Yes  yes  let's leave that one in there.
Charlotte let let Grandma look 
No.
by herself will you?
Oh that's a nice one she looks as though she's smiling.
No she does smile.
Oh look   silly smile.
That's a silly 
Oh.
No sweetheart let let Grandma look.
Let Grandma look darling, she hasn't seen them, you have.
I haven't seen these look just a minute, please.
There's Dollo.
Yes it's your dolly, yes 
Yeah Grandpa's got your doll.
Grandpa's holding your dolly isn't he, funny Grandpa.
I or  
Look it's a picture of Charlotte showing her pictures to
Ah  oh look 
Ooh.
there's Charlotte.
You see  
Looks as though 
do you?
looks as though you've got a pony tail, that day.
I think so  oh it's Guy's party.
Oh it's Guy's party is it?
You were singing songs.
Oh there's Charlotte with her pretty dress on.
I wanna look.
Let me, just a minute let let Grandma look.
Shall I look look  please?
He's with his drum kit.
Please?
Just a minute darling let Grandma look.
Let Grandma look first.
Let me see finish these.
Oh Toby.
There's Toby  this is at the zoo was it?
Yes it is.
Ooh.
Ooh elephants.
The elephants.
That's you again.
Oh look at them.
You liked the elephants didn't you?
Oh look.
Look at the elephants.
and Guy.
There's  and Guy, yes.
There's Guy kissing Charlotte
and there's the hand holding
Yes  there's some lovely ones of that.
Oh.
I'm kissing.
Is he kissing you?
Yes, there's always canoodling.
They're so cute together these two  aren't you, mm?
You and your cousin.
Oh there's a big slide  The Gammels.
I want the big one  What's daddy doing?
Oh what?
What mummy?
Oh 
There's Charlotte cuddling her baby sister look.
Mm.
It's for you.
And she's a bandit.
Yes it is, yes.
I said yes  Why?
She's abandoned her hair.
Well don don't stick it under there cos it'll get forgotten  in fact I'll take it upstairs.
I will.
Awful pictures of me there.
There's you in the snow, isn't it?
Mm  this is snowy.
She's like a little dolly isn't she?
Look at  in the snow.
Yes, that's how Charlotte treats her like one.
I don't think Grandma's seen all those.
Oh I probably just gave 
No.
you a couple didn't I?
Can I see?
I see, see
I probably just gave you a couple of er 
Just a minute.
photos.
Let me see.
Can I?
Yes, I think I've probably seen those, yes  yes I think I have.
 

Oh  baby 
Baby in fish bowl.
No I think Charlotte did have them  I think I must go tomorrow.
Oh yes  I know  we'll go on Monday 
 
we're going to the clinic on Monday  I know I forgot when I was there last week, so  don't worry she won't die for lack of vitamins.
A week without  orange flavoured rubbish.
do do doo.
There.
More trouble than it's worth those  
I want to have a look.
No ask Mummy.
Well if you go and sit in your chair nicely, you can sit and look at them as long as you look and don't try and take them out  They have to be delivered to you, won't they?
Have you done a wee wee recently?
No.
Well you tell Mummy when you need to won't you?
Don't you si don't you wet the seat will you?
You did that yesterday.
Oh that was naughty wasn't it?
No, it was an accident.
Yeah.
Put your  on  Put that one up there.
Oh  that looks a white  for doing a pee.
Oh
Is that the book?
is that the book?tis isn't it?
Aha.
I shall go and forget it shan't I?
Probably.
Do you like looking at those pictures?
Singing.
Mm?
It's 
Who's singing?
Is that singing?
Who?
Was it you?
You singing.
Oh  what's that?
You hold it up and I'll see  I can't say what it is unless you show me.
Oh it's Grandpa  Grandpa.
It's a picture of Grandpa is it?
Yes.
Oh right  you've got a button undone.
Have I?
Mm.
Ooh  oh that one's come undone as well in there  mm  
No, not for dinner.
 
Oh I  I think I shall have to turn this one up a little  Dad says it's alright being long cos it makes me look taller   well I don't know about that  what do you think?
Lengthwise.
It looks alright to me.
Looks alright does it?
I think, yeah I think it might look  wrong if you turned it up actually.
Mm, I wasn't gonna turn it up too much mind you.
Wouldn't bother.
But I I'm wearing them all a little bit longer, except in the  the winter cos I can't  can't alter my coat  I have got a longer summer coat to wear  but the  the one I had last year  erm  all the skirt showed beneath, I couldn't walk about like that.
I'll have to wear a long coat.
How long's your rain coat?
Er  what my green one?
Er this will show beneath it  Don't 
Oh well it'll match.
Yeah, but I wouldn't wear it now  I've put it away now  but er I've got erm I've got a yellow one that I've had  ooh  
You'll just have to have short length coats when you're wearing  longer skirts, you know.
Yeah, well I've only got the one I've only got the one  erm  golly how long have I had that yellow  must have had it four years or more  I've only worn it about three times I think  it's erm a telly mac and it's a yellow one  erm and it is a bit longer so all these go underneath it, quite well 
Oh right.
so I shall wear that.
Well you'll have to wear it then won't you?
Yes  quite a nice colour.
Oh it's a tummy.
Pardon?
Oh  it's a tummy.
Who's tu is it your tummy?
Is it your tummy?
the blue in it.
Pardon?
What blue is it?
What blue?
Well I hope it's not a blue tummy.
We is it a cold morning, was it?
I want   I want .
Are you looking of pictures of you and Amy on the bed together  Is that what it is?
Could be that .
You're so sweet with your little sister aren't you?
You're a good girl.
Is that the face
facing in the three picture.
That's what Amy's doing isn't it?
Looking at face.
Looking at that face  ugh!
Ugh!
There's a funny face.
Yes  look at Amy doing
Funny baby isn't she?
Is she crying?
She does make funny faces doesn't she?
Especially when she's about to cry.
Mhm.
She screws her little face up doesn't she?
Mhm.
And she makes a lot of noise.
Yeah she's got good lungs on her hasn't she?
Mhm.
Oh so it's it's weighing day again is it Monday?
Yes well I'll go fortnightly for a little while  then it'll tail off.
Mummy, Mummy.
Yes, well.
Yes darling  Are you going to sleep?
How often did you have to go with her?
Oh no.
Oh I went every week to start with.
Alright .
Is that Adam?
No, I don't think so.
Oh.
 
Would Adam be home this early?
Well if he's not busy  but he said he might go fishing.
Cos er we've probably parked in his space  Don't do that sweetheart
Well if he's gone fishing then 
don't screw them up.
he won't be home yet  unless he catches his entire entitlement all in one go
Oh.
which he did last week, it was quite funny.
Did he?
He got there at four o'clock  he had four fish he could catch I think  out of the ten for the week cos he caught the others  and he'd caught them all by half past four.
Oh  where's this?
Caught four fish  I think it's West Clandon or somewhere it's in Surrey  it's where his Dad's got  he takes out his annual
Mm.
thingy  cos it's his own it's 
Cos is it a fishing farm sort of place?
oh that farm no it's a lake, private lake.
Private lake, yeah so the fish can't get away then?
The  there's only half a dozen people that are allowed  annual rights to fish there.
I say the fish can't get away then.
No.
Yes, yes silly.
They're allowed to catch ten a week.
Oh.
And he did last week  or the week before.
Mm.
Which is nice.
Mm.
You want to say something?
Oh  you're just hovering are you?
 
Fine.
Ooh ooh.
Wakey wakey.
Come on.
I'm awake.
Oh.
Well  pass me the jelly?
Mhm  of course.
When is the erm
Could you put it down  please?
I hate it when Adam does it so I hate it when you do it too, sorry, can't help it.
Whose is it?
Adam's.
Oh.
Well he bought it.
Oh.
When is the  the fair, the  fair  for the dolly  is it?
Oh  end of August.
Aha.
Oh  holding my doll  he's holding my doll.
Who's that your Grandpa holding your doll?
Yes, yes it is.
Oh what's happened to that one?
Oh several have got er
It's probably  should be waggling its ears  
Yes, or several of them have  lost their  operative parts.
Yes  the canary's disappeared once, hasn't it?
Well we did try and mend it several times, but he's
Oh er
That's a nice little book isn't it?
They're nice little things though aren't they?
Yes, they are but I think perhaps she's a little too young for them 
Down.
really  I mean the actual content of them is not too young fo too old for her but 
Where's Grandma?
No.
Where's Grandma?
Oh where she's here.
Where, I'm here.
And where's Grandpa?
Grandpa's in the garden.
He's working hard.
He's earned his lunch.
Mm  don't chew that  no don't eat it  no!
Charlotte please put it down now  put it down.
Now Grandma put it away now.
Because that's naughty we mustn't chew books  especially not those, not those pretty pictures  there's a good girl.
I done a wee.
Oh you haven't have you?
Have you done a wee wee?
Oh Charlotte.
Oh love  why didn't you tell Mummy?
Well go on up you get.
Get up then, come on.
Go on up you get.
You're still doing it look come on let's get you on the potty  you horror!
Come on quick, quick, quick round here.
It's here such wet pants  just to see, it's probably all gone.
Try, come on sit down see if you've got any more  Sit down properly come on.
No.
You've done it all now have you?
No.
You monster!
Charlotte next time you tell Mummy you want the potty right?
You listening?
You mustn't just sit there and do it love.
Mummy.
What  what's the matter?
Mum.
Well darling I've just got to clean the chair up haven't I?
Oh.
You made a bit of a mess here haven't you?
You make lots of extra work for your Mum you do, when you do this  don't you?
When you've got a potty sitting on the floor.
That's a special potty too, isn't it?
You chose it.
Mm?
She won't be a problem now  she's got nothing on.
No.
And know how to  how to teach her that trousers aren't nappies.
Mummy.
What do you want sweetheart?
Look don't just aha aha aha mhm mhm, I want you to tell me what you want  come along.
Oh.
Pardon?
What do you want?
You want what?
I want pops.
Pops ah, wants a Polo  pops.
Mummy.
Charlotte.
Ooh ooh.
Ooh ooh.
Come on  I want pops, I want pops  ah  I want pops  pops.
Here you are then.
What's she barking about?
I don't know  she's a bad little soul.
Ooh  you see me draw, mm?
Hello  or there you go .
Go and what?
Mm.
And don't come and do it up here.
Well I think she's done all she needs to do for a little while.
Mm.
You must try very hard Charlotte.
Yeah.
Cos when you've just got trousers on it's not the same as a nappy  you know?
You've got to remember to pull them down.
You'll have to remember.
Bit late now.
I done a wee in my
Are you going to do one on the potty now?aren't we?
Mm  well that's what they ought to do.
Yeah  Have you done something?
Mm  yes.
Have you?
Mm.
Yes Mummy.
Yes.
Ta.
I'll do it.
Oh mm  I was gonna go.
Ooh .
You been saving it up have you darling?
There's a clever girl  clever girl  You shouldn't really eat Polos like that though should you?
I sh I suck.
You're not sucking it, you're chewing it  crunch, crunch it's not good for your teeth  mind you Polos aren't good for your teeth are they?
Whether you suck them or chew them.
it's stuck.
It's stuck well you eat that and then that's it now for the day  nothing more.
I'm not having a bath.
No not yet, no later  later you will, won't you?
Stand still my sweet  there's a good girl   How many of the things have you actually done out of 
Out of what?
out of any of these, have you done anything?
No.
Just the first kit.
Just the first kit, yes  I shall probably do that there  put it in without an envelope  looks like there might, I might have so an odd  I got some more of the envelopes at home I might have a small one, but er
So when's the next one due out then?
Oh eleventh of 
July.
July.
Mm  that's gonna have a  have a thingy in it that 
That.
Tis pretty isn't it?
Mm.
Well it won't have er  it'll have the chart for it won't it?
Oh the chart, yes.
It's very pretty.
Mm.
Teach your child cross stitch  I'll cross stitch charts to pull out and keep.
What's that?
Er it's a bit of rubbish, I think you want to throw it away, there we are.
I catch it for you.
Leave your bottom alone.
I catch it.
You what?
I want cut it.
Oops.
Ooh.
I want cut it.
What do you want to cut?
Well that.
I can't see you'll have to pick it up and show me  I'm not climbing over the chair to look  show me.
I won't.
Mm?
Show me  what is it?
Come on.
I'm not coming on anywhere, I'm sitting down I'm having a rest  Mummy's having a rest.
I climbing up again.
I kno know what you're doing, I can see  you ought to be careful cos you'll fall down  won't you?
Little bottom.
Hello 
You're not supposed to climb on there  well Daddy said you weren't to climb on stairs.
I'm sitting down.
How's Alison doing at the moment?
We haven't spoken to them for a while?
Oh they're alright, I think.
Yeah?
She's er  doing 
Still busy?
doing a cake for the  Faisley fete.
Oh yes Jamie's picking up at the weekend, that's right.
Mm  yes  I hear she's got a  possibly another wedding cake in October
Mm.
from somebody who phoned her  over two years ago
Two years ago.
erm  she was a friend of Mrs  that used to live in
 Shorebury Park  who had a wedding cake made  and  she kept phoning her up and Alison wasn't making cakes at that particular time.
Oh when Louis was born?
Yeah, well before sh he was born, she stopped doing them  and er she phoned up out of the blue  and so said to her, no they live at Bognor I think or something.
Bognor?
Yeah  and they're when they come up to London they're going to  
Careful!
and have a look at the pictures.
Ha.
So er  that was good  to remember  and she's got another wedding cake in August  I don't know where she's got it  on the production line.
No you didn't like that one whe where you've had it in the water did you?
It's a bit sharp isn't it?
I don't know  Guy liked it  and he went in it without anything on.
Oh.
It didn't hurt him.
Mm.
So
That there's Mummy.
Your Mummy's behind you.
Or even behind you.
Er
Hello, I'm here yes, I haven't gone anywhere.
I should think that's quite sort of safe isn't it, mm?
Well she we to start with she went I think it might of been that cos we put Guy in it I think, that might have upset her.
Oh.
Because when she first had it, she loved it.
Mm.
And we pushed her all round the pool  but then we bought her a ring, just a ring  nice little one an she's fine in that.
Mm.
But she took a dislike to it for some reason, she wouldn't go in it.
Mm.
But then that holiday was a bit unusual because she wasn't well all the time we were there really  not properly  she had that virus that was  mm 
Mm.
that was getting at her before we left
Oh yes that's right.
if you remember she still had it when we came home
Mm.
she wasn't really very well  got it in her ear.
Mm  and you had the erm
The antibiotic
the storm
stuff
didn't you have the storm  no?
No that was the year before.
Was it?
When she was six months old, this was last year  when she was eighteen months.
Oh was it, oh  yeah.
Right, what do you want?
Why?
She thinks you're going to
No, cos she doesn't know how to hold it properly, to do it  it's one of these silly valves that you have to pinch to 
Oh.
in order to get the air in  Charlotte you're just going to wear yourself out darling I wouldn't bother  do you 
I do.
want it blown up?
Do you want me to blow for you?
Do you want it blown up?
I'll blow it up for you if you want  or Joelle will.
I think she wi she she like blowing  she want to do it.
Do you want it to be blown up darling, to play with?
Yes.
No I blow it.
But it I don't think you can darling, you're not strong enough  get on with it.
Better go and see how your father's getting on I suppose.
Yes, ooh dear excuse me  early night tonight  Amy permitting.
Mm  Well she's certainly got a  had a long evening innings hasn't she?
Well hopefully she'll be in reasonable mood when she wakes up.
Yes, that's right I'm going to  next Sunday as well.
Busy lot aren't you?
Busy again, yes.
Ah.
Tomorrow we are the first.
It is the first of June tomorrow, yes.
Well I've got the committee meeting on Tuesday.
 
When 
 
at home?
Dress properly.
Ah.
Come here Charlotte.
Have you decided to write to somebody?
Don't bite it.
Charlotte, I had enough of that okay?
What's she done?
She want to hit me!
I didn't see her hit you  I want to hit you sometimes, except I don't.
Ooh .
I get a sore bottom.
Yes, you will get a sore bottom  be careful.
Put your jumper on 
Ready steady  go, must why  why?
Wongy wongy wongy  wongy wongy wongy wee wee wee wee wongy wongy wongy.
Charlotte please  now come on get down.
Get down or else you'll slip
Down!
cos you've got socks on.
Good girl.
I get.
It sounds like he's playing with the plates.
Playing with the what?
Don't climb on the chair with your feet, your socks, come on you'll hurt yourself  you sit down or get off!
Off  an 
Oh right.
That's a funny body for doing on.
Yeah .
Oh hello.
Hello.
How are you doing?
Well I've got the window  back in and working with the hand thing  but I need drills to  drill holes for the fittings  and it really 
Mind your fingers.
so I'll just have to  try and remember to bring an electric drill up an see what I can do  but it's all working.
Thank you.
And  left it on the second hole.
Have you got to go and find 
What are we all er  what er?
I cut it if off there.
Well I heard the  was high but that was ridiculous.
I climb up there.
Do you want another drink before you
You don't climb up there sweetheart.
depart?
Mm  I expect we could do another one couldn't we Dad?
Wll yes I reckon the old workman's earned a cup of  tea don't you?
Of?
I'm coming too.
I tell you what else I've done, I've also  no stay there sweetheart, don't 
I'm listening.
walk around like that  ooh.
What else have you done?
I've probed that fruit tree off the glass
Oh right.
and
Come here sweet, cos I've 
generally cleaned up I've pulled up some nettles and got the access to the greenhouse a bit better  it's a bit pooey in there innit?
Come here  ooh ow.
A bit pooey!
In the do in the greenhouse there's some dog erm droppings in there.
In the greenhouse?
He's not going in there now it's are you sure it's not foxes  or cats?
 
It smells like dogs actually.
Does it?
Oh.
Oh it can't be.
But the door was ajar you see, I've shut it now
Probably foxes.
and I've got the windows open so
Probably foxes  mm.
Mm.
Foxes?
Is the actual visual  visible.
There is one it looks like a dog's made.
Oh Jessie  filthy animal!
Only me  Mum.
Not like her to do that.
Well I suppose if it was raining one night she might have done.
Mummy  Mummy Mummy.
Oh how disgusting!
Mum  Mum, Mum.
Oh Charlotte please, stop whining.
What do you want now  Aye bare bottom  ah   ooh  ooh dear, that was a hard one was it?
Was a teeny bit wasn't it?
for the geese.
Want    erm I want pops again  I want pops again.
Oh it's a spotty bum.
You're what again?
You want to go on your pot again?
Ooh.
I don't think that's what you said was it?
No.
Do you want to go on your potty?
No.
What did you sa oh she said
Pops.
Mm  yes.
Pops is Polos.
Mm  where are you going with those?
Don't worry.
I gone.
Oi!
I like that.
That's cute isn't it?
Yes, cos that's alright  that's a good girl there.
Thank you very much it's much appreciated.
Well I've looked at it with a conscience cos I took the glass out originally.
You don't have to have a conscience.
Well yes I mean 
Well it's only slipping wasn't it  before.
No it had the glass missing  it was broken we put 
Oh.
a new piece of glass in it.
He got a piece of glass for me didn't he?
Oh that's right yes 
Yeah.
and never put it in.
Well I was gonna try and get the nuts and bolts because they'd gone, however I noticed 
Stand up, stand up.
what I what I've in fact done 
Come on then 
is that the is the the pink brackets 
No, No, I'll pick you up.
that hold the arm on
There.
R E the
Where?
window brackets
You know what that , that's for the top bit, up the top  aye come on  and Grandma's chain and little pendant.
the pink bits the bit that fits onto ridge, they've got three screws in each piece but they only need two to hold them, so I've taken the centre one out of each one and used it to do the 
Come on back in my pocket  centre pocket.
the one that's got them missing  so they've got they've got to work haven't they?
Thank you.
The er the other have got 
Eh!nosey.
the other ones have got to be placed  as well.
And you've got one too.
But I will do it.
You've got one too.
What?
And you've got one too.
Yes I've got one too, yes darling  yes we're all the same.
We're all the same.
It's a  
Yes we're all the same dear.
It's a nice luxury to have 
Yes  don't undress me, there's a good girl.
It's a nice luxury to have two  but you only 
Where's your buttons?
really need one  one that you  by hand and the other one that adjusts by the temperature you've set  
Mm  I'm buttoned the other side, now I don't want it undone  don't want my buttons undone.
Don't mess my hair up  there's a good girl.
I want cuddle.
Oh Charlotte, stop please I can't 
There's always the danger you see that you 
at the moment darling, Mummy's back's hurting 
She can't, she can't cuddle you at the minute.
Down you go.
Me me me.
Down we go cos you're heavy girl  ooh yeah .
there you go.
might might upset the 
What's that?
Oh it was you.
Who did you think it was?
I'd no idea  something falling over  what's that?
Save our zoo  really?
 

I think they ought to be in the wild.
What the zoo?
No the animals.
Out the way lovey  Out the way.
 
Yeah well you couldn't put them back in the wild now.
No, that's it  What do you think you're gonna do young lady 
Bred in captivity.
you're not gonna get some more dog tins?
No, dog tins are down here.
Oh right  oh right.
some banana  shut the door  come along 
Come along.
shut the door  come on  
Oh no we don't have biscuits.
Possibly.
Ooh no  no ooh    but it's nearly tea time 
No it's not  no it's not.
I can .
You can have a biscuit if you like.
Where's a drink?
Has she got a drink knocking around somewhere?
Want a biscuit, down!
Oh.
Well give her the biscuits then.
Down, down, down left.
Thank you.
What're you doing?
No, there's a silver tin just there.
A silver tin.
Oh.
Out out out out out.
Come on out of the way, come on.
I want that.
Out, now let's see what we can find for you, oh.
That's that one.
Oh  oh.
Have you got another one of those?
We've got some more  in the tin.
What have we got here?
That's mine  Yes, well that was Dad's.
Ooh   
Yes, let's put that there  and you this  one in there.
Ooh  only one  right one  good girl  You've got .
Somebody's been eating a lot of those haven't they?
Mm.
Would you like biscuit?
I said somebody's been eating a lot of those.
Would I like a biscuit?
Plain in the sides and milk in the middle.
I didn't have them  dar no no there's no milk.
Oh cos going down the sides, is it?
That's it  thank you.
Oh,
Which, oh they're the plain are they?
Mm.
Perhaps I'll have two, cos I'm a pig  cos I'm a pig.
Mm?
Cos I'm a pig.
Are you?
I'll have two.
Do you need any more, anybody?
No, no that's Dads' and that's mine  I didn't know you .
I don't normally but we went to Sainsbury's and they didn't have any milk.
Oh.
Cos it was rejected apparently for
Oh.
too high temperatures.
Oh.
So they didn't have any at all.
Oh I see.
Hello.
So I sent her off to Tesco's.
Mm.
Right  go and sit down.
Mm  there's yours Dad, in the middle.
Thank you my love.
Hello.
Who are you writing to?
Hello.
Who are you writing to?
My God Godmother.
Chocolate biscuit face.
Your cod mother.
Godmother.
Aren't you?
Chocolate biscuit face.
Hello,
I thought you weren't going to.
No Jessie you can't do that.
Bonjour Jessie  Oh no.
Hand.
Jessie's don't have chocolate biscuits.
No  they don't  it's bad for her diet.
He won't  
Jessie, no.
I wonder if he's caught anything?
No Jess  good girl.
  

We did our   of golfing on Wednesday.
All alright is it?
Yes  yes we found a few flowers an 
No more Jessie.
No more Jessie, no  that's all for Charlotte that.
Lovely little  path  put that in the book, get it to Janet tomorrow.
Over to there  no.
So it's turn next week.
No.
Have you written it up yet?
No.
No not yet.
No  I suppose you want me to put something together?
Well I'm quite capable of writing what I've seen  you can do it if you like.
No.
What did you see?
Don't really mind.
Oh we saw the grass had been flattened in places, but I should imagine that it's probably by animals.
Well we've seen some evidence of foxes  erm
What what's the evidence?
Droppings.
Well droppings  foxes' droppings are often distinctive.
Bit difficult.
But they're not like dogs' erm  what do you say?
What did you just 
Charlotte!
What do you say?
Burp.
No you don't say burp, you say pardon me.
Mm, I should think so.
Powerful was it?
Oh yeah.
Oh Charlotte.
Has she done one today?
I don't know has she?
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh.
She's probably about to.
Hello.
Hello.
As long as she doesn't do that on the chair.
Mm  I don't think Grandpa wants you on his knee, dear.
Not if you're gonna do that  I want you covered up before you sit on my knee.
Or house trained whichever is the  
My bottom.
My bottom.
Yes I think you want to sit on your potty.
Yes, I think you want to sit on your potty too.
No.
You're making noises  aren't you?
You don't want more biscuits.
You don't want more biscuits, no course not.
No.
You don't want   You don't want your bottom ah  
You're not having any more biscuits.
Broom.
Wow  .
Careful love.
Whey!
That's from my bottom.
Pardon?
Swimming po .
You take that in the swimming pool don't you?
We go swimming next week  didn't have swimming this week did we?
You know, roll over on her side.
No she'll just tip.
No but it's it's actually got holes in  for her legs so  fair amount of her is underneath.
Mm  even quite a lot of water inside I should think too.
That's my arm.
What's that?
A tie  that's a tie.
Well by the time she's finished this course she should be confident to hold on to things in the water, you know
Mm.
like a float or something.
Mm.
It's a lellow  I mean a yellow tie.
Lellow?
Lellow.
Lellow tie.
Yes, you can speak normally to her she wi she will understand.
Don't pull it, no no ugh.
You don't want to choke Grandpa do you?
Expecting Nigel to be home from work early today or is he
He said he'd be home by five.
Oh.
He's gone to  her  he was going today.
Can you do that?
 Horstead Fens 
Mm.
Gets about doesn't he?
Mm.
Do that  don't do that.
I haven't seen him for a while actually.
Have you not?
No, five weeks I suppose.
Really?
Mm, we saw them the Saturday after we w Amy was born.
And that was the weekend they came over to collect the  and
Dong.
erm
Eh?
No they had that before.
Oh do they?
Oh.
The word processor.
Bong.
What was the name of it  Amstrad?
Amstrad.
Yeah.
Oh no they came over to er  they just came over to see us  well see us  see a certain of  new arrival.
Yes.
And as she's five and a bit weeks old, it's five weeks
Mm.
cos she was only a bit then.
That's right.
You tell me  what's the name of er  it's Traf Trafalgar Square, there's er Nelson.
Yeah Nelson not Napoleon  Trafalgar yes  you know how to spell it?
please, squeeze it.
You'll squeeze it.
I like Trafalgar Square.
What are you doing?
Oh oh!
Charlotte, up you get please 
What are you doing there?
on your potty.
Come on.
Go and sit on your potty 
Quick.
or do you want a nappy on?
Quickly.
Charlotte do you want a nappy?
To the potty, quick.
Potty or nappy which would you prefer?
Come on.
You speak to Mummy please.
And don't climb on the chair Charlotte.
Come on get down, get down there's 
Come on darling.
a good girl.
Mm?
Go and sit on your potty.
It's alright I'll just keep  I'll just keep my eye on her  Where are you going?
I've got a feeling she won't
Oh no.
unless she's got a nappy on.
Poor torn it to bits  cor.
 
I don't well I could be wrong she might do it on the spot.
Don't move, don't any more  he'll get  oh he's got a  now.
Probably just
Oh it's
not in properly  don't worry.
it's  isn't it?
Just a minute sweetie.
Do do do do don't come in here.
There you are.
Well say hello to them for us cos we haven't seen them for a long time.
Yes I will  I will will.
Have you had an accident on the chair?
Yes.
Yes.
Oh.
We should see him soon he was  doing some er curtain tracks for us.
Mm  yes.
Oh  I can on my potty  I can on my potty.
So erm  going to change that then?
Yes we will have to get some curtains that fit in the bay  go 
Oh they're going round the bay are they?
yes.
Which , which colour?
I don't know.
I haven't decided yet.
You had those you a you had erm  you have ordered some curtain and you don't know which colour.
No I haven't ordered any curtains,cor curtain rail.
Curtain rack rail.
Oh.
What you hang the curtains on.
Oh right.
Nigel's going to come and fit it  cos he works for a company who makes  and he's doing them in every room.
Is he?
Charlotte will you come here please?
Charlotte.
Charlotte.
He's doing all the rooms for you is he?
He is  yes we're getting a  text electric one in the dining room  but the rest we're paying for.
Er  run.
You ran yes.
Where are you?
I can't get in there.
Well they'll all be erm  they'll all have cords, you see
Mm.
which is nice.
Yes.
Can't get in there.
Can't you get in there?
Why not?
So you'll do away with those then will you?
Your head's too big.
Suppose so.
What is it for, Trafalgar Square?
What is it what?
What is it for  Trafalgar Square?
What do you mean, what is it for?
What?
Erm
Trafalgar Square  is it a memorial?
Well Nelson  Battle of Trafalgar.
Yes, it is a memorial to the Lord Admiral Lord Nelson.
And the battle of Trafalgar.
And the battle of Trafalgar.
Not Napoleon  cos this this one thought it was Napoleon 
 
at the top of the column.
Oh   no, no.
What was that, oh.
It's alright.
Don't do that.
 
Does Nanny needs to sit on the pot.
Come here love, I think Mummy needs to sit down.
Yes, dolly on the pot.
Don't you?
Get on your potty.
Yes.
Well where's Dolly's potty  here it is.
Here's dolly's potty here.
Here.
Here's dolly's potty  Here's dolly's 
 
Oh.
Oh dear   we're in his space.
Come on we'll go before he 
We'll go.
before he sees us.
What you mean there you'll go before he sees you.
I expect he's had to go off the road.
Oh, no no it's alright, it's  that man's gone now.
Oh has he?
Yeah tha tha 
Well we'll be off anyway.
Yes.
Ah you're not going to
 
Yes  
do do do hello  Hello 
Who's this?
Hello.
Hello.
Hello  Hello.
Hi there.
Hello.
We're just off  .
You can move back.
You can move back now  A big van parked  
you've got to get out.
Ah?
I said first of all you've got to get out.
Why what have you done, you've penned him in have you?
Deliberately I should think.
No he's got an inch and a half.
Must have a foot at the back  so er what more could he want, you know?
Hello.
Hello, alright there.
Hello.
How are you?
Alright  
Thank you.
Alright.
Daddy, Daddy, Daddy  Grandma, Grandpa 
Right then.
Grandpa.
love.
bear.
Speak English Charlotte.
What did she say?
Speak India.
No not speak India!
Oh no.
Oh goodness gracious me.
Come on, you come down, we don't trust you up there.
Why has everything suddenly become she  you've only been doing this the last few days.
Tis a funny girl.
Everything is it unless it's a person.
And that's he or she.
Right?
He for a boy and she for a girl  and it for anything.
But I don't know  I think
But you don't know where it is, you don't know where it is there's nothing you can do about it.
Well look, you've lost the needle?
Yeah, be careful what you say.
Yes.
When were you last using it  for knitting or for your tapestry?
It's probably  it's probably stuck 
Toby can you turn it off please?
in a piece of er  knitting.
Can you turn it off  please  Is this your question?
Come here  let's have a look.
Do we need to have the sound on this?
Er  it's complicated no .
What do you want to know?
Oh mince, I've got to get it out of the freezer  Bye.
Can I listen?
Is this disturbing you?
To the radio, of course, quiet.
Is there a lot of difference between  fishing a in the evening?
I don't know, I've not fished there in the evening, yet.
That's true.
This'll be my first  attempt  I would imagine  that it won't make a lot of difference  I could be wrong.
Have you now learnt how to do this tying or do you have to go and see Terry every time?
Erm  I think I've learnt how to do it, it's  fairly straightforward  but er  him having tied the leader on for me  I won't have to  go back to him anyway for quite some time.
So you weren't concentrating when you were watching with him?
I don't think so,th the point is I'm not going to be called to tie a knot like this again  for maybe three weeks and then by then I'll make things up  it was really more for convenience than sitting down trying to work it out myself  so you know .
Is there not a book of  angling knots?
It means there must places doesn't it?
No he's just practising at the moment lovey  he's practising his swing  but I agree if he stood that distance he wouldn't be able to hit the ball would he would you.
It wouldn't reach it would it?
He's right in the middle of the fairway though, it's a nice looking shot he's got to play isn't it?
Mm.
Oh this one isn't so nice  with all this sand.
Oh look at all that sand.
Ooh  well that was good wasn't it?
Mhm.
Clever boy.
Clever.
There we are and he'll go with the man who was practising his swing  what's the matter with him now  come on get on with it.
Come on get on with it, ooh.
Now that's Mark .
Is it?
How did you know?
Cos I know what he looks like  it'll be like looking at you and saying that's Toby  cos I know what you look like as well  do you think?
Yeah  you mean he's an old friend of yours.
Him?
Ha.
Oh he's a great friend  a great pal.
That friend?
That friend, yeah  yeah I know all the golfers, Toby  I know Severiano Ballesteros
Mm.
Mm  oh he's taken a big chunk of the grass.
Did you see that?
Ooh that wasn't a bad shot was it?
No, he got that one.
Ooh just stayed on the green  he's not pleased with it.
Ooh.
Why isn't he?
Cos he thinks he should have done better than that  and he's right  he should of done better.
Is that Ian Woosnam?
No.
Well anyway if you know 
Well it looks like him.
all the golfers you erm you'll be glad that one  once
Absolutely cos they're all personal friends of mine.
You shouldn't tell stories like that.
I'm telling stories  I don't know any of them.
It's like telling Joelle you have Paul Simon's  
No you're not.
That wasn't me 
Well you told her.
You did tell stories though.
I did.
Your uncle tells stories sometimes
What do
only for fun.
do
Only for a bit of fun  that's why  How's your  chin is it alright now?
Chin?
Yep.
Mm?
What you hurt yourself?
No Toby didn't hurt himself, who hurt you?
Dad, my Dad.
What did he do?
He didn't do it on purpose though did he?
No.
What did he do?
Erm when we were picking up the trunk off erm Uncle Alan who's on on the beginning of the fishing
Oh right yeah.
my Daddy  tip it over my skin
Ooh.
and pinched it.
Ooh I bet that was nice.
And then we got a bit of plaster out of Uncle Alan's medical bag 
Yeah.
didn't we?
yeah.
In the car  and we put a little bit of plaster on  and everything 
Yeah.
was alright wasn't it?
You alright now?
But there were a few tears at the time weren't there?
Oh dear.
Just a few.
Never mind.
Shall we go and see if Charlotte's ready.
Well when she's  she'll come in.
She'll come in, sweetheart.
Joelle will bring her in.
She won't just stay in the car, she won't want to stay in the car when she wakes up  cos that's too boring.
If she's not in in about five minutes then we'll go outside anyway, alright?
Okay, you count five minutes.
Well I'm not going to count we'll make a we'll make a guess  alright?
Why don't you give her till half past three?
Well that's a quarter of an hour  it's a long time.
Well it's alright  it's not that long  I suppose it's a long time when you're six.
Mm  well even five.
Or five and a half even.
Five and a half, that's right  he is almost exactly five and a half aren't you?
We were talking about this in the car  cos he's five and six months.
Got somebody else sticking his finger up his nose as well.
Can I have a tissue?
I should think you could have a tissue.
Here you are.
Come to aunty your aunty Trevor, your aunty Carol.
Aunty Carol.
Aunty Adam.
You blow your nose.
You go prurgh 
That's the boy  that's it  all done?
Can't get much out  could just find a bogey.
Blow hard.
Well don't squeeze your nose for the second time or it won't come   that's better  that's it.
That's it.
Well done  there alright?
Now you can go and put it in the bin.
There we are.
Or in your pocket.
That's right you give it to Dad, give it to Uncle Adam  okay  that one's all used up now so you can use another one if you need it, alright?
Now it's three minutes.
Is it three minutes, no it's four minutes.
Four minutes.
Four minutes.
Patience Toby 
You see.
you have to learn to be patient.
You'll need patience for fishing won't you?
Yeah.
Mm?
Good things come to those who wait  or he who waits or  what is the pa 
I don't know.
Oh 
Adam?
Eh?
Uncle Adam.
Uncle Adam.
Mm?
Do you prefer to call me Uncle Adam or Adam?
Adam.
Well you call me Adam then, alright?
That's a  a special treat.
Yeah.
Alright  you can call me Adam whenever you see me now  alright?
Yeah.
You don't have to call me Uncle Adam at all.
You call him Uncle Adam when you don't see him.
Alright?
Yeah.
And if anybody says you should be calling him Uncle Adam you can say  no I don't need to because he told me I didn't  alright?
Is that fair enough?
Yeah.
You don't call me Uncle Adam and I won't call you Uncle Toby.
Cos you're not my uncle are you?
No.
Ooh and and don't call me uncle five either.
I won't call you uncle five  no.
call you uncle six didn't I?
I don't want to be called uncle six  why not?
No.
Because my name isn't six is it?
No.
No.
Could we erm
I don't want to be called 
discourage the feet on the 
uncle five.
Can you keep your feet off the  chair  thank you  good you sit over there there we are.
Ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh ooh.
Do you want another drink or you alright at the moment?
I'd like another drink.
What would you like?
Ooh  how many?
Three and a half minutes.
Three and a half  now  
What would you like?
count three and a half.
Are you interested in a drink or not?
Erm yes  may I 
Stop changing the subject  please.
You'd like some lemonade.
In fact, no.
In fact 
In fact 
no.
Oh.
Yeah.
In fact what would you like?
Nothing!
Nothing!
Oh you don't have to have anything.
Nothing.
Nothing at all?
Nobody's forcing you to drink Toby.
Nothing at all.
Nothing at all no    no  at all.
Nothing at all at all nothing at all at all.
Nothing at all no.
You'll have to check the grass before you go running around out there.
Mhm.
I shall go and  de-umpty before we start.
I think there's one just by the
That's an interesting word for them isn't it?
De-umpty.
Erm   there's one just  as you go out of the french window.
I wonder how many people they have talking about dog crap.
Well there's already half a tape full of Charlotte's bodily functions.
How much now?
Accidents on chairs 
Three minutes.
and things.
Three er
Three er
That's the longest two minutes I've ever seen.
It's getting shorter than ever.
It is 
It is 
getting shorter yes
Yes
it's just taking a long time.
You said three and  you  oh yeah yeah  you  three  last time you said three and a half.
Three and a half  that's right.
I did didn't I?
It's now about two and three quarters.
No it isn't.
Yes it is.
No it's four minutes now.
No it's three.
No four, look  there's four minutes to go.
Anyway do you think any of these companies that you've  
No you said three and a half.
Did I?
Eh?
Yes.
Are you sure?
I'm sure.
Oh.
Last time you said three and a half.
Did I?
Oh it must be three minutes now then.
Yeah.
Oh right, okay  Sorry, what did you say?
Do you think any of the erm  companies that have done business with Japan would have any such pictures?
I honestly don't know.
Would you be prepared to ask them?
How long now?
Er  I know who would  but then unfortunately I think I've thrown their stuff away.
Who's that?
The erm 
How long now?
 text 
 text 
How long now?
Yeah.
Adam, how long now?
You've thrown that big catalogue away?
I think so yeah.
Oh dear.
How long now?
It may still be upstairs 
Oh in the roof?
Mm.
  
If we've still got it that's where it'll be.
Erm  yeah but that's out of date isn't it?
Now  three minutes  I told you it was three minutes didn't I?
Yeah  mm.
Didn't I tell you it was three minutes?
Isn't that out of date that catalogue?
Yeah.
Yeah , but I mean if you told them which one you want they may well still be able to get it for you  It is three minutes isn't it?
Yeah  that's right.
Well we could always tear the 
your watch.
tear the regular pages 
 
out of the catalogue and fax them to Jack couldn't we?
Is this them?
No smack Toby's bottom.
Eh?
minutes.
Oh do it again   again.
Ha?
It might be 
 
getting sore.
Hang on a sec lovey I want just want to ask er Carol something.
You could remove the pages from the catalogue and fax them over  to Jack  you see 
well I don't know if we can get it there.
No to see if it's the sort of thing that
Oh I see what you mean  yeah  well we know what he wants.
Look at this  hello  hello.
Hello  hello.
That's hello in mouth shut language.
Is it?
Hello  hello.
How do you say can I have a twizzle stick please?
Can I have a twizzle stick please?
Can I have a twizzle stick please?
Is that right?
N no.
Can I have a twizzle stick  please?
What's a twizzle stick?
Can I have a twizzle stick  please?
Yeah it 
Is that better?
Yeah.
Good .
what about 
What is a twizzle stick?
I don't know.
You telling stories are you?
Me  would I do a thing like that?
Well you  you sometimes tell stories for fun don't you?
Stories    
Keeping you up are we?
Ooh blimey, yeah.
It looks so easy doesn't it?
Ha  Do they never get interfered with when they go into the crowd but are  or are people very good?
Normally they've been pretty good.
Not a lot of point having a fence there  they were climbing over it.
It's very wide  the    all the people or most of the people that go to these things  are either all  players already themselves
Now how long Ad Adam?
or they've got relations that are, er two and a half minutes.
After a watch.
How long is it?
How long is it?
What minute now it's two and a half minutes.
It said two and a half.
 

Oh well it's only just near  now will it?
You will  a you will Adam.
How long is it to go now?
I've already told you two and a half minutes.
Three.
Wasn't that long.
It  it will say  
Up you get.
Ask it once more.
No cos I'm getting bored of asking it.
Please?
I'll ask it then.
Alright you ask it.
How long is it?
Seventy five minutes.
Seventy five !
Two hours.
It says seventy five minutes  I'll ge I'll ask it again   How long is it?
Three and a half minutes.
What?
What did it say?
I think it said three and a half minutes.
How long now?
Two and three quarters.
Two and three quarters .
How long now?
Six minutes.
Six minutes  
The more you ask the longer it gets, Toby.
How long now?
Eight minutes.
Eight minutes.
If you stop asking it'll get quicker.
How long now?
Twenty five minutes.
Five minutes  no more asking.
Six minutes.
Six minutes   
When that hand  goes there  then that's when we're going outside.
 

What's that?
I think he's .
Careful!
Are you on m 
No I'm not.
You will hurt yourself if you fall about  won't you?
Mm.
Mm.
Why don't you just sit down somewhere?
Ah.
Or go  
He's lying down on the floor  having a nice lie down aren't you Toby?
Goodnight then.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Goodnight.
I'm not going to sleep.
Why not?
He's just gonna have a lie down aren't you?
Why aren't you going to have a sleep, I'd like to have a sleep.
Had to  didn't they?
Never mind  too late now.
Pardon me.
I'll think about it.
You look like you need a sleep.
No I don't.
Well you're yawning away there.
Mhm.
Ah ah ah ah ah ah.
No  no you do yours.
Only cos you did.
No it's because you did.
I yawn now anyway cos I'm tired.
Hiya!
I've been up all night.
Well I suppose if I thought about it I could er  put Amy in the hall and go and do some .
Could do.
If I could be bothered to.
That's the problem.
Yes it is isn't it?
It's a big problem.
Oh come off it.
What?
How long does it take you to do throw a shot.
Well with all those people breathing down his neck it's probably put him off
Is there anything you're going to want taped while you're out?
What this evening?
You're still going are you?
Well it depends what Toby wants?
I don't know  mm  I'm full of surprises  Well I don't think we need to add anything to that climbing frame do we?
Probably not.
Maybe we'll get the scramble net at some point.
Yeah.
Not cheap though are they?
Another forty quid or something.
Yeah  oh good it's that film on again.
Mm?
That film on again  Well and truly into summer now aren't we, there's nothing on the television at all.
I'll just get Charlotte some squash.
Squash?
Orange, lemon and pineapple squash  
Really?
Well it's only recently that she's started  drinking orange juice  I know  But she hasn't liked it at all.
That Agatha Christie's one of the new ones 
No they're repeats.
This is absolutely nothing to rush home for at all is there.
I thought I recognised er  the look of the film you were looking at just now
Half a Sixpence, yeah.
Yeah  I thought it was on a couple of weeks ago  oh no it was the  whatsit millionaire wasn't it?
Have you had enough now little girl mm?
No?changed brands of coffee or something  they're horrible   I don't know what she's doing different   alright lovey, okay shush shush shush  shush  showing her little heart out isn't she?
Who's Catherine?
That's not very nice you know.
Oh oh.
You be careful if you're looking at photos please.
What can I do, what can I do  she's a woman.
Say stop it.
Yeah, you'll have to learn about woman Toby  they're a funny bunch of creatures.
Look at your Aunty Carol doesn't she look funny creature?
Yeah.
you came with.
There.
I think your dad's arrived Toby.
Ooh  is your daddy here?
Really?
I think I just heard a car door shut  do you wanna go and open the front door for him?
Yep, there he is  can you reach it?
Can you reach?
He's here, he is here, he just walked up the
You go and tell me if you can reach the front door.
What a greeting.
Oh that sounded like Brian  silly Grandpa.
Silly Grandpa's got your dolly.
I did.
Hello folks.
Good day.
Hello.
How are you?
Alright?
Alright?
Here you are I bought er  I couldn't resist that.
Oh go 
Oh yeah.
What is it?
We've got give that a whirl haven't we  ah?
Or a bottle  I'll pop that in the fridge  thank you very much.
Okay.
Oh Happy birthday 
What is it?
to you.
Jacob's cream.
Got myself a bottle and got him a bottle.
And Toby's been a little angel this afternoon.
Wonderful  have you got a typewriter here  do you think I could use  
Worn himself out er  Have we?
I've got a feeling we haven't
Oh we've got a really ancient  Adler 
Oh.
up the in the roof I think it is still.
It's in the roof, or in the garage?
No it's in the roof  pardon?
Do you need it down?
It's in the roof, the roofery.
Er  if you can wait till next week I'll get it down.
No it's alright, I'll er  I'll sail over  and do it there.
Mummy, mummy.
Yes love.
What?
What is it?
Now.
What do you want?
We've got to find out what mummy's doing whether  cos I got the mummy's  which means 
Do you want to give her a ring?
No?
I will give her a ring in a few minutes, but suspect  I suspect  that you and daddy have to have a bath together.
Ooh.
That sounds exciting.
What does that mean you get for supper?
I don't know we'll have to what I can freeze  won't we?
We should do erm  I could do the custard pudding  I could do the dessert and you could do the savoury.
Alright  and what are you going to do for dessert?
 
He's just let  let the cat out of the bag there didn't you?
Do a pudding  or we could do  erm custard.
Oh I don't know
Custard.
Could you tell me how you do it.
Toby Toby you I'll tell you what if you want daddy to really want his pudding .
Stirring?
Best stirrer in the business.
I  
What Broule?
What?
No Broule I bet that's that's a
That's
a bit a bit sophisticated .
just custard.
How do you do your custard?
Cos it's a very nice taste.
Aha  I 
Did you really make custard?
nutmeg on
Oh I didn't realise.
top.
Okay?
What did you have to make your custard with?
Nutmeg on top.
Yes.
Two eggs
Yes.
and I used  erm  very ni erm up to three in milk
Right.
on my own measuring jug
Right.
and erm  and then I whip some more
Mhm.
well erm in fact I put a bit of  erm flavouring in
Right.
and then  when I I put the mix in in the oven hot so I put  the nutmeg on top  grated nutmeg
Sounds good.
Although 
okay?
Although
although 
So I make the  
although
although, except the
Yes, mix.
And then you pour it into the bowls 
although oh what's although in French?
and you put them in the oven do you?
No.
How do you do it then?
Then you erm 
Wha what's the context?
put you put a fla you put erm  nutmeg and erm  vanilla 
A flavouring  vanilla, right okay.
Oh I can't think.
After that okay?
It's a real one none of this custard powder job,
Honey can you remember what although is in French?
Real custard.
Although?
Although.
Erm
My brain's gone.
Holiday  that's one.
Although a lot of the world's natural re resource like  all come from this port.
Right  all
Although you .
Wouldn't  text deal with it?
Well I suppose.
ha ha ha 
 
he he.
Have a look in the dictionary.
Is that right, I think so.
Ugh!
Have have a look in the dictionary and
There is a word for that but I 
I can't think what it is.
 
Have a look and br bring the dictionary in and 
 
we'll tell you the right one cos there'll be several probably.
Alright, alright.
Alright.
Tilly tilly tat.
Had we'd better go back hadn't we?
Yeah.
Right I'm off.
Do do do do do do do do do.
Now where's your glass and your video?
I will see you in due course.
When you see 
Alright?
He's going fishing.
 
I'll find them.
Cos I'm not coming back again.
I'll see if my video's on the hall table .
It is  with some photos.
There's some fishing there my  
Yep it is   my glass is 
Right see you 
on the slide.
when I see you, alright?
Yeah.
Here are  here dad.
Right okay.
Bring the photos then Toby as well.
There's nothing like a  in the family is there?
Yeah.
Only one?
Right.
Do you want me to sew this back on for you babe?
No it's alright I'll
Mhm.
I shall say hello to my friend  
Yeah.
I can't wake her up or else I shall got shot.
No  she's been awake and asleep and awake and asleep all day today  there's no pattern today.
Right.
Brian there's some photos there I don't know whether Toby's picked them up or not.
Oh right.
I'll get them.
Are those the  the party then?
The party and the do and  whatever
Oh yes oh right
Got them all?
Charlotte will you leave the money alone please  honey could you put it out of reach please, love.
I'll get it.
Dad I'm bored.
Right  okay then 
Say bye bye Toby.
oh actually I need the 
Bye.
Do you?
Charlotte 
Bye.
Charlotte come here.
Come here.
Bye.
bye Charlotte.
Charlotte will you come here please love.
Charlotte, please.
Charlotte go to your dad.
Do as you're told.
Can I have a kiss?
Give Uncle Brian a kiss, come on.
Oh dear.
Charlotte  having a paddy?
Oh you want to come and watch don't you?
Oh yes, say bye bye don't we.
Yes it's alright, it's time go, she want's to come and watch you go.
Oh I see
Well
She doesn't like anybody to go without her say so.
It's a bit too difficult for you to blow up isn't it sweetheart?
Do you want me to blow it up for you?
I don't know what you're doing playing with that  Goodness me!
What a pair of lungs.
Er lady I think.
Are you going to sleep now little one  mm?
After all that milk  you look pretty sleepy.
What are you trying to do?
Don't squash it.
Blow a gasket?
He's nearly done it look  isn't he clever  no don't do that love.
Charlotte  leave him  Charlotte!
You miserable child.
Now the dog's joining in, oh that's wonderful.
I laugh  doggy doggy doggy dog.
She doesn't like things that blow up does she?
ah.
Oops  oops  hello Jess  all these blown up things all round the house  no no no no no Charlotte  don't hit the dog, that's it you cuddle  Jessie darling in your chair  in your chair go on  move  I don't know why she wants to play with that that's for crawling around with   you don't need to crawl any more Charlotte.
I don't remember this being as  much air as this in here.
Oh Charlotte!
I wish you wouldn't do that  that's  
Charlotte let daddy blow it up.
It's not nice darling please stop doing it.
Good girl  There, all done  what are you doing?
Don't bite your nails.
There's no more.
Don't burst it.
Oh little girl don't cry  don't cry petal  there you are.
There we are.
Ah little one.
Did you say thank you daddy?
Thank you Daddy.
That's alright  Charlotte can you pull your trousers up at the back, they're a little bit falling down  good girl.
Droopy drawers.
Good girl  and what's your leg doing up here?
Mm.
Ha  your trouser leg.
Standing next to the other one.
Can I help  come here  come here.
Doesn't matter does it?
One leg up and one leg down.
it's more bits, more bits and more bits to cut.
Pardon?
Is she sleeping?
Well she's just vaguely dropped off  I'll have to see how long it lasts.
we want, you want 
Very funny morning.
You've got a biscuit.
No way, if she comes running in here and says, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
I had no idea, she certainly keeps much .
Is that the breasts?
Mm.
No, I think I'll have a bit 
Oh sorry.
Hold on let's, let's try and have a guess.
Erm, Charlotte how much do you think?
Twelve pounds.
Mm.
Fourteen pounds.
Mm.
Two stones.
So just one for you then all the rest to Charlotte, that right?
So that was , hold on, eleven.
Two, four.
What was she be born, ten?
Ten fourteen and a half.
Ten fourteen and a half, and when was that, two weeks ago, yeah?
Two weeks.
Two weeks ago, cos that adult slightly or the children slightly.
Let's say
Most  turn the light on in there.
Yeah.
Said, I just said, get it from the erm 
Eleven, seven .
Yeah, yes.
Eleven , seven.
And a bit more.
Eleven, nine.
Try twelve.
Twelve pounds,.
There we are, you go back to your nice kind mummy.
The way she looks, she's about to wakening so
Hello, can I have a little, god my , more than twelve pounds,, or you more than twelve pounds?
You are.
See to that , I can see 
Can you ?
Yeah.
You cheeky monkey.
I like .
Ooh, ah.
Are you home because you're home or are you going fishing or
No, I'm home is always home.
What's all this?
Soaps, no it's alright your dad's taken it, oh Basil going to call again, this all happened when I was out.
what, what for?
I dunno no.
He'll ring this evening.
This isn't new instructions for Wednesday morning.
Call it number thirty, Andrew.
Bork.
Banker.
Borker his name is.
Borker, who what's.
Who works .
Who works for Radio One .
That's who own the property.
Oh that's good, that's what I want.
His gonna show you round both of them.
Ah that's great.
Because she can't get there.
Good I'm pleased about that, so I didn't really want somebody coming all the way down from the West End cos I'm I, I'm what I would call a  buyer, I'm only going to be a buyer if I can get money from somewhere that I don't know  you know what I mean.
Well I don't, I don't want to waste somebody's time, be wasting it.
Mm, no, I know what you mean 
Can we draw?
I can draw ma?
You can draw if you like, yes darling.
Right,
Children's World, fifty, sixty eight quid, oh that'll be the a South Afri a 
Yes , do you like to put those in the tin.
That was a request from Charlotte, she's been demanding chocolate biscuits.
What?
  

are you going to interrupt my piano lesson tonight aren't you?, she's timed her feed wrong today.
come and talk to her daddy.
Do you reckon?
Aren't you?
You want to come and talk to your daddy?
Do you think she will?
Maybe.
I don't think her daddy will be able to talk to her if she's hungry, somehow, will you 
Do you want daddy to talk to you?
Oh, look at her face.
Put that lip away.
Poor cat .
You've had a nice afternoon haven't you?
Oh,.
You think it's funny don't you?
Tell your daddy what you've been doing this afternoon.
What you been doing today?
Erm
Where did you go?
Erm,Park, I went whoop .
Did you?
Silly car .
Yeah .
Where else did you go?
Went in a car in  did you?
Yeah.
Where else did you go my darling?
Where did you go and take half an hour over choosing your books?
Oh.
Where did you go?
I think somebody's in a silly mood.
Did you go to your library?
Yes.
And a , and I want  .
Did you find lots of nice books?
No, I .
Go find the books and show me.
They're in the kitchen darling.
Show me your books.
I don't know .
They're in the kitchen, Joelle will give them to you if you go and ask.
Go and find your books and show them to daddy, come on.
Yes.
I got it 
Oh you've been to  have you?
Mm, did you .
Sweetheart I wouldn't of known what to buy.
Is the leader just a leader or are there several different types?
Well as it happens, this .
Your 
This, do this.
Do what?
I want Polos.
Well you can go on wanting you've just had a biscuit piglet.
I wanna eat it, I want Polos.
Charlotte please no tantrums.
I want Polos.
In a minute love  , what?.
I wasn't thinking about that, I was thinking about the way you were walking 
Are you talking to yourself?
So you're going to have to go poppet.
Mm, no.
You ask your mum.
Can't you have, can't you find a book?
Can I have Polo?
Can she have Polo?
Sorry.
Yes, alright.
Where, where are they?
They're in the larder on the shelf right in front of you, about nose height, or somebody's nose height, I don't know which  or not, but they're right in the middle of the shelf.
They're taking the piss.
Come and sit down, come and sit down.
Which one you want?
Mm, that one.
Why did you take so long to choose your book Charlotte?
Because she, oh she talked to a giraffe, you no that's a big giraffe in there.
Oh she talked.
Yeah she talked to her.
Are you listening?
Mm.
Mm.
Edgar, Edgar, er was a tractor,, she , I  she's trapped.
Ask her if  What?
My truck.
My truck has lost what?
Has lost his trunk.
Trunk.
Trunk.
Right.
What's that his trunk?
I've no idea.
Can you show me the words Joelle?
T
You show me words Joelle, my trunk she sobbed has lost it , ah it's a poem.
Is it?
Hester felt a proper , my truck she sobbed has lost it .
Oh right.
There it is, is .
Oh the  I , he never seems to be .
Joelle it's a poem.
You have to read it in a certain way.
Da, da, da, da, da, da 
Da, da, da, da, da, da , da, da, da, da, da, da.
Come on I don't know .
Da, dud, di, dud, di, duddily, da, did, diddly, dud, di, dud, di, da.
, I wanted, you have to be careful the books you get out.
You're going to be
She showed it and, I said do you want to take it .
It's not much use if she's not going to  with 
Oh Charlotte please, don't bite in it.
Suck it.
Yes, suck it, O K?
sucking.
What?
Sucking.
Oh you've got in suctions there have you?
Yes.
Oh you haven't, I was talking to daddy actually.
You want a cat .
She's the same little girl and I want my potty.
I think so, I want my potty.
Jessie wanted to catch all the  some of them had big beds and some of them had little beds, Jessie, you're not listening eh?
Blowing strange kisses to her mum..
Some of them are big beds and some of them are ,only girl in the world who is , do you think she do that,.
What?
She  and Jessie wants.
She probably can't understand Joelle.
Oh come on,, her mum and dad always says no.
What?
So they kept him in  for a cat instead, but Jessie wanted a , then Jessie , she could've just love a fluffy white , so .
took all of, all of her  and burn  burn , I'm going to look at .
Bird.
Bird, what , I'm going to be .
I'm going to be lively until I get a cat , if I don't get a cat I'm going to be lively for ever.
Oh,on Monday Jessie went to school and the teacher saw her cat suit he shouted so loudly, she jumped, jumped, jumped, jumped up, up on top of the , don't laugh
Why?
I can laugh if it's funny.
and wouldn't come down ever for .
On Tuesday Jessie went to a restaurant, cats don't sit at tables said Jessie and .
Too late isn't it?
Milk and food she said to the waiter and please don't cook .
Maybe .
Excuse me  said the waiter, soon Jessie began to smell the .
Will you suck it.
When he put  back again, that's when he , now you , to take that silly suit off  , no I won't .
Had to ask people  some people might object.
Say what you like 
Oh thank you.
Ah.
We have an addition.
Mm.
Not really no.
No.
Might as well have some light on the matter.
What, oh, perhaps cos I never   We might just about be able to see.
You haven't got  have you?
, I didn't know that one had gone, usually it's the bulb over there that had gone, but I find it so difficult to get at, you change it.
I didn't know this.
It seems to be gone for a long time.
I don't know about this one,.
Oh, well, will, will shall,know it all without music now don't you?
Well of course.
Mm, shall we start with, with a Tchaikovsky, see how that is going?
Mhm.
It's coming on very well, isn't it?
I'm afraid this last week hasn't been wonderful for, for practice.
 
For practice.
I understand absolutely, I, I could say exactly the same so, don't .
Lovely, very, very, good indeed, that, that is there now, sounds very good, just, erm, a few little things, would you try to give me more on the fifth finger, the E, the E flat, there, think of a crescendo , to that, want that come out, then, then it will, erm, I'm almost frightened to put a crescendo in because it wasn't the, a big one.
No.
If I put that in, to remind you to bring that up.
Aha.
I thought this was most impressive, very, very good indeed, it  it was, it sounded really very convincing, it did, worked beautifully, now, where, the only error as such, is this bar, you're making these much too long, you're making them almost crotchet length.
Mm.
But, so erm, just think there for a moment, one, two, one, two, and one, and two, and, you're going one and two and one and 
And 
So you're halving the tempo, but, it needs a slight  roe that means just lead into it, so,, two and one, can do that, but you're doing ,, and it's instable for ever.
Right.
And then, you know, it, it, makes that sound strange, so just watch that, that, erm, what if we just pick it up around here, just for me to hear that and get that right, we ought to be fine, any .
 

And one and two, that's it, got it, erm, the, better we just do to check that it's correct and  to remind you for rhythm, is listen to those, because those are exactly the same as those.
Yeah.
Just once again this time .
Two and one and two and one and, now there you just make the crotchet a bit too short, erm, try until you get it into your system, which you will, just counting that, in, inside yourself.
Mhm.
And you'll find then that, that, that will fit, can you just adjust your ?
This?
Yes.
Work out what fingers should be.
F sharp.
And one, two and  and, you've got it, yeah, yeah, do it once again, and try, the other thing, is try not to hold down  that D, as you play the C, it's not important, but, it's better if you don't.
Oh goodness me, can I go home?
I want  to have a look at, at this first, or the, the other piece or would you like to 
Yeah, maybe.
Yes, there, there hasn't been
This, this happens from time to time doesn't it?
Oh I know, erm, with all of us, I understand completely, whilst that you feel a beat in it, erm, no where your left hand has to play, left hand seemed to be er leading a mind of it's own, yes.
All over the place.
Do it once again.
Yes.
, do it a bit slower, one, two, three, feel it,steady.
Yes, that, that was almost that you have a complex about it.
Still not right.
Well I didn't have,
, but you do now.
Erm, it's, it's fine, it's, they were little slips, are you practising your left hand on it's own?
Eh, I haven't been this week.
I would.
I've just been doing it together.
I think just a few times
Mhm.
would  would help it, it's it's not quite secure enough, because it might have been before I arrived, but all the weaknesses show up 
Yes I know.
you know, so erm, I, I think a little left hand practice would solve it, I noticed that you put a five on that, I think it's better if you put a four.
Yes.
Whether you will or not is another matter, that, try it again, and no faster than that, very, very sturdy, very sturdy.
It needs  practice.
Yes.
Well, because it's, it's rather a case of the blind leading the  the blind, erm
I think they're both  separately, but they
Yes, now you, you played stuff just as difficult as this, and  there's no, no problem, don't do it too quickly though, and, I don't mind if it's not finished next week, or the week after, it's the quality we want, so, so, don't, don't rush it.
Just, if I were you I'd just do a little on it, every time you practised, and then put it away.
Mhm.
But, what, insist on, on left hand especially the little finger being really firm, so I shall leave you with that, that piece 
 
and wait excitedly, you know next week.
Mm.
How one pages the other six.
That's it.
Right.
Done it separately.
Oh yes,, then  except miracles.
No I, no, I mean you really respond very well, that Tchaikovsky was lovely, I understand at the present you can't do as much and admirable as you're still doing.
Well I have to have something to do by myself.
Yes, well yes surely make that or otherwise you, if you give up everything.
Yeah, even if it's only ten minutes a day, at least it's something.
Oh yes, yes, I think we all need, even, even if, plain, life is full of playing games and the game can help you get through the day sometimes.
That's right.
So, right let's hear the right hand.
Yeah, just erm, that was fine, fingering here, erm, why do you put a, put a four on that, I, I would of thought that, that is more sensible, you put  into the next note down, let's try that, er mm 
 
Now do you know where two is in your mind?
Mm.
, sorry the and, do you know where it comes in the troll?
In the middle.
Yes, on that F sharp, right.
Mm, one and two and, lovely, that's it, got it?
Mhm.
Though watch the beat there, then we'll be fine, good, let's go on.
.
Yeah, now, are you going to put an F  you put a four on that, so if you're doing it there, do a four also.
What on the A you mean?
, yes on the A.
Oh right.
the same.
What was I doing?
Put a five.
Oh right.
making life difficult.
Difficult.
, just try it.
 

Then a four.
Good.
Yes, now I wouldn't slur those quite so much as I would make that all legato.
You try putting a thumb on the A, no do, do this slowly, making the whole thing legato.
The thumb da, da, yes, but, if you're in  it's a cord of G, you'll put a two on the B, final note, and then go up to a five on a G, not a one, it's better  to do that, see if you can try.
That's it, do you find that difficult?
No, just awkward.
If, if, if you can't , if you prefer to put a one there cross it out with a vengeance.
Well I .
Take a rubber to it.
I try to .
And, it's, it's better roll than keep on using the thumb to get you out of the keyboard  but, if, I don't want it to spoil
Well I see, if it, if it.
See how it goes, but that's, that's good, now let me just .
Good, very good .
Yes, very good, and you're sure you haven't put a three on that aren't you?
Of course.
Good nothing wrong with that, nothing wrong at all, now I think rather than set you something new, it's better to, try to get another bar.
Think so.
So, concentrate on this and I'm, I'm, must get round to , I'm sorry my life has been in turmoil because of the, the dog situation, Jean and I haven't been up to the West End, but erm, I, I know which book I want, I want to get you, erm, and yes, I want you to do this, so  and this actually it's very good, very difficult, good, do a bit of technic.
Mm, shall we?
Why not?
Have you, have you been spending hours on the technic?
Oh absolutely.
The 
Would you prefer not to?
All I've been doing is well, I've been training,scales and arpeggios.
Oh yes.
Two hands doing it.
Oh, yes, you've had a lovely time.
Wonderful time, it's loopy, it's up there somewhere.
Well stop it doing that.
Where?
This one isn't yours.
, is up there.
Wonderful, that's it.
That's it.
I haven't done all of them.
No, no, what, what have you done?
Erm, well I've done C.
Yes.
And I've just about managed to get staccato in the right hand.
Do you a lot of good, you'll thank me for it one day.
You try it the other way round.
But do now, what you find easiest,.
Don't find any of it easy.
That's a funny balloon isn't it?
Oh what?
That's funny.
What da man doing?
Big man.
Big man, yes, right, you have a look at the magazines.
And Postman Pat.
You want a Postman Pat, oh we'll see if we can find you a Postman Pat, mm.
They're new Postman Pats in here, no.
No.
We'll go and find Postman Pat, there might be up there, go and have a look, you have a look?
There Postman Pat  there, oh you've got that one, you have to wait until next week, alright, O K, we won't buy that cos you've already got it, O K, ooh, ooh, are you with me?
Are you sulking?
You listening would you like some bananas?
Oh, I want banana.
You want bananas see.
I want it, I want it.
How about please?
Mum, I want it.
There we are , you can't have it until I've paid for it sweetheart.
I want.
Charlotte, that's enough.
I want.
Enough.
I want, I want, I want.
said I want, I want, because you won't get anything, right one bag of potatoes.
Can you try and keep still, right, potatoes.
You being a car?
Mm, are you being a car?
Where man gone?
Where's the man gone?
What man?
He's gone .
There's lots of men.
But, lots of men in the garden.
Lots of men in the garden are there?
I don't think so.
We'll have a look.
What you want to look at?
I don't know.
You don't know, let's, let's, have the list, there we are.
What do we need?
What do we need?
I don't know.
A Postman Pat shape.
You've got some Postman Pat shapes at home.
You 
You've got, there's no need to buy any more do we?
Yes.
Yes, alright I'll get one, one thing.
.
I want to hold it.
You want to hold it, here you are then, you hold it.
Postman Pat, Postman Pat,, early in the morning .
Oh, right, do I need any cereal today?
Mm.
Oh any, you're going to fall out of this aren't you?
One, two, three, oh.
Pardon?
One, two, three, oh.
One, two, three, what?
One, two, three, oh.
Oh, are .
And what we need?
What we need, what we need
Bag.
is
Is a worm,.
You never watched Lady And The Tramp for a long time have you?
Na, na, na, na, na.
No you haven't.
Yes I do.
Yes I do, when do you do?
When did you watch Postman, I'm sorry, erm
Postman Pat.
When did you watch Lady And The Tramp?
In the lounge.
I know where you watched it, I'm asking you when you watched it.
Postman Pat, Postman Pat,Post way too  early in the morning.
, anybody loves a  .
Would you like some chicken for dinner?
Shall we cook a chicken?
No I don't want, I don't want .
Oh Charlotte stop whining.
I don't want, I don't want.
Well I do, I'm very sorry, I want to have chicken, so there.
Will you please be careful what you're doing with that tin.
It's dangerous.
 
Now where are those little, biscuits we had before?
Hello, I didn't see you.
Oh hello , how are you?
How you getting on?
That another one?
Oh yes.
Oh.
How are you anyway?
Alright.
Yeah.
How you keeping?
Oh, alright.
Yes.
Exhausted.
Alright there.
Oh yeah  hard work with two.
Yeah, but , Charlotte, she's looking away, hey.
Are you going to say hello?
Don't be rude come on, say hello, do you remember Lynn?
Haven't seen you for a long time have you?
No, not happy with me today.
She's lovely.
Ha, how's Natalie?
Oh she's alright, she goes to school.
Does she, doing exams yet?
Yes,.
Is that ?
She's done started it already.
She's started?
Yes .
How's she doing?
Alright.
Oh.
Yeah, still Natalie  to learn, the way, how I look at it.
Pardon?
She's not ready yet to learn.
No.
I think somebody's tired.
I wouldn't keep you, I give you a visit one day.
Yes, do come pop in.
We're usually there.
I'll give you a ring.
Yeah.
We don't get out much at the moment.
Nice baby again.
Oh yes, and the big one.
Yeah.
Twelve pounds now.
Twelve pounds.
Yeah, she's only coming up for six weeks, mm, a monster.
little boy, a boy?
No it's a girl.
Girl again.
Mm another girl, I know.
another go 
No , two girls that's nice, we got two girls, they've got two boys, Brian and , so that's alright,, we're quite happy.
Someone to pass the eh clothes down to, innit?
Yeah .
Oh dear.
Charlotte I've got to finish, get home and feed this monster, don't do that please.
See you then.
O K, see you soon, yeah, bye.
Charlotte.
 

Don't cry.
Be good another day.
Do you like these?
Do you like these?
, we'll get some of those, I'll put them in, in the trolley, come on, now Charlotte please don't start being naughty, don't start.
Charlotte mummy get cross with you if you start this nonsense, just got to get some dog food and some bread then we can go home, O K?
No.
Don't you say no to me.
You don't want me to get cross do you?
I don't want to get cross.
Oh I know, we need some more raisins don't we?
Shall I go and buy some more raisins?
Mm.
Difficult to pick up this isn't it?
I want one.
Oh you can't hold that?
Right let's find the dog food.
Food for Jessie.
Right you stay there, mummy get the dog food.
We don't need cat food.
We don't need cat food, we haven't got a cat, silly girl.
cat food.
We don't need cat food.
You only buy cat food if you've got a cat.
Meow.
And we haven't, got a meow.
Meow, meow, meow, meow, meow, meow, meow, meow.
Just a minute get some of this.
Meow.
Mum.
Mm?
What do you like?
That.
What?
What's in here?
What's in there, we've got biscuits, I'm just going to get some raisins, alright, they're just up here, you stay there.
Here we are.
I want raisin.
You want some now do you?
Alright, I can open this up, I got the little box, there you are, just a minute and, oh Charlotte, oh you are a menace, there you are, now you be quiet for a minute will you?
Let's get some peas, I think that's it then.
Right, O K, now we can go, now we can go home.
Ooearry doggy.
Mm,later, alright?
Right, you've got, they're hidden away at the moment, I'll put them in the bag, alright?
We find some more later, promise.
Oh Charlotte don't whine.
We'll go home and have some lunch and then Joelle will be back from school won't she?
That'll be nice won't it?
Yes.
does she?
I want biscuits.
You want biscuits, well we've got some biscuits, but you'll just have to wait a minute, I can't unpack everything now, alright , right let's see if we can find the car  Get you two in the car first I think, right then, oh, what a heavy trolley full of food  Oh dear, dear, dear, will you please put your feet down Charlotte, stop me being kicked.
Where's the sun , where's the sun gone?
Where's the sun gone?
Oh it's gonna rain now.
Right, now, will you climb into your seat for me?
Oh.
Get into your seat lovey, come on quick, quick.
There's a good girl, up you go, mummy
Mum I'll do it.
mummy do the straps for you.
I do my straps.
I don't think you can, can you?
Go on you try, you start and I'll see if I can plug it in.
I plugged it.
You gonna plugged it are you?
Alright there's the other bit, see if you can do that, I'll put the shopping in the boot.
Sit still lovey, come on get your hands out, now put your bottom in the seat properly, so I can do this, there we are.
Oh.
Alright, alright, off we go, let's go and get some petrol, otherwise we won't be going anywhere  will we?
If we run out of petrol, won't be very clever.
all raining now.
It's all raining, isn't it nasty?
Nasty.
It's cold.
Oh it's not very cold.
Yes.
It's not cold, just wet.
It's wet, it should be nice and warm.
You're nice and warm in there are you?
Eh?
and warm.
You're nice and warm, I'm very glad you're nice and warm.
warm, raining.
It's raining, yes.
It's raining, look, see  cover.
Mm.
All the car under , what colour is the car, what colour is my car?
What colour my  car?
Mm?
Black.
Right, now here we are, this the right kind of petrol.
Right, now you be a good girl for a minute, while I'll fill up the, fill up the car alright?
What did you say?
I said doll is going any  box, box.
Doll's going where?
Going in my pushchair.
Oh, right.
Dad's a silly tape.
Dad's a what?
Silly tape.
Silly tape, why's it silly?
Cos it
No don't touch it sweetheart please.
I'm not listening.
No, I'm not listening at the moment.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Are you dancing?
Mm.
You what?
, I can't see.
Can't you see?
Mm.
Ooh Amy such a noise.
, you going to do your jigsaw now?
You do Spot.
No I can't at the moment sweetheart, because I'm feeding the baby.
You have a go, I'll help you afterwards.
No, don't you want to try?
You try.
I don't need to try now.
I'm sucking my finger.
Why?
Yes.
Your, what do you want to do with the ?
What do you mean what do I want to do with it?
The eh old one.
Oh, I'll put it outside.
Outside, for what?
Put a plant in it or something.
Don't want to throw it away.
No.
If there's room in the cupboard by the back door, put it in there, otherwise, we'll put it in the shed.
You'll find room for it somewhere.
Yes.
Charlotte.
Mhm.
What you doing?
I  doll I'm going to put it in .
Why don't you bring her and put her in your dolls pram?
Mm?
I can't  in here, in the .
I can't hear what you're saying darling, you better come in here so I can hear you.
I don't .
You don't want what?
I don't want to get wet.
You don't want to get wet?
No.
Well you're not going in the rain are you?
No.
You won't get wet here.
Won't get wet.
No you won't get wet.
What?
I won't.
I won't, I won't  Oh Amy you are hungry monster, oh 
Your drink's on the table darling, here, can't you see it?
A red cup.
What you looking for love?
Another.
Where's another what?
What you looking for?
Aha, it's here.
What is?
What isn't?
It's in the dining room.
What's in the dining room?
My .
Your drink's here love, it's on the table right in front of you.
I want it in a cupboard.
No your drink's here, I can see it, it's on the table in a red cup.
In here.
Oh Charlotte.
Here, in here.
You've found another one.
How many drinks have you got?
I'm not having that one.
You don't want that oh.
What's wrong with that one?
Is that not a good one?
Is it empty?
Mm.
Mm 
I'm falling down.
You're falling down, oh, how careless.
No, no, no, no.
I want to look at.
No you can't look at them at the moment.
I'll look at them with you later, but you can't look at them by yourself.
You look at them.
I will, later.
You're not .
Mm.
Pardon?
I don't  along.
Oh.
I'm not a , I'm being at home.
You're at home are you?
And they're not.
I've been cross the road.
She put, why you being cross?
, go to sleep, go to sleep.
Who, who you talking too?
To Joelle sleep.
Oh Joelle told you to go to sleep did she?
Yes.
Aha.
Did you go to sleep?
Were you a good girl?
You did go to sleep didn't you for a long time?
Yeah.
Long time.
Long time.
Long time, I'm playing that,.
I think you manage to .
I think what?
You manage .
No what, oops, not until Thursday, Tumbletots on Thursday.
Oh.
Do you need to sit on your potty?
Charlotte  are you listening to me, ooh, ooh, wakey, wakey, do you need to sit on your potty?
No.
You sure, alright, you tell me when you do.
It's on there, need it, needed it.
Right, well remember where you've left it then, so that when you want your drink you know where to look.
It's here, it's here.
Yes I can see it's here.
It's here.
Yes.
And that's .
Oh you going to put them both together.
Oh that's nice and tidy.
That's nice and tidy, and that's nice and tidy.
That's right.
Me turn it round.
You do what you like with them.
Turn it round.
O K.
I see them, wanna see them, see them,pretty.
It's very pretty.
Pretty, oh.
Charlotte, come sit on your potty, quickly.
No.
Charlotte please, do as I ask you, come along.
I wanna do a poo.
Yes, well you go and sit on your potty and do it, there's a good girl.
No.
Charlotte if you want to do a poo, you must do it in your potty.
Where you want, where do you want to do it?
Well, will you come and sit on your potty then?
No  You go in the pushchair, at .
You take your dolly for a walk.
Oh .
Oh dear.
Mummy's tired 
I'll .
Oh sleepy babies.
Has your baby gone to sleep too?
This one's nearly asleep.
I'm not hurting your foot.
I'm glad to hear it, I don't want my foot hurt.
You sit down?
What does he eat?
Yum, yum,.
I know, he says yum, yum, yum, what does he eat?
He eats funny things doesn't he?
Can you remember?
What?
He doesn't eat bread and butter like you do, does he?
What does he eat?
Mm, can you remember?
No?
Mm.
Mm.
Mhm.
Mhm  Right you going to sleep  for ten minutes, no, what a noise.
Does your baby make noises too?
Yeah, Amy's.
Amy makes a lot of noise, doesn't she.
No,.
What's you dolly's name?
He's called, he's called Mrs Jacobs.
It's called Mrs Jacobs is it?
Oh.
I put in her here.
Oh you're going to put her in how you started, that's alright.
Amy's not using it at the moment, oh goodness me.
Careful that doesn't fall on you Charlotte.
You being careful?
Mm.
Mm.
Don't want you to get a bump on the head do we?
Wonder if your daddy's caught any fish yet?
Careful sweetheart, careful.
Mind her .
Don't break the straps will you?
No.
Cos we need them.
Cos the doll in car.
Mm.
I put the doll in the car.
Well you've got your own little car seat for your doll, look it's on the cupboard, up here, that's your special one, isn't it?
No that is the special one.
No that one is, is Amy's.
That one doll's.
Oh you can put dolls in it as well, but when Amy wants to sit in there, you can put your doll in the other one, can't you?
Alright?
In here.
You can, you can leave her in there for now, cos Amy's not going anywhere.
Not going in here.
We're not going anywhere now, not today.
We're not going .
Not today we're not, no.
Unless she comes here, but she might pop in.
Might pop in,.
Mm.
But where are we going tomorrow?
Can you remember?
Where?
Sue.
No we're not going to Sue, we're going swimming.
Now, tomorrow.
You want to go to the swimming pool?
Yes.
Yes.
Take you swimming.
And when we come back, when we've had our lunch we're going to see William.
Would you like to go and see little William?
Yes.
Would you?
Mhm, William have a, have a drink.
Well I expect William will have a drink, yes, and I expect you will too, what you doing?
there's two cups in here.
There's two cups there, they're yours aren't they?
They're yours.
They're yours, not William's.
Not William's.
You might see Georgina as well tomorrow.
Oh no.
Oh yes.
I want to see William.
Yes but Georgina's going to see William too.
I mustn't go to see William.
Yes you are.
I not going to see Gina.
No,Georg Georgina is going to see William, so we'll all be together with William, that'll be nice won't it?
We have a, in, inside, all of them.
You're going to drink all of them.
Not both together, sweetheart you'll just spill it  Your a little comedian you are, aren't you?
I wander through the  .
Oops, careful.
I'm not 
Ooh did it go bang on your foot?
Move it then.
Here you are.
Here you are, here you are madam, here you are madam, who you calling madam?
Mummy,shut that .
What the handle?
I can't at the moment, I'll do it in a minute for you.
Eh, Joelle do it.
Well, I think Joelle's a bit busy too.
Joelle is busy.
I think Joelle is busy, oh dear.
Joelle is put on chair .
Careful, oh it's a bit heavy for you.
The table .
A bit heavy for you.
You be , I sit down, put dolls in here.
sit up.
What's the matter ?
Mm.
Oh doll over there.
She's gonna fall out isn't she?
No.
If you tip the chair up she will.
Oops there she goes, poor dolly.
falling over , and I pick her up, oh poor doll, she gets all wet, she's falling down now.
Oh dear.
Oh poor dolly, oh 
Ah, ah .
Oops.
I never go.
No.
in here, in here.
In here.
In here, in here, in here, in here.
Oh.
and
Haven't you had enough yet little girl, mummy's getting ever so tired, oh what  doing?
Well you try that one then, you see what happens.
what's happening, see.
No, don't think that one goes does it?
That goes.
That's it.
Not right there, no.
No.
How about this one?
Oh yeah, this.
Aha.
There we are, eh, what about that one?
I think goes in here.
Do you?
Yeah.
I think you might be right.
Yeah.
Yes, oh now that one might join on quite near, mightn't it?
That one there, yeah.
No, turn it round, turn it round.
There.
A bit more, where the colours fit in, that's it, that bit, oh you're a clever girl, right now have a look at that piece, and see if you know where that goes.
That goes
What's that little, what's that little pink thing?
in the mouth.
That Spot's tongue?
Yes, goes in here.
That's right, turn it round just a little bit more.
There.
No, no, look there's another little piece of his tongue, there look, so if you turn that round, that goes on there doesn't it?
Mhm.
No you've turned it right round again, you silly billy, turn it round, turn it round, that way, that's right, that's the way it goes  Right now we need another piece don't we?
Perhaps that piece goes on there somewhere, is that a piece of his nose?
Mm.
Right, let's see if we can find another eye, is that an eye?
Yeah.
Well you haven't put the nose on yet, go on, put the nose on.
I can't.
Yes you can, there, solved, no that's wrong isn't it?
That piece first I think.
That's it, then we've got that piece the other way on it, that goes in there, that's it.
Right now we want to, that's it, that's the bit with his spot, big brown spot.
Oh what, what do Amy doing?
I don't know, I'll have to go and get here, shan't I?
No.
Well let's hurry up and finish this, then we'll put her in her chair, and she can watch, one goes there, think that one goes there?
Yeah.
Yeah, and what about that one?
What this one, try that one in that hole there.
Alright, turn round.
That one there, that's right.
Oh,
There we are, there you're alright, O K, now there's his tail, that goes up there, and try that one, see if you can see where that goes, oh what a clever girl, and that one, no there look, there's only two holes left, that one and that's the other one with his foot.
Where do you think that goes?
I know.
It goes on there, well done, let's turn it round and see the whole, whole thing, there you are, there's a great big picture of  with his tail falling off, there we go.
We do Thomas now.
Can we, oh, how nice.
We put box.
Oh put Spot back in his box, there's his box, I'll go and get Amy and put her in her chair, and she can watch you do Spot, alright?
Just a minute, mummy help this, there you go Amy, you sit down there.
You sit down there.
What you doing?
Want to do Thomas now?
Mm.
There you go then, now we can do Thomas.
Here you are.
What, you coming to help, I'm not doing it by myself, there's the other pieces there look  Oh Charlotte that's naughty, go on pick them up now, please.
I'm not going to pick them up when you just throw them around like that.
Charlotte please, pick the pieces up.
No, no more pieces.
There's two more pieces on the table.
What've you found?
What is it?
What are you eating, tell me.
Eh, tis erm
I think it's a crisp.
Crisp.
a delayed reaction.
No  no don't.
saw do that Amy.
They're  at you, cos they don't know what you're doing.
Ooh  make a funny nose, ooh, ooh,
It's a good game isn't it?
You think there's more grub around, well you can keep on thinking.
Do you want a cup of coffee?
Erm, I'd like something to drink, I don't think I want coffee.
I .
Cup of tea.
I chocolate.
A cup of tea I think.
No, no, no.
Don't be Charlotte .
I think she wants  walk.
Mm,and wait.
.
Why?
I'm tired, I need you to do a few things for me.
What?
Prepare the  thing.
Oh you've broken another one, oh you must cut them.
Where is it?
Show me which finger it came off..
It's supposed to .
So
 
It wasn't going to leave until half past three, four o'clock, he would've arrived at fishing at half past five, he's gonna be late, unless he does very well very quickly, then he won't be late.
He won't be here for dinner probably.
Thomas.
Mm.
I go and make the beans.
They're already made you just have to prepare them.
And eh, what ?
There's half a potato left from yesterday, which I'll give to her.
Mhm, mhm.
Shall I?
Shall I give it to you?
Mm.
Yeah, you'd like some chicken for your tea tonight?
Where's you say your tea .
It's not tea any more is it, it's dinner.
It used to be tea, but now she stands up.
Who's face is that?
It's Thomas face, and that's .
 

oh that's right, turn it round cos I can't see the face, there, that's the way it goes, that .
it's getting heavier.
Can't turn it round.
No, oh you had it right the first time, oh no you didn't, you need a face, find a face, look.
There it is.
How's that?
No, that goes over the other side of it, that's the other corner.
Charlotte mind the box.
Oh that piece can go there can't it?.
When's George and  go to sleep?
Erm, I think twelve.
Twelve, douse is that this week is the week after that?
I don't know, what are we today third?.
Mm Spain into castle , one for my sister, one for  and one for .
Going to be busy on Saturday morning aren't you?
Oh yes.
Oh there's plenty of card shops in Croydon.
I'm going eh, early in the morning.
Mhm.
Right yes, yes,, yes.
And that one, that's it.
And that one.
You going early?
No.
Well for Saturday morning.
What you've called Alice.
Went .
.
In the morning.
That's the time you're going to get up or the time you're going to leave?
Well what happened on Sunday?
On Sunday I'm up.
You don't get up until ten o'clock.
No I er, I do wake, wake up at half past nine, and I .
Oh that's early.
And half past nine  ten o'clock,, I .
And you went to watch children's television?
No.
Yes.
You went to watch the television, I heard you.
It wasn't children's television.
Oh it wasn't, oh.
No, it was, it was a very interesting film .
Oh, intellectual cartoons was it?
, oh no, no, it was a film.
What is it?
What is it?
What?
What am I .
So he was  and, and I ask .
Charlotte don't climb up there, get down.
And  you can do what you want.
Mm.
So I  do what I want.
I'm not saying you shouldn't, I was just laughing.
Yes, I know, said  little, little bit before seven because I was .
Mm.
so I, I took a .
You reckon you'll be able to do that by nine o'clock?
Of course, I think.
Careful sweetheart.
She's having fun.
Yes.
You having fun little girl?
My little girl.
You know when I, when I change a nappy?
Mm.
I see her .
What .
that sort of thing.
Mm.
Something inside it.
Yeah.
Yes, it's got milk.
Yes but,.
Well at this age they're all tummy, going, they're just like, big, big, big tummy, they're
Erm, what about erm,?
What about it?
She .
And eh, when you are going to give some solid.
Mm, then it will change.
What would you expect?
It's only breast milk it's like that, if they have bottles, bottled milk it's more solid from the beginning, but it's not nice, this isn't bad, messy, but it's not smelly.
Is it,change her nappy, my sister, my step sister.
Well you've changed Charlotte's nappy, that's enough for anybody.
Oh god.
Some of those are pretty nasty, mind.
What  her face.
Gently..
, erm
I'm going to do some .
Are you lot going back to keep fit?
.
Stop it .
Lay down, lay down.
cos every  I don't want you going I don't want you going on, by yourself, cos it's dark.
Lay down lay down.
Lay down I said.
.
So you can go if you want.
Yes.
What you doing?
Another paper.
Oh, you've found two pieces.
Yeah.
Oh, draw me two lovely pictures then.
.
It's the half past seven , at seven o'clock .
I can do.
Start and  finish.
I can do the bath but somebody sweep   .
Oh dear.
Go .
Right I think it's probably .
didn't.
No it's number seven   .
There you are look.
Oh.
 
 
Well it's the same with all these , it's like pictures and diet books, all people are always skinny.
Yes, always nice..
I saw those this morning..
You have to do something quickly before you see your mum.
Two eyes, two eyes, two eyes, two eyes, two eyes.
Yes, yes .
in the hole properly, don't .
Yeah, I think  now.
I think, I actually I hid, where does it come out again?
I put the book away, it's come out again.
Somebody must of found it.
Yes.
She, she go and take .
Yeah, well, she didn't know how to.
Oh dear, just a minute.
I don't think it's  for you just now Charlotte.
I think it .
Yes I was.
Yes I know you was, but, oh .
Do what you want and you regret it.
You don't need to, to  people opinion .
Put it on the piano, or somewhere, where she can't reach it.
Would you mind doing the beans now Joelle, cos it won't be ready otherwise, it won't be ready in time for dinner.
I do .
What?
I do.
Have you not had much energy recently?
Oh, I work late Friday.
Talk about vintage cars outside,inside I think.
Oh yeah.
Very clever of her, boast at the same time.
No, I erm , no I have to work late on Friday.
What did you miss aerobics then?
They're erm, I erm, said goodbye  come and pick me up by the  school.
Pick me up from work about eight o'clock.
That's not on Weightwatchers is it?
Do you think you could go and serve you and Charlotte.
I don't think so.
No.
I don't think I'm going to be able to.
Give her a little bit of eh leg meat, yeah.
Of a what?
Leg meat.
And there's half of baked potato in the fridge if you can scoop it out of the skin and heat it up.
Pardon, not hit it, heat.
Stop crying  Did you have a nice weekend?
Shopping in John Lewis for .
At the weekend?
What on Saturday?
Yeah.
it's not open on Sunday.
Yeah, she wanted to get some fabric to make up a jacket.
Oh this is the jacket that mum said  .
That's the one.
That's the one.
Shall we, shall we turn this off now?
No we not.
No we not, alright.
We leave it.
We leave it alright.
Can I see?
Is the television control behind you?
Could you turn the volume down.
Which one's the telly?
That one.
That one.
It's like arrows, that's alright, we're not turning it off love, don't worry.
No don't turn.
That's it, it's wonderful, I don't think we need it quite so high, when we're not concentrating.
No.
what you got, mind yourself.
So what, what you do, what sort of type of things did you get?
, in the picture it's really , it looks more like a jacket rather than a blouse.
Oh right.
But, erm, I mean all the fabric we went to get, they just cotton and erm
Yeah, but there's cotton and there's cotton.
cotton , weaved cotton or something, something cotton, I can't remember what it is.
The Aberdeen
Hello.
.
But erm, the fabric that Jamie wanted all print, it's just printed cotton,.
Oh.
But I mean the style of it is obviously jacketed person, blousey, cos it's  collar and she's got three buttons at the front and it's fitted as a jacket as opposed to a tuck in a blouse.
Oh right.
And it's got three quarter length sleeves.
Oh.
Or half sleeves..
it probably looks half isn't it?
Wear it as a skirt as a jacket  blouse.
As a jacket, yes , that's right, I think it'll look quite smart, you know, with, perhaps a straight skirt.
With a plain, that goes in one of the colours.
Mm.
Oh well mum will enjoy herself won't she?
She always does.
Well I expect Jamie can, get as much, get as far as a button your blouse.
Oh well Jamie, well, I think she'll
She did do some sewing at school didn't she?
Yeah.
So she shouldn't be completely
I don't think  you know she's doing it down there because it like, it she's not very good at understanding the pattern.
Well she's not got a machine anyway has she?
Charlotte you don't read books when you're watching the television.
You're watching the telly.
You read later sit and watch telly.
No, no, no I won't .
Did you hear how, oh suppose you haven't spoken to her since the party have you?
No.
What's the cake like?
What did she do?
but she didn't see the  on you know, on the cake, it's all .
Oh cos  do My Little Pony some time ago though, frantically looking for a pattern you know a magazine or something.
Yeah, yeah..
Wonder what Charlotte's passion will be by her next birthday, at the moment it's Postman Pat.
Mind anything Disney at the moment will probably go down a treat.
Sorry?
Anything Disney will probably do down a treat, like Lady Amd The Tramp, Sleeping Beauty or something.
Yeah.
Oh dear..
Have you, have you not seen it?
I have, but I can't remember it.
But you don't remember it.
I don't know how much of it I remembered, cos I've seen it so often now, mm, can't remember the first time I saw it  Didn't know .
Lady to the rescue.
I use .
I hope you don't get wet.
That's right, that's what I'm just thinking actually.
Cos I don't know what time Adam will be back  he's  fishing.
Oh right, I don't, I mean, I don't really want to get wet, but I mean, it's not so bad going home,wet going home.
Oh you can just jump in the bath.
Just get in the bath , it's the going in the morning.
This morning it started to .
You can wake up now, got to change your nappy,, mucky nappy, mm.
Yeah .
Why what  say?
She's up late tonight.
Oh it's normal now.
Oh is it?
Yes, she has  now.
Well, she  her, her sleeping habits during the day change to afternoons, and, well today she's been she had about two hours this afternoon, so if we did our normal and gave her tea at five o'clock, and send them up for a bath at half past six, there's no way she'd be asleep.
No.
So we sort of switched all around now, so she eats with us at half past six stroke seven, goes up for a bath at seven thirty,eight o'clock and she's in bed by nine, then she, she's usually asleep by half past ten, but eh, it seems to have cured the problem we had with her , wanting, wanting me all the time, after she's gone to bed.
Yeah.
So, seems to be working.
Well this one seems to go to bed a bit later now, so she goes longer, but she's feeding all day today,, I'm at  every couple of hours, so with a bit of luck, I'll finally put her to bed maybe half past nine ten o'clock, she might go through till three or four, which isn't bad.
No.
It's usually half past nine till, I wasn't so good last night, she went until two, but then she didn't wake up again until seven.
Manages to do long stretches at night, which is nice.
Yeah.
And then she went to sleep again until ten, on our bed.
Mm.
She's  reluctant to go back in her own bed, so I just point her over me shoulder and lay and said get on with it   an insult.
lose his sense of smell in the wet.
Richard had any more pets recently?
You haven't had one.
Yeah, he's booked one of the thirteenth.
Oh,good luck, eh.
We listened to some karaoke tapes this afternoon.
Oh yeah?
Well, bought a couple for Adam, his
What he want's them for?
Not to sing, he wants them to play the guitar with.
Oh.
So we listened to them and had a laugh,, teeny weeny what's it, polka dot bikini they're quite funny here.
He wanted boppy ones, so he, you know, he could do a Hank Marvin you know?
But erm, I think he should have a bit of fun with those.
We bought one each for the girls .
oh well, can't have everything.
well there's a good, a good bit of scope for eh, playing don't you?
Eh?
Good bit of scope, a bit of
Oh yeah.
words in here with the music?
Oh yeah, all the, all the lyrics are in there.
Why I suppose being all those sort of songs, everybody knows them.
Yes.
Alright  come on you. 
Yeah.
holding your head up.
Getting a strong neck aren't you?
Mm, well it's not quite  using my shoulder a bit, she does her press ups  put her on her stomach,, mm.
Charlotte  it's dinner time.
Oh.
Give me a kiss.
Lovely chicken.
No.
It's finished now, just about.
Chicken, yummy.
Don't want chicken.
Love some, yes you do.
Do.
You do.
I do want, I do want to see.
You want what?
Oh dear.
Off you go then you go have your, your dinner.
.
I want dinner, I not finished, finished.
Yes it's finished, it's finished.
It's finished.
Turn the television off then, go on you push the button.
No .
There you are that says the end, that means it's finished.
That is the end.
That's right.
That is the end of the .
That's it, off you go then, you go and have your, go and have your dinner I'll see you in a minute.
Bye, bye, bye, bye.
Bye, bye.
Bye, bye, go and have some din din.
Charlotte you come and your dinner or it'll get cold.
Alright.
Go on off you go love.
Oh dear, oh dear.
Crocodile Rock.
It's my party and I'll cry if I want to 
I'll cry if I want to.
cry if I want to .
, don't cry, oh Amy.
Suzie, Suzie, Suzie.
What you looking for?
Charlotte  you're coming.
Quick.
What?
Come on let's go and change your nappy little one shall we?
They're doing a, I've got a piece of paper somewhere with it all written on, I'll show you, they're doing a piece of research with a company that does dictionaries and a university, to put together a load of modern usage.
Oh right.
Like, has a, like  the girl that came talked about it, like for example, people are using wicked, good.
Oh yeah.
So there's, obviously lots of other pieces, English at work  as well.
Yes.
So I've been left with a load of tapes,batteries.
How long have you got to do it for?
Mm, as often as I can until further , she left all the .
Yeah.
Brilliant little machine actually, well it's only a Walkman, but the microphone is incredibly 
Yeah is that the microphone there?
Yeah.
Clever.
It's a small enough tape innit?
It is really .
Let's go and do a bit of spying.
That's right.
conversation come into it?
Oh yes,, you could just quite, quite a lot in it, quite vocal she is.
Who have you had taped?
Mm, mum and dad, Brian and Lynn, erm, no, no not Brian and Lynn, Brian, Brian and Pauline, Bett , my piano lesson's on there  yesterday.
That'll be interesting.
Mm,, piano playing's not so beautiful, but, is when he plays.
Does he play when he comes here?
If he's showing me something, or is, before, I start a new piece, he'll always play it.
And yours sounds nothing like it?
No, well certainly not the first time I play, it, I approach it when he thinks I've finished, but it's nowhere near, I mean
Provisional, expect to sound as good
Mm.
so
concerts and things, but you can, you can tell, with just, just by listening that it's not just any old body tinkling on the piano, it's wonderful, it makes you sick.
Is Charlotte going to learn to play it?
Well I hope she'll be interested enough to, but, not really before she's six, cos I asked him last couple of times ago, he said, what sort of age, cos obviously the size of the hands comes into it, they can't do too much, but he said he wouldn't consider before six and you ought'a have to take the parents into consideration, of a child that age you gotta have a parent who's prepared to sit there and make sure the child does what he's set them to do, because , oh Amy, you not getting any  out of that.
Have you finished it?
Ha, you big lump.
No wonder she puts on half a pound a week.
Mind you erm, I mean that's not, it's normal, I expect you to put between six, six ounces and eight ounces .
Oh dear, oh dear, it's a hard life isn't it?
taken it off.
How you doing?
Eh, oh, O K, I'll find out tonight.
Oh of course, Wednesday.
The way in to work, cycled there last week.
Oh my.
I had to, Richard had taken the car , he takes it in the morning, but
Oh my goodness,.
Well he  he takes the car to school, but, and it, sorry takes the car to work and before he's bringing the car home and then he's been going to school on his bike.
Oh right.
So of course the bike, the car's for me to use in the evening, but last
You cycle home from here and then ?
from you, then you get changed and then go, but, last week he took the car, cos when I got home, first I was late last Wednesday, well I say late, I didn't get back here, erm, until seven, so by the time I got home it was quarter past seven and I have to make sure I get to Weightwatchers between seven and eight.
Oh, for the weigh in?
Mm, so I had to go, quickly get changed, and cos it, it, I normally I just wear a pair, a pair of sandals and light weight clothing, but
Oh dear.
so, I couldn't go in sandals, well obviously I can't cycle in a pair of sandals on
Can't really cycle with a floating skirt on either, can you?
The last  with me leggings on and this top on.
Well, I looked a bit of a sight, but I thought well, well, you know, what else can I do, I mean I couldn't take clothing to get changed in to.
Well, they wouldn't expect you to would they?
I've, I'd got a few stares from some of the women there, I mean, there are some women there that are huge, and maybe they looked at me and thought oh I hope I can wear leggings like that one day , I mean I don't think I look too bad in the leggings, I mean I would never have done it when I used to go to Weightwatchers when I was thirteen and a half stone, I would never of gone in leggings, no way, but it doesn't
Well you don't, you don't really look as if you need to lose weight cos it's probably why you got a few stares, it's like all the diet books that have sylphlike people on the front.
Well .
I mean I spoke to Jane the other Sunday and I, I said to her you know, just be honest, I said I don't care what you said, but just be honest and tell me how much you think I weigh, cos she doesn't know how much I weigh and she thought I weighed about ten stone, I said well stick thirteen pounds on top of that , then you'll be right, she couldn't believe that I, that I weighed that much, so obviously it doesn't look that bad and people at work, well they've noticed that I've lost weight, but they don't say how much they think I weigh, so I don't want  come to them to sort of, have a, have a g have a guess of my weight.
Guess the weight of a Suzie.
Yeah, but they have noticed which is something I suppose.
There's somebody came in today, a guy came in today who used to work with us who usually comes in occasionally and I would see him, but for a few weeks now, so he noticed it.
It's nice that people say it to you unprompted.
Oh yes, you say I'm on a diet, they say oh well you have lost a lot of weight then.
Yeah.
Adam's mum's like that.
Oh is she?
She knows you're dieting, every time she sees you, ooh you've lost a lot of weight.
Even when you haven't, yeah, but erm, no I mean, there is a guy at work, I mean there is a guy at work that's constantly saying to me, oh it's really noticing, it's really started, he says this every day, and he, after a while, I mean it's nice to be told it, once in a while, but not every day.
But not every day, it loses value doesn't it?
Oh it does, and he said to me, erm this afternoon, he said eh, oh he said eh, your weight loss is really, really noticing this week, and I thought well, even if I had lost weight this week it's only going to be a couple of pounds, and a couple of pounds would not notice.
Plus the different clothes you wear.
It doesn't matter who you are, two pounds won't make any difference to your appearance, I mean, yeah I suppose clotheswise
Well as you, as you get smaller, two pounds does notice, it's when you're 
Maybe it does.
when you're bigger, and you've got a real lot to lose, and two pounds is nothing.
Yeah, two pound is nothing , yes that's true.
Two pounds is actually quite a lot.
Yes it is.
Good evening.
My goodness me how many have you caught?
Have you got a whopper in there?
Yes.
I's gonna say the bags  full.
Goodness.
So, so your new leader did the trick.
God you need, my god.
Mm.
Ah.
In the chair Jessie.
Good grief, what's it weigh?
Three pounds, five and a half.
Wow.
Who shall we have over for dinner?
Not giving that away.
That's a lot.
That's amazing.
Alright, yeah.
Wow.
Well I'll tell you what
Excuse my ignorance.
It's a fish kettle job isn't it?
Excuse my ignorance, but what is it?
It's a trout.
It's a very unusual colouring.
Mm.
No I think it's just the .
Mum.
It's spotty it's spotty, ha.
No he lost some, lost some of his scales, that's all.
I was a, having a devil of a job bringing him in, cos erm, he was in the top rank and he was, weave, he was weaving in and out .
Wow.
Oh well done you've got him.
No good talking to me about top and bottom length , cos I don't know what you're talking about.
Mm, the top lake is like very flat water, is a lot of weed and a lot of scum, right?
Oh right.
So bringing the thing in, hello darling, and erm, he was just literally he was rushing around the weeds trying to
Trying to escape.
tangle it, just trying to tangle it up, cos the idea being if he gets round a weed, often enough he go  that means, basically it gives him a lever, I mean they're very clever you know, these fish, they're not, they don't just sort of sit there and wait.
You mean someone ?
They're not like coarse fish, Jo, perch, or roach or whatever in the river, if you catch them, they just sort of, lie down and wait for you.
Give up.
Yeah, yeah,.
Wow.
Oh, well done you did it.
Joelle.
Poor Joelle she's got some work to do.
What she, cos her mum's got a fish shop, she knows the way of  cleaning fish without you cutting them,, pulling it all out from, through the gills.
Ready, steady
And of course they, they stay whole and they're beautiful when they're cooked.
I don't  I'll tell Adam  everything, he can do it himself.
 
That's right.
I'll cook them.
Careful.
I'll cook them and eat them.
Yeah.
He can catch them and gut them.
That's right, yeah.
Charlotte I wish you wouldn't do that because you keep sliding, one day you're going to slide and hit your face.
Is that a seat?
Not it's actually a step for the bathroom
Mummy do it.
so she can stand at the basin .
It's slippery there isn't it?
Well I suppose it is with shoes on.
Mm, it's not meant for .
Oh Amy haven't you finished?
Come on, just gotta get your .
Oh  back?
Yeah, in the kitchen.
Why I don't think it's in the kitchen is it?
I don't suppose there would be a rainbow would there?
What they made of?
Mm cotton and lycra.
Is it cotton and lycra?
Eh, cotton polyester, lycra, elastic.
Forty six per cent cotton, forty six per cent eh polyester and eight per cent lycra.
I brought erm, a pair of, a floral pattern leggings from Marks and Spencers on Saturday, but when I got them home, they did nothing for me.
Ooh.
Come to daddy.
No..
No.
Charlotte can you come inside love, come on darling.
You given me a cuddle yet, no you haven't have you?
Let's have my cuddle, come on put your arms round me, give me nice big cuddles , give a nice kiss.
They were, they were calf length ones.
Oh right.
Liked cropped trousers.
Ooh,.
Only leggings.
Only leggings and erm, they were blue, different coloured blue flowers.
Getting undressed or something?
No I'm, I'm getting dressed.
Oh do you want me to leave?
It's alright I'll shut my eyes.
And erm, I tried them on, well I, I bought, I mean I bought them and brought them home and a sort of cropped, cropped leggings they didn't really do anything for me.
Don't slam the door.
I'm not going to darling.
They catch the calf at the wrong place or something.
Yeah.
I have no idea, I haven't taken Nurofen for donkey's years, so I don't know what the situation is 
Are they downstairs ?
They're either in the, in the erm, little cupboard in the downstairs loo or they're in the bathroom.
He has some work to do I gather.
Did you see the trout?
I did trout.
What a trout.
Yes, big one.
Not to be given away..
Getting ready to cycle home.
Have to go work.
Have to go work, yes.
Then you can have a bath, ha.
I meant bath for Charlotte.
Mm.
Eh, concentrate, oh yeah leggings, erm so Jenny tried them on, and they looked really nice on her, cos her legs, you see, cos I've got this bit here, little bit there, erm, and being cropped, just made the legs look a bit sort of stumpy.
You haven't got stumpy legs.
Oh I have, have  well I've got high heels on,, but it's, it's, because I am 
Yeah, I know what you mean.
Because I'm a bit patterny, flowers, with this little bit here and being cropped there, just made my leg look a bit, and I thought oh dear, and I wasn't convinced, Richard couldn't stand them, he thought I looked absolutely gross in them.
So I thought, well I said I like them, and he said you can wear them as long as you're not out with me.
So I thought well there's not much point in me having them, cos I would wear them 
If you find something unacceptable there's not much point.
Well I, I'd be wearing them at weekends, so, you know just, just just slouching around in really, well you know, perhaps, cycling yeah.
Not in front of the husband.
Cycling.
So I thought there's not much point in me keeping them, if he really does, doesn't like them at all, he
Well done.
So erm
So she's got them.
come inside, stay with mummy whilst I go and find myself some pills, please don't do that Charlotte.
While you go find some what?
Oh, pills, think I might have some in the car actually.
You got some in your, I was just going to say in your handbag, in your briefcase?
Could be.
Erm, yes I'm going to try and buy some plain ones, you know her, you know her navy blue ones 
How many more?
you know her navy blue leggings, but they're thicker than .
Yeah, yeah they're nice.
I thought I might get myself a pair of those.
She got those from M and S, didn't she?
Yes.
Cos they looked really nice with that jumper she wears.
Yes, so I thought, I might erm, cos I bought a jumper, I bought a pale blue jumper to go with the flowery leggings, but, I've decided I'll take blue jumper back, cos, although it would be alright with plain white trousers I thought that's all I would wear it with, I wouldn't wear it with anything else, so, I think I'll change that, if I get the dark blue leggings like Jamie, then I'll get the striped jumper the same.
Soon be twins.
Soon be twins.
Daddy.
What's the matter with you?
Pull me.
What do you mean pull these, what for?
It's dead.
concerned about it.
Got some.
Do we need, me to buy some more?
Yeah, I .
Better be without the Paracetamol for the last ten, eleven months or more.
Mm.
Is that all you're allowed?
Mm.
Well I mean, I don't know, I didn't ask any doctors, cos, we normally have Nurofen, but I didn't ask any doctors whether they were acceptable in pregnancy or not, I just assumed they weren't, cos nurses said last time,, that eh Paracetamols was alright.
Yeah.
Paracetamol is alright when you're breast feeding.
It was very difficult misses, you always have it both ends of your , go on spit it out, spit it out, go on, you've got a mouthful there.
More,, oh, oh dear, go on .
Quick, quick, quick.
Quick what?
Quick what?
Quick.
She's getting worried about the door .
The door.
Yes.
The front door.
Yes, whenever anybody knocks or rings.
Funny girl, I remember she sat there and said don't worry it's only daddy.
Quick,.
I said no it's not daddy, who is it?
When she found out it was you, she was alright.
.
She got worried about my piano teacher when he arrived yesterday.
Come on .
No, Aunty Suzie got to go home.
She's got to get on her bike.
Oh.
I've got to ride home, you're gonna give me a .
Change your nappy again haven't we little one?
Thank you.
Oh Amy darling.
What she say?
Don't worry little girl, oh it's a hard life, oh sweety poppet.
Hello.
.
Right come on.
Let's make a move so I can get all, Richard probably beat me home.
So I said, I said to her oh god you, you be lucky cos if you've done that aha, and he, come back .
She said you better not forget you're employed, you are not in here on holiday, she said you  your, your boss, your boss must say that to you
Mhm.
not you.
What she say?
She said we are not employed, we are , so I said oh, what's the difference, you pay for that, you've been paid for that, I said , because I promise you can, you can go .
I .
What a funny girl.
She's crazy, she's crazy.
She, I think she get, she thinks she can have
Sounds like she's looking for a holiday.
Mm, yeah, sounds like she's looking for a paid holiday.
Paid holiday.
Yeah.
I'd be astonished.
I'll tell you the, some people take advantage of au pairs, no doubt about it.
I mean you remember I told you about my cousin, mm, now he is not somebody I'd recommend an au pair, au pair to work
I don't, I don't.
cos he
I don't think his sort of  by work.
Yeah.
She can go out for with some friends eh, every time she wants.
Mm.
So I don't think that .
Mm.
I don't think .
But has she got children to look after or not?
I think she quite nice with children.
I don't want send her here.
No.
I don't think, think it a good idea really.
I'll tell you what, what I don't need is somebody with an attitude problem.
What, what's that?
Somebody who has eh, er, a special type of attitude, you know, thinks in a particular way.
Aversion to work.
Because you're right, as soon as they make noises like that, I'll shall say there is the door, get on the other side of it, I haven't got time for it.
No, but the way she said that to me I thinks .
I am astonished, surprised is a better word.
And I am , take some .
Hm.
Don't think she, we appreciate that.
I'm sure.
That's not your problem is it?
No.
 telephone ringing I don't suppose Brian would want to come, do you want to come tomorrow morning?how are you?
Good, good, eh I just wanted to find
She was asking me what Brian it was, you were talking to her.
Mm.
What's her name .
eh  or something like that.
 

Mon amie..
 

My, what does it mean?
erm
is something that I would not say to a French lady, something that I could say to my daughter, right?
You can say that your French .
Put her up put her on her side
Well we counted twenty and then we were laughing so much we thought oh we'd better stop her you know  twenty sort of goes from one side to the side when she's lying on her stomach.
The reason they could sleep on her stomach.
Yeah when they go out hospital for Charlotte  the babies  the night.
Hmm hmm
and there was one baby who was climbing out of the cot.
then they put them on their stomach
Ahh
and then turn them
Yeah
So that they're getting a even tanned 
But this one was virtually almost out of of the cot 
Climbing out?
It was really incredible 
Mum!
Natalie you are drinking so much.
You don't really need to drink constantly.
Um mum er mum
More?
She might not have had it all
Please
Please?
Mummy
Mummy
I don't know whether Charlotte's 
She's drinking so much I can't believe it.
It's blowing
It isn't even that hot though really is it?
It's blowing.
Please 
I don't want to have to disturb this one.
Won't be able to put her back to sleep.
Hmm 
But we have to though won't we?
Yes
Hmm 
Yes you're being good aren't you?
Sounds like Georgie.
It is Georgie.
Oh dear!
More close
Georgie!
Okay what happened then?
Hello Georgie.
She fell off the bannister.
.
no more roughage 
You were jumping up weren't you?
You were jumping up and down and then you fell off.
No
You fell off but never mind you're all right again now aren't you?
Hello!
Fell down
She fell down didn't she?
Bye bye house
Pardon?
Bye bye house
Bye bye house?
Hello then!
Going back to the subject of their parents thinking about it.
How did you find you know having someone living in your house and things like that?
Well I'm not the best in the world at having somebody else living in the house.
Did you find it difficult or are you finding it
It's easier to start with until you sort of get used to somebody
Till you get to know each other 
overlap get annoying and things.
But it's not as bad really.
How old is she?
She's only eighteen that's that's 
Do you let her out I mean does she go out in the evening?
Let her out!
Ha ha.
How do you know like an eighteen year old is someone responsible
If she wants to go.
No
Does she go out in the evenings or anything like that?
No no she's not that sort.
She started she's that, she made friends with one or two of her colleagues so she goes to the cinema of an evening 
Yes yeah and she  yes
It's impossible
Yes yes
She doesn't do it at home, she can easily go out
It must be difficult if you had someone who wanted to go out all the time or  if they're sort of really living it up or something I mean
They are required 
but there are sort of rules and regulations
they are required to do five hours work for you a day
Mm
Six days a week
Right
One free day off
Mm
And a reasonable amount of space
Right oh I see yeah
So obviously eating's generally theirs.
Just sort of you could reasonable expect them to baby sit two or three times you know.
Yeah.
That must be great having a baby sitter on tap
Yes it is
That must be really nice
A car a car
Uh uh yeah
A car
Actually for me it's probably the best thing 
Yes
Not having to have meals done if I'm busy
No
I am.
but you don't touch because it's precious.
Taken care of
Yeah
That's why I make sure I've got a couple of hours where I'm really with her almost exclusively overlap too easy otherwise.
You know take her out and things like that.
Yes oh yeah overlap must be very convenient though specially like with another one then you know these
Or in this sort period before things actually settling down into a routine
Mm
Once she's in a routine a bit more then  but we are still trying to do as many 
Mm  Yeah we've been found it really difficult finding a baby sitter really I'm surprised ever since we've had Lisa we've been really bad uh uh actually having baby sitters and you know actually making the effort to go out really.
We should shouldn't we go out more often really.
But we just you know like Saturday night we really enjoy making a nice meal and having a nice bottle of wine or something and doing something 
The circles in the groups that you've been going to
Ahm  well I have had uh yeah I mean I have had people if I'd really wanted to but  I mean we've had baby sitters and things like that.
I mean I'd prefer really to find a teenager.
An eighteen year old or something like that eighteen seventeen eighteen nineteen year old something like that who would like you know a fiver or tenner.
Have your neighbours got ?
Where we are now ahm there are all ahm either very young or very old.
Natalie!
They're either very young or very like young families or like about in their eighties .
Oh right.
wait isn't it 
I think ahm there's the N C T would erm at Woodmanston they just started about three weeks ago, three or four weeks ago.
So I haven't been to any of those coffee mornings  I've met a few people from it.
Ahm so I'm going to see if I could set up a baby sitting circle or something like that.
So that would be quite useful.
Another friend 
Once you get to know people well it's nice isn't it?
Yeah hmm  What have you got?
It all used to be quite lovely before we had 
Oh that's nice yeah
And then they're being sponsored for Romanian Orphans
Oh that's
to raise money to take the equipment out there so that 
Oh that's good for Romania to decide oh that's good
So that they can actually get out of their cot and have a move for five minutes but 
just gone to Romania  uhm two weeks ago.
She's she's a nurse so she's gone out there to work in an orphanage.
overlap 
But it's not easy I mean you know I was reading an article ages ago a few months ago actually and saying you know if you think about it the sort of revolution was over a year ago and still the government hasn't done anything about it and I mean like a lot of provisions that have been brought into Romania sort of go in the front door and out of the back door and you know they sort of sent those of supplies like contraceptions and things like that for the women and  overlap 
and the doctors was selling them to to to rich Romanians and things like that so there's such a lot of corruption in the country.
It's also saying that you know  the family it's only the family unit that helps itself out so if you're an orphan
You haven't got a chance
You haven't got anyone to look after you because they just look after their own really.
They're currants
They're what?
Currants.
What did you think?
Don't ask me.
It's just a different dried fruit  and the other ones are sultanas  the brown ones  the bigger ones.
Mm
Oh sort of yes
We must make a cake
We?
Must we?
We don't have to but I'd like to  want to get rid of some of this flour 
You've got so much stuff in there 
Let's do a chocolate one today  and I think somebody else
wants a biscuit.
What sort of biscuit?
You put 
What sort of flour do you need?
White and you when there's white flour at home I use it
Yes but has is it um plain flour or flour that raises itself?
I think well because I  my mother buy always the same it's the flour specially for the cake.
You know it was something in it.
There was something in it?
For raising?
You don't put something else in as well to make it 
No
Okay.
That's all right.
As that's what we've got a lot of.
So I put
It's good self raising flour
Two two hundred two hundred fifty
It's all right don't don't need the  just just what else do you need apart from that?
Butter.
Butter or margarine I use margarine  I use butter  and flour and
In the morning in the morning 
Sugar sugar
No no no come on don't play with that love please pick it up quickly  off the floor  don't walk on it.
It's Amy's blanket love I don't want it all over the floor.
Out of your nose out of your nose Charlotte please.
Yuk!
Err!
Where is your dolly?
Going to find your 
Put put Dolly in the push chair  Charlotte.
Would you put out of your nose?
Don't make a big thing of it.
The more you ask her to stop the more she's going to do it.
I don't like what she's doing
I know, nor do I but the more you talked about it the more she'll do it.
I dropped in here
Sure 
I have my antique 
Dump tee dump tee dump dump tee dump tee dum
Charlotte careful
Umpty dum tee dum tee dum
Yes you are mind the table Charlotte there's drinks on it
We can go to   together
Can we?
You don't want to go down to the slides yet?
No I said Charlotte
Well you'll have to because she can't swim yet.
Three months  when she's three months she'll be able to.
I will remain here?
Well if you want to.
No that's not for you.
It's Joelle's
No it's not Joelle's and it's not Mummy's.
Mummy's
No it's not well it's Mummy's at the moment but there's two ladies coming back to collect it tonight.
So we're going 
I can see 
You can see?
Yes I'm glad you can see.
Oh oh it's my present.
No it's not your present
My present
It's not a present.
It's lots of tapes.
It's lots of tapes.
If we go to Croydon Croydon 
Croydon Croydon
Croydon
If we go to Croydon  do you ever go to clean your shoes 
Oh
Every time I look at it I see these bits of chocolate you spilt on it.
I have 
Have you?
Very well.
Yes if we go to Croydon
Croydon oh.
What?
Tomorrow.
Oop mmm
I told it to go something
Don't you?
I'll kill her
Charlotte don't jump
Ah ah
When she was a little baby  little baby with  she was
She's changed a lot since she's been here?
Oh look.
What?
she had a different hairstyle.
Oh dear!
What have you got in there what have you got?
Is that your Lego?
Is that Lego in there?
You gonna make Mummy something?
Oh Amy don't cry now.
To where we must go?
Where must we go?
We must go in the shop in the Pinge to buy something for my bunny.
We must go to Penge you mean.
I said Pinge.
Didn't sound like Penge 
Do doo do doo
She's a cheeky little monkey
Cheeky cheeky.
Cheeky cheeky.
What do you need to buy for your bunny?
Something to put for put inside.
Oh stuffing.
Yes 
What's the matter sweetheart?
Your eyes hurt?
You going to have a sleep after lunch today?
No.
You have been good for two minutes.
Oh no.
Yes you have 
Not a choice no.
Not a choice
Adam's going fishing?
I don't think so no he'll probably going tomorrow.
He's having a look to see how much work he's got in the office today and if he hasn't got enough to worry about going to work tomorrow he's just going to go fishing tomorrow.
They haven't decided yet whether my car is going up to his office or to fishing.
 

Hmm I must go to Croydon mustn't I to change that bra.
You're going Mothercare?
Pardon?
You going Mothercare?
No I didn't buy it in Mothercare.
I bought it in Alders.
In Alders?
The big 
What?
The big all the men 
I don't like 
You don't like what?
overlap 
The big all the men 
Why?
See the big all the men.
That's a lovely tower.
Bit cold.
No no careful bring it away from the baby.
See if you can make it any bigger.
Oops!
Bang!
You've broken it.
Some are not not funny.
It's not funny.
Oh all right then I won't laugh.
You won't laugh?
No.
I don't laugh if it's not funny.
It's not funny.
Good.
So  how boring
It's not funny.
Eh?
How boring.
It's not boring.
Do you want to go by train?
Uhm.
Well I don't mind going by train but I don't want to come back by train 
 
Because of all those stairs.
No.
As I was thinking of how to manage the pram
See the big 
Oh yes
And I wouldn't want to put the pram down all those stairs.
Two one two three four
I wouldn't walk to Croydon with her hanging round my neck.
It er would be too much too long.
One two three four five.
they're for you.
Be careful mind because you're going to land on top of those bricks so be careful.
Woo I'm being careful.
You're being careful are you?
I'm glad to hear it.
Two three four four six eleven eight nine  two four four quick quick quick 
Yes but it's not  It's not hurting but it's disturbing you know?
I cannot bear the
Confu wha a tooth?
Yes.
Sure you don't want to see a dentist just to make sure it's all right?
No I don't want to see a dentist.
You're a silly girl.
No I'm not.
Yes you are.
No.
Yes.
Don't argue.
 

Could you  put her blanket in the the seat just so that they don't get little bits of cotton in it she might um breathe them in.
Thank you.
No!
I'm not being 
You're not being what?
I'm not being silly.
You're not being silly?
You are being
hit you.
I heard my my 
overlap 
when you  him?
Charlotte take it away please.
I heard my laugh just now
You heard?
I heard me laughing.
What on the tape?
I think I must do something.
What you can't do anything you can't change anything about your voice or your laugh.
You are what you are that's it.
Yes I can.
Yes dear.
under there
Sorry about the way I laughing.
I can't sit under there.
Huh?
Everybody has their laugh that's it.
You can't change it can you?
No I can't.
was snoring the other morning
Huh?
Adam was snoring one morning this week.
Charlotte came in in the morning what's daddy doing?
she stood there went  Charlotte please will you stop climbing.
One two three four five 
Oh dear!
Oh Amy.
I think it's going to rain.
It looks pretty horrible doesn't it?
two my cup is here.
I know what we can do.
When?
Tomorrow.
What can we do?
Yes if we go to Croydon
Hmm?
For for come back cause your pram is you don't want to come back by train because you're afraid of the steps.
No not afraid of them  I just don't want to
Yes I know what you mean but yes er but we can go 
But they're stairs there.
They're stairs?
Uh.
Going up
Stairs up to get out there
Charlotte!
You get down 
It's even worse You have to climb up steps to get out of that station.
Oh!
I think.
Any way it would mean we'd have to walk from Thornton Heath.
Might just as well walk from Croydon.
Come here.
Charlotte! you come your lunch please.
That's a bag of rubbish darling.
Don't touch it please 
Would you come in the lunch please Charlotte?
Leave her it's not going to do any harm 
It's grapefruit.
It is not.
You've found another drink now have you?
You've got drinks everywhere again.
Down here.
Good.
What's that that was orange is it?
I don't give upstairs to grapefruit.
You didn't like it?
Put on there.
Put on there.
On there.
It's strange because when she was just with you  she like it.
Down here down here
You just like 
If you put it in her cup.
I come up.
Yes.
That's the difference.
I never put it in her cup.
She always had it out of my glass.
That is a 
She'll eat or drink anything if its off somebody elses' plate or out of any body else's glass.
Mum!
Mummy!
Yes Charlotte.
But you know
Whee!
better?
When she  touch she like it but I when I give her 
Hmm hmm
Mummy!
Mummy!
Charlotte!
Come here.
No.
Please.
Please.
I'm sorry darling I'm sitting down and I'm comfortable.
I don't want to get up.
I can see you  
Oh dear!
Huh oh dear.
Would you like to do me some do something for me?
Yes.
Under the table here there's a book.
There's a big thick book.
Can you see it?
I can.
There's some of your comics on top of it.
In the no in the middle here look.
Can you bring me the book?
Postman Pat.
No underneath that  there's a book.
A big a big
A big book
Nay Thomas book.
No darling no.
I don't want Thomas the Tank book 
Yes 
No sweetheart I don't want that.
It's not what I want.
That's the book I want.
Here you are give it to Mummy.
Can I have her for a minute?
Thank you very much Joelle pardon?
Can I have her for a minute?
Here you are.
I read it 
And don't keep don't keep moving.
Charlotte could you give it to me?
What?
I give it to her because I just  think she's going to give it.
Darling
A man  one.
Number
Give it to Mummy darling please
What do you want to watch?.
Yes.
So you don't want any more biscuits then?
Oh you can make some biscuits as well.
That's not going to use up everything is it?
Oh right let's have a look what can find then?
Oh!
What?
What a big one.
That's what she likes.
Biscuits and cookies.
Pastries pies
She's Oh such  she's lovely.
Of course she's lovely.
All babies are lovely.
You you you know she she can to be friends between you and me.
Of course.
You don't smell of milk do you.
No
Currant cake.
You know the thing I don't like?
No I don't know the thing you don't like.
When you have some er parties or something like that.
You just don't care too much.
Not you but others  and you put some icing.
Icing.
Icing.
You ruined it.
And sugar.
I don't think I need that.
Probably not.
she done some she done some chocolate cake and she put in er chocolate icing.
And I think so many
Too much?
Yes.
I I usually can't be bothered
Hey hey hey hey what's the problem  what's the problem?
Something's warm
You'll manage  large cakes let's have a look at small cakes.
Why don't a large one?
No these are little individual ones  rather than one little big one.
Lamingtons 
A bit of crackle.
Em 
Small cakes or rice cakes.
Oh my goodness me.
We used to make those when I was in the brownies.
Rice crispies.
Oh I done that chocolate 
Chocolate 
Erm erm some
Wicked.
Ginger whirls.
Muffins.
Ah muffins 
Some erm 
Double chocolate muffins  
Um mamma 
Chocolate I'm not.
If you see chocolate chocolate muffins you won't be on a diet will you?
You know.
No I haven't got any erm  oh yes I have  no no we have there's something missing.
What?
Those little tiny pieces of chocolate that you can buy you know those little dots.
What?
You just bought some
Yes I know you need that as well.
I've got that in the cupboard.
Chocolate?
You need ordinary chocolate.
Cocoa powder which I've got and the chocolate dots
Yes but how much you how much use how much ordinary chocolate you use
How much?
Four ounces.
Four ounces.
Hundred grams.
Hundred?
Mum mummy.
So you have a big big thing of chocolate
It's too much chocolate.
No no we can't have those they're too naughty.
They're too naughty.
It's too much chocolate.
It's too
You can't do ordinary biscuits?
Muesli muffins
Coo!
Three ounces of Muesli, wholemeal fl  no you see it's all  of flour.
Kiss kiss
Blueberry muffins.
What about vanilla muffins?
 

Is it Tuesday?
Just a minute.
Well we could do this one and we could just put more or less plain flour again.
Typical the only one with self raising flour is the chocolate.
blub blub blub.
Beg your pardon?
Mummy blub blub blub.
She's done a poo poo.
She's dribbled that what you mean?
Look we could make some chocolate ones  it only makes twelve.
Look you can see that?
I can
You make a naughty 
Charlotte please don't don't go noisy.
There you are.
We'll make some chocolate ones.
This is if you  Charlotte will you come away from please.
Noo noo
Charlotte.
Well don't make a noise then.
 
Oh come on now you don't  Come here come here
 
What's wrong what is it you want?
She 
You want to sleep before lunch of after?
Come on.
Come on where?
Come on.
Look come on what?
I don't know what you mean when you say come on.
Come on mum.
What do you want darling?
Oh come on.
Come on.
Let's have a cuddle come on come in.
Would you finish your sentence?
Was that your saying?
We can do some chocolate ones.
If when you take her out you can go and buy some bits little chocolate bits
Mamma my 
Sure?
Tell you what.
Let's see if we can get the chocolate off your face shall we?
Lick the .
Put your tongue out.
Put your tongue out ah ah.
Lick this lick lick it
She won't
And again     Oh Charlotte well it's got some of it off.
. Oh Charlotte
Come on Mum.
Where do you want me to go?
I know what she would 
Come on in the kitchen.
What do you want in the kitchen?
Want biscuits.
you want biscuits?
But it's nearly lunch time.
No oo.
Yes.
Come on Mum come on.
No come on.
Charlotte why can't you keep still?
Because 
Come on Mum.
It's I'm here for a minute please
No come on.
Please darling
Come on.
I know when she when she  its usually when  
Mmm mmm  I've got you.
Come on.
I've got you now.
Come on come on come on  come on come on
What's mummy going to give you for your lunch.
What would you like?
How many apples have I?
Come on in the freezer.
We go in the freezer?
We'll go and sit in the freezer shall we?
Might get a bit cold though in there.
That all right?
Yeah
Oh oh!
Whaa!
Whaa!
I get cold.
You would wouldn't you if I put you into the freezer.
I don't think I will.
Yeah.
I'm going in the freezer.
All right then bye!
You come 
all right 