

What time will we go to Eve's tomorrow?
If we left
She said Elizabeth and Mat
Steven gonna fetch us, about er  quarter past one I think he said, have dinner round half past one he said, then 
 
We're walking we're walking up it, at
We're walking up if it's a fine morning
Yeah 
get up there some time between one and half past
I didn't hear any, did you hear any weather on the news?
oh yeah  I will hear it tonight
It'll be on again later
 
yeah  yes I wondered if David would be on bus, I saw Wendy having a  he worked later today because he's got so much done on front of the er  that weather he couldn't er, do any decorating outside  still we never got nobbled down street providing the er  canvassers
They'd all got too cold and run home I expect
this morning, but 
Yeah 
it was thick cold
He said there were three er, down there canvassing for the main parties and er, well quite a lot of people there and of course rich pickings for, providing they can get anybody to stop and talk to them  don't know, they'd drive around
I expect so  this is that
said that people are losing all interest in the election and they've got no faith in any of parties they all seemed to much alike and all fund ranges
well, er in a, in a sense it, it's, it, it been known since
Who?
they're talking none about the, the economy and turn up before the end of the year, this, the, the, they've been hanging on and on and on, and er slagging one another off all the time
Yeah
they've
 

but er
well both the Liberal Democrats put a candidate up anyway 
Yes, I remember seeing any
Well they didn't do
if they, well, be having, well, didn't have any meetings
They left it a bit late didn't they
Yeah 
really?
Maybe they had problems getting it 
I wouldn't mind going to hear it if they do have a meeting
Well she's er, I don't know whether she still teaches, she did teach at Corby 
Corby , yeah I saw a bit in the paper
well if she still does it didn't make it clear, and she lives at  Knilton 
Where's Knilton?
Well it's near
I've, I've never been there, I mean years back when we went cricket in the football one, we, we went to
playing football, but in those days Corby steel works
 
And you're only a village 
And you're only, still a village
Yeah
yeah, but it's a, a fair size down, but er Middleton I've never been there, I don't know where it is, but it must be near Corby  that worth finding on the er map
What?
We can find it on the map
Yes I expect so
To tell you the truth I've never heard of it
No
I just think that, there weren't many small villages in Northamptonshire that er well I didn't hear of, if, you know, I didn't know of, even if I hadn't visited them, but erm 
Wonder if she'll be staying in Wellingborough, at least she'll have to travel
Pardon?
a lot to this constituency during the next few weeks won't she?
Did she what?
I wonder whether she would be staying in Wellingborough or
No telling, how she's got to, we all obviously she has to 
Well these days in a car it's not many minutes drive is it 
Yeah, no, no 
from Corby and Wellingborough
makes several
unless we get a usual three inches of wet snow and that'll stop everything , you never know do you?
There's one thing a man
No snow now
Pardon?
Hope we've finished with the snow now
But there's one thing you've got to 
 
I've said to many years now about English weather in a sense it's, it, it, it's got a something of endearing quality, you don't like going through the bad weather, but the fact is that we do get generally good weather 
Yeah 
at times
well there's so many areas in the world where they get lots and lots of er
Yes you know, you know what the weather's going to be like 
Well you know what it's going to be like, it's sort of a set piece each, each season
Yeah
but er, you can't say that er  the British are
well we can do that we had some lovely spring, that day we went up to the park it was what spring like weren't it?
Oh yeah 
Now it feels cold again
It were March, February too weren't it?
That's right
Yeah, fantastic
the snowdrops there
you know I remember ever so clearly, when I worked down the  Totexas, Dentons 
Mm
all those years back, in the late fifties were it?
It was the fifties yeah 
I was down there in the late fifties 
 
it was nineteen forty nine
and I remember one particular February, it will always stand out in my mind because er, it's a fairly long walk done to the factory from, from here and every day after the midday meal, when I set out to walk down there as quick as I could it had been cloudy since, it was raining, every day without fail I used to get to work soaked, first
 
What February used to be sort of reckoned for rain didn't it?
Yeah
The way, the way they talk about March winds it was February rain they
well
you see, first in
yeah
when I got there, several times he used to  scruffle into the er packing room and come out with those two, three of those well a couple of those large sheets of brown paper that they pack, yeah, pack the few boxes in 
 
and I'm not used to that, shove them up 
and, but, but 
shove them up their trousers and pull the trousers up, expose the leg and wrap round paper around and that was a amazing 
was that keep
and it dried the trousers out, and dried the leg and, it were lovely and cosy after
half an hour or so
backward a bit when you walked
Aye it did, but
it were a, it were a efficient way of er getting dry  mm and the next day there would of
this evening
Does what?
I wondered if David had got this evening to catch a bottle of wine
Perhaps not
could be  the two of them they just, when er, when Lee set out  on a Saturday evening with er Kevin  and they often sit there and er have a, er a bit of a snack, supper, light supper and er
 
Well, although you get a 
in the evening anyway don't you?
Yeah, but a lot of the time 
 
have a main meal waiting  probably, have a lighter snack later on, have a glass of wine with it 
Derby and Joans pair
how old is Wendy?
Is she older than David?
Wendy, she's just a little bit older than David
Is she?
four or five years I think
Ooh I didn't realize that  so Dave's forty one?
Forty , forty last June, he's coming up to forty one this year
forty one in May?
Yeah 
And Wendy's er
Wendy must be forty five at least 
Ah, oh I didn't realize she was
unless she was, she's quite a bit older  than Dave 
at least she's older, but er not to that extent
I wasn't very happy about it at the time, anyway, I was, her being, I think he was only  when were they married?
Seventy  three, the end of seventy three  and he was twenty  twenty two wasn't it they were married?
She'd already been married and divorced and she was quite a bit older than him and I, I wasn't very happy about it to start, but they seem to have settled down alright
Well she's made David a good wife actually 
Well they've never had any more youngsters go
Told me, she actually told me once that she considered herself lucky to er, have met David, I reckon she did because er, she, she was divorced then and er  of course, didn't she have a son?
She has got a son, yeah, I don't think she sees him much now, he did come here to
that she sees much of him, he's er  about twenty or more now
Yeah  I was surprised that er Kathleen is it, when Kathleen told us down street about her, her son
He went in the army
Yeah, or rather
that's the older one, the one who's friend of Mat's?
That's right yeah, for a little bit, I was on about the reference to er Embassy Service though 
He'd a, he had some sort of operation or something, it's not, but at Debbie's wedding, Andrew weren't there because he  some operation on his jaw or something that, can't remember now what it, what he'd had done  were having his jaw bone 
 
Oh yes I remember him, yeah, they were a bit concerned, well I would have been, and then
lucky with their
I was gonna say
jolly lucky  whether they er, whether they all turn up on Friday to er, have a word with Eileen I don't know 
Ah yes I think they all know he's coming now.
Does Steve know?
Well we told her last 
Oh was she so 
when she came up last Saturday
Oh did you?
Oh, thank god for that  Michael knows, Michael's manager he knows, did you tell him?
Yeah I told Michael, I phoned him this morning
Brian knows
Yes 
come here
I've got some bits in there for her  a few kittens in there for a couple of days I, so they'd go up, pick them up and they get left 
Well we'll pop down, oh we can't pop down tomorrow unless we go before, get in the morning, before we go to work  across to Steve's, if it's fine it'll be a good walk over there 
No I don't mind walking if it's fine, I said to Sandra 
so, we take 
providing it's not raining
we'll take, we will take that she ought to go 
won't it be muddy?
well we know I shall go through the fields, but we can still take the short er cut through the estate up Bedford Road, by the cemetery
Yeah, doesn't
pass up by there?
So you go through the cemetery
I well, you can go through the cemetery, yes, you can go through there 
Well I didn't know where it was near a path 
and then you go 
well is it likely to be in the
you go in at the top of 
the church is 
top of the road, what road's that running off from er High Street, South
Mm, yeah 
can't remember
Stones Lane, I'd got used to Manners Lane, they call it something quite
since they've built up there, Mannings, Mannings Street or Mannings 
You, you put down that you 
escape there and
yeah
and that's the best way, it'll er, oh you'll save  ten minutes easy, it's a fair walk it, on the main road
I was hoping when they got that link road through they might connect up, but I don't suppose it, sort of roads gotta put parking towards the long piece of 
Oh no, it won't be a 
major road
it's just
 

no I'm afraid there'll be no footpath there, in fact, it hurts me a bit that because they're cutting straight, they're cutting along in line with that pub public 
Yeah 
footpath
One thing if they 
it's nothing wrong with 
if they put a cycle path along the edge of each road when they build them
No, they're not as sensible as they are you  remember in Prestley when we went there  so what er, perhaps, especially for solid places, solid with the roads in Germany
Oh in Germany yes there's
you've got priority there,
statue and cross over.
I mean it, it's incredible in
we, we went to, we travelled about a bit while we were there  went into Holland and er came via through Belgium and Holland just to get there, and look how tidy 
But before we went down into the 
the towns were
tried to borrow a bike for us so that we could bike round, but when she 
Oh 
she probably failed to er look
it's not as if there's anywhere where you can hire a bike I'm sure  you know, but, I suppose you're going along on the road, across the road I 
course that's, that's the beauty of er biking it up the hill, that's some, there's so much scope for not being on the road, you've got special baths for someone
Yeah
the only one I want to know in this area is a, you can 
the one between the 
that's it
they put that there when they built that new school 
they did that for the school children
so that the
children could find the school 
yeah and that's the only one I know of  it's incredible to me  either 
Is it raining again?
No it could do in a moment or two though it er, it looks a bit ominous, you rub one or two er doubts, they are similar colour to these actually
Is that, that the first one that's opening a creamy coloured one?
Yes  oh this  Ellerdor is er playing around a bit now
Yeah 
but it's not as spectacular, not a very spectacular sight is it?
What that erm
 Ellerdor 
Oh it said in the, in the book when I read about it, it said it had green flowers, you say is that green flowers
I didn't even know there were any green flowers 
I'd never even noticed the one next door, but the herb must have come from that
No, er Jane spotted cos she said that's where the seed must have come from 
Yeah 
she said they seed freely, so we'll have to watch we shall have them all over the garden next year 
Oh when you , when they've flown
Yeah
she's
cos er she said she's only got one she'd like another, and
that we've got two, she should have this, smaller one down here
Yeah
I'll dig it out for her
What time we taking
I don't know, when you like,
back over with you, I'll sort something out while I've got some small change in me purse now I've been shopping, I'll sort it out 
there's another five, there's another five
Mm, you've 
  

Is there two?
You've got some er, have much have you got upstairs to change?
You've got er nine upstairs to change haven't you?
Yes I know I'll take it when I go down to the post office and I keep forgetting, don't like bothering with it on Thursday because they've always got a shop full and I  go
any other day 
These tomatoes are a bit hard, did you know?
They're what?
The tomatoes you bought down the market
They're what?
They're a little bit hard
Well there was some marked firm tomatoes, then there were the others, I had some of the others
It looks more
well I skinned them
if they were firmer than these
I'll have skinned a couple of them
 
well these, these are, there, I mean in, they, they'll are
without er, the other fruit 
No , the ones at the front of the store were for seventy P and they were marked firmed tomatoes, the others at the back were sixty P and they didn't say firm on them so I thought well, firm probably means hard, I'll get the, get the others, so I'll skinned a couple of them for tea
Oh they're alright though
anyway, I've got to go upstairs, oh
I saw some nice Cox's orange on the market two pounds for a pound
Mm, I
to eat
well these looked er really nice and ripe
Oh
If I worked magic, things that were tragic, would have no place beneath my waving wand.
With great magicians I'll sit and converse, the whole universe would seem like a little pond, deer would swim by and as it swam by, ravage by war neglect and in great pain, I'll take it out just to wipe its poor face clean and then quietly put it back again, if I worked magic, magic 
Yeah, what do you think to it?
That was really good, yeah, good tenner
What have I, well I haven't to, I've got to fit the erm cord symbols, you know, get the sequence of cords, I've written it down you see
Are you gonna piano rise it then?
I, yes that's why I arrive, piano er score for it, and er it's a sort of fairy tale lyric you know, I've
Very Paul McCartneyish, reminds me of him.
A bit changeable but er
Yeah, sort of thing that he'd be writing down
it's not a bad melody, I thought I'd get it down, and record it.
It sounds good
But if Lisa er  would be plain and have a chat, put your
I think it might be a good id , I don't know whether, Lisa would like it better if you would let her know and let her get Kev talking on it, which perhaps be a better idea if she was in on it, but I'll, I'll have a word with her
Yeah, have a word with her and perhaps she'll like to listen to that to the er words sort of that, and then make her own comments, it's nice to get the opinions you know, the, the many of the family as you can
Really, I'm the sort
and er, it helps me to, it's only a hobby, you know, but er, it's one that I've had for donkey years, I want to er keep going with it as long as I can
Like somebody, somebody said on the radio the other day, everybody's got a song inside them
That's true 
Some have more than one
Well I know 
 
but I mean I, I expect it's true, everybody does  well even those who er, well people who turn now, they must have, voices I'm told about work and they could er
Yeah
write lyrics and er
well I refer
music
yeah, yeah, I suppose I'm what you call tone and deaf, I've got no music
at all 
oh you were telling me, you used to
Oh David and me, oh yeah
Oh Dave, yeah, have you heard from Dave , you used to make
Oh yeah
He did it on the guitar and you were simply found a few words and
yeah  yeah it's true
it was a long time ago but as I recall they weren't too bad, to even, if you'd have stuck at it, you'd have got better, it's the same with every job you get better at 
Yeah, oh that's true, yeah 
if you tackle it, even go out there, or wine making come to that
No everything painting and decorating
Even painting and decorating Dave as you say
yes, we're not in the rain no
no, no, why you not going to that anyway because er
Well I tried yesterday, but I got wet
How long were you there?
About four hours  came home when it rained and then it stayed dry
I think it must have rained in  Erchester not here though
It poured, round about twelve, twelve thirty  not like this like heavy
No I don't record 
poured but 
like er
but this, we got some solid rain 
we did have a bit
Yeah
but er, you got more, you, of course you were nearer the river
Yeah that's true
It's time we could do with it
I know we need it, but, I would have been anywhere at the moment though
Ha, about twenty inches we need, is it two months?
Well, forget about that
Oh, we'd go down
, just see them all paddling in the
well this is the most, this is the most rain we've had for  in such a period, no, in, in about a week something like that
Yeah, yeah
It's sort of rained 
 
it's strange, because er last month and the month I wouldn't associate with rain and that November with distant fog, fallen leaves and
Yeah, well
just to
It'll do a lot of good I mean I've put both plants out during the week, they were fairly dry then, but now if you'd see that, that, they've taken already
Oh definitely this is sort of herb job
Yes, this is what I mean
 

Cor dear I wish I could
Tell when you gotta  have knowing
Is that, that plant, yeah 
usually down the front there, somewhere
Haven't got any
have you?
No, I have not
Oh, what a minute, what?
I, well I the erm, what er, herbs up underneath the apple tree
Do what?
the herbs under the apple tree, what are they?
Sorry I can't, I can't see against the window
The herbs under the apple tree, what are they?
Chives
Chives
Oh
sorry
I thought we gave Wendy some last year
Yeah,
do what dear?
No, he wants some
Oh, I've never heard, well I've heard of it, but I've never seen it 
As for a recipe, you pick these recipes up and that's a stupid blooming herb
This paper's
Taunton in Devon 
Good old
Hurry up then, come paying, there's a shopping precinct in Taunton, Devon
Did you see the name of
town of Somerset
Did you see
What?
the name of the erm
That's unusual for the Observer
the Raving Loony Party member who's
Paddy Ashdown
Yes
Patrick Ashdown
Oh that's it Patrick I'm, I saw the Patrick Ashdown, I didn't know what
his real name isn't Patrick, it's John
Yeah, I mean it's a bit, a bit naughty in a way innit?
Yeah 
There could be a few older people that could make 
it could be confusing cos people
Here you get
Although it does now say on paper what party they are, it never used to
No
but it does now, it does have a party as well as a name on the election paper
Well, a lot of old folk er, I don't think they're much bothered what they say, they know the name of the candidates and they seemed to 
that's for the name, yeah so ,so , some of them will be confused, but not enough for them to have any problems I shouldn't have thought.
Did you get
I think they hold the balance at the end don't they?
Oh I think
getting in this er, seat it er
I bet it, as regards it cut down to about five
five, probably less
and Freda will get in as well 
There's no doubt who the majority will go  well most of it
Powell will lose his seat
but Freeman Fry will be
But I don't like the way he'd er, all this, all about er  how you'll be annually taxed under Labour because the truth is that even under the Conservatives, all the years they've been in, and all the years they've been reducing tax, taxes from time to time, indirect taxation increased
Oh I know, you only got to look at the VAT ain't you for starters 
Yeah , taxation now if anything is harder than it was in seventy nine
Yeah
they shouldn't talk
I, I, I'd would teach them to stand up and tell them the truth, there don't appear to be too many of them about these days
Well it's just brought out a budget to paper over a few cracks and make it look good because they knew that, they've got no more chances this is it innit?
I think 
Well do you think this really impress er Lisa?
I'll have a word with her when she's awake, she's still on a third dream I should think at the moment  but she's er, certainly good talking, I could, I could try and get her without her knowing about it and see what happens, just dinner time I'll take it down and try it, oh you're gonna take it round Steve's ain't you?
Today
Oh yes well you can perhaps do it tomorrow
Yes, through the week some time
do it a good turn if you could er
Well they normally stay in now, er, Monday and Tuesdays usually Lisa and Kev stay in with us and watch the telly with us  they go, he plays pool Wednesday
Do they stay in on er, Sundays do they all
Well generally he comes up for dinner, but he ain't today so he'll be Rhys will come, be in for dinner, he'll turn up about three, and they sometimes stay, we sometimes play game in the afternoon, board game or something, it depends
Steve, you see, they often get
Why, why bother about the football this afternoon?
See he'll watch it and all
Man City and Southampton ain't it?
Yeah
Yeah, don't bother me none  as long as Southampton win mind you
Well Southampton er can pull er 
Reg see where Tottenham are in the league?
 
Pardon?
See where Tottenham are in the league?
No
They're about six from the bottom ain't they?
They lost at home again yesterday  they shall find themselves some trouble if they don't buck their ideas up  whether they're lacking or not 
Well they're
I expect
well they're
Well it, the way they started off in that cup final, last year
Yeah
they're a danger to life aren't they?
Yeah it's terrible really
I've had him off with that first foul in the first minute, that he committed, ridiculous
Were Lineker weren't playing where he?
No
Not yesterday?
No
 

All raving about Rob Jones 
down again
yep afraid so can you 
 

get wound up
I know,would wouldn't surprise me either
Pity you know
He said that's half the reason that Brian Tolbrook took over at Tettron ain't it?,
I think he had his eyes, he'd got his eyes on Tettron replacing 
Yeah 
in the league 
he probably looked into the future a bit and decided that er 
yeah 
well it cost them a hundred thousand to do it, but, I mean he's never been able to afford the
yeah and he's deciding that Adam and he's deciding that Adam weren't worth it and
Yeah
went for it, but
well he apparently spoke to erm, he had quite a lengthy conversation with Ron Atkinson apparently, cos Atkinson used to be the manager of Tettron didn't he?
And he was telling them you know what a  a good club it could be, it's the ground
they opened their own ground as well you see, but that was
 

and, I mean don't, he's upset that
a wound up, I mean if there was a league team like Kettering, Kettering like the fourth division, that would be brilliant  be nearer to go wouldn't it?
Why they all have such a large ground
I've never seen it
I remember going there
bet it's got four star pitches
after the war and there
 

and they had a record gate 
 

It isn't a ground
near a ten, near the ground size of Kettering's
but they've got to, I remember when Rhys played in that, the F A bars quarter final, two seasons ago down here, they got well over a thousand down there then, and you just couldn't move, that were brilliant, all the way round the ground there were about four of five people deep
there's
ground, it's a shame because
no point for promotion and weren't allowed to go off, cos of the state of the ground
I know that 
 
but they could win the league this, this season and not go up
That's right
The Taylor reports got a lot to answer for really 
How did they get on yesterday?
Don't think they played
Well somebody said they're at Grantham
Were they?
It weren't in my paper this morning
Well check it on the er back page inside 
got to be the 
they weren't in the ordinary fixed roll
re-arranged
you see  I met an old work mate of mine he said they were at Grantham 
No
Well they're on the
though, weren't he?
In the paper I saw they were supposed to been at Bury but they played Bilston, Bedford 
Oh, that's right, you did say didn't you?
Ann's gotta take my erm thingy in, my erm  what's it
Game
Your game oh well 
Windfall was it?
No, no
What's a what's it?
erm, you, you know your computer, your thingy
oh the Amstrad?
 
yeah
ye , no, the Amstrad
The Amstrad?
Yeah, I had a choice to take that in
mm
Do you want a biscuit Gem?
Were
yeah
Oh yes, suppose so, fine dad, no
 

er, I'll leave them on there
Right-y-oh, help yourselves 
David's been up
Make sure somebody saying what
 
yeah 
work
Check on the football results and that
Oh, I see
Nan  he erm don't take them in every lesson
Oh
takes them in like erm  turn it around every week, don't know yet
how often do you do french?
Four times a week
Four times a week
That's quite a lot for a 
She said, she said four times yesterday
Oh
Science we have twice a week, but, it's double lessons
Oh
So I'd rather have it four times
yeah
er 
we have 
do you do cookery?
No
Well she done a bit didn't you?
You made them cakes that time didn't you?
Mm
She's done 
on birthdays you go to a swimming club, at lunch time and your mates are there.
another year where your
 
mm 
year ain't you?
Yeah, must be later on
I know Michael said Laura was doing some cookery, what was it he said?
What see if I go, have I got something that Laura wanted cookery, I've forgot what she wanted now, I forget what she said it were, she was making  see that bit about you, about you
No not yet I've
I didn't read the very far
Well she copes because she had the same problem as me with her hands if she's writing for long, her hands ache, so she can write a longer letter if she types, so I said I, I didn't really, I like a hand written letter best it seems more personal somehow, perhaps they do, having a typed letter means you can send a longer one, they all mean
Does she perhaps get with a, a
Well I do, I 
 
write, it's now I have to ache, I, I wait a few minutes and then I, go on again when me hands had a rest
 
Well my hands ache 
been in the garden last week, about 
Yeah , that's where the fun is
If I'm holding anything, so that I'm holding the hand in one position for a long time
Yeah mine do that 
They inject it in into animals
Yeah
and er, and satisfactory results
oh
and of course there's, there's a lot of the testing
yet before they can er  decide to, inject into you
yeah
but they think that they could er be on the way to er  actually making a
cure
I see
asthma's wound up, they reckon they've found a cure for that
yeah 
now 
central
what's it, been on the television about it 
There's now a cause Flo, it's a cause , they've found a cause
Yeah
Yeah
I saw something on the television today it's sitting there said they've a cause about it 
Yeah, yeah, yeah 
They say a cause 
It won't be long 
They can, they can work on it even further then, can't they, you know, to
They can look for something
yeah
that'll be a brilliant breakthrough
Well it would several of us have rheumatoid arthritis
yeah 
I'll never, never 
And a 
on
went back to my unit during the war
yeah
I, I helped a young girl get an old lady onto the er train
mm
and I, I, probably only a youngster then, well I was about twenty six or seven, but er, I shall never forget  her fingers were like claws she couldn't move them they'd sort of set
Ooh
Oh how awful
clenched
lord terrible
this is different from the  sort that we get, it, it, it doesn't only affect older people, children get it, it's so
Yeah I know
crippled with hands and
Well this old lady well she was 
Yeah 
terrible she was 
yeah 
helpless
I mean to tell you that I'd seen old Ken 
Well how's he getting on?
Well, he's had several heart attacks, he's been in hospital
Well I knew he was going in, he told her
Yeah, he's had several heart attacks
How long they keep him in do you know?
He were in there eight weeks
sshh
oh dear
yeah and
well what the first thing he do and he has to go in the
no, no, they leave her in the home 
oh
It doesn't seem that long they'd taken her out
No he told me, he actually told me, they hadn't got a bed for him, they hadn't got a bed for him, so they looked after his own, the bungalow
Anybody in his er
 
change of health, never looks after them afterwards 
does she?
erm 
 
They always have someone go in every day anyway
There's, there's a nurse goes in to bath her everyday, put her in the bath, so then there's the home help visit, the
 
yeah she's bedridden, she can't get out 
no, no, oh no, no 
 
you can claim
she's bedridden, she can't do anything
you know
as well 
It's awful ain't it?
Yeah
But I mean er, a man in his state of health never ought to be left to look after a woman like that, but different if it's an ablebodied
 umping disgraceful
I think it's disgraceful
Christine's only my age, I was at school with her
Yeah
Yeah 
achieve don't I, but I mean
 
 
we knew Chris by error, but he's got a
but he don't make any
she's been bedridden for twenty years now or whatever 
no he didn't 
perhaps when I see
start thinking I'm getting old
yeah that's old er
, still
yeah
it's funny, you don't feel any older inside it
I'm not old
you, you speaking for yourself, now you know
Why do you feel older?
What, what you mean 
Well, oh, me eighty two years
and you just speak for yourself
imagine her when I'm eighty how I'll feel
 
 

Yeah he done a real good time
Gemma's got a long way to go before she gets to eighty 
You're not twelve yet are you?
No
When she goes back she didn't say anything about Kevin, it must have been a
come to England, she, she said
Probably see Deborah soon
but er she didn't say 
probably make sure when she's coming 
anything about coming, and yet Jenny came up and told me that she was coming on Friday, er before I got that letter, got that letter the next day
Oh, didn't know they were coming
Mhm
She must of erm got
 
I don't know how long the letters take, when they come by air
You'd think she'd got
 

A nice little red wine
It is nice
Yeah very nice
Oh yeah
Yeah
Yeah, I'd like to go
And me
and you, yeah  take the animals with
 

said I was gonna try and learn a bit of German before I went again
Laura's learning German and she's at school 
Bloody, Ruth left er, were they married?
She left him, hasn't she?
Yeah 
Yeah , that's right, yeah
yeah, they do these days
They've erm
he tried to get into the house Rhys were
I didn't know
But she came back 
 

yeah but couldn't get in though
Well you'd have somebody had to go in with her to make sure she didn't take anything that belongs to him
Well 
Didn't he run a market stall?
Yes dad, but, apparently enough he got into a lot of trouble with the tax
Oh, they're, they're after him like you know
The policeman up several times 
The police have been up several times, you know that attache case I said the dustman found that time?
Yeah
Well that was something to do with him apparently enough
Police came up, they've been up, we've seen them up there several times
yeah, so
 
What, been selling dodgy
or something
Pay your tax a day as you must 
 
Oh
He's not been paying, but I suppose, with a business like that it'd be V A T wouldn't it?
Yeah, I bet you
Wouldn't it?
dodgy stuff 
yeah V A T, be V A T thought it would
Get paid in tax and er don't have to make any record up 
That's right yeah, yeah 
It could be direct tax as well they may not, they'd may not have declared er
Oh that's correct, yeah
He's probably earning you see, I mean
yeah
with a lock up in store 
 
and a
around, yeah you'll get round do you good and well in work 
When Betty left, I, I 
He went, he went the clothes mostly had in London 
 
oh he went all over the place with that
What thirty quid market
I don't know whether Pettitcoat Lane, but I know he went up to London
Honest, honest 
 
well he always seemed to me to be a bit of wise guy 
Oh yeah he is, he is 
 
long, long conversation of 
I've corrected her once about it 
er, he told me how
Ah, shame that
Well he's got a lot of fishing equipment and I said you're a keen fisherman then, all walk in
and mentioned it in passing, you know, and he said er, yes, he said er I've started 
 
would you like one?
I said well, of course I would
Yeah
how much do you want?
But I never got one
no, no
I didn't expect one either  so naturally I wasn't disappointed
no
well although he told me he'd er, he'd, well he'd had a reasonable catch he'd er, remember them, bring one up 
Well that's a trout we had Wendy gave us didn't she?
Yeah, it was nice weren't it?
But her
fellow got two
That's right
a sea fisherman in Erchester and
Yeah, yeah
what's his name?
mm
was it, no it's Church isn't it?
What?
the chap at er
I don't know his name
I think he's name's Church    see I work with a, a young chap from Wellingborough, Graham  and er, he and his brother in law always went round the reservoir, Ramsthorpe, Grantham
Oh I know
that your dad was working
Solhall
Then we came out by Buckingham Palace and somebody had or
the queen's home, the flag was flying
Ah
so Lisa said can we go in to see her
 
 
She's only six, I said yes we'll just knock on the door and say I'm Lisa  I've come to tea
Anyway cheers
Cheers Dave
 

Is that the
Well they're sparkling over
Mm, they're nice
They're better for you that way though ain't they?
Oh
You could produce them
or the bananas, scrub out er, quarter of an hour or so
Mm
then strain the usual, and just use the juice
oh
use a chopper all the way
oh I see
it'll give you
Put plenty of lime in
wine with a stronger body
oh
 

How's your growing in
What about that dragon trap?
Too many long 
Haven't seen it yet 
Oh
I mean it's not what you can tell 
 
that time we went with him, we saw the
It needs
don't it?
oh 
When Gem was up here the other day she was telling us about one of them teachers who plays computer games instead of giving lessons
Oh
Ah
who
Amstrad
Ah Amstrad eh?
In science I think she said wasn't it?
Yeah
Well that's alright innit?
Yeah, they were playing Batman games it's a new computer 
 
Yeah I think some of the teachers
 
Do you like them 
Would you like a biscuit too with your wine?
Yes please dad, you can, yes please 
Yeah, do you remember that time with
What?
bought a ticket then.
Right, who's where?
Doesn't matter really, don't think it matters.
Well I've put the two girls on the end.
Oh right
No
No Emily don't want it  where do you wanna sit then?
Here
Alright well go there 
Alright 
Where you gonna sit?
There or there?
This one or that one?
Make your mind up
She's not sitting near me
You'll be a rose in between two thorns there
 

Right I'll bring a cloth in so you can get
start
Can I have er drink mummy?
I say, go and get yourself something
You'll have to get yourself something
Oh, can I have wine and lemonade?
No you're not having wine and lemonade
Can I mummy?
No
You're not big enough to drink wine
Can I?
Can we?
No
Say please
Can we daddy  mummy, mummy
What?
can we?
No 
No I said
Pardon?
 

There was
in there, there's a table in there
Oh you could
Yeah
Not much though is it?
unfortunately
No, if, if 
 
What?
It's only about three ain't it?
What?
How old's your dad?
Three, he's twenty, thirty seven
Right, always have to ask
how old he is, ah love?ah?
Right, that's old
I never know when anybody is, I know what year they were born, I have to count it up and see how old
I know how old mummy is
I'm meant to be twelve
Here are
I'm eight nan, I'm eight in April
You'll be eight this year 
eight 
you'll be eight in May
April
April, April
and I want, mum I want
Yeah help yourself
I will
I know how
Peas, carrots
I know how I want, an onion 
sprouts and a bit of cauliflower 
I know how old mummy is, she's forty
Sshh 
Roast potatoes?
Here are, go on 
I'm not having carrots
Why not?
Roast parsnip , do you want some roast potato?
No
Thank you
Mash potato?
Please
How much do you want?
Pass me
   

oh dear
cat fish
will that do?
I didn't bring the
 
Ben 
How are the roast potatoes done?
Do you want one?
Yeah please, I've done two each for us
Why is he
George, why, we'll swap over
I want, I want the gravy, can I have the gravy?
Oh that reminds me mum, where's my shoes, where's my diet pepsi?
I, still haven't got it
You get
don't you?
I got cake 
Er 
yeah  I want
What?
Have a bit more, no they they've got them, cos they don't like it when it's done round the meat
Yeah alright
and mum and Steve got a leg so you can help yourself
Don't you want some coffee?
Yeah, I will have a bit 
Do you want a roast mum?
Er a roast potato?
Er no thanks
Try and
I'm supposed to, watching me diet and I haven't been eating roast potatoes
Why you been on
mummy 
What else haven't you got?
Peas and carrots
What you want?
Gravy 
do you want
yes please er Sandra 
 

Er parsnips, Fred parsnips?
Yes, I've a  had two roast parsnips  it a
You got gravy?
Mm, yes thanks 
I'm rather partial to parsnips I'm
Brings the flavour to it 
Yeah 
Once we had , once we had big ones better
They're big enough aren't they?
You want
Er they're amazing these seeing
Oh I know
I know when he was a kiddy he'd never eat them
I know, have you got your parsnip?
Me, I
it is tasty isn't it?
no, have some more
right
Steve call it gravy, I call it
Doesn't, why?
I thought it was
 

I call circles squircles
You call what?
Pass the
Circles squircles
Squircles?
Mm
Oh that comes from that game you play with the cards don't it, when you call it 
What 
She doesn't call it squircles
No
I should think a squircle is an irregular circle is it not?
No, it came about because she put down a what card and I
to say squares and circles 
Squares and circles 
oh, she couldn't make up her mind and it come out squircles
Innit?
It's funny how names like that stick when, you know, it's
the child will say something 
yeah 
and you, you pick it up 
It's obviously
 
Squircle 
What?
Can we play a game after din-dins?
 Lindard 
What's that?
Oh 
 

Mum 
You got pepper, you want pepper?
I've had some thanks er Sandra yeah 
Oh you've had some , where's the top to that one?
I don't know mum
Oh it's over here 
What don't you know?
 

Daddy 
Are these the garden parsnips?
Yeah
Very nice
Yeah 
Yeah we picked them yesterday
Once you had big, big, big ones, didn't we daddy?
Got early potatoes then yet?
No not yet
Well it's pretty quick yet
Er there ain't no trays 
Bit late for
ain't it?
Mum is that one more , one, four, one, four, one?
Yeah that , no I can't
 

You'll want to wait till the end of the month before I put mine in
Have I got alcohol?
I've probably put them in
Yeah
Well that's the foremost for August
Oh dear
Mm 
well I'll have to work out how many I need, I might need some more yet 
More what?
That broom I've got, cos I, I took the rest of them bushes out
Did he?
No
What are you gonna put in with them?
Are we gonna play a game afterwards?
I spoke to
 
If you like , what do you want to play?
Erm  Cluedo?
Mm
Cluedo?
I can mix it around and carrots and the 
Cluedo 
parsnips and the fruit and veg 
Yeah, I don't mind 
will be on this side, and the 
or see what the others want to do
beans and peas and
Do you want to play a game after this?
all the 
will be main bit 
Yes when we're finished.
Good idea rotation plot
Cluedo?
We're gonna play a game of Cluedo
What now?
after  din-dins
I can't play it
dinner and din-dins
I can't play Cluedo after all these roast potatoes
 

I've only ever guessed that right once, a day over at Marion's once and that'll be break  
Did you work it out or was it a guess?
Mm?
Did you work it out or was it a guess?
I worked it out from what cards I'd got and what I knew somebody else hadn't got 
We all went round with
and we're all pounding this little
dad's go and he got the wrong weapon, he crossed out the wrong one on his list
 

I went, the last time I played it, which was erm, about few weeks back, few weeks back, I had all the 
I had all of the  cards  and 
All at one time?
all one time cards, all of them and it, there was a thing 
 
in, but, and, you took
 
those were weapons , yeah
weapons, and it was the dagger and you couldn't work it out and kept on asking 
I did 
her, I kept on asking her
 

I've got there first
Only because I got, I had to go out of it 
Have you done any with your lace making kit yet?
Mm
Not a lot
You haven't, you haven't
seem to have had, like, enough spare time to sit down and
No
you know, really study it 
Can I have some more gravy please mum?
Not too hot is it?
Where did they come from?
It was
when they had it at
Oh
at Christmas, I got him the beef 
Nice beef 
from Budgen's, when erm ah, you know at Chris , Christmas they had it down at one seventy nine a pound, didn't they?
Mm
And I got this big bit then, put it in the freezer
Lovely 
I wished I'd have bought some more now 
Is it 
So do I
He didn't go out
That's one advantage of having a big freezer you can get things when, when there's a bargain going
Mm, yeah
We've got two little freezers we have
Oh they've got a couple of erm these
down the market don't they?
Mm , I've never been there
We went round it  I often er
Have you ever been to that Corby market?
No, David has though
Yeah, supposed to be good
erm, one of the er chaps that come to work and he's always on Corby  that's what David told us 
What sort of stall?
Oh a stall of mixed each you know?
No
I think he provides game as well,
like parsnip
Got a bus pass token now, so
you can travel round by the bus, or round the neighbourhood
Yeah
fares are already paid now
got that
Mm 
on the bus a bit when the weather improves I shall like to go to Harrendle 
But whether it was still 
you can get, get to Harrendle and Peterborough on the bus now
Oh can you?
I didn't know
what all those yellows
well they go in the week, you can on a Saturday
You get six pound
seven pound fifty, on these
thirty pounds worth ain't it?
Oh yes, thirty
Thirty pounds with each, were fifteen pound
Mm
For fifteen pound?
about sixty, yeah, because, say you pay out a quarter of the price from, you there
What you get a book of tokens or something?
No it's
No they're, they're little silver thingies
Take them out as you use them?
Well they're useful 
No 
on that little rider that's always
so far, and then we go on that at least once a week when we've been shopping
Mm
it's
it stops outside the gate
Are those the
Those are they
Let's have a look
They're like toy money aren't they?
You get , you get them in ten pound batch
Yeah
Aluminium
How do you know?
What?
That it's safe
Oh you can tell 
How?
against the light
The difference how, for erm 
as well, can't you?
you can use them as
you've got a list of
with a list of
firms you can and 
and you 
so you can take them as well, don't they?
Mm, mm
If you book Serve
Serve, yeah Serve takes them, yeah I know
You can use them on
Oh can you?
Ooh
Well er Fred  and his wife went several times on them last year
Oh 
Is that, I thought that the card and Serve take it out for the doctors a few weeks back when he got your bronchitis and you weren't too well and erm, car picked him up and took him up there, then you get
he walked back, it was a nice day
Oh no
he walked back 
You'd pay for that, ride back
I wrote to Eileen I said about your dad had a hundred and four and I said er, I'd a, sent a taxi from Serve to take him up, I said then he dismissed the driver and see he walked back, and I
before I left, is er, got a mental pict , when you said dismissing the driver, mental picture of the, this chap in a cock cap and that, and your dad saying alright James it's enough
I'll walk back 
 
I don't know how long you'll be in there, but I'll just go off now
to er, old
well I said well you mean
are you?
No problem mate I'll walk now, are you sure he say?
I said yes, I've walked
 

it were that nice  well I tale it all the veggies were your own produce?
Oh not bad , no not the cauliflower 
Oh
I bought that yesterday, over the market, this spreads hard nan cos we run out 
Oh, oh we've run out of 'tatoes as well we've run out of carrot and peas 
We're 
I thought we'd never end them
That's right 
Right but we did
Mum
carrots are
Carrots are, yeah
Carrots are, yeah
Oh
Emily eat a bit more please
We do more carrots next year
Goody 
Got to get me parsnips out
So your spuds have lasted well haven't they?
Yeah, yeah
Yeah, erm
Perhaps I'll, I'll pop it down
not at much room this year, so
What
put more carrots
I've got twenty one pound of seed, I had 
Mum 
twenty eight pounds last year 
can I have a tissue please?
Well I've got fourteen pounds
I should have more peas and beans this year
And carrots
And carrots 
Yeah I think I'll 
 
give those er beans you grew last year will grow this year Steve 
Oh
Yeah
aren't they?
well 
Mum
Mm
if I eat this, can I er, can I leave the rest?
Oh 
Some more mum?
Mm little 
Yes please ,
for nan
yes please 
I had a glass and a half of your dad's home made wine before we came out
Oh I  
I'll be half asleep all afternoon 
What is it
Spanish?
Don't, Debbie usually come in er, Sunday morning, but er what, they've got somewhere else to go today 
What's that there?
so they didn't come, and I didn't go out and Gemma came up and I was sitting there talking and they had a drop, drop of wine and I had one with erm   and Gemma finished her biscuits up, we've got to get some more biscuits now  Gemma brings her
right up to me now
Oh does she?
, well I didn't, I didn't do it for her 
 
I just gave her a bit of a hand and  these sort of questions where they've got so many alternatives answers to fill the spaces
Yeah
Finished them at school
You finished them at school?
Yeah 
Are they ripe?
Do you want any more mum?
Yeah
Mm
Anything else, any more?
Aagh
Erm, well I couldn't really,
pudding then?
Oh
Yeah
Mm, very funny yorkshire pudding , that's one of the things I, say I shouldn't eat that is on that, those yorkshire puddings, but I'm having a holiday today
 
Actually , actually had a fried egg for breakfast today for the first time 
Nan 
in a couple of months
scrambled in the morning 
Nan  nan
Mm
There's some more meat if 
can I have 
anybody want's it, I
nan
Yeah
why, erm, at Dawn's we erm done this thing, and it was sort of, there was four sides of it and it was one, then there was two inside, well there was one at the back, erm, Henry and Mrs  said when you get these back you'll see what you've got, and people, she said, people who have got over twenty of er, the better than the people who are lower and I got twenty one
Oh did you?
What was it then, a test?
Yeah we had a French test and, erm
no thirty out the lot 
I was very , Martin got forty three, then White got forty one, Lorraine only got forty
and no one else got that many, forty one 
Alison is in Amsterdam
Oh is she?
gone with the, the, from the college there, she's been on an art course and they're going round er, art galleries and museums and places like that
Oh yeah
for ten days she's there
Oh
I'm leaving that mum
Eat your veg
actually married and said she wasn't looking forward to going, but I'd imagined she would enjoy it when she got there
Mm
She wasn't?
Mm?
She wasn't looking forward to go 
Yeah that's right
How
Is it compulsory, yeah?
Well it was part of their course I think, I, they didn't they paid the full cost of it, they contributed a bit, but I think Colin stood
That's what we're doing innit mummy?
Yeah, she's going through they, is Gemma  going?
 
No
Oh, she's going to, on day trips to France in July isn't she?
I'm going to London 
Oh 
I'm going to London museum
What they charge for that?
No
Mum when are we going to London museum?
Thirty five 
I shall have ten pound deposit and I think there's twenty five pound left to pay.
Oh
Thirty five, but that includes the meal as well, they'd have had a meal in the restaurant there won't you?
Yeah
It's a long day though
It is 
Yes I know 
and leave what half past?
Yeah it used to be 
They leave at half past four in the morning and get back just after midnight
Yeah 
Five past 
Yes I remember some of the others going.
Sarah went when she was at school
When you going next Friday?
She said 
They usually go from 
I know 
somewhere close, Bouloigne or somewhere on the
I suppose they're going to Bouloigne 
Yeah we're going to Bouloigne 
Mum I know Julia's trying to find out I needn't go to school on Thursday so I can have a lie in
So why she'd like to go to France on
one of those day trips to
Wish we co , if we're going on Friday yeah
Too much of a strain going over and back
She's still at school, she's not at home 
You don't miss a day off school just because you're going to France for a day 
Yeah, but the next day we'll have to have 
 
a lie in
No
Only if they speak English
I'm going to London 
Only if they speak English 
to speak English?
What with the school?
Round London, yeah
British museum?
The Toy
Which British museum they going to?
Famous one
Oh no.
First time I went to London, I was about as old as Emily, I went with, we went with the Brownies for the trip, we went to the zoo 
They have 
A museum of childhood 
Why?
within childhood I think it's called
Oh, what's it like, toys thing 
Toys yeah, yeah 
First time I went to the zoo I was  erm
 
I've never seen , the queen's doll's house at Windsor Castle
No
 
Bethnal Green , Museum of childhood
see erm, when we went to Windsor on the boat wasn't it, when we were going up and down the Thames 
Thursday March 
Oh
Yeah
Thursday March, twenty fourth
a week on Tuesday
Tuesday March the twenty fourth
Mm
When's Mother's day?
Very nice
Two week's today
should be nice
twenty ninth?
a full set of toys that people used to play with in the old days, and that sort of thing
Jolly
That's gonna be a long day because the don't get back until about six o'clock at night
What time do they start?
Well I presume, it doesn't say, I presume round about nine o'clock
Mm
Is
Emily?
Do they get them there or does take pack
 

I'm going as well 
 
You're going with them?
Yeah,
penny
and I, I'm going to help
Lucy had, I've had frog's legs
You have not
Now then, what about Penny do you want
Mum's having Penny
Oh, mm
How about, have you ever had frog's legs?
You put some gravy on that
 
No, but they're very nice you can take it from me
Snails eat snails, escargot
I'm, I had, I used to
What?
Don't know if I want to go to
have frog's legs
No you did not 
 
I did, well
On one of these trips to London when I was at school, good when we went with the Brownies, I went two or three times and er, one time when I was a bit older, I mean the first time I went as I say I was only about seven, but, when I was a bit older I went again, they said if 
Me, oh 
if we'd got any young brothers or sisters if we wanted we could take them with us, fine, so I said to me brother Vic who's three years younger than me 
Mum I'm leaving that , I'm leaving that, I'm
Mm 
and that 
I know
we went to Trafalgar Square and we stopped to look at the pigeons and we'd moved on and I, I suddenly realised I hadn't got Vicky with me, so I looked all round, couldn't see him, had to go right back to Trafalgar Square and he was still looking at the pigeons
Oh god
 

Wonder if pigeons
That, that, that, oh put those away we're having dinner
I know
come and sit at the table and wait, come on, put those away 
Usually have it pork and
We don't have beef very often, but you get a bit small enough for just the two of you, by the time you've cooked it 
Yeah 
it's a bit sort of 
shrunk innit?
Tends to shrink
Mm  how can you eat any more?
That's a burnt bit 
Roast potatoes were very nice
But I tend to eat more chicken and fish and things like that now
Yeah
than I do red meat, don't eat
 
We don't eat that much red meat do we now?
Supposed to be trying to watch me weight
I like bacon
I got down to eleven stone and then I stuck
Oh yeah
for three weeks now I've been stuck on eleven stone, I got, I lost nearly a stone in first five or six weeks, now I've stopped
Yeah 
I think it's mainly because I don't really get enough exercise this time of the year I don't 
Ah maybe when you can get out in the summer
I'm just hoping
I'm losing weight as well, I was, fortnight ago Friday
Oh yes, my
Mm
I cut out all me, in, eating in between 
sweets and chocolate
I couldn't 
I think I've lost about half a stone so far
Yeah
Yeah you will do, it's surprising
Yeah even low fat
Well I, I do
on me bread and what have you
I've tried to cut out chocolate, but er, get a bit now and again, hard weekends
Yeah, I shall, I'm gonna treat myself at the end of each month
You, you dad, dad usually gets 
Dad 
some chocolate on the weekend
Yeah, at the end of each month I'm gonna treat myself to some
 
Two, two or three week's running Jenny came up on a weekend and brought us a bar of chocolate each
Oh 
I said you're undermining my principles 
Well we didn't see them this week, they told us that they wouldn't be along didn't they?
Oh they were
How much do you weigh nanny?
They told us they wouldn't come this week
They said they wouldn't be up this week they've 
Eleven and a half stone 
got somewhere to go
Ten and a half stone 
forget where it was they were going
Eleven and a half
They were going Dunstable
Eleven?
But you worried about the
Oh yeah 
probably why they were going out
well no, no not  no it's, it's miserable innit really?
Yeah , yes you've got a car and you can go and visit somebody and go door to door 
I like 
too bad 
Right 
but if you've got to go and get a bus and
Yeah
sort of spend the day out
Would you like some more wine dad?
in the blinking rain it's not
you ought?
Yeah 
but when the weather improves we shall, we shall go as far as Harrendle on the bus
Mm
I wanna go Black butchers on the square, last time we went to Harrendle Bob and Delph took us in the car
Bobby 
and it was market day, and on the square near, where they have the market 
 
there was this er butchers, and I went in there and I got some sausages, oh, er nobody said anything about these sausages I just thought well I'd better take something back for Fred's dinner so I went in and got these sausages, well they were the nicest sausages I've ever tasted in my life
Really?
they were just like the old fashioned kind  and er we've never been to Harrendle since and whenever I get to Harrendle I'd get some more sausages.
More sausages 
That's if it's still there 
They were lovely 
One of these family butchers, butchers who makes his own 
Yeah , I
from erm erm, there's a butchers at Kinbolton
Mm
you know the, the S bend by the school?
I don't know, I don't remember Kinbolton, I've been through it I think 
Oh well 
I don't think I've ever stopped there
there's one of our supervisors and because they work all over the place, you know, they, they travel around and he's
Yeah
he's sausage buff
Yeah
and he reckons they're the best sausages he ever, he's ever had, from Kinbolton  I don't know the name of it, I know where it is, you know that S bend the tight S bend, Ferrari's club
it's on there, it's on that side
Side, left or right?
On the right as you come down this way, on the left if you go out there 
 

Couldn't have been our paper this morning they've moved on to 
oh he's picture, one of the politicians, campaigning, said in Taunton, Devon,
 
Please may I get down from the table?
Somerset
That's right
Please may I get down from the table?
How close is it to the
It's not far 
and that bloke 
it isn't all that
because er, Tavistock er
No
Why?
Tavistock,
that's it Tiverton went in the, that
and that's not all that far from, from Taunton 
No Taunton can't be very far away
Have to write to Hilda or ring her up or something, she can't write now her hands are so bad she
Oh
she can't write now, I haven't written to her for weeks
No
I said I'd ring her up on her birthday and I didn't
Oh it's my brother's birthday today
Yeah
Who's?
Graham's birthday.
Oh is it?
How old's Graham?
How old's he?
Thirty five I should think
What you got there?
Thirty six 
No thirty six even 
thirty six, he's about three and a half 
Cake, what happened to the cake?
Ow 
That's a nice one isn't it?
We had er
I like the doggy
Thursday afternoon me and mum looked after Daniel and Benjamin, cos erm, a relative of Sarah's died a week before and the funeral was Thursday, so, I said to mum yes I'd go up and help her
You had them over here?
We had them over here 
and when they brought, they'd come about quarter, tea time I think and they said Benjamin's tired, he'll probably go to sleep
 
But he cried 
and he cried and cried and cried 
How old is he?
He'll be one in a week
I told you he was only about a year old
Yeah, erm, we, we thought we'd got him calmed down at one point and he started up again and he was like that right the way up till I went to fetch Emily 
 
and that's quarter past three
Porky pig,that's lovely, that is
but he was, he was that tired but he wouldn't give in, he kept wanting to see what was going on
Mummy
but oh dear but he, mum did get him off to sleep in the end 
Oh that's nice isn't it?
Dan , Daniel was alright, he came with me to fetch Emily 
 
from school
Ah
Wasn't it James who was
 
Oh I was shattered , I was shattered by the night time
I think it's his neck the dodgy one
We'll just cut 
 
it is an unusual cake isn't it?
We gave him a drink, we gave him some chocolate buttons, we gave me a big
shoved to one side, ooh dear
What about the buttons?
Oh that's nice isn't it?
That's the one I like, the doggy
I like the dog one
It difficult to make to look as realistic as that I'm
Yeah
and the, when that's after that the penguin
Ah 
I wanna penguin for my birthday mummy
Do you know what you're gonna get demands for some of these for birthdays
I know
Yeah
yeah
I wanna penguin
I like that
got a lot now
Ooh, yeah
I ended up using black you can't very, you can't get black very well
Ice cream cones those
Yeah
difficult
Ooh that's good the aeroplane 
Yes
The wafer things
Treasure Islands  
Plastic
What are they Matchmakers?
Oh yeah 
Yeah 
I like Matchmakers, I like there's
Wicked witch
Julia 
wicked witch of the west
don't tell us
Is
 
The garden I like 
You used to have a story book when I was a kid, there was a witch called Jenny Green Thing 
 
I can't drink it you, I still have a drink yet
Yeah it's a
Yeah,
that's why I can't that's why I have different 
That's alright 
cos I'm on erm low alcohol wine 
They're made with swiss rolls 
 
cos it's 
It looks very nice
Ooh, ooh, ooh
Ha, yeah it is a good wine
Cut the swiss rolls into slices
a ros, erm
cos half of them don't need icing 
 
Yeah, no
and the others are chocolate, and they've put them in a
I hate chocolate
it's low alcohol
That's nice
they've only got five percent
not, that wouldn't be very
I know you have to cut the cake up with all those little bits
Ooh I could do that
Ah
Yuck Valentine cake
Getting used to it now though, it don't bother me really  I didn't do much for it anyway so 
Like it, mm swiss roll in there, yeah
Yeah
Oh keep turning
Oh that's nice that, thatch cottage
with the garden
, I like that one
A big red bus
Yeah that's good innit?
I like that one
It is good innit?
Yeah
I mean
No you're not
look  about all that meat you give her
No, Penny will have it
Freddy frog
What?
Mm, she doesn't eat a lot of meat
Chuffa train
Choo, Choo
She never eats all her meat she eats all the potatoes 
Dinosaur 
Choo, choo, choo, choo 
Toadstools 
Goblins
and the goblins
I like the lamp shade
Goblins in there
Yes that's nice  bumble bee
And flowers
Vegetables that's unusual, do I 
Fred do you want that?
No
your dad's birthday like that
Dad you gonna open one of them for your birthday?
All of these are a lot quicker than any of those dog food 
 
Dad
What?
You gonna make a
A cake for your birthday with the guards on it
Rosie rabbit  Tommy turtle
Tommy turtle
Concorde, it's breaking
Sandcastle  athletic's track , they cater for all interests in here don't they, discus
That's the one I like
the swimming pool
that's definitely the one I like
Yeah   steam
The steam roller
Yeah 
Noah's Ark, that's good, what do they do with the animals they can't make them out of 
No, those plastic mounds
they must be model animals
Yeah, yeah cos erm I like that 
Snooker table 
you can have that 
Ozzy owl
that's nice
We lost one
you had an owl cake once did you or was it a cat?
An owl one
It was an owl
a birthday cake like an owl
I like that one
snail
ooh, er
somebody who loves camping 
I want to go camping with some of my friends
Paddock, that's for somebody who likes horses
Gemma
Yeah Gemma's potty on horses  Mary, Mary quite contrary, how does your garden grow
What did they all the
Julia were there?
Yeah
Yeah
What, what
what?
Shall we start right at the beginning?
What's he like, is he alright?
No, I don't like teachers
I think Porky pig that was the first one I saw, that's always good 
That's alright, yeah 
very nice
We saw him at Old Trafford
What super match?
Not the last time we went, the time we went to see United against West Ham
we, we went and you know park where we normally park and went down to the United chip shop and er we got our chips and stood outside 
Have a chip shop?
and this bloke walked passed
Yellow and white  
No, they were brilliant
Mum
Manchester United chip shop yeah, and it does, I tell you, it does a concert business 
 
from about er
It would do
I should think about half past ten until 
 
about half past two
Yeah
and there was a cast of flow of people cast a queue 
 
out of the door and going in
Do you like this 
there must a tremendous 
and they were nice chips as well 
Don't it make the sounds?
I mean we stood outside and 
No it makes one sound 
Oh
this duck came past and er I heard Mick 
Have you seen this thing you put the button at the top to make their
two years headmaster and he was up there, he's got two kids, one of them's a West Ham supporter and the other is a
supporter 
Oh dear 
Who were they playing?
West Ham
West Ham
A lot of rivalry there then I suppose
Did he tell you he didn't have his side of support, I told him as long as he shouts just United that's alright
well there you are the boys
teams, so
 
What he do a smile that backed
and it shook his little lad back
Don't make the same sound every time doesn't it?
West Ham supporter, the best 
Yeah 
 

Who won?
United did 
Two, none
No, two, one
I was a bit worried yesterday it was 
Only if they're out 
in that pot in that little cupboard
They, they played a lot better second half than they did first apparently 
I'd have banked for a draw actually
Yeah
What's this?
I don't know, I can't drink 
I let her do it all 
It's nice out there
No
It used to be all green that's better 
 
I'll try and catch the goals this afternoon, cos 
 
Mum can I leave it?
Not now, put it away, put it away 
They're bound to show all the action replays afterwards 
Oh no
birthday
You can watch the football in there why we tape 
Right there's erm  it's a tin of fruit salad but I've put in some er kiwi and grapes  so it's fresh fruit, it's in its own juice, so it's not in a heavy thick juice, there's Viennetta or you can have a bit of each
Well I'll have a little bit of each then please 
The Viennetta isn't spoilt,
squashed side
I'll go out and got to do that
 
 
What?
Oh is there?
Oh 
Aagh 
What are they?
What does that mean then?
Meringue
 
Mum I 
The only thing that 
still qualified
er, don't want any of that 
 
It's been beaten yet has it?
Yeah
Er, that's whipped cream and that's like whippy cream that hasn't been whipped  but that's, that erm
Unwhipped cream
er the
Elmlea
Elmlea
I'll have this
Dad what do you want?
 
Do you want the same as mum or a little bit of each or 
Ah yeah, I'll have the same as well similar to mum's please.
Can I get mine please?
Mum I
I know what I want
What do you want?
I want, I want some of that, a big bit
No
I want all of it
You can't eat it all
I can 
It's different , it used to be all green ice cream, but it's now got all white layers, got a white, white
Yeah
I think it's lovely
Erm,
 
 
I prefer it like that
Oh
Yeah I
Yeah I want in there as well 
Are there any strawberries?
Anybody else want a meringue?
Me
Dad?
Yes thanks Sandra
Right
ordinary which I believe
Dad
Er, ta
It's like your gonna have to have the
No, no I don't want it
, mummy's going to have the broken one 
Broken one 
I'll have the broken one
No it's mine
I'll have mummy's
No  oh I want one 
Oh 
as well 
I was 
Got to 
hoping I'd have it myself today
Mum what to it be in there to all fruit salad bowl
You've got one as well 
This
is nice 
Yeah, well I don't want
Long lost
Oh
That's yours
 
Where?
  

Come on
go on 
Ta 
Of all the fruit I've never bought before, a couple of weeks ago, now you know, a mango.
I think I know who done it now
I think I'll stay here actually
six
I'm staying there I accuse myself in the kitchen with the revolver or whatever it is, the revolver
Who?
the revolver
The revolver, where is it?
Emily
Have you got the revolver?
Miss Scarlet in the kitchen with the revolver
No myself in the kitchen with the revolver 
Oh yourself Colonel Mustard did it  no I haven't got any in there 
Have you got any of them
I haven't got any in there
the kitchen  oh no, I hate the
have you?
Have you?
Who's winning?
Me
I think I know who done it, but I don't know what with 
Oh I know who's done it , I don't know who, what with
I ne 
Do you want a game of this?
Oh, watch the match that's why we came in, put that on
Oh I was gonna say we can put telly on in here if you like, if you want a game 
In a minute when we've finished this 
Weren't that 
 
There's not enough in
we need three more pencils dad, if you want to play that
They're going to see the football 
Finish that game first
Emily have you got
I think I know who done it but I don't 
kitchen 
no where or what 
where, with what 
I know
yeah 
 
I know who's done it, I think I know what with and I'm, I think I know what, where.
Emily have you got kitchen, mustard or
 

have you?
No
Ya ho, I know what it, where it is 
I don't 
 

My turn?
Yes 
Two, where am I, two  I've got two 
I'm gonna go
Meow, meow 
I
   

with the banner in the
Banner coming through
Come on Julia
Got that, Professor Plumb in the study with a spanner
  

know who it is  
I think I know who
Oh anybody shown who
 

Well I know that
Six, one, two, three, four, five, six  who turn?
Your turn?
Who's playing then?
Three 
Got to go back
Oh 
I don't know what they're up to, I'll say 
Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah 
I choose myself in the kitchen with the spanner
Spanner, where's the spanner?
Myself in the kitchen with the
er, Mustard, kitchen, spanner  no I've only them
 

Julia 
 

Have you?
No, you've got to
cos I've got
no it's mine  I took  three and I don't know where, who and what, five, settle down Emily 
One, two, three, four, five 
I choose Reverend Green in the hall with the lead piping
With what?
Lead piping 
What?
hall, Green, piping
fine 
I wished somebody would show me a weapon
Four
Four, where are you?
staying there
Staying there 
I'll say it, in the kitchen with the revolver
revolver
I just have 
 
Tell you what, Mustard, kitchen and gun
No I say the, Reverend Green done it
No I haven't got any of them
Green, kitchen, gun
So , sorry, I thought you said Mustard, kitchen, gun, oh alright
got any?
No I still haven't got any 
Do you, do you, do you Elly yes or no?
Oh ooh goody, I know who it is and where it is now
Who's turn is it?
Can I stay where I am?
I know where it is
and
I know everything
Can I stay where I am?
Yeah
It's the Reverend Green in the kitchen with the spanner
Right
I haven't got any
Yes that's it
Cos, cos I've got 
I've got , got, look, kitchen, spanner and Reverend Green
I got that about two rounds ago, but I'm not sure if it was either
Well I knew it was Reverend Green some time ago, but I couldn't decide which it, I just got that
 
that, about three goes ago 
I did, I didn't know
But I wasn't sure if it was Reverend Green, cos that
 
what you do rub them, rub them out
and then use them again 
yes I know that
mm
I know that
oh, should, do you not much play when we've finished
I had 
 
I think so yeah
I don't know whether they all want to play or whether your dad and granddad wants to stay and watch the football
Yeah I think they say they want to play 
Go and find out what they're doing 
turn the sound down a bit 
Julia
Yes
we need the
 

we do
I'm eating my penguin  but, weren't that mine, that blue one?
No
 

there
Yeah, here are mum, we're gonna have to share them
Yeah
me and dad  Florrie will have that one  one for her and
We've only got three in there
me and me mum
these have got to be mixed up together  is there nobody else coming in?
I'll have Man City erm 
I think 
 

Mummy  we're sharing
I wonder what piece, what are, where's two centre
They're little Ritz crackers  help yourself.
I've a erm
We're spoilt for choice here especially when you're supposed to be on a diet 
The best of cheese 
No I got that down Budgens
I've never had selection of Budgens
Yeah, no I get me cheese from Budgens 
Can you get some for me?
Alright, we had fan on er Wednesday night 
 
Nice is Wendy house, that we got when we were up in Yorkshire weren't it?
Why 
Oh yes 
You know I only want white
Rubbish here dad.
How many erm, it
Well I've got some more out there 
Taste this, anybody want 
Emily leave it 
Look, ding, dee, dee, dee  granddad  granddad, teddy bear
Can I have some teddy bears?
Say please.
Please 
Pickled onion?
Er, no thanks
Teddy bears, teddy bears, ooh teddy bears 
da, da, la, da, da, la  
Salmon, ham from the bone 
Er, I'll have a piece of ham please 
Can I have some egg?
Please.
Please.
Manners
No, I like egg
Do you want that little tomato?
Ooh, I don't, I've got enough does anyone else, want, else want any eggs, tomato  does anyone else want any more egg?
Look, wait and see
Well I shan't er Julia 
I want some more, I won't, well want some more
Oh, well there's ham, there's ham oh I've got a shell, no I can't have one, cucumber
Now I've had none
Here it is, is
 

Tomato anyone?
Do you want a tomato?
I've got one I've got 
Anything else?
No, I've got some more out there
Erm 
Dish of ham?
Please
No Julia
Ah look a teddy bear without a head
Oh, are they supposed to be teddy bears?
Yeah, a teddy bear without a head Julia, Julia he's lost his head  mum
What?
a teddy bear without his head
Yeah
he's lost his head 
You've beheaded him 
Oh
poor old blighter
Poor little thing 
Soon they'll, we'll be in half term with Julia
If you go down to the woods today 
Do the song
da, da, da 
Go 
Yes please, thank you
Mum
What?
I don't have tea
No I know you don't have tea, you'll have to go and get yourself a
coffee
You don't want coffee do you?
Yeah
Oh can I have a brown roll Steve please?
Yeah
That's it
 

Oh, erm I want May to December taping
Oh the Cable Simpsons
What time's it on?
Quarter past seven
Why can't we watch it?
Yeah, why can't we watch it?
Cos I watch it Tuesdays when your dad's out, there's not much else on
Oh 
Do you watch May to December?
Do what?
May to December
Yeah, as a rule
Oh good
Put it on while you're here then
Where?
Tell
I'll erm
Oh yeah
What time does it come on?
Quarter past seven
When they changed the girl in it?
 
I didn't think I could get used to it again, but, it's surprising how well she's fitted in 
Mm 
with the role.
yeah , that's right
Mm
It's seven now 
Little red head the first one and I remember her face
Mm
I can't put a name to it 
No
It's seven now
cos she was in a new series not long afterwards wasn't she?
That's right , yeah
Mum  mum, it's seven
I said quarter past seven
Oh 
Got a quarter of an hour  what's the old lady's name do you know?
Stock, Stocker?
Is it Stocker?
Ah, ho
Mrs Stocker I think 
It must be very fine 
She actually
Mum 
Right 
Can I have the salt please?
Does anybody want to see a teddy bear?
Anybody want to see a teddy bear 
got no feet
My teddy bear just disappeared
It's only his feet
Can I have some, erm, cucumber?
Yeah it is
Please
 

use this mug?
Quite hungry
 

Mum  that roll please 
The storm's getting a bit promising now
Right
About the erm, with this erm Cotswold news, I think it's about two pound seventy a pound
More like
no, I only have a small slice
Mm
every now and again 
Thank you dad 
I just treat myself
Where's teddy bear?
Weeee
Budgens do er, erm, cheddar with onion and chives as well now, that's quite nice
Huh, where's his arm gone?
We had a teddy bear without a head, a teddy bear without, with only feet, and know I've got a teddy bear with an arm, without 
 
very much
without an arm, see there's only one arm left and that
This teddy bear's doing the can can.
This teddy bear's sitting down
Oh yeah 
I knew you saved this
What they gonna do with the old post office?
I think it's being used now 
Don't have any bum 
I still use, it's still used 
he didn't have his bum, mm 
as a sorting office
Oh I thought
Yeah after the run down 
Just aft , yeah
This one's going for a walk
I couldn't see how it was gonna work at Budgens to be quite honest, that new post office
Oh I've seen it, but I haven't through, you know, been round front when we go to
I passed up there and we go left
Mm
but here we, we never go up and go in the general by the
anyway 
Has he watered down the stock?
for me
a quicker service there, than in the post office, I don't know
Mm 
I , as I say I haven't been
Couldn't get any slower 
 
No it's 
What?
they have got some new staff, yeah
But that is Budgens' staff who are being trained 
This one's angry
Oh are they?
Yeah
Oh are they?
This one's angry
They've got a security guard in there now
Who?
in Budgens
Who?
chap walks round as a security guard now 
That's right, I thought there was one
New, a security guard 
I saw it 
walking round
Look  this one's walki , no angry
I don't go in Budgens all that often, that's why I don't spend more if I go in it
Yeah
I went in there and bought some chewing gum  when I went down to see it
That's what you got in there?
Mm
You could have got that from the little shop 
Our 
Yeah 
little shop you went down?
Six
Who was that?
Me, Laura, Laura's mother, Sam, Sam
Two Sams?
Samantha  and Samantha 
 

Don't know her last name
What?
Oh,
Huh, why she went on
Do you want coffee Emily?
Have a cup of tea
I don't like it
Never heard of anybody who don't like tea 
Does she ever drink tea?
No
Why?
Cos she won't
I'll
her
Yours
around here 
What is it you don't like about tea then?
I'm not sure, I just don't like it
You're not that keen on coffee
I don't think Gemma eats as well as these two do, she's ever so finicky worse than you used to be.
I'm surprised they eat sometimes 
Tut huh
Well she's not so much now, but she  Julia would eat all day if we let her
 

I know er, who she takes after though  what is 
I'm 
it you do like?
coffee
Yeah, what drink?
Blackcurrant 
To eat, to eat
Food
Ham
Ham
rolls
rolls
them
cheese
teddy bears ah?
I'm scoffing them
I love gammon I do, gammon and pineapple, fish and chips
Julia I've got a teddy bear hopping on one leg 
 
Have you?
You like how I make chips?
Not as much as the chip shop though
They are
They are aren't they Emily?
What?
Of course they are better than the chip, chip shop aren't they?
No 
They, they're the best in the whole world, I've ever tasted
No I prefer chip shop bought
Oh  I like the sausage and chips you get from
 

I've never yet met a child who didn't like chips
they used to when they were younger, neither of them
Me?
No you didn't use to eat chips when you were younger 
When you were younger you'd
Don't any more 
Ah, I don't want any chips thank you
We only have them once a week 
Fish fingers, yoghurts
 
Only a 
oh look this is gonna do, this one's gonna do the splits
Yeah
We don't have chips very often, I make them now and again, I haven't bought any chip shop chips for some time,we're having some Friday, cos er Eileen rang up Derek to say they were coming and said tell mum not to get anything ready we'll bring her some fish and chips.
Can they get fish and chips in Germany?
Yes, there's a nice fish and chips at that van that came round in 
Oh yeah, on the camp
Oh
but erm 
I don't know about the shops whether they sell chips 
Do the towns and villages have them?
What?
Fish and chip shops
Didn't see any
We see a lot of English sheep
Fast food 
There's some nice little, er German villages down and around the campers 
began the camp, there all around this er village  and they took it into the er
Is it a big camp then?
Oh yeah, the largest
camp in Europe I should imagine.
Is it?
There's one in America, Belgium, French, British,
 
Does anybody want that egg?
Dutch
do you want that egg?
Well mum, do you want that egg?
Well mum, do you want that egg?
Mm
Do you want that egg?
I don't want any more, thanks
Can I have it?
Yeah
Have it all
I'm going to
I don't want it, I don't like it
I know, that's why I didn't ask you
It reminds me of
Me?
Julia
Do you eat it all?
Yeah thanks
A whole day, a whole afternoon, a whole
morning
Yeah, think we will
a whole, do you eat all this feed, food on this table, in the morning, afternoon and the night?
 
She'd be, she'd be starving 
How long are Eileen and Tony going to be over there for then?
They'll only be there for about twenty four hours, they'll go for about a week but they're spending most of it with er, Deborah down at erm, Bambury
Oh
I'll be over 
 
for lunch 
He hasn't seen a lot of Deborah and Sarah
No
so they're coming erm Friday just before dinner time they said between eleven and twelve and er they're leaving Saturday afternoon about three 
Julia do you want any of these?
Oh
Any more of these?
But they'll 
Yeah 
just be here overnight
They're bringing fish and chips, it's Tony's favourite meal
Share them out
and er mum I'll make erm 
dad do you want any?
Do you want any?
No
Well will I please make them an apple pie 
Mum 
he likes apple pie
do you want any grandma?
grandma?
Have we got any apples?
Yeah
No, well, we've got a few wine haven't you?
grandma
I thought you'd got some on the weekend
do you want any of these?
No thank you
You said you was gonna
Grand granddad, do you want any of these?
We've probably got some
Gran
How many do you want?
gran
I've got some apples erm I stewed and stuck in the freezer, to make
Oh
to make apple pies, you can have some of them
oh, well I erm, I did do a few but I've used most of mine up I think, I can look in the freezer to see if there's any there, but I don't think there is
mum, do you want any of these?
You know, I've only got that little bit on top 
Dad do you 
of the fridge, it doesn't hold much
oh well
it's not worth, supposed to be a freezer, it's mainly for storing frozen food, but you can freeze small amounts in it.
I've got quite a lot of apple, so you can have some
There's yours Julia
ain't it?
No
I've got some bags of rhubarb as well 
not a whole one 
Oh
Mm 
 
If I took that with me, they'll be alright in the fridge till Thursday would they?
Yeah, yeah, cos they've been in the, yeah.
They're frozen so I'll get them out 
So I've had three whole ones 
remember get them out just before you go and then you put them in your freezer when you get back.
Yeah 
Yeah Tony's very partial to your mum's apple pie.
Last time I made one he ate nearly all of it himself didn't he?
Watch 
I'll buy for a cost of bottles of his favourite beer Grosche
What?
I've never had any of that
Tony likes it, he said it 
Deb likes that too
Deb always asks him to bring us a Grosche back
Mm
it was er, couldn't get it here then
it's a nice beer 
but you can now
Is it strong?
I don't know 
 
I don't know what the strength is
They've got beers from all over the world in Budgens, Mexican, goodness knows what
Is there?
Ah
Mm, I couldn't buy it from there because it's too much expensive 
Er 
to buy
are we gonna play a game?
No
Not at the minute, no
Whoops
I would buy a, er a four pack, so er Ton , Tony wanted to be
Oh
Oh well, I'll try them with yeah
I'm gonna read this book
No you're not put it down, go away that's for Benjamin's birthday, I don't want it getting dirty while were having er tea 
And afters 
 
OK
I don't know, teapots
teapot
lid
where
got a teapot in here
Let's have some more tea love
I've put my tea up there 
Where's the teapot?
This one please
Oh    er I'm glad there's enough room to put it all on 
 

Have you seen any magpies up top of the garden lately?
No, I haven't
I haven't
I have
Your mum says we've got some
 
It'll be nice when these are grown up and you can sit back down and wait on you
Mm
Mapgies are such a
 
it'll be nice when these are grown up and you can sit back and let them wait on you
Huh, I can just see that coming off
Ta
Mummy and daddy can wait on us  aren't you?
That's miss lazy nineteen ninety two that is 
When I was Julia's age I used to have to take my little brother and sister with me everywhere I went
I used to say to Emma, that little girl of yours she's a proper little mother, must have been er, see in the future I should think  
Used to have to take erm  my youngest one, was it, uncle 
Grandma 
Pete, she was then 
granddad, granddad 
or was it uncle Phil, one of the two
granddad
she always had to take him out 
have you heard this before?
Mm
Yeah
She couldn't go out and play with the other kids, she had to take him round for a walk 
That is the same as pardon me for being rude it was not me it was my food 
Yeah
so
it just popped up to say hello, and now it's gone back down below 
Say it again
Pardon me for being rude it was not me it was my food, it just popped up to say hello, and now it's gone back down below 
it was not me it was my food, it just popped up to say hello, and now it's gone back down below 
but we used to take them to the pictures on Saturday afternoon my mum used to give me nine pence
Oh
penny to get in the pictures, and a penny 
 
Pardon me for being rude it was not me it was my food 
Pardon me for being rude it was not me it was my food 
it came back up to say, say hello and now it's gone back down below  hello  hello 
No I've never, never heard that before
Pardon me for being rude, it was not me it
it was my food, it just popped up to say hello, and now it's gone back down below
Slowly
pardon 
Pardon 
Pardon me for being
 

Pardon me for being rude it was not me it was my food
Come on Julia, I need some help
Sometimes
come on Julia, I need help
Shouldn't help
No Julia
How would you
  

What's that, how do you ask when it's your birthday?
 
 
 
 
Yes, we know you know 
Thank you Sandra 
 
French is weird when you get to the highest
don't they 
 
When you get to, to eighty it's four twenties 
 
and then it's
What?
What's a hundred?
Cent, C E N T, cent
Cent, cent de une   we had to try and remember all them.
God, can't remember
It's
 

Don't know
Yeah 
What's a hundred and twen 
what's a hundred and ninety nine?
Don't know, it's
What's two hundred?
I don't know  
yeah 
 

What a strange thing 
What a mouthful just saying that in ninety nine
dad do you know 
 
Germany
German 
Not much no 
I told myself I was gonna learn a bit of German before I went to see Eileen again 
German 
Has Eileen, has she learnt any?
But er, I can count up to about seven, I can say yes and no and please and thank you and 
Hard work, you know, Tony knows a fair 
Say something 
good morning
thank you in German
please is 
The term  please and thank you and ya is yes and nein is no
Very popular in
I'm going to start learning some german
Yes that's right
and  is it?
What's that for
Ya
Mother and father
Not very
 

It sounds awful doesn't it?
Nein, for no
Oh
They spent time in Luxembourg, did you know?
Luxembourg
What was it?
They had a weekend there 
What was it for father?
Sshh  
hello 
What's wrong with that ham that's on your plate?
Oh
Come on, pass it over
come on 
I want to know why daddy
I'll remember that one 
Haven't you got
Come on Julia
Poor old Penny ain't gonna get much out of that
I thought you wanted a
Oh May to December
Too late
What time was that on?
Now, quarter past seven, it's not worth taping the rest of it
Why?
Put T V on
What's er, do you want, do want put it on here?
Put T V on 
Yeah put it on in here
Have you got any homework?
Yeah
Have yeah, what you got then?
Question, only one question
One question?
Yep  he sh , shouldn't of given it
 
That is a lot that is isn't it?
Shouldn't of given any 
 

Oh, so you've got nothing else?
Mm, mm.
Nothing, did you get any homework to do for tomorrow?
Mm, mm.
Cos
that bit 
Come back yet, have they?
No
Why cos they're
Yes
I'm going to take another one off him I am
Can't
Yeah, it's Julia
 
it's Julia , I said to Julia 
 
Yeah
No, not now I have to take this
I do a, well I suppose it's twenty eight days like everything else, that's what it is
Mark at work he's always a
Where from?
Don't know where they're from
What's this you're saying?
Is that the one with the
Bigger that that
He won't set it out and call it a
No
Right, fine
Yeah, I 
No, no
No I thought you said
They lost
Oh I don't know
No, I
Oh don't worry I'll get it 
No, I'm alright
Yeah I
You know I ain't had a look at them yet, I shall have to have a look
You don't do it
Ah, but they are now, been that one we laid the
Yeah
I think I'll go and have a look this afternoon
it's the
yeah
the female does as 
Oh you've got to cut
brown colour aren't they all over?
No they're a light
a bit nasty as well, but they're just not big 
Oh I thought they were, oh
No
Who's is this?
Paul's big erm
This afternoon we'll  it says in the instruction, at the end of every third tape change the batteries, so er, we'll take them two out tomorrow
Yeah
and chuck them away
right
OK 
That's what she said, she said you'll want a 
I think bloody batteries
So er 
so er, talking for half hour
Yeah
and er  I thought er, I've been playing about with the old ear for a song for a long time, but I ain't worked the cords out
so, well between the
and er, I was saying to old
and we had a conversation about it
Hello, yo, hi, how you doing
No, don't do that Gemma that's why, that's why you're not supposed to know
but, and er Dave would
our conversation we had, we were talking
Yeah 
 
and then in the afternoon you come up didn't you?
That's right that's correct, yeah.
Yeah  and then er  I'm told he works
there up there all day and 
You can have it on later 
Oh yeah
so this is the third of it, so have you got plenty of
Yeah I will do
Well
on that one
OK mate
But, I mean
the ten tapes and
and er, she said she needn't of left them, but er  only the last batch you got, only if you get twenty tapes
oh, right oh then, she said it's been done all over the country
Oh
or whether she's covering Lancashire or
No, no, I think it's
innit?
They've just been
Yeah
Yeah
Direct, yeah
If, should she come here at our house
I mean, does she go and pick people at random?
However she wondered about our pensioners
Oh
she just been over some house in Trafford Road  and er, I think she left some, some by there by what she said or to who, who it were, but it must of been them who put them onto us, because she come in
and she said er, I understand you write a lot of letters in the paper, I said well, I,
It might of been a man.
so she asked us if we would like to do this
Oh, that's
seeing as we've got a big family, I thought well
Well yeah, that's right 
Get as many as I could possible
Yeah, I'd have done.
Anyway, we'll all go down in posterity
I should think we will
Do you want a tea ma?
Three years is no time
No
Three years?
He's had all his hair cut and he's shaved his tash off
What short, short?
Yeah
Oh
and he's shaved his tash off as well and he's always had that tash ever since I've been there, it was really funny
Yeah, it's funny when someone's always had it.
I remember when Sue worked behind
beard and that all the time and he shaved that off, oh
My boss was telling me about some old boy right he had a beard for all his life yeah?
yeah
a really long beard right?
yeah
And one day he shave it off, it took his wife three hours to notice and it took his mum all day to notice 
I think that's terrible and he's always had it?
Yeah he's always had it, always, and they never noticed
That's terrible, poor bloke  oh dear
mm
  

ain't she?
What?
No
Thought you were asleep
   

Mum
What?
have you got
Can you go and get her please?
I'll get her
 

Chew shut up
That's enough Chewy
Chewy 
Ah, I called you
Look mum
What?
there it is
it's just that
Yeah it's
but it's going white
It's cert , it's going very pale yes
it's certain in it bleach innit?
Oh yes it's lots of
Oh
Yeah
Ah which was
 
probably it were not 
Yes I hope so,
that one
Did I?
Yeah
I didn't notice it until later on
How's it spelt then?
A M E M D E I
Oh 
I thought I'd catch his
more than that
Yeah, he'll probably come back, probably have lots to eat, who knows, he looks friendly, I don't know, oh you know at ruggers his mum came up to me and
yeah
Yeah
he's
Is it?
Yeah
I still don't know a few ideas though
It's prob , probably got the odd market
and I thought well, I, I asked cos I was so sure that was a male
It's been a male and female
Just a male
big
I ain't been out
Shall I go and have a look to see if there's any
Yeah you could do  I don't think
or not
 

Try now then 
Is that better Chewy?
ouch 
Oh Chewy
I know it sounds quieter
Is there any in there?
No
No
I don't know, mind you it's early yet really, cos they're all
ain't they?
Yeah, lines
yeah pulled it up to the shed and I've left it there
I didn't know what to do about that, I put
and they
 
I know it's not in there unless it's under the
but I doubt it
Maybe
I doubt it anyway
Perhaps it's sold
yeah they do, I
they all love that there
Right I give you it, it's the same old
  
Could be 
I mean six months been out there
Long time
Yeah
Yeah six months, not having no
right
may as well 
alright don't want them 
fix my 
Were they
Thank you very much
I'm tying up shoes,
OK, do you want these Chewy?
Finish all the lunch off.
That's nice
Yeah
Oh
Should think dear  anything
Some more
I'm going upstairs to listen to some music
How big were they?
About two, some of them were about two foot some of them were about four
How much were they each?
Er twenty two pounds fift , er twenty two pounds fifty
So, dear ain't it?
Worked out less than, I don't know  and they give us all the posters and everything, so weekend I'm gonna send away for another seventy
No
Yes, seriously
You ain't got enough room in your garden
Course I am 
that
beginning of the extent or the end of the extent of the fish pond 
That's trying for them, twenty two inches apart
There is a saying ain't they?
Yeah, if you want a hedge six, if you want a hedge six foot high, a good solid hedge six foot high, plant eighteen inches apart, so I've had, I've planted them between twenty and twenty two inches apart
They take years to grow
No they don't
How long?
Er, they reckon they grow two to three foot a year  they're the fast grow ones, once they get a hold, they start growing and they shoot up each week and when they start shooting up, that's when, you've got to keep them watered, and you've got to feed them with that plant stuff do you know what I mean?
Yeah
Got the old watering can and then you get down on this plant, and then when they get a gist of that first time that they go whooo, you wake up in the morning, you've got co , conifers like Jack and The Beanstalk coming
 

I was gonna come over and see you about, about
Mm, mm.
I could find out where you did your, that, that hall, I know people in
know where it is in it?
Yeah, but that, I don't know whether it's
knew anything
See I told you they would
No I don't think so, nobody does
What, what did they say about your tash?
Do you know, I went in there right and the majority of people never took no blind bit of notice then suddenly one person walked through the door, you know, he's always playing next to me  and he sits down, puts his trumpet there, gets his trumpet on ya, sits there, turns round and the next thing he were laying on the floor going
and that was it, everybody else turn round and  oh, blah, blah, blah, blah and that's how it goes and that
that actor oh blimey he's
we say no, what does he remind me of?
And
going oh he looks like a bloody poofter know ooh, ooh 
 
and then that was it and then a bit later on, that was all they said about me haircut and then during the break somebody else said, there's something else gone as well and they couldn't make out what it  what done mine in, my musical director he come, he says you know what will look nice now with that haircut don't you?
I said what?
He said a patch, I went  I said
little one, he said no I've never noticed
never noticed you had it?
no 
 

I can't believe it's Thursday 
So you've got plenty of food on you?
Yeah, I see, you could possibly
for a fiver 
I think
Ah?
I think er, that
Same with my missus, don't get suspicious
I know she thinks I'm picking you up, but,I and Mark are gonna give you some money for
I said yeah, he is, I said he could do
where do you think you're going, I said London
You always tell her we're going to London don't you?
I think one night, right, I'm gonna say Carol were gonna be out late, right, I'll tell her we've got two down, down buyers and sneak out 
Sneak out 
down
He, he wouldn't serve me though in the pub, cos he knows how old I am
No, you'll be on it easy won't you?
Yeah
Yeah, I'll
on his
won't it?
Yeah it would as well, he'll probably bar me as soon as we walked in, he don't like me, does he?
You won't be able to drink now you're driving
So
and over, my
and the car registration number is  oh, oh, blah, blah, blah
You always say
You ain't got your  Garrot Turbo sticker on your car.
I know.
I thought you said you had yesterday.
No.
You said, you were going on about, something about, when they sing oh  Garrot Turbo sticker
Yeah, but I haven't stuck it on yet.
Where you gonna put it?
I don't know yet.
There ain't room is there?
No.
Anyway
Oh, want to stick it on top of that dome like cowboys do
, I want, I want, I'm gonna laugh, yesterday
and there's all these
Yeah
Yeah slapped all over his car  
 
There might be a load slapped on your car.
Oh, it's
walks down about eight o'clock, talk about long legs, she's got really long legs right, this one.
Get all the components done and that just leaves me to do the joints.
What you gonna do them on your own?
Oh I see, I mean, if we're still doing components tomorrow
I will be won't I?
Monday 
Well even if they
They just want to check over
Yeah
Yeah
Yeah
Great  I know the er, Dave has said about the er
Yeah
they get them out because
I mean they really are gonna be, you know, in a hurry to get stuff out the door 
Is that it, is that all of them?
No, there's some here if you want
 

Oh  are they the last ones?
Over there 
What?
Where?
The
 

Erm, can you get Jeff to do the first soldering for you?
can you, you get them close, just say twenty
clean and then start to finish them
Yeah
alright?
And then Jeff just carries on finishing
yeah, yeah
But just, as soon as, er, er, when
soldering, I take it you haven't just checked any over yet
No
before they go down?
got these about four, four to put
in, then we'll start checking them over 
Right and then get them down there, the machine won't be ready until about half past nine.
Yeah
If Jeff doesn't get those soldered allows you to get
You'd better come in Monday morning, you won't
through that will you?
Yeah 
I don't really
I think people who drink from the bottle want their bollocks chopped off.
Yeah
You got any more of that?
Yes please
Pass, pass me a couple, one, or something
I'd like to say hello to Ben, hello to all Ben's friends
Bend friend
Ben's car's going off the road in two weeks 
I'd like to say hello to Mr Major, hello then Mr Major I think your
It's election soon
Yeah it's the election soon
yeah
I don't think Major Morgan's gonna, gonna win, I think he's gonna be out, out, out
yeah
out the door
out the door, throw him out, get rid of him, up the
vote Labour, Neil Kinnock, leader of the Labour
 

On this
I can't pay
No you don't wanna
I wonder who took that poster what that they had?
Somebody good, vote, vote what, right to the white, out the nig nogs 
You got one of these?
Why won't it come out?
Yeah
Yeah
that's good cos I want it
I think there's just enough for those
got some stairs anyway 
What we doing checking them over aren't we?
Yeah just er, you know what's supposed to be missing don't you?
Yeah
that's right
Yes,
resistors and things like that, you see
well that one's going in the
 

just make sure the, R C's are round the right way
Yeah, that's what I do again, this time check the R C's innit?
Yeah  cos I've still got that card
Of the red caps it should be twelve, thirteen, seventeen, twenty, twenty two, twenty three and twenty fours, no I'm thinking of
I was gonna say you're reading and I'm thinking I ain't got them ones .. e.
And another thing to do is just make sure these caps are still straight, there's some on the left get pulled out when we
on the blue ones?
And on the yellow ones 
This is an excellent song this is
Mm
Chariot's of Fire ain't it?
Mm
Excellent
brilliant
Yeah brilliant like Queen they're brilliant
Wembley
Yeah.
I hope the I R A don't plant no bombs in Wembley Stadium, time they all get together,
Mm
the Government ought to get
at Wembley Stadium, cos I don't want, I don't want to get blown up  I hope you're listening
Mr Government
  

was quite big we went to see last night, there was quite a few people around 
Well Jeffery   
How 
Which way does that green cap go in?
Erm
My mitt's just about come back to reality, last night when I was playing my trumpet right, it was numb, my fingers, I'd got no feeling in it, it was as though it was dead.
It's horrible when you get that innit?
Mm
It lasts ages and ages no matter what you're doing  it come back
Me and my missus are actually going out with me in the next couple of weeks,
That's our future
For your band?
Mm  he was on about it last night, he says well I think all we really need is to look at is two hundred pound up front, buy the equipment, couple of decent speakers, a graphic equalizer and the twin deck tapers
Mm
and a foot switch
press it and it starts the tape, it stops the tape
Yeah, that's all we want.
Marcus has got loads of ideas going through his head
No, these are though, want them?
Er, yeah alright
yeah  so I mean he said we're gonna have to go out for a drink and sit down and discuss it, you know 
Cos if you really want
booking on his own at the moment, three hundred pounds on bookings he's got, coming up in the next three weeks 
What just, what for him and you?
No, just him
Just him, mm, what's he play?
The trumpet.
You know I told him
the other week
Yeah
I told him there was some , I said somebody was interested in, well he's got back in touch and he said can you come and do a twenty minute spot at this hotel in Bedford  and he said really, I mean he's doing it 
That is
easy money, twenty minutes 
I
ask him if come in Monday  and he could say
Don't know  so I'm getting really excited about,
really serious  you know there's some times when you can get two cabaret spots in the night, you do one, one somewhere and then
Yeah 
and the best thing is that nobody's doing it, everybody's doing cabaret spots along the line  jokes and stuff like that, but nobody's not doing cabaret spots with trumpets 
You're gonna see Andrea tonight ain't you?
Remember to say hello 
There's a resistor there that was in that tray I don't know whether it's fell out the board or
Oh yes,
 

Ah surely we ain't got to
But don't you get anything for your wife for your anniversary?
No.
Not at all?
No.
What, not even a card?
Oh I got her a card, yeah.
You're meant to buy present though?
No.
Yeah, you're meant to
I ain't got no money have I?
What if you, if you lent us some dosh I suppose I could be with Louise tonight, right, I could go home with a big bunch of flowers cos I'll have a guilty expression on my face.
I could do
Mm, well it's what you thought
 

Are you sure you two are playing at
No not
there out via satellite 
Right, then you look
video tape they're gonna slap in the machine
the
seen when the machine is
They could just say no
 

Why do birds fall in love, why do birds sing so gay, why do they sing that song, why do they 
Ah
Phew what's that smell?
You want me to, what, what have I got to put down on these then, they all be
I shouldn't need to push anything down
Well yeah they should be, should be packed, tack down in fact should be 
So I should 
without having to worry about pushing any down 
Yeah, right-oh 
Yeah, but you know just when you have fingers over the R C, just to make sure
well they're just, you know, don't push them hard though Jeff you'll bend the legs  and snap the board 
About time you got on the
I think 
He's going to go loopy, he's gonna go
are you accusing me of drinking and driving?
Just don't, but if they say oh yeah, you're gonna say
he's gonna say,
and then when they breathalyse me, he's never, he never drinks anyway, he'll be negative, he'll say right see you
that'll be too much, he says take you to court, try to harass me
Yeah that's a nice word harass me
Mm
same tone yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah that's a good word, that'll be the thing oh yeah, yeah, yeah, oh yeah, mm, yeah, you'll see, mm, wicked, wicked, mm
Erm, I'm just sitting in the front of the car last night and erm 
Have you got my
yeah
do you know what time
the four of them working
Was it
the car wouldn't
I was sitting in front of the car and erm  everybody, everybody started beaten her up like
Beating you up?
Yeah, Georgina goes to me aren't you gonna stick up for her, stick up for her, so I did 
You did, stuck it up for her?
Yeah, they got aerated started 
Aerated 
beating me up
No, our
 

I don't want to see them tonight
Who's them?
dude, cos I'm only going to get the piss taken out of my hair aren't I?
Yeah
He told them?
Yeah
No
Yeah
What did you say?
I just told them you'd had your hair cut really short
What's he say?
Does
look funny and I said yeah
If I get the piss taken out of me tonight
and I look more hard
especially if you're
 

I'm really
I'll send you round her house, I know where she lives
knock on the door
I ain't going round
You are, still a monkey wrestler
Oh yeah, I remember you saying 
 

ah well
Ah, got that record again Freddy , that's not good enough, mm
could warn him Marcus
would, wouldn't like, one, one would quite fond of you prince charming
Yeah, yeah
leader of the Labour party Neil Kinnock
Wentworth Dock
It would, must be 
and then up early
Have you got both keys missing?
Mm, I ain't had one board yet with anything missing, I must have your boards
I found that board with half
oh yeah
I bet it's not, it's neither these,
neither of them 
 

Mm, that is
Mm that's
in ten there
I've got a power supply at home I want to bring in and have it checked out.
Have it checked out, you want me to check it out?
See if it works.
Mm
Ever since I check that what's your board
no
I mean look that
See look all that down there, you've blown it all up, and you're supposed to be clever
Clever, I am clever  I'm the cleverest one here
Oh is checked at the
innit?
Mm
It's only like a C B power supply
Ah
missing as well 
it's not me, it must be your boards 
What's the weather like today?
It's sunny today.
Well what's it meant to be like?
It's supposed to be dry, warm and sunny, hello, hell what the time is erm, Marcus
What?
Mm it's quarter to ten already 
Well
Well
I love summer, summer time you know it's special about summer time
I like it when it gets dar , dark
Ah?
I mean I like it when it's still light at night
light at night, yeah so do I, mm  well, oh
I'm glad he moved away, I ain't telling
 

oh dear 
So what we doing tonight then?
What we doing tonight then?
Well what, what do you want to do tonight Marcus?
I mean if you like, I mean, I'll pick you up at normal time, then we'll just
 
I don't 
What?
You see, I'm, I'm not sure where I'm gonna be
Oh I see 
Glen's picking me up at half six, yeah
Mm
I don't know if we're going to
alright then, you know, get, I ain't bothered I mean I'm fine if you wanna, I'll kill a butcher somewhere
I'll ob obviously be over in Attenburg or in Rushton
Well I can't go down the square that'll be too much, but I mean
oh yeah I've been going bowling
I can't believe
got up this morning, but I, Maria must of told you that
No she didn't
I
I'm going, I'm going get a P A for my car and gonna drive past the square and
And baa, baa
baa, rah
baa, baa, baa, baa
is she really busy?
Yeah
Don't she know nothing?
She's like, accident prone
No
Yeah, she's, for the last three nights running, right, every night she's tried to get out of Ben's car when we drop her off home
Yeah
she's smacked her head  on top  it's so funny, silly bitch
Oh, she's scatty ain't she?
Oh you know I tried to find out her phone yesterday
Mm
She ain't on the phone
Oh Marcus
she used to be, but she got a bill for erm five hundred pounds, so they had to have it cut off 
Little girl 
Mm
yes we're at Wembley, Wembley, Wembley, we're going to see Freddy Mercury and we're off to Wembley 
I don't think I'd go and see Freddy Mercury
Oh, I do,
he'll be there, you'll be safe, he's only, he's not really gay, I think
do you really think
Is that all that's left just them twenty five?
Mm, what's Jeff on about when we'll keep up with him?
He didn't say that did he?
Yeah 
I bet he does as well shall we send a blank board up there, get that spare out, do put it in the tray and see what he says?
No, he might be able to
solder it, if we do
course he wouldn't, just, put the blank board in.
No, it takes ages down there
big straight Dave, that's their manager, Dave the manager he's the one with the dodgy voice
dodgy voice, he, he, that voice, Birmingham accent, oh David
oh David
Ah?
Don't you dare tell
my Prince Charles impression, don't you dare say anything to Ben about it
No
I nearly said it too loud then  when does one, one could have one, one,Diana
I reckon you should let me have one of your cappuccinos  Oh yeah
Oh no
Oh yeah
Oh no
I'll buy if off you.
You can't can you because there's only two there
So?
and I want one at dinner time and one this afternoon.
No you don't, you only want one at dinner time and that's it.
No I don't.
normal cup of coffee this afternoon
No I couldn't do it, you wouldn't like it
Yeah
No
Yeah
No
They look nice
Mm they are nice, they're dear though.
How much are they?
Ah?
How much are they?
Two twenty five for ten.
How much?
Mm
So how much does that work out each?
Two twenty five for ten, twenty five P each innit?
Oh, let me buy one off you.
Oh no
I'll give you thirty P, five P interest, five P interest
Oh go on then thirty P
Bloody hell
Bloody limited this month right
I ain't got thirty P in change I'll give it you in a minute
Mm
I've only got pound coins
That's all right 
Do you
you just add water, you don't need sugar in that, that's got sugar in there
Why is it sweet or not?
No, not really sweet, no, you don't put extra sugar in if you want, but I
you don't fill your cup right up with it because it'll make it too watery in your cup, cos them cappuccinos come very little
Yeah they are aren't they?
You only wanna fill half your cup up  with water, otherwise it'll just come out like running hot water?
Running hot water
Cos those little, cos they're only little cups about that big, the proper cappuccino really, it's watery enough in my cup, it's bearable.
Mm, they're nice.
Yeah, I wouldn't fill that up right at the top 
Mm
 

I reckon they should do tea here, I'm getting really bored of coffee I tell you  I heard Georgina scratched Ben across the arm
  

Right that's
yeah, wouldn't need it, finished
These are done over here are they?
Mm, mm, is
for us yet?
No, you'll have to clean it, I've started taking the stuff off
Cleaner on?
Yeah, cleaner's on, yeah, by the time you've finished there, there'll be some, some, some, some
right
I thought Dave said Jeff would clean them?
So did I, but he obviously hasn't 
What time did your
come then last night?
They didn't come last night.
What did they come in the day?
They were already out when we got home
What just left on the drive?
Mm
In a big bag?
Ten in a bag?
Oh my god
I'm surprised they just left them there
They were on the front doorstep, or round the front doorstep, probably say on the front doorstep, trouble is they found the front doorstep on the side
plastic bags  being warned about perishable if delayed
Perishable?
Mm  I mean they are perishable if delayed aren't they?
I mean perishable means, they'll perish, they'll perish
die well wouldn't they if they were delayed 
Why you whacked them in the garden already?
I only bought ten in last night, I've got some more to put in tonight, it got too dark
It didn't get dark till about just gone seven
Yeah I know, but, well I got home, I didn't get back till five cos we went round me mum's
we got back at five and oh dear me, there they were.
I was putting them round the back and sat thinking about it and I said well we ain't got no peat, so we had to rush over to Hetford and bought some very good peat, and erm, by the time I got back and started digging hole for them to go in
Mm
quite
at first of them, on a small one
Do they look nice?
Mm, they're alright, they will do when they're, when they grow big  I think they're excellent actually
Well they're cheap and once they start growing
Yeah
you know, will, make will real good screen
Yeah
better than a bloody fence
Look better don't they?
They do, and they give off a nice piny smell as well 
Mm, mm
Big style give me some boards to look at
Er, what about them twenty there?
I've done them
Ah?with you , is this U 2?
No
I don't know who this is  Jeffery and the five
 

always take the weather with you, everywhere you go  
with you, everywhere you go always take the weather, everywhere you go always take the weather with you, everywhere you go always take the weather  
Next week's gonna be really 
Oh 
ten to eight
No
Yeah
Why?
Dunno, had to me Theresa weren't ready, didn't expect until eight o'clock, I thought yeah I've got ten minutes, sitting in my bedroom drinking a cup of tea and I heard this bing
Why's he do that then?
Oh I know why, I bet he thought if he's
right that I'd be going over to
and he'll be sitting up here, but he never got
or anything
Quarter past right and
Mm
gosh, couldn't you see this coming?
No, the next bit I looked over me bit and you were parked up alongside me, why?
 

OK 
I haven't done that
Yeah, sorted all the
didn't you?
It's gonna take fourteen days to build this, this stage at Wembley
Really?
Yeah, there's got in, it was in the paper the other night  the team of a hundred people gonna take fourteen days to erect this mega stage for Queen that's gonna build at Wembley 
Build the stage
must be a good one
Mm  no mate, not
Mm  Comic Relief soon ain't it?
Mm
You've got any more, boards to inspect?
No
No, right
Robert Plant
Mm, can't remember what band he is out of, he's out of a big band 
That's what I
he said he didn't know whether it was Pink Floyd
It's not Pink Floyd.
I know what it is.
What?
Led Zeppelin.
Is it?
Mm  yeah  I think he's the lead singer out of Led Zeppelin
Mm 
Is Joey singing Queen?
Yeah, er no, they're all gonna sing with Queen I think, they're all gonna do ten to fifteen minutes each
Yeah
then they, it'll be a mega band for singing for an hour, hour and a half, but what they've speculated is that, Queen's gonna be on there for an hour, hour and a half and then the
like David Bowie will sing with them and  everybody will take a turn singing with them, like that, that woman that sing that Barcelona you know, er  whatever her name is  I suppose she'll, she'll sing at erm, er and somebody else might sing that Barcelona you know that one
Yeah
there's one, that  Italian singer as well.
I ain't heard about
whatever his name is, he's that big fat opera singer.
Oh, la, la 
somebody called Brian Murray
you know
I've heard them before, I don't, you know, and, Roger Taylor and you, John Dean
They're gonna be there, they are, and if, if, if
I wonder if Roger Taylor's getting married?
Of course he's getting married.
He's out of Pink Floyd.
No he's out of Queen, Roger Taylor.
Is he?
Mm  he's the drummer, it depends on Roger Taylor I mean, there's one in Duran Duran as well 
What's wrong with this board?
I bet there's loads of them like it in there, these should be tapped in by both leads
Mm, have to remember that in future  Do you mean she's got over her illness then?
I don't know, I suppose so, she hasn't said anything to me 
I haven't got patience for people who are ill
Most of my babies are my fish
mm
cos one of my fish swim really near the bottom, on the gravel
Yeah, that'll be alright
I wouldn't know whether that is pregnant or not, it's taking deep breaths 
Mm
she's laying on the bottom going , but I didn't move her cos it
she's been like that for two days now
Yeah 
Do you know anybody wanting baby rabbits?
No, why you've got some?
Well one of our bab , er one of our rabbits thinks it's pregnant, whether it is or not
Better not if it is, you're gonna have to get rid of them pretty sharpish, as soon as they're old enough mate, you've got to anyway 
Still ain't got rid of that cockerel  don't know where to, to get rid of it to.
The bird's gonna have to be ended up on a Sunday dinner somewhere innit?
No, that's why, that's why we don't want to get rid of it to anyone, just in case they chop it up  
Have it for dinner  Couldn't do it could you?
Mm
 

Neat
Yes
yeah, you gonna have to speak at
No
Take that cowboy one off
Can't do that
Why?
More than my life's worth
What, cor
girl walked all the way from America
Is that
You've got to cut dead square across the back ain't you?
Mm
, I'll shave him for you Mark
No way  well, well it's a bit long you see, but it's just
Well you should of had it shaved.
Er, no I don't want it shaved, no
Not a lot, just, you know, take a little bit off
There's a funny programme in a couple of week's time
Is there?
She only did it as a temporary measures just to
Get it out
sort it out, just to sort it out, it's like, it's like cutting a lawn innit?
You never cut it straight down low to start with
No 
You've gotta, you gotta chop big bits off and then, sort it out later 
So you shouldn't wait two weeks now
Mm, or whenever 
How is it going Jeffery?
Dunno
Wiggler
I'm not a wiggler
wiggler, wiggler 
he let them have that, yeah, as soon as he starts crying .
I'm gonna bring in a hair tong today
A what?
A hair tong
Grecian Two Thousand
What's 
This , this don't taste like coffee
What's it taste like?
Mm, hot water 
You've put too much in it.
No I didn't do it, I only filled it up
Of course it taste like coffee
It ain't, it ain't, it ain't got a real coffee taste
Mm 
You've still got your other tomato seeds tomorrow ain't you?
Yeah
You're useless, what about that?
Too hot to handle
Yeah, it has to be on a day when I'm ready for it
Ready for it
cos I'm
 
ready 
it might take me by surprise
It won't obstruct no light though because I told you the sun is more er, without the back it joins down the car
you don't get no light between the two houses anyway, we always have to have
Does she get on alright do you know?
Yeah.
Well they ain't going to anyway does a  two or three years, they're old age pensioners, the house is too big for them cos they're waiting for a place to move, that's why I want to get it, get this hedge grow before the next one comes in 
What size, what size is, is
oh the old boy next door he's alright, and the woman next door she's alright you'd never think much of them 
 
Why?
Well you wanna go on holiday
Yeah, well he's already turned round and told my mother he's not knocking 
mm
they said for a near six foot high plant eighteen inches apart, for a near ten foot high plant twenty four inches apart, anything over that plant
Yeah but you
  

yeah
So I've, I've got the actual main table for the pond and all that, went along that edge  that should be in the ground actually, but, I just
all the way along
yeah, a big size electric
Yeah, but can you imagine it
Yeah
That's mine
this, this, they only start from sort of like, there's the house, and it goes half way up the garden, so I want fifty up at one side, and put fifty to go up other side, I want fifty to go across the garden, and they're gonna go across the garden and cut the garden in half
no they haven't, they're gonna go all the way round the top section as well, but I just wanted to get the bottom section built first, get some of that plant food in
when the old boy comes round and see what you've done with the old horse manure, spread some of that around and that'll make them grow as well   

this one completely
but they do last for years and years don't they?
Oh yes
 

Are you gonna come home and help me dig this pond out then Mark?
Yeah
Yeah
Was that plastic any good?
Well no not really, but 
Not good
No I'll get some, you know, what I'll do I
Use
they've got holes in it Dave
Have they, oh I dunno, I dunno 
 
I just grabbed it from underneath the garage
Yeah  there's no, I, I use that
of the actual
You'll find two without, caps missing
Mm
Well can't we go down and
packaging 
Buy yourself, buy yourself a plant because when it, when you open this all out it's a huge great er
Yeah
squares
yeah, well, you know, these
even if you put two or three layers
Mm
to stop, so if one goes at least you've got another one to save underneath you know?
See I want to get the same sort of material though as what the other liners, I want to stick the two liners together  to make all one great big pond you see right the way across the garden  but the other pond might be about two foot deep, this one's gonna go down
down to about five, five foot deep I think, four or five foot deep
Right, so
 

well what do you want a pond four or five foot deep?
So you can see the fish in it, me cousin's is five foot deep, maybe six, I think it is six 
Do you get it
in the garden?
No ain't gonna
no it's gonna be none of that
 

 

were never know
 

got a, a
That's why you needed it that deep
Yeah
for the carp
that's right, and then I
You know what you're gonna keep all carp and that 
Yeah all carp in it , I've got all carp in me little one
Have you?
Yeah
I thought you only had just normal goldfish in there 
No , I've got, there is goldfish in there, but they've got Koi, I've got three Koi in now I think 
I need that
you do  definitely 
It's nearly, it's nearly as deep as me
Oh, oh, I'll probably be down about four, four, cos I'm five seven, as Mark?
We'll see, we'll see how deep you can get.
You can start digging about six foot though, start, start digging a long time  is your missus now helping you?
Sorry, yeah I said Mark's gonna come over and help me dig it.
What's she say?
Oh really  are you getting cloud, smoke wafting up
over there 
Ah?
What's been over there?
Getting teas in and stuff
Getting the teas in
Oh yeah
tea's in
 

Yeah I'll definitely come over if Andrea's there
it'll be at the weekend won't it?
Mm
What this one?
Yeah
it's nearly empty Jeff
  

really bad for my stomach, ah, it's staying all hot 
When you burp in a minute, you'll get all the acid
Ah, that's horrible that is
just stay in your throat
Mm
for about two hours 
Ah, my stomach's getting so hot 
I'm only gonna get it four foot deep with it anyway  it wouldn't be four foot deep all over, it'll start off at two foot and then slightly slope down to the deep part
Yeah
I might go
I might just plant some, we'll, we'll see, we'll see, we'll, we'll design a piece of
I'll design a piece of
oh
yeah, that'll do keep the old garden
 

You'll have to come over and pick me up though
Mm, I can do it, on a couple of days when Tel's at work, you sit in a box, on a chair
What
No, no
I was gonna say decide when you're gonna do it and have the days off work, but they won't, they won't let us both have days 
No, no, no , oh no I ain't having days off work cos he's altering bloody garden
Why?
Why ain't I
off
I can 
     

Yeah, you definitely want a slope one better 
Cos if you have it deep, that deep all over the fish will just swim at the bottom you'll never see them
No, these
carps at, my, my cousin, they're really weird, you go to feed them, they come to the top, oh the water stays crystal clear
Does it?
Mm  the water in my other pond is crystal clear, see straight down to the bottom, and another thing I want this hedge quite high cos keep the sun off my pond, if you let the sun on the pond it'll just go green
Yeah, if you shade it
like my cousin's it's well shaded, he started
mind you he's got a good filter system, he's got a U V light in it,
see when the water comes back out the filter it goes through this pipe right, a big unit type of thing
Yeah
the water flows by, it's got an ultra violet light in it and the ultra violet light rays kill off the er 
  

can have enough of these you know.
Enough of what?
These insulator bits
Ah?
I dunno, there's about thirty boards left
I've got ten here  there might be enough  don't worry  what, what time are you coming out tonight?
Probably be at Ruth's by about eight I suppose 
 

If Brenda wanna go over here, or what, I'll go over anyway 
I can never
Wrong L E D
No, that, that L E D has been
all the way round
Well change it then, ain't you change that yet, you found that this morning early
 

all you have to do is pull it off, they do come off you know?
Yeah but I can't be doing with it 
I'm only going by what this
 

They ain't very far apart  they do grow big you know
Yeah I know
There's this old girl at er the top of the road you know, got them, she planted them half way down her garden, right, when they'd grown to about six foot high she said we could have the rest of their garden, so we did, that's how come our garden's so big cos people give our, give us the garden
Mm 
Council come round our house they'll say yeah your garden looks big 
If you can't plant them closer together, instead of their roots going outwards they'll probably go downwards 
Oh er
Yeah, might do, there must be a reason why they say plant nineteen inches apart
Of all the hedges I've seen they've been about eighteen two foot, about that far apart
I'll have a look see how far ours are apart in the garden
yes and they've put in there and they're about two foot apart 
Could be ages to grow like that, now it's grown a real good hedge, in fact no it ain't a good real hedge it's got massive great gaping holes in it
Who's that
old man?
Mm round their summer house  at least they've got a summer house
Who's got a summer house?
We were gonna have a summer house built in our garden
Are you?
Yeah, that's, once the conifers are all growing up, we're going to have a garden shed a greenhouse and I'm gonna build a summer house up the garden, that's by, by round where the pond is
What a proper greenhouse?
Yeah, but we want a proper greenhouse  don't have one in the stock room do you?
No
One of those aluminium greenhouses
they cost a lot of money they do
Mm, I know, that's why I was
cos it's made out of aluminium and you've got to put the glass in, it's really expensive I tell you
Mm 
No, sheds are pretty expensive as well they're a couple of hundred quid aren't they?
My mate used to fix sheds, the garden sheds, had this little card with Chad on it said what no shed  
I remember that record this morning, let's think
Yeah, fine  I'll bring it tomorrow  I even got it out
 

No I want the green, I want the garden chair, I was thinking of getting a big garden chair and stick it in one of those lean-to
and lean it up against the garden shed, you know what I mean?
Yeah 
If a, bloody greenhouse on it's own, when they
seriously
When we had the gales a couple of years ago, I was in the kitchen making a cup of tea and I could hear all this glass smashing, and I went ooh what's going on, and the wind whistled across the field, it's all open field
Yeah 
Yeah 
it flies down their garden and in between the two houses it acts like a wind
and you get gale force winds blowing down there and of course I opened the back door and there were panes of glass flying past
No
Yeah, swinging around us, literally big panes of glass and they were flying down and as soon as they got away from the houses, it opened up again, they were crashing down all over my drive and all over the road out there
What were they from?
From the greenhouse
Oh
Something fell in greenhouse and broke the pane to allow the wind to get into the greenhouse, which is oh dear me, as soon as the wind got into the greenhouse as I say blowing the other panes out
Yeah
and as soon as the panes been blown out, it was such a force, it was blowing them between two houses, smashing on the road, and in the end, once a few more panes had gone that was it the whole greenhouse, I sat there watching this greenhouse, it just suddenly launched itself off the bit on it, over our fence, it went, there was glass everywhere for weeks afterwards, when I was cutting the lawn, oh dear the
glass shattered 
I'm not surprised, glass is really expensive now
 

Dave Lee Travis 
Having their secret talks in there ain't they?
Mm  there not very secret with this mike
 

Is that recording?
Yeah
Oh 
you didn't lend him another one,
easier than that
I suppose Carol rented that place with you
mm, so do I, I would of said oh by the way, Dave wants to borrow that
Keith come back here and say have you bought out a video and I'll say oh no I couldn't, Carol wouldn't let me bring it, they oh no hen pecked, ooh, ooh
I'm not hen pecked
And does erm
I'm not under the thumb
no way am I under the thumb 
 

Right, who's finished on them boards?
No one round here like
ah?
There's no one round here big and strong
 
 
only me and I'm busy 
Sure 
mm  alright
What's happening?
What's happening?
Might as well get the boards couldn't they?
Well that didn't last long did it ah?
How long were they made for?
About five minutes  what?
I never want nothing on the side Dave
You could if you have half the chance
No I wouldn't
Yeah
No, oh, er, you'll be seeing Jeff when you're married 
Ah?
I ain't coming, I ain't doing after
no I am actually I'm going over Ruth's to pick Marcus up, I'm taking Marcus to see somebody 
oh, oh, oh, what does he think I am?
Ah?
I don't know
  

Andrea 
I seemed to have a thing about people with the name's A yeah, beginning with A
Mm
Andrea, Ann 
Annette 
Annette who?
Oh yeah I told er this old girl yeah, who told
I told her that I had you at work then yesterday, right, she says oh no another one, right, and ended up
I'm going no I already know that, you must of got that, where did you hear that from?
Oh that's olden 
Yeah
You know Lydia?
Lydia at reception?
Quite funny really
  

Yeah I know 
Where are all those boxes gone?
Don't know
I bet
Mm
How do you know?
Cos I heard him say yes
Do what?
all those record sleeves
I used to have loads of records, they're all gone now, scrap
Are they?
Mm
I would of had them  that's why the UB40 record's down there
Mm, I know
I could of done with them, I like UB40
No
Yeah
I've got a rat in me kitchen what am I gonna do, I've got a rat in me kitchen what am I gonna do, I'm gonna get that rat that's what I'm gonna do  
That's done me in lifting those boxes 
likes UB40 
Yeah I know 
yeah, I know she likes UB40
How do you know?
Cos when I come over here, that was when Andrew was there you know, and she was going through all those records
Mm
she got a UB40 record out and I said there'll
 

she said then 
Elvis Presley record
Elvis Presley?
Yeah
Mm,
Oh well soon be Easter 
April the twentieth 
You got them?
 
Oh er, it works
Seriously
Well
mm, this weekend I think Easter were last year
How things can move back?
It's a late Easter this year, they never have Easter Sunday
Don't they?
I never knew that, well, learn something every day innit?
I don't know why they never have Easter
You know I said we were gonna run out of these
Mm
I'm right
You're right
Mm  where do you think any will be?
No idea spots
What rivets
no plastic
How many are you short?
I dunno, I'll tell you in a minute, we'll have a count  nearly dinner time
It can't be, twenty minutes yet
So that's nearer than, what it were half hour ago
Have you got salad again?
Yeah
Oh, how long you gonna keep this salad lark up for?
Mm, you'll see, when I'm as skinny as you
Oh are
Yeah
you'll never make it
course I will, you'll just see 
Oh, well, you're gonna have to keep it up for about a month before you notice any difference
Mm, I'm already noticing the difference
Ooh
you might not be but I am
Instant loss of weight
I'm feeling  healthier  nice to feel healthy
packed up smoking, that makes you feel healthier, you'll feel healthier if you packed up smoking, mm  everybody ought to pack up smoking, I think smoking ought to be banned, ban smoking
ban smoking if you've given in
you're wishing
Oh er, anybody can stand for an M P
You can
When I Mr mayor
mayor?
Mayor, is he?
When I become the mayor of
I'm gonna ban cigarettes
and I'm gonna ban  ban
all single men will have to be shot  over the age of forty
That's Jeff gone  what you doing Jeff?
 

I ain't going over
Everybody's going
no I
You'll do Louise , she comes out at eight o'clock, by nine o'clock I wanna go anyway 
Yeah
yeah  and
do I?
Oh, you, er 
No honestly I try not to
it's only the last week before I went back to
I was out
Oh yeah
Yeah she did, cos you went out with Gavin
Yeah, but that's all she thought, she, she still didn't realise that after Gavin had gone that I got in me car, come home and seen you, didn't she know?
No  good innit?
None the wiser
Very good, the only way she, say, stop me going out tonight
 

Can have no room for conversation
 

Where do I put these
Marcus?
Anywhere you like
Well I don't know where you want them
so they wanna go over here then don't they?
Yeah 
A nice day out
Yeah 
Cold though
No, cold
It is 
Do you like it here?
What?
Seen, have you any in this box?
There might be
there might be a
 

there's three packets short
Ah?
there's four packets short
No, look, there's loads here
Where?
There's some anyway  Why how many's in a pack?
Ten ain't there?
I don't know  don't say  I'll put them ten  it looks like more than ten there though 
Why don't you take this down er
How much is it?
How much
are they expensive?
We went past a garage yesterday they wanted fifty two P a litre
that was erm, where were we?
Motorway?
No, it was on the way to erm  on the way to Earthenburg that the garage just before Earthenburg, last one on the
 

yeah, I think, yeah I think it was
cos it's a small garage innit?
yeah
er, no
they can fill it up for you 
There are villages, there are villages sometime in
what those
yeah up, up the Northampton road
Not the Northampton road
Yes we have
no it's Northampton road
Oh, on the way to
you turn left there, the other side of the green, where that cartoon character is
Yeah
yeah
Just up there on your left it used to be  when I was a young lad, with their little forecourt with a little office in the middle  two petrol pumps, I always remember that
They've built houses on top of it now though 
They must of transferred it though
Mm
built, built the houses on top of them
What did they do built it out of concrete or sand?
I don't know
There a bit, years, twenty odd years ago since the garage was ever used so
yeah
 

supermarket
 

You got your paving stones Mark?
No way, bloody hell, they cost about four hundred quid the paving stones
Seriously, more than four hundred quid cos they're two pound something each
Each slab?
Mm
No
Yeah, six hundred by seven hundred
that's two pounds thirty nine for
and I want two hundred 
Is it worth it?
Yeah  I thought, I thought that
they used to be cheap, there was a lot of one pound seventy, they're only a little slab, drive me boring doing the little ones, so you might as well get two of the big ones  once you've done
  

no they will still go won't they?
I say I would have found you the cheapest ones, and they were good quality ones as well, you know you go to some of these garden centres and
well half of them
price of them, you know you go into er
cos they've got the big thick ones there
That's what I want six of them by six hundred
What's that thirty two?
yeah they are
 

but that
they're not
   

Why is he always going and telling
Mm
why does he always tells
 

Still gonna be short of these, there was more than ten in that pack
How many were there?
I dunno, I ain't used them all yet  still reckon we're gonna be short though
oh yeah, ow,na, na, na, na , we're still out of grey ones, couldn't use them though can we?
What?
Those grey ones
No
cos there not for this board are they?
That's for that other dodgy board  did they ring up about
just gonna leave it?
  

no, I didn't know him, well, no
we were some
short on boards, Dave
picket, and when they go out we all come back, reject work, such and such a component were missing, they sent us different components through
What did you say?
Said
bloody do them he said 
dodgy board though, he looks shifty don't he?
Mm
Above the eyes  yeah, we're still quite a few of these short aren't we?
I know they want these in the bin
Snapper, well and
but I can put it in can't I?
I'll put it in, cos I sent some boards up last time
  

Yeah I know, didn't count hardly any of them did we?
Only the R C's, there would of been nothing really  ah need another six and that's it
Six?
Yeah
Have a look there might be some more in there 
If not have a look down the bottom 
Have a look in those bins innit?
Mm
There's bound to be some in there, well there might not be, but
Turning right
Going round roundabout backwards
go to the, the one with the A forty five, A forty three lane, with the two
and there's suddenly
to the next lane, another one went there
at the side of him, it's eeeerrrr, hand on hooter and all of a sudden he goes back over again, he, he just didn't even know I were there, no signal, no nothing.
I had visions it's for the thirty
and they still, they don't have a
don't they?
Yeah
They were
he's gonna have me in a minute, you know, and I thought hand on hooter 
at all, but he weren't, you know, he weren't signalling where he was going he was just talking
Mm
so, I couldn't of got out the way if I'd of wanted to, cos I was about that much from the curb, I thought he's
wandering a bit, you know, no one  

He was obviously looking for directions, but he certain
to the inside in, working his way round it, he came from the outside and then he was coming in, you know.
Ooh, ooh, there is some maniacs driving, huh
Well you're alright if you're concentrating, but you might
Mm,
mm
Mm  we thought we'd see your Capri this morning
You did, mm, mm
It's a D reg
no I'm alright, you can see
Was it clean when you sold it?
What you got?
I won them,
You trusted
next thing he knows after a week it er, finds it and then it's gone innit?
 

Is there a price on it?
Mm
How much?
Three, five, nine, five  how much did he say for you saw it?
Three, five
So they're making ninety five quid?
Yeah they'll make their money on them
Is a knock on the price, you don't get a full profit with
get ten vehicles before you get your profit
They
Wherever they pick my car up from
auction
Probably worked it out
Mm?
probably worked it out 
Well I don't see
buying the car off er, them at Burton Lane, there's, there's, somehow you've got a good picture at Burton Lane 
What, because they want these vehicle raffle thing?
it might not be their car  could be a load of
raffle
Oh no 
Yeah the company who owned this
Products or whatever they're called
doesn't mean to say
that's not proof of ownership
Mm, yeah but it doesn't make a difference  if you think about it, technically you buy a car on H P, that ain't your car 
you pay for it, then it's your car, but it's still registered in your name
Mm, that car is mine out there, it's not the H P
No, but you know what I mean
the log book doesn't mean anything really
they, they, well they just send what it for to the car, they didn't know what, what sort of car or the registration of it or something, they want to know, you know.
They wanted to know what it roughly what it was for
They said it doesn't matter what it's for
mm, holiday even or just money to spend
 

My hair 
I bet you take ten minutes on your hair now won't you?
No
it stays like it permanent, when I wake up in the morning
What it's like that?
Yeah
Oh er
it is seriously, it's like that blindfold
Oh er
It is, it is 
So you're not cutting it off?
No
So if I mess it up then now, when you come over to pick me up later it shall still be messed up?
No, alright, yeah
Alright then, we'll see, I ain't got no aftershave to put on tonight, you're gonna have to bring a bottle out with you Mark so I can slap some aftershave on
Why?
Cos I ain't got none
Well, you don't have to whack it on
You do, you do when you're entertaining
You said you don't
Ah 
Oh I ain't
I might not be, I doubt if I will be
Have to buy some
I don't like Orion
I do, I've got some Lynx spice at home
You smell that and it smells like sweaty armpits 
It's horrible  I wanted Jarva but they didn't have it
Oh I like Jarva
Mm  mm I can feel little prickles coming through under my nose, mm
Probably just nipped the skin when you've erm
No
start growing again
No you've probably nipped the skin when you took your moustache off
Mm, it went numb yesterday, completely numb, and dead 
I'm surprised
up there for ages, have you?
No for years
It's all
couldn't take it 
Like, whack, whack, like oh dear  
Have you
some of them Mark?
I might
Oh
Well if you wanna see me tonight 
no I watch that tomorrow night
Oh I don't watch that, it's a load of rubbish,
Enjoyed it last week
Yeah, but Jeff I might be getting the real thing tonight, er, ah, you'll be
Mm
On the way home we'll pop round the evening telegraph, tell them
oh, er
dogs recorded 
That's alright
What
didn't it?
What did?
No, sure you can record it as much as you like, it don't matter, mm
I'll be getting it tonight
She'll be too tired after her aerobics
She said she's working till six, and then going to aerobics
Mm, mm 
 

been on ages
We're gonna play these tapes in my car tonight, have a good laugh, especially if somebody does turn up, I'll say here are listen to this, this is what I think of about all at work today, what I'm gonna do, mm she'll say come on then, better get on with it, and I'll go, yeah
baa, baa, shepherd, baa, baa, baa shepherd
You'll be seeing
humpty 
I had
about that last night, Marcus Peter 
He reckons that he didn't say nothing
No
How did you know then?
I was just going aahh
no way you saw 
do this, yeah , no way did you get it
Marcus  pewtall wood, pewtall Marcus's nick name is  pewtall wood , pewtall 
I don't look like  flumps 
You do
You look like humpty dumpty
Does he?
Yeah
No I don't
Yeah and the we we 
Er?
 weeble 
No he don't
I bet he does
He wouldn't, next one though I'm gonna stick a mark up me backside and do it, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh
You'll hear it coming down the anal passage 
There's still a penguin in that bottle
I know there is
Ain't you gonna eat it?
No, a pick up a penguin
A pick up a penguin  right, great, come on then Jeff say something  pardon it didn't pick that up  he said bollocks, Jeff just said bollocks , that's good  oh if tonight we would, see me driving along in the car and got that on, oh no, it'll be really funny, we're gonna be sitting there going come on as if we'd said that today
Ben
I won't have this tonight though
Why?
Cos I have to give it back
Ah no, still got that other tape you taped from last night haven't you?
Yeah
You'll bring that out with you
I ain't listened to it all myself yet
Yeah we can listen to it in the car, I wanna hear what was going on 
I took this out last night Jeff, right, and er, I put it in my pocket and I put, put the mike, strap the mike to it, it's gone
like that, no one knew, I was driving the car and I recorded everything that was in the car all night  no one knew until the end of the night, I got the tape home, I go this is gonna be interesting   I had to do it on one of my tapes though
Cor a conifer's still in that bag 
It'll be alright cos they've been sealed in a plastic bag
there ain't no muck on the root, it weren't the root, it were washed 
must be when I looked at it they'd been grown in the field, because it's burnt, you can see it's got this reddish muck where all the mud down
that area is reddish anyway, when you'll, and they've been washed you see, they've been rinsed off in water, to get all the muck off, and then put in bags of ten  cos when you touch them you get all this red stuff all on you, red muck,
they come through the post
In a big, big bag
in a big plastic bag with a big warning perishable if delayed mm, so there 
it ain't bad though I mean twenty two pounds for fifty, work that out 
yeah, plus I didn't charge for postage either 
two or three quid isn't there?
Mm
mm, cos the bag
how long where you seen them?
About that round, massive great bag
mm
You know he didn't take it in
Mm  well the little piece of
had been kind of, or whatever they are Mr F   and then on the back it's got for Peggy's six foot high and under plant eighteen inches apart for high six foot plus plant two feet apart
I mean Christmas ones are only a couple of foot apart, there's only about that much between them, you know?
And then, they grow together
Mm?
Yeah 
She gives you a better ground, ground cover
if they're two far apart, you get big gaps at the bottom
Yeah, that's why you keep the tops chopped, cos they actually comes out by themselves, they'll come out
and into the garden as well you see, not only longways, but quite wide
Yeah I'll be planting mine right up against the metal fence
Yeah
so hopefully they should grow through the fence, come out the other side and eventually the fence will be hidden such as 
well it's got my electric cable running through that fence you see
Oh 
Well it actually doesn't very, it doesn't touch the actual fence it erm  all along the concrete poles they've got holes through them where you can put some wire different higher of fence you see
wire through each lead, you know, put back through each one, where you going?
The shop
What for?
 

Thanks a lot, bye 
Mm, that's right though, there should be a  they make out,wh ,wh , what's all that about then, vote for at the next election or something?
No
mm the B N P party 
What happened to the B N 
I thought it was the National Front actually 
B N P huh 
British Nationalist Party  mm that sounds a good party to vote for 
Have you had your leaflet through the door yet?
No
You're obviously the last people to have them then, I think everybody else has had them
I want the phone bill to lob into them as well, but I ain't got one
all round the trees, like that woman did with her husband  cos she, she was a bit of a lunatic and er
and er so one night she gave him, come in a bit paralytic, wanted a drink, so she give him a drink with a load of tranquillisers in
Mm, mm
he passed out that killed him and found him in the garden, it took four years to find him
really?
Whenever, anybody asked where he was, oh he was abroad working abroad
Oh those trees will grow really quick anyway, cos they're so many goodness in the ground in their garden, it's bloody amazing never think to
and I reckon what it is they spray the fields with all this stuff
and all that lot, yeah, and then when it, when it rains you see cos it's a lot of clay
It can't be washed away so easy
Yeah it does, it all washes down into the garden you see cos the garden's on a slope and the field, the field slopes straight into the garden, and when we have, when we really have lots and lots of rain, you look out your back windows and there's about that much lying there, cos it's running down and it can't get past the houses, so it just builds up and floods
Yeah, I shall make sure the er path between your houses is lower than anything else, so it takes it away
Mm, my patio's going down there
Oh you can't
patios
No, it'll be alright
Mm, you wait until we have that heavy rain
Er want, it want
by the time I spent just
it's gonna be flat to the, and I'm gonna build a wall about two foot high and level the garden
Yeah
and level with the top of the garden
Yeah
so it'll all be level so that 
Yeah, it'll still come down though won't it?
No it wouldn't, can't, can't not at the ground level, it will sit at the top
No it won't, no it won't, seep through earth eventually
No, but it wouldn't seep through that wall though will it?
No it'll go round it, won't it?
Down it or under it
It'll go in next door's garden then, mm
It'll either go round it or under it won't it?
Mm
What about size,
right up to the house innit?
Mm
right up to the house
Mm
the patio, not the wall
No
you can either go round it or, or under it
the wall just going to go straight across the garden
Yeah, what are you gonna have some steps up?
Yeah, steps in the middle, yeah
That's it and that's where the water will come through
No
come down them steps and straight through your house
Er, er, er I'm going to put a drain in anyway, in the middle of the patio
Yeah, but where?
What?
Where you gonna
Into the sewer, cos there's a drain bit just where the patio's gonna be and the drain what comes out the outfill
the washing machine away
Yeah
and I just have, well
put another pipe in
just put another pipe in it  knock a couple of bricks out and knock a pipe in and that's
no I didn't want to leave a little, only want to leave a proper little drain things, you know 
It's probably a six high inch pipe underneath there I should think 
Mind you, them, actually they
straight underneath the back door
Then they all go along the back
Mm
with them along the back
Mm
I ain't worked out how the sewers
goes to the
Mm
I think it goes underground nex , our next door neighbour's house, and out, the only
we've got, is at the back of the house right, and then it goes up there, then that is the houses and it goes down to the sewer in the road, so er
I didn't know
no, no, no, that's what I can't understand, no I think it's about a hundred years old you see, probably
erm thinking about sewers ain't they?
Yeah, probably not, it'll pocket out the window job
mm
so as long as they er didn't actually have
You had toilets out in the garden, didn't you?
Yeah, that's why you see, we've converted, put a wall up where the door were and knocked the wall down and had a door into the house 
That's chaos that is
innit?
Yeah, see all these trees as well, clean all the air, all  the air and the ozone and
convert carbon dioxide not, not, not carbon dioxide back to oxygen can't they?
 

them might not even go straight to
but half way from the lawns here, I'm thinking actually about having a round lawn, right,
Yeah, that's harder 
even on the 
to keep cut easier to cut it square
well have a square one, but where, half way up in between the fish pond and the lawn I was thinking of come in, in again with the edge both sides, sort of like, where it goes, where they go straight, come in sort of like plant two there or three there, two there, one there, you see so it does it into a point again, both sides you get two
I wanna plant a maze actually in my garden , that's what I want, you'll be amazed Mark wait till I start digging my pond cos Marcus is coming over to help me, yeah he is 
No problem
ten minutes
no it's not
this gonna be twenty foot wide and four foot deep, no not twenty foot wide, twelve foot wide, twelve foot square and four foot deep
where you put all that earth?
Mm, it banks up the other side  banks up the other side you see and then once the pond's all in you sort of landscape it all down and you use it as a rockery, I want the
anyway to go the other side on the other
no it's been there two years
I'd just chuck it over fence and
that's where all the
All the rubbish goes
all the rubbish out of our garden is over there, in the field
Yeah
lots of all, lots of wire and bricks and stones and old potatoes, you want to see potatoes that grow in that field, there's never been potatoes in that field before, but there is, we throw all the dicey ones over the fence
Why don't you throw it in the dustbin?
The dustbin's round the other garden, the field's nearer
I bet the farmer loves you.
It's alright growing potatoes in his field
Mm
It is when you've got another crop there innit?
 
We, we , we said it's about time they grew potatoes in that field
So you could pinch them
Yeah, so we could, yeah, you know, it'll, it'll be a lot better, I mean all they do is grow either that grain or corn
Erm they wouldn't grow, they can't grow grain or use two or three times in succession, but then for that another seven years because it takes so much goodness out the erm thing, there's so many diseases and they got to change their crop after a while 
There's been corn
Yeah, grain's horrible because it's smells terrible, it really gets to you.
They bale it all up through, when you go and nick a load of bales
Like they use in the big railway days 
No, no they've got a square
Yeah
Ooh, yeah, you'll be seen
I would
my conifers are gonna go across the garden in between and then they're gonna go
round the top, so nobody will be able to get into it, out the back anyway unless they're, unless they climb through them, you can't climb through the conifers when there
Yeah
you can't get through, no possible way
No, I really wanna, liked to have
you will cos it wouldn't get through will it?
It will, they'll make a hole through it
They can't cos I've got that metal fence through it
They'll go above the metal fence
That's right they will do, how high is the metal fence?
Two or three feet?
Three feet, it jumped it at the moment, but when the
conifers are there
it can't though
in the middle of the hedge
  

It can't do that, hello it's only me
   

Ben you're always driving here and there  
I tell you we ain't got no more of these
No
Ah, yeah 
Ah it smells horrible
Yeah I'll help you do your erm
Yeah fine, OK
Fine if Andrea's there
 

If Andrea's there I bet
cos while I'm doing that I
innit?
no
    

God knows how they do
 

Hard core you know the score  it's so dodgy behind my house
where's the odd five gone?
Ah?
Where's the odd five?
I don't know 
I think
done them all now
What?
done all these
I could 
Lucozade, Lucozade 
Oh wow, no way I'm not hundred percent
Yeah
I tell you what when you packed up smoking it was last cigarette you
Yeah, well I thought it was
Yeah I know that
The money I've spent on cars, I mean
Can do, it does you know, so I don't smoke now cos of my breath you see, if I had a fag she'd go straight away 
Oh dear me
Oh that bloody crap
 

Well how did she know, ah?
  

What's that?
I said you'll be seeing when you watch that and you'll start crying 
Do what?
When you start crying when you watch that video
Oh sure
Yeah
Yeah I bet you do
You bet I do, do you?
Yeah
You must be joking
Bring tears to the eyes, all that
Yeah, no, yeah
been kick in the bollocks
, you'll have to take that off there  yeah you can   
You cried didn't you Mark?
No
Oh yes you did.
No, no I didn't.
I know you did, you did.
No I didn't.
Carol told me
Oh, er
yes she did
no, so did you
It's a sad film though
It is sad 
   

When that white light comes down at the end
  

Turn this up a bit cos my missus
Get the tissues out
Get the tissues out, that's it
        

Have you seen it?
Yeah
Show the bit in
when he starts going, you think I've jumped 
  

Yeah that's all it were
Yeah it was far weren't it?
No, but if you noticed right, the only people who got them, yeah, were the people who killed people
Mm
and the only people who
and everybody who killed people got those nasty ones, cos I was sitting there thinking that, and I watched it through again   why 
I might get a
there's that old boy sits there and go
he does it every time
and he's sitting there you know going blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, there
and there's that
Hell of a good film though, it's the best film I've seen in a long time.
Oh yeah
Yeah and there's that old boy in the
leave me alone, he obviously did jump didn't he?
Yes, when he run off, he jumped in front of it didn't he?
Mm, he reckons he was pushed
Yeah I know, he, you think I jumped, I was pushed 
That was Annie Lennox  You should be Prince Charles
 

 

I said yeah
This one
a complete prat
No, just a
  

help me out
No
No
say right, yeah Freddy Mercury you can come up on the stage, don't you think?
No
Why not?
Cos they'll see you and think yuck
oh, you look nothing like him, you've got blond hair for starters
I'll dye it 
she's done a runner, oh dear me, naughty, naughty innit?
Who's she running off, some other bloke?
I don't know
An American millionaire or something
Who she, who, who, who is it?
Fergie
No I didn't like her anyway
That ginger hair thing?
Yeah
A bit like
 

I've only putting these green
yeah
Obviously cos I've got the green ones  oh 
Don't know, no  I don't think so somehow Mark
Don't know
O N D
I listen to O N D
Do you like O N D?
Yeah, they're alright aren't they?
I like a couple of their songs  How about Depeche Mode, have you ever heard of them?
Yeah
Do you like them?
No
No, oh, I've got one of
Ah, what?
no
How about the
do you remember them?
No
No
No 
They're saying that
remember?
No 
Don't you remember that other one, the one
No
It whistled virtually all the way through, it went  don't you know it?
No
Where have you been?
Where have you been?
Not on this planet
Try and remember Boney M
Yes 
Well then 
don't remember
the old era
yeah, why not?
What you gotta ask Andrea later?
For the tape
Nice
ah, got
will you remember when she gets there?
Probably not
What if I write it on your forehead and then she'll see it won't she?
God she's gonna have something to say to you about your hair
No I was thinking
no you've gotta let her see your hair
No
no, Carol will tell her
she'll got
tell Andrea I've had all my hair cut off as well 
Oh no, what have you done to your hair it's all coming out
Where?
What have you done to it, on top?
Just there?
No the other side, all on top it comes sticking up
Ah
Oh dear me
has it gone down again?
No it's, it's sticking it way out there
No
It is seriously it's got a big curl sticking up on there
Oh er
it's all at the back
where?
All on top, you see, it's quite weird
No it ain't sticking up, you liar
It is
You're a liar and I'm gonna have a look in the mirror in a minute  I know it ain't sticking up.
It weren't at first but it is now
where?
    

I drive into the, I'll drive round into the tower park  then drive straight back out again, I'll make you run after me
I wouldn't run after you  not this time
You'll go OK, good enough
If I ain't in the square then don't ask me where I will be
Why I won't will I, I won't ask them where you'll be will I, cos you won't be there, so I can't ask you can I?
Ha, ha, ha, you know what I mean
and he's there for four to five hours  with just live entertainment, you know during the meal.
So you know it's er  quite a big thing.
Right so  don't get enough .
Mm yeah it's a shame innit?
Loads there 
I tell you what a lot of it is erm  if, if they're gonna get married, people won't want for anything.
They, they'll drop literally everything.
It's nice innit?
Mm.
Well it's like you say, if they work there they work.
If they don't they don't do they?
You, you know it must be just like er the Mexican manyana, you know.
Yeah  yeah yeah.
Erm Alexandro, the bloke who lived next door 
Yeah?
Well, he lives in a shed.
He says er do you like hazelnuts?
Yeah.
And I thought he was gonna come up with, you know, a dish.
He's got a bloody Tesco's carrier bag full.
He didn't!
I've got loads of erm
Yeah!
Tons of it, you know.
loads of negatives of those  
 
see them.
Where are we?
This is 
No, well come about Christmas time, you know 
That's  that's all taken in
that's all taken in the gardens.
Are you alright?
Mm.
Down there?
Yeah.
Do you wanna sit here?
No I'm alright.
That's all taken in the gardens and and inside the building of the palace of .
.
During the war  the princess or the queen of that area  and all her  and everything, they all left.
They just abandoned it.
And the place has been left ever since and they just look after it.
If you step inside it's really  ooh
?
No no, these are, these are not waterfalls.
They're all steps dad.
There's about  twelve steps.
And in each step as you walk along it, and it's a, it's a goldfish pond.
It's lovely.
You'll see the fish.
It's lovely though innit.
Here you are dad, sit here.
Dad, sit there.
come along.
Come on.
the right sort of lifestyle.
you know .
If you've got  opportunity,place, but not work again.
That would be nice wouldn't it?
Of course, the problem in that area is it's a, the earthquakes
Yeah.
There's a lot of tremors.
But  this Alexandro, his house is er  cracked from corner to cornerl
Is it really?
Yeah.
And it's  about that wide.
So they've got to re-do the foundations and everything 
Yeah.
So  he's been  for two years.
And I couldn't stand that.
No.
If it's  I want to get it fixed again.
Yeah.
Get it back to normal.
Mm.
the weather's lovely, you know?
Yeah it is innit?
And even the, the winter's are not basically cold.
They go down to about  fifteen degrees.
That's mild innit?
That's mild .
 
We've gotta go soon anyway.
When we was there in October, it was twenty four degrees.
And like you say, they've got jumpers on 
   

Who's a lovely boy?
 

I've moved that, I moved that so he didn't knock it over cos he were knocking it with his tail.
Well it don't matter.
I've gotta find where they were though first.
Where were they?
Which one did I have them in?
This one.
That's  This is a place  now from Tony's  on some of those photos you're looking at when he was in the garden  see the mountains.
This is a place called .
It's a mountain that you can see, one of these four mountains.
Now this is, Rocetta is the first campsite that Hannibal had when he went through the alps with his el elephants.
Oh.
Oh.
if you like.
And we went up there, oh dear, driving up there you're going up on this little tiny  when you've got a big car.
Like this.
Little tiny road about this wide, you go round a corner and you think your wheel's gonna fall down the side and then you meet somebody coming down.
Ooh it's  horrifying.
Oh it's, it is, it's lovely.
I shall de I shall go back.
Driving through Italy is an experience.
You know I mean they're terrible drivers.
Well yeah they've got a reputation haven't they?
Well they .
Now you've got  I mean the  autostradas that they build aren't as good as, as, nowhere near as good as the autobahns in er  in Germany and through th you know, Switzerland and that.
I mean Switzerland  in Switzerland the roads are .
You get into Italy .
You've gotta pay to go through, all these tolls  which we did okay cos what we done we bought a pack which gave us   petrol coupons.
And got money back, the ones we didn't use  
 
We used all our time, we ended up having to pay in the end.
It's only about like a pound
But when it rained, going down  I mean going down it rained so much I thought we'd never, never even going to get there.
I mean the car stopped once.
Went through water this deep  .
I went to  erm the guy I work with is a Belgian and I was invited to his birthday party.
In  Munchengladback the Belgians  community .
And er this man, Patrick, his m parents came up and his mother started talking to me.
And I was trying to explain something to her in German.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
  
 
was about  maybe twelve degrees.
she were drinking, it's called  Trappiste And the beer was from eight to degrees to si sixteen degrees.
Ooh.
And she was 
Yeah, yeah.
But er the blokes were looking at her 
just sitting there  
Yeah.
It looks like this, Trappiste A bit sharper in the colour but 
Yeah.
Ooh.
I like  given it up now.
British
during the day.
It's not too bad, Germany but I mean it's not as good as  
No it ain't.
Ooh.
But I would like to 
Yeah, very nice .
But erm  when the weather's
Oh yeah, pretty place that isn't it?
fine yes it's a lovely place.
How did you find Tony?
Is he er coping?
Well he weren't too bad dad but he's been really poorly.
I think he  I think he does too much.
He he worries too much.
Yeah but he does too much as well.
He does loads of jobs.
No, he worries about not worrying.
You say to him don't worry about it.
You know, it'll be alright just  have a good time.
But he doesn't, he worries
Where is that ?
about not worrying.
I mean, you know, what  what can you do about it?
That's  Monte Casino Oh if you've heard of  Monte Casino .
Well it's a place in Italy where the Germans tried to take it.
You're best not worry  
But you see with him being ill, he worries about not being able to bring money in.
You know, to the family.
And Philomena says well it's alright you you're ill.
You can't bring it in.
So she works and the, the two kids work and they get by and there's no problem.
But erm he does, he he worries a lot and I think that's half his trouble.
Yeah, yeah.
Is it the er  is it the family house?
You know a
No erm  they sold Philomena's family out.
But  when she was over here, she sold up and her sister sold up at the same time.
And they went back and they bought this really big house, well  it wasn't a house it was a shell.
Just you know, floorboards and a roof.
And they've converted it to two flats.
Philomena and Tony live upstairs and the sister lives downstairs.
And it's  three big bedrooms er  a small kitchen.
There's a, a living room and a lounge.
Big bathroom and toilet you know, and verandah  To value it over here you're talking about fifty thousand pound.
But there I think it's thereabouts  twenty thousand, between
More probably sixty or seventy in this area if you've got a good house.
Did it as they want it sort of you know?
Yeah, yeah.
I bet it's beautiful innit?
 
What are houses going for in the old Yorkshire way?
I don't know.
Haven't got a clue.
I know my sister's mortgage has just gone down.
Do you know how much she pays a month?
Eighteen pound.
Cor!
Because she bought the house in the, you know,six in the sixties.
Phew.
Mid to  mi mid to late sixties she bought her house and  just  this is their second house  and, you know, that's all the mortgage was.
And that's just showing you what inflation's like.
What's the rent on these now?
Er 
six pounds.
Six pound weren't it?
Yeah, yeah.
thirty now.
And they stormed it, it's built up on a high, you'll see the photo of it when, where it  and they protected, there's a film about it, where the erm
Well the name rings a bell.
I expect 
Yeah.
old films really but I don't like war films.
I like the old fashioned I don't like the modern stuff .
But erm this was  cos  the Germans were so angry cos they couldn't get up there and they lost so many men  up there .
But erm  they were so mad they bombed it.
They, they took all their stuff.
All their special, you know, relics and that and they put them all in the cellars so when it was bombed, all the precio all the treasures and that were kept.
came back up again and they rebuilt it.
Mm.
These are all the old erm  armed forces' old shells and hats and things you see.
All the different hats, there's German's, Italy's  British
Oh yeah.
all sorts of hats there.
Tony, not my Tony but Tony who is Maria's son, Maria is Philomena's sister.
Oh yeah.
Her son  said he hadn't  see that, he said,.
so I said go on then  so he said, well he 
He came to England, his mum had lived in England in Bedford .
Went back to Italy.
He'd only been back there about three or four weeks and they  conscrip conscripted him.
Conscripted for two years.
Mm.
And they get terrible pay though.
Mm.
Terrible pay.
It's only .
See there he is up there.
Oh yeah.
So 
Yeah it's thirty nine a week.
actually but  Well when we came in  forty odd  forty odd years ago it was twenty three and six a week.
Mm .
For these houses.
Now we're  thirty odd pounds.
your maximum's only about a hundred and ten to a hundred and twenty a week.
Yeah.
And you've got your tax out of it.
And when you get a rent like that.
Really you  pay eighty pound a week haven't you?
Yeah.
your stoppages.
Stoppages, yeah.
at least fifty pound a week to pay for your food
Yeah.
and living costs.
Yeah.
Then you've got your water, your gas.
Yeah.
.
You can see why people don't work in this country.
Well this is what
That's it.
You can, yeah.
I mean  
you'd be surprised.
I mean  it's chea effectively it's cheaper to live over there.
Yeah, Yeah.
The taxes are high mind you.
Yeah.
And you pay for your er your medical expenses and things but  it's cheaper.
 
but they were cheap.
Yeah.
And you pay for quality.
It's  
Quality, yeah.
Yeah.
We didn't go into  we passed the leaning tower of Pisa.
But it was  sort of let me think  it was over  and it only looked about that big.
Oh yeah.
But it  really amazing just to see it, you know?
Yeah.
We're driving down this road and I said well Pisa's down here 
Yeah.
Oh it's a lovely palace, it really is.
That reminded me of Versailles.
That's the Polish cemetery and all the way round  This is the erm Canadian and British, all this  the joint you know  forces.
Allied forces.
Allied forces, that's right.
That's the Polish and there's an Italian one.
Oh yeah.
And a bit further away the German one.
Yeah yeah, I won't be long.
That's a nasty cough you've got.
Yeah look this is  I know.
This is  I know it's terrible innit?
This is Tony, Maria's son.
Oh yeah.
chest  
And there's Tony.
And there's my Tony .
 
And we all had dinner that night, and every time somebody said Tony, well 
Oh dear  I'm ready if you are then   Get some wood shavings and 
 
Yeah.
That's  full time job that is.
 
I can't get over him, he looks just looks like .
What's he actually do, for a living?
What does he 
Well he's, he works in some factory  and the partner he does, he does erm chimney sweeping with the old .
He earns quite a bit of money from that 
 
Vino  vino, whatever you know?
And he used to go round the side  get through  bottle a day.
no more.
So he never drinks no more.
He is thin really cos he looks, he looks  he looks twenty years older than me.
   

He sounds just like Alan 
I know they do.
Yeah just like them.
Well Clare reckons  
 
Sally   Sally   That's Sally
Dunno.
Emily, that's Emily yeah.
Is it?
Is it?
Yeah.
Doesn't she look like Sally?
So does er Deborah looks like Sally when she's got her glasses on.
And Laura's got glasses now  
Look at this Tony, look who   Well I've got it  it's Sally.
And it's who?
Emily.
Emily.
Steven's little  here we come past Steven's house.
Oh did you?
Which one is it?
 

She says it must be one of them along there.
You know.
It's got daffodils all up the side of the rails.
  

this bloke, he cracked up.
There's a wall stands about this high  and he's do he does his duty on top of the wall.
Sits down like that and he does a dooberry on top of the wall .
Yeah, tell you what he does, he gets his back legs up on top of the wall and he does it on top.
This bloke he cracked up.
He couldn't stop laughing.
Either that or he backs into  reverses into a hedge.
Yeah, yeah.
He never does it on a path or nothing, he always reverses in somewhere.
Yes he is, very 
 
Nearly long enough for a dress innit?
I had another one, came right down here mum.
A lovely one.
And I picked up a load of washing the other day and put it in the washing machine  and I washed it.
And it come out .
Eh?
Well that one's nearly long enough for a dress 
Oh , I can't wear them that short now.
Not with my legs.
Well they wear them with these leggings don't they?
Coloured leggings and sh ever so short dresses  the youngsters.
Yeah.
Mm.
Is this Tony's dog?
Yeah that's Sally.
Oh we had such fun with her, that curtain.
What were you, what were you doing?
Oh he flashed the camera and it didn't, she didn't like the flash.
You know you can just flash it ?
Mm.
Yeah so we just went  pretended to take a photo  and she'd  psshoooow and she'd shoot off.
And then she'd peep her head under the curtain to see if it had gone
so we took a photo of her and off she'd go again .
Ever so funny.
.
Italian doggy  
Oh my bum's still sore.
It it's sitting in those chairs I was  yeah sitting on them, on them sloping chairs
Oh my bum hurts 
sitting on those sloping chairs on the, on the ferry.
I c we we bought these two sloping cha 
I reckons she's got blinking piles.
We bought these two sloping chairs right  and Tony, where our seats were there was a big light in the ceiling, a big round light there, and it shone straight in the side of me eye  I said we can't sit here.
How are you supposed to go to sleep with that flipping light there?
I kept moaning.
So in the end I went upstairs, left Tony to it  and I came back down and I tried to go to sleep again, I put me coat over me head and I couldn't sleep so I moved.
I went three seats down  
Well you, you'd think it  
what's, you know it's sunk into the ceiling.
It just gives a, a glow off.
We were sat  
 
See it wouldn't affect some people but
It doesn't bother me  
I can't sleep with a light on.
I can't sleep with the light on.
No.
cos the, the gap between the chairs is about six or eight inches  
And it hurts me eyes  
 
Well I don't you know, haven't got my hearing aid on, I don't hear any noises in the night.
But if your dad switches the light on for anything  
I always go to bed before Tony.
I'm  I'm  I'm terrible.
I'm sometimes in bed by half past nine.
And if he comes to bed and puts the light on.
He's got a lamp by the side of his bed 
And then you wake up and walk sideways don't you ?
you can dim.
So I put it on the dim switch so as he can see to get in the bedroom.
Now if he happens to knock it or he, he lights it up or  I always wake up.
Always.
go and do some work.
If I don't put that light on and he comes in and puts the light on, I wake up just like that.
What's the er  in the background.
Well that's some erm  it's no significant  it's it's just 
innit?
No it's the other side of
Which way is it?
Oh it's the other side.
Lovely innit?
Yeah.
Have you got any money on you?
Not on me, no.
No,.
Oh alright  I'll got and get  
So I wanna next time I wanna go to Berne.
I wanna go on holiday and I wanna go somewhere near Berne.
Yeah she always wants to go to the expensive places.
Yeah but it's
I wanna go there because you can ski.
I wanna learn, I  skiing.
Where?
At Berne.
Switzerland?
Yeah.
Or even staying in Germany.
She wants to  
I just wanna have a go at skiing.
My friend's just had a go at skiing.
Skiing?
Oh she, Julie thought it were lovely.
Well I'd  I'd like to just try it you know?
Cos you get a lot of snow in Germany but we haven't had much in the last two years.
are you taking yourselves somewhere?
I'm going now.
 

But I used to like my little Hillman Imp.
yeah, yeah.
mine's only  it's only a  you know  about nine hundred and  sommat C C engine
No I don't like big cars but I  
I like a car where I'm in charge.
Well if, I tell you, if I thought  if I thought for one minute  that we were gonna come back to England like in the next year, which we won't cos Tony's got another year to do now, it's a bit longer than we thought it was
Mm.
but  if I thought we were coming back, I'd get myself a little car.
You know I, I can't drive that big  
 
Well I can.
I mean I can move it and I can make i but I, I don't  
 
don't like it.
It's too big for me.
I like it being a passenger  oh I don't like driving and the wheel's on the wrong side.
Are you getting used to the opposite side of the road now?
It's easy 
Yeah.
Yeah.
When you think it's nearly two years since I've been here.
Yeah, yeah it is innit?
Last time we came home we, we came off the motorway  and .
And  wrong side of the road so  chap coming round met us  
It is confusing, yeah.
It is confusing that is.
Oh well I  opposite side of the road's nothing to me now cos I, I live on my bike.
I'm always on me bike.
We came out the, out the ferry port  and you're alright going straight on to the boat, it's when you've gotta turn right.
Very easy to simply turn into this lane instead of going right the way over to the other side.
Yeah.
You do it without thinking.
That's where I fall down straight away.
Mm.
When I'm on me bike.
I'll be down there in front of them cars.
And we've got right of way now.
why they don't change over in this country because we're the odd one out and if they make cars they've gotta make them  with the steering wheel one side or the other 
Well yeah but think of the chaos it would cause, swapping over
Yeah.
ooh think of the chaos it would cause  
What you need, cos I remember reading about when they changed over, I think it was in Denmark or somewhere
Eh?
and at a certain time  everything stopped.
All the traffic, it was all sort of er  arranged that at a certain time all the traffic stopped  to the other side.
To, to change this, the British road system to the same as the continent would be easy.
You take away all the road  
It would be easier for the car manufacturers wouldn't it?
That's it yeah.
Yeah.
have to make cars with the steering wheel one side or the other.
Well I think it would be ideal
take away the roundabouts.
I I think
Roundabouts are better off 
congestion.
but I mean
No way.
No way.
I prefer them.
traffic lights I do.
No, they're no good.
Prefer them to traffic lights.
Well  over there you see we don't get many traffic lights.
You don't get many traffic lights or roundabouts.
Although in Germany  
amazing roads.
You don't see any cars 
three or four roundabouts.
Well you see i i yeah but it's a bigger country and I mean it's so congested in England.
You've gotta have some sort of 
Even in town you don't have roundabouts.
traffic control haven't you?
Well there's no roundabouts in the town.
It's all filtered innit?
It's all filtered on.
Mm.
Yeah but I mean I suppose it's what you're used to.
got priority.
I couldn't believe 
 
Well when  was there that fortnight and it seemed ever so strange  when we  car with the driver sitting that side and all the traffic coming by the other way, it seemed mad to me cos of  just those few weeks, I didn't get time to get
Ah  no.
acclimatized to it.
You'll have to come longer.
I told you you should come longer.
Mm?
You'll have to come longer.
It's, it's, it's a thing that could be done in this country  
It needs it.
Yeah but when wh 
But er it would cause chaos for a time
Yeah.
especially with pensioners  
Oh yeah, it would.
Right I'm gonna go  
But not only that but you, there'd be a point where  
We're going  
We'll see you later.
 
Did Marcus, did Marcus take that wine to work?
No he really liked it.
Yeah he liked it.
He got a bit flushed though.
his face were all flushed.
He didn't drink it all himself?
No he gave us a glass each
Oh .
and then he had  he'd only had a couple I think before he went home but he doesn't drink much see.
He come down, his face were all flushed
Right  so I'll see you later mum
Let Marion taste your medicine.
I'll see you again mum, okay?
see you later
Bye.
See you later
Ta ta.
Bye.
See you later.
Ta ta Marje.
I named a duck  I had this letter come  no no no no, I had this letter come, right, and it said  now they've got this duck and they didn't know what to call it and so Gemma said well I think  erm Eileen, Auntie Eileen ought to name it so  I, I was asked to name this duck.
So I said well I think Drucilla's a nice name for a duck.
And now they call it Drucilla the duck.
It's, is this it's a lady duck presumably?
Well I  it's a lady.
Yeah they'd have said a drake otherwise.
Well yeah, true.
I
I call them all ducks, but there you are.
Well they all look like ducks.
But they've got both you see and they refer to them as the ducks or the drakes so they
Yeah
one of the main streets.
Who is?
Right.
I'd better go mother  
 
We should be,we we're only here for a little while cos I'm going to spend some time with the girls cos I ain't see their 
Yeah, yeah.
Sarah for as long as I can, well as long as I 
Well
I mean I've seen, I did see Rob last Ju Ju 
Well I ain't seen Sarah since our party at least.
I ain't seen Sarah since the party, no.
Same as you and, and Marje I  their Marjie she started to cry when I went   .
Didn't know what I were gonna do with her.
Ah,?
Yeah, bless her.
She did, she started crying 
Well it surprised her I expect cos we weren't expecting you so early.
No I was surprised when I came in.
I rang up Derek and Jenny came up to tell us and she said er  Eileen'll be coming on the twentieth and she won't be here till between eleven and twelve.
Well I didn't think we would be.
I was surprised  Tony 
never did get round
You know, because he's .
And he's .
And he hasn't got anybody, anybody near him.
But he thinks he has.
Yeah.
And that's his trouble, he thinks 
Yeah but he won't you see, it's it's, it's his personal pride.
But he's got to realize that he is ill  and the more he worries the, the, the worse he's gonna get.
conscientious.
when he does his, his  er chimney sweeping.
You know, erm  he charges  oh, fifteen pounds for labour.
And he  a funeral parlour .
Fantastic job.
so he must be doing good work .
But  for him to go self-employed  will cost him more money  than doing it on the bl black market.
So he doesn't go self-employed.
Well he were working er   weren't he, at one time?
Yeah, yeah.
What were he doing?
Labouring.
It were just a labouring job.
Mm.
Look's nice.
Yeah that was .
The the, the house is in such a position erm  it's, it's in a cul-de-sac, well  the road goes up this .
There's a house at the end .
And you can see 
never did get round to hoovering the carpet.
I did s bit of dusting and then they came in and I just le 
Well when you've had your holiday that's nice 
If you wanna come, drive over on the thing and come, what we'll do, we'll do what we do when we bring  Pat and Alan.
Pat and Alan are coming right?
They came and stayed with us when we  
 
but erm  they're coming over and they're coming to our house on the Thursday  and on the Saturday morning we're driving down to  which is down near .
It's a lovely part of Germany, you've got fields and vine valleys and oh it's a lovely area.
We've driven down that's a s similar way to where we went to Switzerland 
Oh yeah.
down there.
But we're going there, spending a week down there with them and then they're coming and spending a week  four days with us and then they're going back.
Mm.
So  do that.
We'll go somewhere .
Hartz mountain is supposed to be really wonderful.
the Hartz mountain where you went
Yeah that's where we went when we went on that  ferry  
Yeah well I ain't been there yet, but we're near there where we're going.
It is lovely there, yeah.
Yeah we're near there and, and  did you go down   near Bavaria there, did you go to Bavaria then?
No, we only, we were just  you know
Or did you go up  way?
we were  Hartz mountains and drove,drove and we
we had a, rented a place, a flat 
A place there called A  Altenhow Altenhow , that's supposed to be nice, in the Hartz mountains.
Well that's where we went, where erm  if I can remember, erm  er  what was the name ?
I can't remember the na oh  that was an 
Yeah, yeah.
ancient town yeah.
Yeah that's 
Erm and some place that's a skiing resort in the winter
is that the place you mean?
Yeah.
Yeah that's a really old
Yeah.
ancient sort of town.
I'm trying to think of the name  lots of little towns that were  
Yeah they were all er all the way through, yeah.
Cos they're easy to get to each of them, aren't they, apparently?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah that's what we 
 
  

Well, yeah
Well I mean Ton well I'm alright.
I just don't, I just don't like, if it was a little car I wouldn't mind.
And I'm seriously thinking of getting something but I ain't gonna, not yet.
Not till I can afford to go out and buy one.
No.
I'm not gonna go and  right, well anyway I'm, I'm
Well it's been lovely to see you.
Alright?
We'll see you again.
Yeah.
Pop  
Well we're coming again this year but we don't know when.
Well you'll have to come over ours.
Yeah we will do.
We'll, we got we gotta go to  gotta go and see our Tim.
He's really upset because  we haven't been to Devon.
It's such a long way you know 
Yeah.
if I go to Devon I can't come and s up this end
Are you going this time?
No.
there's more people this end, we can't get there dad.
It's a, it's er it's a long old drive.
I promised him I'd go this year though.
I know it is.
It's  it's a long way.
How long you got?
Altogether?
Well just this week.
We've only got a week.
went down on the bus it would take him 
That's right,
You see if we go we drive.
We've gotta spend overnight and come back.
There's two days.
Well I promised our  our Sarah I'd spend some time with her  I ain't gonna say too much but she does get a bit upset at times 
 
You see the thing is wh when we come home we've got such a  su such a, a distance to cover, you know it's, it's difficult.
I mean  the fact is when you're over here, how long are you over here for?
Well we're going back on Saturday.
Saturday.
Well it means you don't have time.
No.
You've gotta  travel 
That's the trouble.
all over the country and you can't do it  
You just can't no.
That's what we said to Tim.
We, we can't get down there because that's two days  you know?
And I have  g I have paid for  English lights  just for the sake of a week 
You can't satisfy all of them.
No.
That's the point.
Yeah well
It's just a question of you coming and doing your best.
Yeah.
See the other 
You can't do any more.
the other thing about coming over is it's bloody expensive in England.
Yeah I know.
You know?
And er  w when I came over before and we did Hull  you know Warwickshire and   I did twelve hundred miles  in ten days.
Well it's a lot of driving  
Yeah.
you know?
I needed a rest when I got back.
And it's a strain  
It is, you know?
Especially these days on these roads.
Yeah.
Well 
Yeah.
And they er adopted a scheme  last year  when they cut off part of the high street from traffic.
Mm.
And you went down the high street  and you turned sharp left  and went along Dock Street  and circling  supermarket at the bottom end of town 
That's right yeah.
Yeah.
They've cut that out now.
Oh.
You go straight down again.
And consequently the the high street  uncertain now
Ooh
Yeah.
And they're all doing their shopping .
I'm er I'm a believer in  er pedestrian precincts  you know?
Because if you want to do shopping or  just  window shopping, you should park outside of the town  or on the outskirts of the town  and you can walk in or you can get the  the bus service  
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's just as easy.
But that's the problem, bus service
Well yeah
in this country today the 
Well  it isn't a bus service is it, you know?
No.
Because you  feel obliged to them don't you?
Providing a service.
been destroyed.
Yeah.
I think the best move they made in  in, in recent years has been the introduction  of what they call the   and it travels all the way in the town.
And forty pence you can get on and go up to your home, they pull up outside our gate.
Yeah.
And for forty pence 
It's been a godsend for us to go down the street shopping, if you've got a load of shopping you just stop  right outside the gate.
Yeah.
They did that, they did that in er  yeah they did that in  Levington with er 
Yeah.
taxis.
You got  and you, you  a taxi came along  and you paid him forty P or fifty P, whatever
Mm.
and you went anywhere on that route, yeah?
And if you said you wanted to be off the route slightly, no problem he'd go around.
That's it.
Yeah.
It has it's routes, it goes round and round
Yeah.
and you can go on it  anywhere as far as you like for forty pence.
And you can do the lot for forty pence.
It even takes you over the hill into 
We can get down on the high street any of these times and it drops us back up here.
Yeah.
It's a circular route all the time, it keeps going back to  the town centre
Yeah.
but it's ever so useful.
Yeah.
I it's excellent.
It's superb for
Yeah.
for pensioners.
But a lot of youngsters use it too.
Yeah but I, I think that youngsters  can abuse the system as well.
Well  well so far it's it, I mean 
 
the chap, he's very obliging, he  
We got our own  
get off.
Oh and you talk into the
Yeah.
Yeah.
?
Yeah.
Our Marie's is a nice car innit?
Nice little car innit?
It's a nice little car.
Yeah.
She's had problems with it though.
Talbot  Solaro 
Yeah, nice little car.
I wouldn't mind one like that.
Talbot  Solaro 
They've got three now  they have to queue up.
There's Alan's and  Claire's 
Claire's.
and Marion's and if the one that's nearest the house wants to get out first everybody else has to  move .
It's cold out there now.
I've decided.
Ooh so what time do you wanna be 
Tony?
what time do you want
What's the time now?
Not yet erm
Nearly twelve.
Ooh yeah.
Do you ever have to er  
Well you go when you're ready.
While you're 
Can you drive with that?
out I'll get some plates and all and er set the table.
chip shop    
Well he can't drive now mum cos he's had a beer.
Oh.
So I'll go down here.
Oh right-oh then.
Yeah.
Okay 
Where are you going?
What?
Where are you going?
Chip shop.
Oh this one here 
Oh I forgot about that  when I said er 
Are they alright?
They're alright down here, at least they were the last time we had them.
We don't get them all that often.
 
Well I'll go and get them.
I'll get the case out the car.
Now do you want me to give you something for them?
 
And when you get back  
No no no.
er
I were a little bit shocked when I saw Tony though.
Don't he look old?
I hadn't realized he'd changed that much  
Saying about Tony, how old he looks.
 
.
But he's been very ill.
Well how old is he?
He's not as old as you is he?
He's older than me.
Fifty one is it?
He's a year older than me.
 
Year older than you?
Oh I thought he was 
Fifty one.
between you and Marion?
He'll be  he'll be fifty two this year.
No no he's that year older 
Oh I get mixed up with their ages.
Yeah he's a year older than me isn't he?
He'll be fifty two this year, Tony.
Yeah.
But when you're very ill like that it ma it does make a difference doesn't it?
Yeah it does.
Yeah.
Oh aye yeah.
Wish I'd got me bike.
Ain't used to walking.
I usually bike.
Hey!
And don't stop and talk to anybody.
I won't on the way I won't on the way back.
.
And put your coat on.
 
Well look, I don't know what you're getting but one portion of chips'll be enough between us.
Where's me coat?
Eileen.
What?
One portion of chips'll be enough between us cos they give you quite a  generous helping of chips so I
Are you sure?
Yeah.
You want fish do you?
Any particular sort of fish?
Fried  and dead.
No just a piece of fish.
And a few mushy peas.
What you having?
Chips.
Few mushy peas.
Mushy peas?
Right, I'll get two tubs of mushy peas  and erm 
Well see what they're like.
They sell Chinese stuff as well.
It's a Chinese place.
Well no, I want fish and chips.
Oh.
We don't get proper fish and chips over there you see.
It's the first thing 
Well we had some nice ones from that van that stopped near the
Oh we did.
town the  centre, we had some there
 
beautiful chips
Oh  who does?
Oh yeah.
I can make chips but  it's the fish, the fish is different.
They
It's, it's not fresh fish
No it isn't.
in that sense because it you're so far in inland.
Anyway I'll put some plates in the oven and er 
Well that's the problem you see.
We get a chap come down from Grimsby.
Aye.
Used to come to  Southam 
Oh did he?
Yeah.
Yeah well he comes down  and he's here  
really.
What for?
Cos it
Well he was here today.
I could have got some, I don't know.
I'd have got some this morning 
He was there.
He sells a good variety too, good er
no.
I should, I should  at least by half past .
There's a good mix of species on offer, you know?
Yeah.
Oh yeah he's good  
 
Here  I don't want that there, I shall
Well I don't want it either.
stab myself to death.
Here you are.
I'll see you in a bit then.
Okay.
Yes, put it that way.
Have you got a bag?
Wanna basket?
Yeah, I wanna bag or something.
Yeah cos I'm 
Erm well yeah but I want about  I don't want  do I?
Oh alright.
I want something 
they'll be wrapped up.
 

fish and chips?
I don't 
 

Are you coming ?
You're coming back in are you Tone?
Pardon?
Well Tony's coming back in.
Oh alright, leave the door open.
 

Oh she's not gonna drive.
What?
She's walking, well she's running 
Well she said that 
she's not walking.
For a start when she was talking about fish and chips she said well we'll pop along in the car and get them from Moor Road  cos they have nice er chips there but then, being as Tony had had a drink he wouldn't drive so 
There's a bottle of wine here .
It's a Moselle.
Oh .
Oh yeah, lovely.
And we've got one there for Marcus as well.
  

Oh wine is just 
 

Well thanks very much Tony.
That's er er  lovely.
Well .
Put it  
Put it up in front of the window .
A string of beads of like that
it was too low so I cut them down  
 
it was still too low  and they ended up  .
four beads long 
Er well look, I've gotta go down the street.
I shan't be long.
Do you want us to take you?
No .
You stay till the end.
What?
put the back seat forward.
Oh yeah, yeah it's all full.
Yeah we've got the back seat full.
You  
Are you sure?
Yes, I'll just stroll down and come back .
I shan't be gone long.
If, if you pass  Wills's shop  and you see Georgina, my friend, you know that girl I spoke to
Yeah.
with the long hair?
If you see her, tap on the window and tell her I'm here will you?
I might pop in and see her  if I get a chance but 
Look  look Jenny look at this,anybody's getting engaged or married.
Look there's a little card there.
There 
 

Come on, biscuit barrel.
Go on.
Get a biscuit.
He loves it.
Yeah he loves it.
now.
Oh  just sit down.
If I sit down I shall be asleep so  who's chair's this?
I don't know.
You sit here.
I don't know!
Oh dear!
Yeah my job Marje it's, it's  it's er one of the cushiest jobs to be on camp really because  this er where we are, we're the people who dish out the furniture for the quarters.
Oh yeah?
You know like your  i if you move into an army quarter you can have it fully furnished if you want, I mean 
Oh?
you don't, you don't have to buy furniture.
He's out of luck, Gemma finished the biscuits the other night  
  
Poor sod.
Well between Gemma and the dog you don't stand much chance do you?
said he was gonna bring some biscuits up the street cos I still haven't got any.
well I've gotta go down the street, I'll bring some biscuits back.
I was just telling Marje 
Oh it's not  it's just  and I'll walk down and er  I will bring him some biscuits back 
Oh he heard you, on tape.
Don't bring the best chocolate ones,
  

Well I didn't start getting any dinner cos Jenny's just on about getting fish and chips.
Yeah we  we're gonna get some fish and chips
  

It's a Belgian drink.
Oh yeah?
Oh?
When you pour it out it looks like ginger beer.
Does it?
Yeah.
you don't, you don't even feel .
twelve percent.
Is it really?
Yeah.
As I say I, that's why, that's really why I was expecting you  more towards twelve o'clock time.
So I said well if they're gonna get .
.
Don't worry about it, we'll go down and get some later on.
With the car  
perhaps to that Moor Road 
Yeah, we'll go up there.
That's strong.
Yeah well it  yeah it is a bit.
It is strong yeah.
It's nice stuff.
They said, they said it don't give you a hangover but don't believe it cos I had a  you have a 
You s you serve it in a  you know the big chunky glasses you can get?
Well if you put them in the freezer
Mm mm.
up, pour it straight in  and down.
Mm.
Do you still drink like that Brock?
Like  in Budgens   few weeks .
We'll get some of that when Eileen and Tony come.
Went down yesterday and they're out of stock.
It's expensive over here though innit?
Er   I get it for three  quid, three  something like.
Is that the  the big bottle or the small one?
No, they're the small ones, small bottles yeah.
It's expensive that.
Oh yeah I know,
We  we'd pay about four pound for twenty four bottles.
This beer called
Yeah.
It's, it's er Belgian.
Oh.
And it's  it looks like ginger beer.
When you pour it out you get a big head on it like this and it's, it's  lovely stuff.
It goes down like wine.
It's, it's  smooth, real smooth.
Yeah.
They have quite a few er foreign beers in er  in Budgens these days cos the other week we saw some of that Brock 
Oh yeah that's erm that's 
then when he went down he said well he couldn't see any yesterday.
No don't    I don't  I, I just get, I mean I, sometimes I have some like but  it's so easy to get hold of it out there mum.
I mean  we've always got drink in the house and s and occasionally we'll have a drink at night but sometimes we just don't touch it for ages unless anyone comes round.
It just sits there
Well I mean your dad's got 
Anyway, I'll be gone and I shan't be long.
Give us a kiss 
See you in a bit.
Eh, where's my purse?
Dad will you bring me some cough medicine?
Cough medicine?
I've got some.
Have you?
Oh that'll do then.
I'll have some later.
We've got some in the  pantry.
But I can bring you some if you want some.
Come and taste mine.
 
Oh no, no.
When you've tasted mine you might not want, you might want me to bring you  bring you back a different sort .
Why, where do you get yours from?
From the doctor.
The vets.
No he  
look at these in bits.
Eh?
Are you going down the street now?
Yeah.
Well you want some money don't you?
This is, hang on  this is a part of Italy.
This is the time we went to the beach in Italy.
I'll just look at these.
And the sun setting.
Let me show you ones with Tony and them on then.
It's a nice big beach isn't it?
Is this down in the ?
Is it Tony?
Er  no 
No it's over towards Naples.
Oh I see.
This is Tony's street.
You can't get two cars down the street.
Can't you really?
Could just get his car down it.
And they had to park it in a  a , an alley on the side.
Oh yeah?
It took me  six turns to get it, get it reversed in.
Because there's no room at all.
Shall I show you a picture of Tony?
These.
these pictures  are all round Tony's village.
Yeah.
See what his village is like.
If dad starts looking through there he'll never get down  the street .
Well he he's gonna look at the rest when he comes back.
See them when you come back.
Right-oh  
 
Well he won't be long unless he sees anybody to talk to.
He's like you for that.
Er  did you want anything else?
No thanks dad.
I can't think of anything.
 

I can't think of anything  except for the biscuits because I've run out of biscuits.
I was  Eileen.
I know what you want.
No no I'm no I'm  I'll just get some cough medicine.
Me money's around though, I don't know where it is.
No I'll bring you some back.
It's in your bag.
Your bag's over there.
Oh, alright.
Any s something, chesty stuff, you know?
Well that's what mine is for.
Taste it first.
I'll have some of yours then.
No, go and taste it first.
And then you'll know whether you like it.
That's it, he's settled down now.
Here you are.
There.
Lay down.
That's it.
Do you want another cup of tea Tony?
There's probably 
No thanks.
another one in the pot if you want one.
No.
It's on the Adriatic?
Erm   the other side.
The other side is it?
It's the western coast.
Oh the west.
It tastes like liquid salt!
Ugh  no wonder he said
You what?
It tastes like liquid salt.
I know your dad said he didn't like it.
   
That's why I didn't say anything before you tried it but your dad said he didn't like it.
It acts as a mouthwash as well.
Is there any particular kind you do like?
Erm  I don't care as long as it ain't that.
I'll have any sort but that.
Right.
This is all rou this his village.
You know he's surrounded by all these mountains.
Ooh.
Right?
This is his back garden.
That's the house, that's his back garden.
Part of it.
 
That's looking out of erm 
big garden.
that's looking out the  front window
Oh yeah.
over the  rooftops next door.
I mean  you know, sometimes you  you see a picture of a place  when you've been there and it doesn't even resemble it.
you know, as it is now  it's very lovely.
Over the road I mean.
Yeah.
They're practically touching actually if, if they, if they had a balcony and Tony had a balcony you could shake hands 
Oh.
Yeah .
That's opposite Tony's front window
It looks nice.
It looks nice  
where he  a man's growing his tobacco look.
Well
Tobacco?
growing his tobacco.
 
Yeah.
Ooh.
And that one's same as the other one.
That's the other one like that.
We've got loads the same.
I think you usually tend to get
Yeah.
when we, we come back from holiday 
That's  
your dad usually finds he's taken the same picture two or three times or more or less and
Keep them in the same bits won't you?
Yes  
same place but a different angle.
 

This is
this is all out of his back window  the views out of upstairs, out of his kitchen window.
All these.
That's the photos I took of it, yeah  at the palace.
It's only like a little village isn't it?
It's not a, not a big town.
Oh it's, well it's three little villages together.
See there's no difference really from the postcards.
Erm there's erm
Mm.
Yeah, oh yeah.
It's boiling there though.
they're walking round in  er woolly jumpers.
Were they really?
It's about twenty four degrees.
I was sweltering, I was wearing a t-shirt and they were out you know with jumpers on and all sorts.
They wear pyjamas at night  and all sorts they do.
there's  Carbi Resorta and  his village itself is called  Viapechio something like that.
I can't really say it.
No.
.
That's their dog, Sally.
Now this is where you can see  this is 
their step's there
Yeah.
well you know you look down into that, onto that flat, the one ?
Yeah.
Well there's another one over this side.
That bit there is the under part to Tony's house where the cousin lives.
Oh.
No, hang on  what is she?
Sister.
She's  she's Maria's sister, Maria's his ?
No, it's Philomena's sister.
Philomena's sister  lives there.
That's a big plant isn't it?
Crikey it's as tall as you.
Yeah it's elephant ears or something isn't it?
Elephant ears.
love that.
Now these
 
if you've got good eyes you might  
There's one of them.
Oh yeah?
Oh yeah.
All these things on the wall  you can't touch it.
This is Tony with his  camera.
If you touch it it rots.
Does it?
Yeah.
It hasn't been touched for hundreds of years.
This is what I think is fascinating.
This place here.
Are these all lizards?
There's lizards on all of them.
Here, that one?
Yeah.
There's lizards on all of them.
They get in your bed don't they?
Ooh.
Never got one in mine.
Lizards  
When we went down the south of France we saw lizards like that on the walls.
They moved ever so quick  
Yeah these do.
Yeah.
This is Tony's cellar.
Oh.
No it's, it's literally chopped out of rock.
You can see all the steps are all 
Yeah.
stone.
It's all chopped  it's like a cave.
You go down and then  you walk along here, right to the end  right round, sort of round the bend there
Yeah.
and there's a well.
He's got a well.
And this is really deep ain't it Tone, this bit?
That's about forty foot down  
This is about forty foot down and then it drops again
Oh.
into a well, where he gets his all, his fresh water from it.
There's a li he puts a light on and it lights it up down the , a long way down.
But it never ever alters.
You can draw water out, you can put water in, and the level never ever changes.
Wonderful water.
It's really nice, ain't it Tone?
Yeah.
It's the only trouble though, they haven't got any mains water.
Oh I see.
Yeah.
These are the same again.
These are over the rooftops.
And anything that  does come from the  you know the system?
Mm.
Erm  it's bad.
You know, it's really dirty water.
 
Lovely little villages though.
I mean you can see how they live, I mean look at the roads.
Ever such a job to get our car up there.
That's Philomena walking up the street.
Oh.
She's saying  no don't-a take-a one of me.
Switch-a the camera off!
photos 
Yeah.
. Oh these are the actual  
You walk down the road erm Marje it's really funny.
And it's  hey Mario
Ciao.
Ciao Mario  cappuccino?
And off they go.
It's really funny.
I'd love to live there.
Yeah.
It sounds really nice.
Fantastic.
Hughie  come here.
Oh that's next door's dog.
Can't remember 
Come and see me.
what it's called.
But it ain't very nice.
 

That's next door's dog.
These are all grapevines  
 

she's got grapes  lemons  she's got a tree that's got lemon, orange and grapefruit on it ain't she Tone?
Yeah.
Growing in the garden?
Yeah.
All on one tree.
On one tree?
Lemon and a 
yeah on one tree.
They were all grafted on and they're all growing on the same tree.
 
Derek's got an apple tree with  different kinds growing on it.
Derek's got an apple tree with three different varieties on it.
Marvellous innit?
That's clever.
That's  that's sunset.
Yeah I might have guessed that.
Yeah.
Out of his kitchen window.
Looks like a castle dunnit?
But it ain't.
It does.
And that's a shot  see  this part under here  is Maria's under part where the cellar  cellar goes down  no and  yeah, that's  No.
This is where the cellar is.
You go round through Maria's gate  then you go down the back and behind that little pole there
Yeah.
and down under here.
That's where the cellar is isn't it?
Oh.
And these are the steps.
Go up there, up to their stairs, that's her kitchen window and there's a lo big sun lounge there that goes right along there and right along here.
Their bedroom doors used to open up onto this balcony.
You could come out in the morning 
Oh.
That's a nicer one of the garden.
This is the  that's the lemon, orange and grapefruit tree there.
Oh yeah?
The grapes are all along here  see behind the washing?
Yeah.
And she's got kiwi fruits and  peppers and all sorts of things growing in the garden.
There's Eleanor.
to grow them.
Climate for it  
Do you remember Eleanor?
She was a little dark-haired, curly girl.
Beautiful curly dark hair she had.
She was a little tiny dot.
Aubergines.  little aubergines, they're like this.
You know, they're the little ones she says.
All fresh, picks them when she wants them.
They're all at er  Monte Casino .
There was a big battle there.
The er  the Germans bombed the monastery.
Oh yeah?
And er the Italian government rebuilt it.
Oh yeah?
But the view cos you, you're going up  seven miles
Mm.
all, all the roads round, yeah?seven miles innit?
It is.
It's se seven miles of road  up to the top.
Yeah.
And the view is lovely.
the actual cellars  they've got some of the old er  writings that the, the monks  and you're not allowed to take photographs.
Yeah?
And there's a book and it's  oh about quarter of  and it's got  the bible written in fourteen nineties.
And it, it's there, you can see it.
You can see the writing on the pages.
You know, it's  fantastic.
Yeah.
No I can't say I remember her.
The only one I remember is the son, the oldest boy I think.
Oh dear, he wears me out Steven.
Steven!
Oh god.
And she  she's, she talks more than me, and sh her voice is like 
That's saying something.
 

grapes, look at them.
Yeah.
Grapevines.
You can see there's grapes on there.
 
Derek's got a grapevine as well.
Had forty pound of grapes off it last year.
Did they?
Yeah .
These are all rou you see  they're all  these are all round that area.
What about Hotel  Rodeo 
Yeah.
 
And that's all these are in Tony's hou I'm just trying to show them Tony's house first you see cos it's  it's all these tiles that fascinate me.
Some of these look more or less the same don't they?
Yeah they are.
We took them  look at the
Yeah  we used seven films.
What's that, chickens or ducks?
Dunno.
They keep everything round there.
You look out one window you see a chicken, look out another window you see pigs.
Another way you see goats.
 
Yeah.
They come round in the morning
Marjie ain't had a goat yet .
No.
You, you'd love it.
You'd be in your element you would.
These tiles are all throughout.
Amazing aren't they?
Oh they're wonderful.
All you do is, you get a mop and you just swish it over  and you get a dry mop and just polish it up.
No polish or anything.
And they shi lovely aren't they Tone?
Yeah.
Great big tall ceilings.
That's Tony.
Don't know quite what he's doing, pulling a funny face as usual.
 

And that's me trying to learn me Italian.
She's telling me these little bits to write down.
Oh this is me, me and Philomena.
Me   This is me and Philomena.
I'm right into the Italian soaps while I were over there.
The what?
Oh Christ yes.
The Italian soaps, couldn't understand a word, they were ever so good.
They're Argen they're Argentinean  which are dubbed into Italian.
Oh.
Well 
Oh dear me.
it starts at quarter to eight, goes off at ten.
It's 
What was you supposed to be doing there then ?
They're watching t Oh I, I was messing about with Tony  so I, I flashed me skirt, flashed me knees.
Oh this is Alexandro's birthday.
Alexandro  he lives next door, right?
And he's living in his garage mum.
This is going down, round the back  
Ooh er.
Why?
He's got loads of money.
Absolutely loaded isn't he Tone?
Who Alexandro?
Alexandro.
Oh yeah.
And he lives in this garage because  out there you get earthquakes, and when you get earthquake damage to your house the government will fix it.
They say yes you're allowed so much money to have your house fixed and they fix it.
But they only come when they're ready.
And he's, he took all his stuff out because he thought er they said they were coming.
Then they never turned up so now he's got his cooker and his sink, goodness knows what in his, in his garage.
Ooh.
And that's their next door neighbour?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Ever so nice.
 
Can't speak any English though, it's ever so funny.
You just get in, have your tea, and Alexandro'll come round, come for a beer.
There's Tony look.
He ain't got no teeth now look.
Yeah.
You can't just have one.
No, no, no .
No, I didn't recognize him.
Oh, you know when you've just had your tea, you like to sit down?
I never recognized him.
He ain't got no teeth.
Yeah.
No,
He's been ever so ill mum.
Really ill.
Yeah you said he had.
He's lucky he never died.
I tell you.
Are they war graves Tony?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah in  Monte Casino it's erm  there's the English, Polish  erm  ooh  and French  cemeteries.
There isn't a German one.
No.
No.
No.
  
Now what's funny about this place is  they're all Italians that are in there but there's loads of them that live in this particular area, that lived in Bedford for a long time.
So they all speak English.
in Bedford I know.
So there is 
Well all these lived in Bedford for a while.
She speaks with a Bedford accent.
Ooh er.
Ever so funny.
Jean, was her name?
Zina  Zita?
What was her name?
Zelda, Zina?
Veena.
Veena?
Yeah.
Nice girl she was.
No I remember Derek saying how many Italians there were living in Bedford.
This is the Hotel Rodeo at  Garoteo where we stayed, where we   Rosetto where we stayed on our way down towards Tony's.
Oh.
Oh mum it was terrible!
No, the place was okay  but we had lizards outside our door, loads of them.
I it were ca , it was, it was raining so much you see?
There's more of S Sally  hiding behind the curtain.
 Monte Casino where we  went straight into the pub and Tony says  three beer  and  hallo he said, alright mate?
yeah really.
He said do you work?
He says now and again.
If he doesn't wanna go to work he doesn't.
No.
That's good 
They keep the nets down to keep the flies out.
Yeah.
That was a hell of a trip, down through Italy.
Another one of Sally behind the curtain.
Me and Philomena doing the potatoes.
It rained for three days.
Oh gawd!
I like those shiny floors.
Lovely ain't they?
Bit easier than hoovering carpets isn't it?
This is Guido.
Now he's learning to speak English.
He's a 
Who's he?
He's a man who lives 
Is he a neighbour?
down the road.
You'll see his family in a minute, hang on 
Tony's friend.
He's Tony's friend.
Yeah  we got in to er  Roseo and .
And er  I heard this clanging.
And I thought .
You know, we were going for about ten minute .
So I looked out the window and I see  and they've all got these big bells round their neck.
Yeah?
string like, you know?
Oh.
He's my friend as well now .
Some of these photos are terrible.
That's his family.
That's his mum  and his grandma and granddad  and his dad  and his brother and his brother's wife.
Mm.
I've got some nice photos.
I sent them one, they're ever so pleased.
They were all dressed up.
You know not, not just  a cowboy belt.
They've all got  flowers in the hair and all sorts.
 
Yeah?
That's me and Maria doing the potatoes.
Yeah.
That's  
Yeah that's my mate, Yeah.
Me and me and erm sorry not Maria, there's Maria.
That's me and Philomena.
Philomen 
Phil, yeah.
Philomen.
She used to come in, she'd say Antonio!
Then Tony'd say bella !
He used to talk to her in English with an Italian accent.
It used to crack me up.
And she, and she used to   
You doing potatoes by the bucketful?
Well there was a lot of us for dinner.
They don't half eat though!
Good grief.
I mean, you got  dinnertimes it was erm typical pasta with her home-made, home-made spaghetti sauce and parmesan cheese, great big plateful  and loads of meat on the side.
And then at night  egg and chips, cos she knows Tony likes chips  or chops and  ooh.
Said didn't I, I'm gonna put loads of weight on?
Ha!
Ate loads.
That's a  that's a fresh fig off a tree.
You can walk the roads and pick them.
Ooh I've been told they're very nice.
I've never tasted one but they say they're very nice.
Ooh.
They taste so different to  the figs we get.
Yeah.
They're really nice.
Oh this is the night we arrived.
Things like that   
Like the cheese.
This is the night we arrived, we were looking at photos look.
Oh yeah.
She brought this hunk of erm what is it 
How far is it?
parmesan isn't it?
Parmesan yeah.
Oh a hunk like this.
 
How many miles actually is it Tony?
Where, down there?
From France to Italy.
How many did we do?
Oh dunno.
Or Germany to 
Two thousand something?
I did two thousand  four hundred kilometres.
 
It was ooh it was, do you know, it's one of the best trips I've ever made.
Yeah it's  
I've never been anywhere like that, to drive through.
The, the travelling  you know?
We did fifty what was it?
Fifty three tunnels?
Ooh, look at me there look.
I think I'd had a few, few home-made wines.
 
Look at this home-made wine.
Look what they've got here, the bottles 
Think it was fi Eileen, how many tunnels was it ?
Fifty odd wasn't it?
Er tunnel no it was se fif 
Seven 
Fifty something going down, seventy something coming back I think.
That's right.
Oh you, cos they just dig through the mountains you see, so you don't have to 
The, the longest  the longest tunnel is er  nineteen kilometres.
Ooh, some tunnel that is.
Yeah, what was it called though?
It was  Gotard 
S S 
It was  Gotard weren't it.
No.
No, the other one's bigger innit?
No, Gotard 
 Gotard 
Yeah.
You've certainly got a lot of photos anyway.
Oh we took them all the while see.
See they're the only teeth Tony's got left.
Them ones there, that's all he's got left.
He ain't got no more.
 

And do you know what?
Because he ain't got no teeth mum, you know they 
Well I, I can see it's him when they're 
Yeah.
a bit closer up but 
You know  when you ain't got your teeth in, how your face tends to s sag a bit?
Yeah.
Well you see, Tony's got them here but he ain't got them there so he's, when he sits there and he's relaxed his face goes 
sad .
He got sad old Tone though.
Every time I write a letter to him now I say  keep smiling, turn them corners up cos they all go on at him.
Oh there's them cows.
Yeah.
Oh there's Sally playing peep-o again.
There were loads of them.
That's one of the houses in the village look.
What does he do?
He's 
Tony?
Well he works in a 
Jack of all trades.
Oh.
He does a bit of everything.
He works in this company where they're something to do with material isn't it?
He's a labourer.
He's a labourer, but then he goes out sweeping chimneys.
Oh.
These are the ones I like.
That's a nice looking house isn't it?
Mm.
Bit unusual.
Yeah there's loads of nice little houses round  there's another one round here with pictures on the walls somewhere.
I see cow's got the right of way.
 
It's the streets I like.
Look at the streets.
Oh dear .
See this is Tony's street.
Ha Tony's street!
Lane.
See look at Tony's.
We had ever such a job to get our car up there.
got a better 
That's the same one as this one on here ?
And this one.
That's Tony's street.
Is that Luxembourg?
 
Look at that one.
Ooh er, crikey.
That's  
 
Yeah, oh he's .
No lie down.
That's it,lie down.
Here look at this house mum.
Good boy.
Look at this house.
Luxembourg there.
Oh that's nice isn't it?
Yeah.
 
Is that in the same village?
Yeah.
You can go the coach route can't you?
We wondered round the streets just taking photos.
You can go the coach route can't you?
Yeah well  we was, we was gonna go down the west coast  go and see Rome and then down from there.
Yeah.
But the weather was terrible.
I was driving through what, eighteen inches of water.
Yeah  when you go through Switzerland.
Yeah.
It seems to be following you.
Yeah well Switzerland weren't too bad cos the road surfaces are pretty good.
Yeah.
But in Italy there's no drainage.
Ooh.
but on, on a motorway  brand new motorway, no lines
Yeah.
no white lines, nothing.
No?
about eighteen inches of water.
Right?
Cor!
And the cars are just  straight on.
You know,
Went round taking  photos of old and the new.
See this is the new stuff that's going up.
Yeah.
And the old stuff is much more interesting, don't like the new stuff.
Yeah.
This is a  a rest home for the nuns.
And they go there when they retire.
See that's  that's sort of there.
That was built sort of there.
That's the old stuff.
Yeah.
And this is the new.
There's timesharing and 
Different 
And this one
It was bloody  we well I had to stop because I couldn't see my way at all.
This one's another one.
That's in the next village.
It's a nice street innit?
It is nice.
Yeah.
And that's, that's the fish in the palace park.
And that's Switzerland, coming out of Switzerland.
And the other one is  what's on the front ?
That's  Monte Casino 
Very nice.
And that was  Monte casino on that one.
That's a nice box for photographs innit?
Oh this one ain't much good actually.
This one ain't much good.
It's a nuisance.
The other one's absolutely chock-a-block.
I'm keeping them together in their little bits because I've got them all sorted where they belong, so 
 

Have you seen these?
No.
This is all, they're all the little houses and  and streets and  and that, that one.
Right, what's the next lot?
Alright, sit down you.
Sit down Joey.
Good boy.
Right  now did you see the one  with the sea on?
Oh no.
Well that's the day we went to the sea.
When weirdo bought us a coffee.
Which sea's that?
It's the  Mediterranean innit?
I don't know, it's on the left hand side.
Or is it the North Sea?
Naples side.
Oh.
I think it's the Mediterranean.
Did you see Naples?
No we never went  
No.
Even the locals won't go and park their car in 
Right, Philomena's two brothers, both policemen in Naples 
They're policemen.
I kn know the traffic's er terrible.
and they don't even in, in the city.
Well they, they'll pinch them.
Oh is it that bad?
Yeah it is, it's sad.
Oh it's terrible!
Yeah.
Yeah.
The sea looks nice though.
The cars get ripped off, if they park  they'll take the car.
Will they?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, I waited until I got back into Switzerland before I said  I've been to Italy and I haven't got a scratch on the car.
Oh it's lovely but see  now this is, when was this?
Oct early October?
Early October and it were end of season.
Mm.
Wouldn't believe it would you?
No.
And they just shut up and go.
Yeah.
Yeah cos, cos  
E everywhere you go they're using the horn.
Yeah.
Now it's against the law to that in Germany.
Yeah.
So I couldn't really get into the habit.
No.
You know?
No that's true, yeah.
I'm gonna sneeze in a minute.
I can feel it coming.
How far is the village from the sea?
Twenty five K's.
I think if you know where you're going it's nearer than we went.
We do weren't too sure were we?
Was that was that hot air balloon following you by  any chance ?
 
It, it just came over, yeah it, it came up over the 
It looks nice dunnit, that?
 
We were just standing there looking over the  the the  
That's er 
the parapet
Yeah.
and I turned round 
there.
and this balloon came up from behind 
This is all palace.
In the gardens and inside the palace.
The  Cacerta 
Yeah that's in that first photo innit?
Yeah.
And I thought well I'll get that balloon and perhaps
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's the gardens where all the fish, there's fish in all these steps.
Oh.
You'll see some of the fish.
Where's that?
This is  Cacerta 
 Cacerta I heard the name but 
Oh it's, it's there on the side of the box.
Sorry?
Yeah I've shown them that, yeah.
But there's some more as well in there.
You need a, a  you need to see it though really.
You can't get it  it's such a sort of  panoramic sort of view, you know?
All this is all in erm alabaster.
Ooh it's lovely.
Mm.
Fishes.
There's loads of them.
Yeah, every step in like in that house 
Every step has got fish in.
is water.
And they've all got fish.
In the steps?
Well there's steps.
You go up on a step and then you've got another pond.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it overflows coming down into another pond 
There's a massive garden.
Oh I see.
and they've all got fish in.
What, koi carp and all that are they Tony?
All sorts.
Yeah.
There's all sorts.
Yeah.
I think they're goldfish actually.
There's some goldfish but  
These look like goldfish.
carp and, it's got everything in there.
I don't think there's any koi carp.
Look at it, there's millions on that one.
Yeah that's lovely innit?
Cle and yet you look at the water.
It don't look very clear when you look at it, but the sun  and that it was  it weren't half hot that day.
Well the camera can probably see more than you do.
There's statues everywhere.
I was just testing the camera so
I, I, I ordered a camera  and expected it to be  with us the week before we went.
We were gonna leave on the Saturday morning, it arrived the Friday night.
Did it really?
Yeah.
Oh, it didn't give you much chance then to get used to it did it?
I mean you know  
No.
I just, I just got seven films and I said well if they  Friday if I don't, well  
Well they worked good didn't they?
There's some that are a bit, you know 
No, they're, they're alright.
They're nice.
They're good photos they are.
This reminds me of when we went round Versailles.
That's all painted ceilings and  
Yeah.
This is like in a big glass case and it's  other parts , there's like a little bit there looks like the nativity and then the rest is all parts of Naples in olden times.
It shows you the
Ooh.
the .
And you walk round this glass case, it's all different 
But the curtains, it says please don't touch, if you touch them they'd fall to bits, they're that old.
Yeah.
Oh yeah, Tony was saying.
They're hundreds of years old aren't they?
Yeah.
And look this, this room, you've got the  it was all like this, all gold filigree, it was all over.
Yeah.
The ceilings, all down the walls  furniture.
Ooh it was 
It was it was the er the throne room wasn't it?
Throne room, yeah.
It was wonderful.
Mm.
And that's
Er this sort of thing, as I say i it reminds me very much of Versailles when we went round there.
Yeah.
That's all  painted ceilings and 
How far's Tony actually from Naples?
It's about  sixty kilometres.
Sixty is it?
Yeah.
But, cos you see Tony, he, he likes to take people out
Mm?
and h he's been to places  his memory's terrible.
Is it really?
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
He 
He has been ever so poorly Clive.
He, he  you see what 
I, yeah cos last time you when come over he was supposed to have been ill weren't he?
Oh yeah.
Yeah oh he's er what happened to him, right  he used to like a drink when he were here.
He went out there  and you see and, and they drink wine instead of tea.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
And he was going round and they made such a fuss of him cos he was Philomena's husband 
Is that a waterfall at the back there?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It comes all the way down.
Did you see that first one, where they're?
Yeah?
You'll see it  quite a way up.
You'll see it in a minute when you get  back to the end again.
You see it's not, not alcoholic the wine.
No.
And when it's pressed out of the grapes, the juice comes out, they allow it to stand for five days and then they put it into bottles.
Oh, I see.
There's no alcohol in it.
Isn't there?
No sugar, nothing added.
No.
No it's just pure grape juice.
Oh god, really kicks you.
Yeah.
It kicks.
Does it  
Yeah.
Well, see when you're drinking that all day long
Yeah yeah.
It rotted his liver.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's 
Oh.
So w without alcohol there wouldn't be no dehydration either would there?
Not in  
No  
No, no.
No I should think it's  it's very potent.
Even the, the locals add water to it.
Do they really?
You know they get a small glass like a whisky glass?
Mm.
Half of the  wine and they top it up with water.
Oh.
And, and th this erm  it's like the coffee.
Italian coffee in little cups.
more than four a day if you're a working man.
If you don't work, one a day.
Yeah?
Because it, it  it would rot your stomach.
Ooh dear.
stuff 
Ooh ooh.
I didn't think it were that strong like, you know?
I thought they drunk that all day,
I brought some back with us.
Yeah.
And I've still got half a pack.
Have you really?
Yeah.
It was only two hundred and fifty grams.
Yeah we've got half.
Oh yeah.
It is strong.
Really strong.
These statues are everywhere aren't they?
See there it is.
Look it comes 
Yeah.
right down.
All the way down.
There's Tony, me and Maria.
Who's Maria?
Maria's erm Philomen's sister.
Oh.
That's  across the gardens of the palace you know?
Yeah.
All the mountains all round it.
That's what I like about it, all the mountains all over the place, you know?
Yeah.
Back to the beginning again.
Yes they're lovely.
And the weather was gorgeous.
Well we did have some rain but 
Well for that time of the year it was remarkable really.
Er  .
Oh that's at  Rocetta .
You can see  Rocetta from Tony's garden.
It's a little, it's a place.
It's, it's a hill, a big  and this is where  Hannibal started his trek
Oh.
with the elephants, across the alps.
 Rocetta was his first campsite.
Oh.
You see?
That's why it's famous.
Did you hear that Clive?
Sorry?
 Rocetta the ones that mum's looking at now
Yes?
 
What I'll do, I'll pass you the box and then you can take them out a bit at a time cos I've sorted them.
Ain't they?
Oh.
your dad'll wanna look through them I expect when he gets back.
That's where Hannibal  parked his ele had his first campsite.
Oh 
Oh.
That's a true story then, Hannibal?
Oh yeah.
I didn't er realize that actually, yeah.
Well where, where Tony lives there's that village  is over three thousand years old.
There's tunnels under the ground.
Yeah.
tunnels  
Well you know the what was it, Romulus and Remus?
Yeah.
With the wolf.
What's that then, hidden in the trees?
Mm?
Erm 
Well apparently there's a, a golden wolf 
That's the cemetery.
Oh.
buried in one of the caves.
I'm not too certain which cemetery but it's 
And nobody's ever found it.
Oh.
it's an important one.
But it's, apparently it's supposed to be there.
It's it's supposed to be there.
But every day they're finding something new.
Are they?
Yeah.
hills all round innit?
Are there still
Oh yeah they're still excavating it, yes.
archaeologists are still there doing it all you know?
Yeah.
Oh aye yeah.
Oh.
Well the things they find, you know 
I'll bet it is.
Oh as I say I've seen the film.
I, I liked the film of Hannibal, with Oliver Reed.
Now that's quite good.
Yeah.
Was it  
I've never seen the film.
It's very good, the film is.
But I mean round there it's absolutely steeped in history.
I couldn't believe it.
Mm.
I mean  er when they told  the tales of the  of the seven winds and the  was it seven winds?
Yeah.
The seven winds and Romu Romulus and Remus and the, the, the wolf  it all happened round there.
And they reckon the golden wolf is still down 
But  
there somewhere.
Rome is supposed to be built on seven hills isn't it or something?
It is.
Yeah, seven hills.
Yeah we saw the seven hills as we drove past Rome because you 
Yeah 
can see it.
Just like this can't you?
Yeah.
Amazing place.
We didn't go into Rome, we went round it.
It spreads about twenty five mile  
 
 
for the time of the year it's gorgeous isn't it?
Yeah look at the size of me though mum.
I ain't half a fatso.
And that's the main town the city.
Yeah.
Ooh I put loads of weight on out there.
And then you've got all the outskirts around that, you know?
 
Cos you're talking about thirty, forty mile.
I'm supposed to be trying to watch me weight now.
Yeah?
Yeah.
It's massive.
I've er, I've lost about a stone in  a couple of months or so, that's all, but it's er  better than gaining I suppose.
Back to where I started I think.
Unless you've got two pictures of that same street, no  
No, you're back to where you started.
This is
 Rocetta Clive.
Mm.
Funny little place.
Ah.
Right  Rocetta Now where's this?
 
Oh this is the palace  this is the, the   Monte Casino This is where 
It's the abbey 
The abbey at  Monte Casino Do you remember
Oh I've heard about the abbey  yeah.
the war film.
You know where it all got bombed
Yeah.
and what they took all the treasures down into the  cellars so they were saved and they rebuilt it.
In the same style as it was years ago, using some of their old bricks and everything that they could but  it's been 
Yeah.
rebuilt in the same style and all the treasures are still there.
Yeah it's amazing, all these  
I've seen the film of this where they're trying to g and all around from outside you can see the graves  the graveyard.
Yeah.
There's the German graveyard, the Italian  the, the erm British and Canadian 
No, the German one's not there.
The German one is not round  Monte Casino 
I thought it was.
It's further out.
W way out.
And it's only a small one.
Oh I thought it was.
I want a tissue.
  
handbag.
Can you pass me my handbag, Marje please.
Oh dear me.
Derek said he might come up tonight.
Yeah we saw Jenny down town yesterday, she said they were coming up tonight.
Ooh, can't stand this.
How, how high up were you there Tone?