

What about hero in a ?
Heroes in a .
Yes!


Are they?
Oh 




I know somebody who wants some black boots, I might see some black  
 
Pull them off, pull, pull!
  



Ooh I think I'd better go lock up my garage before it gets too dark.
Ah.
Yes.
We're not worried are we?
Ah no
 
Come on wriggle bottom.


Do they call you wriggle bottom at school?
No.
Oh ooh Kate!
He was being silly.
Well!
You'll give me, I'll give you, I'll give you 
I'm gonna tickle you.
I'm gonna tickle you under the arm.
I'll give you a  tickle 
Don't hit me again please, ooh don't.
His front door's got one of those spy holes
Oh yeah.
Oh what's that  
 
I've never looked, I mean I've never looked, I've never looked through one and i i it's funny really cos you look through and the door,th the door that was near to there looks absolutely miles away, you're going through, going through a 
Yeah.
Like a  type thing?
Yeah i it's n th that door looks miles away but I mean in actual fact it's not very far, ever such a strange
 
Has he got the ?
Yeah, three more.
I mean two more.
Oh so it's like in the back of  three then ?
Well I don't really know what it , not really  
Was it nicer than ?
No but I mean well if he's got three other  flats  
  
But it's funny I don't know  really.
I don't know, I'm sure it'll be four really.
Well perhaps it's the shape of the  if they go in threes and the other three perhaps approach from a different stairs and it comes up, you know the type I mean?
Yeah  
he's got two  
To make, to make a to make an even number six or something  
Stop it now stop 
or she'll get burnt won't she?
She's 
So anyway they want  you know, a washing machine, I said  a washing machine .
well it's either that or the launderette and I mean that's, that's quite costly isn't it?
I mean
Well  to buy very much else I think a washing machine
I thought they'd got one actually 
I mean she uses her father's and th th they've been using .
I said well I should get in as quick as possible 
It's a cooker and erm 
A cooker in there is there?
No 
See last week they were  electric one.
Yeah I know.
He, he chewed it all up.
Out, out .
I'm not gonna  it on the floor.
Would you like the dog?
It could come and live down at your house?
No thanks.
Yeah.
Right, hands up who wants the doggy down at your house.
Three, three of us.
 
go in the garden.
Do you wanna go and live down in Katie's bedroom?
Oh yes he'd love that 
Look yes he, wag your tail.
Who's a good doggy?
Ah!
Wag your tail, yeah see
 

He said yes.
 

I'll provide the biscuits every week.
Hold me up.
Oh no I can't Katie, I can't, you're too heavy.
Up you get, ooh you're a big lump now, you are getting a big girl.
I like 
Well I don't 


What time did people start coming round this morning?
I mean I looked out and thought well 
Sometimes er it irritates me when they come.
such funny people 
Ah look where you've put it, poor doggy!
Watch out Ben!
Watch out, whoops.
 

No  we have to be quick  doggy
Yes  the raft,the lifeboat


all on the boat
Yes, yes I think he is a bit of a 
Oh poor doggy 
Come on, give it to mummy.
That's
Give him a smack bottom, I love you  oh Katie  
There's a crocodile coming, quick, quick  quick, quick climb up on the boat, quick.
All on the boat  hurray 
Hurray.
How about looking after your dog?
Just  just put it out of your mind 
Yes I think I'll have to go outside and get some  stuff out.
Dolly want to come with you.
I don't want dolly out there.
Don't you let that poor dolly go out in  
I don't want dolly out there.
I don't want that doll in my car.
She, she won't like it.
You stop with me dolly.
What's dolly's name?
It's raining.
What's dolly's name?
Not dolly, what's it's name?
Oh I don't think she's got a name  
Dolly 
It's dolly.
I think it's Sarah.
her real name is Sarah.
Is it?
Sarah?
Oh that's a funny name.
That's a very funny name.
Has the carpet man been yet 
When is he coming?
No on Tu on Tuesday.
Oh it's Tuesday.
Tomorrow.
What time's he coming?
Well in the morning.
Ooh  
Well it'll be done by dinner time then.
I hope so.
We've taken the carpet out already.
Oh my darling that will look nice won't it?
And you've taken all the furniture out?
Yes.
Good.
And I, and we took  out.
Did you?
What did you take
what did you take out, tell me?
A, a small one.
Ah yes 
Did you?
Oh 
A a and I, and I, and it was very heavy and we both had to take it out.
They did as well 
Now let me think if I can think what it was.
Erm  a stool for the organ.
No, bigger than that.
Er
It was a real big 
a ch a chair?
No.
Scary  
Er  a light?
Er a t a t er
else, let me think what else
Scary boots.
Scary boots?


Don't 
 

Well yes, give me a clue.
What's it begin with?
It begin with K.
Cupboard.
Scary boots.
Curtains.
Oh er er er I'll tell you,i i it  little door at the bottom er er er a small little gap like a drawer
Oh yeah
thing to put a table mat in and a drawer at the top.
A sideboard.
Yes like the half, the ha the half unit, you know we've got a 
The half unit.
double unit and we've got a
A half unit  
and they and, and they both carried that out together.
Did you carry that?
Yes that's very good.
Oh you're so helpful now aren't you?
I don't know how you manage to sit on anybody's knee
But we had a job to get the  tall one with the glass doors cos we had to turn it on its side cos  it wouldn't go through the door, it stuck, what a performance doing that 
Have the spots gone?
Yes I told them to, yes that one's going, that one's going, no more to come after this.
And they're going really  
got, I've got more.
Where?
There.
Are there?
Oh they'll soon go  
stop 
You watch your legs Katie, they're lethal.
Well at the moment they've got free fitting on all carpets is their latest offer 
 
but I don't know whether they've 
I know.
cut the pri well not cut the price but when I, I 
Doesn't matter if   I'd like something a bit l l like that and er he wants it all 
No.
Well I would think that's probably the best idea  
Yeah I mean  get the hall but he can't get the er you know  
Yeah, yeah if it's if it's thirty 
Well  to go this week then cos they've got free fitting.
Well I suppose
They say free fitting, they'll most likely  underlay, cos they're so clever aren't they?
 
Well I still reckon it comes to ar I, I think, I still think they're good, good value
Yeah.
cos I think
I think that 
it's swings and roundabouts
Yeah.
it comes to about the same
Yeah.
for what, the kind of, the, the carpet that you're going for.
I'd tell him to go and ask at the gas sh offices for any erm shop-soiled  
Well he he's supposed to know  gas fitters.
 
some time, the thing in the shop, you know what I mean?
Not you, it's that it's, it's been on show.
Mm.
Well you 
No no, don't put the nuts in your mouth, remember what daddy told you about the nuts in there.
No, they're dirty ones Ben, put them back  
They could make you very very poorly.
Yes bad nuts are terrible.
Daddy, daddy
What love?
When can we go and get a ?
It's in the garage?
Oh yes.
You want to go with me to the, the garage.
Now what are you going to do in the garage?
I'm just gonna sort one or two boxes out.
And these have got to capture the gremlins if they run out.
Yeah.
Now no running outside cos it's too wet.
I don't  
No we don't go out no we only go on the, no only gonna open the garage doors.
Three or four minutes then because it's the Turtles today isn't it?
You want to be home in time to watch that and  
 
no you're alright, you have about ten minutes  with 
Nanny look after dolly.
If you want to.
Have your coat on then  
Put your coat on then cos it's a bit 
Leave dolly then   about ten minutes.
I wanna take her
No, no you can't take dolly, she has to, well you can't go then.
She must stay inside.
No 
If you drop her she'll get dirty.
What if she gets dirty, then you'll not be able to take her to bed 
Or you might  somewhere and lose her.
I won't, I won't get her dirty.
No, no you leave no
Sit her on a chair in the hall.
That's it, she can watch for you coming through the door.
What's this in her hair?
Oh Katie!
I didn't put it in her  
Oh!
What's that?
Cos I can't get her hair washed and clean now, look you've put some of that nasty stuff in.
I, I  I didn't do it.
I tried to get some of the Blu-Tak off.
Or Ben didn't do it.
Well somebody's done it, it must have been the gremlins.
I bought some Blu-Tak the other day 
Oh you bought some?
Yeah.
Oh  Adrian could have got you some .
Oh
What?
well I've never got any, I saw it in this shop
Ooh!
Ah!
so I thought ooh  I bet I never 
You'll have to get some 
want any now I've got some  
Yeah, can you pick it out?
No.
It's horrible stuff this isn't it?
Where's your coat Ben?
I wonder what the erm  well I've  take my tables out
Ben  Ben!
Do you want to sit golly next, do you want to sit golly next to dolly?
Yes that's a good 
Yes that's a good idea sit them together in the hall.
that's a good idea.
Golly sit next to dolly.
Yeah.
They'll look after each other.
Good golly miss dolly 
You ready?
Gremlin time!
Oh yeah 
Left right, left right
Just a minute.
You excite them a bit too much Derek you know.
  
Well I'm just  make sure you behave your alright but just go a bit steady out the front there.
Right they they've  now.
 

Oh that's growing.
Yes.
Is that  have you done a side or?
Yes.
So that's
Well that's it, I'm getting a bit 
Fed up with it 
Well not fed up but  
No, no I know well  ready to get on with the next bit.
We yes that's right.
Yes I think this is, this is gonna be far too long er from what, in the end to
Well  I, I think that might be  a better fault than it too short if you know what I mean.
Oh yes, perhaps probably is.
I think, I bet, I think you could wear it or put a belt round and make it into a  it might not be, you can tuck it under, you know, put, like a blouse effect.
I think it's better than too short anyway.
Well I mean I've got to er alter this because I  I've got to do a dropped sl sleeve but I couldn't 
Oh yes, what did you 
undo it, no way could I undo about that much
No, and it's, it's a pat wh when you've undone it, as well, it's a pattern to pick 
Oh you can't pick the that's it.
It's not as if you've got a couple of plain rows you can 
No there's not anything you can 
I mean at that point I would either do that, you know er change it or that would have been it 
Oh , yes.
I couldn't fiddle
No that's the  
couldn't fiddle with that so at least you, you know, you're not going to toss it aside if you change the pattern.
No that's true.


That's right and I thought well  likes 
Well that shouldn't be er too  
likes the short sleeves anyway, been shocked if I'd got sleeves  
Is it going to oh it's a short sleeve one.
Mind you  
Oh is that one with the 
and you have buttons down.
I might erm I might see what the sleeve's like, I might er er wait and see how much wool I've got
Do it three quarter sleeve.
Yes I want to get the neckline done.
At least if I do a dropped shoulder I might do the neckline before I do the sleeves, and then it  once you've done the sleeve it's finished, you know what I mean?
Yes that's a good idea.
I feel  done a bit of sewing up on the shoulders and then it's  well on the way.
Ooh this morning I thought blimey it's darker than ever this morning.
Yes I thought it was really
Ooh
well I didn't really want to get out of bed and, well I don't have to  when I'm not going to school I, I can have well 
No you don't have to rush.
I mean ten minutes extra, but ten minutes seems like 
Well it's a lot I know.
seems like an hour and a half when it's at that time 
I know.
in the morning.
And then I thought oh I really ought to get out of bed now otherwise it will be a rush  and it was pitch dark as anything.
It was  
An and e everybody else was, well Adrian's always sleepy, but both Ben and Katie were still asleep and I thought well 
It's unusual isn't it for them?
I'll just leave them I thought well there's no real need for them to be up
No
I'm talking about quarter past seven, at this time, well there's no real need for them to be up now it's just that if they get, they like to have a  a little bit of a play time.
Ju well you know, I mean they can't get up to much but 
Yeah  I know
if you've got to hurry them up too much then it 
doesn't always go down too well but  well in the end I went in to their bedroom and actually they were awake, they were just laying sort of a bit sleepily  on the bed together  on Katie's, both on Katie's bed.
And they were, they were okay though but er it was dark.
Well it,very good  I hate the fog, you know,
Mm well, Derek having to travel in it.
It wasn't, I can't think whether it was foggy or not first thing, it was a little bit.
Well it wasn't too bad, no, a little bit, nothing very much.
I can't really remember.
Just thought oh blimey, I mean he gets there  
Well it must st still be dark mustn't it?
But, yeah cos I can never see what he's doing to  you know and I think oh standing out 
Yes and cold and, well the damp I should think is 
bit  rawified .
is not very nice.
Well he's not back too late today though is he?
No.
Er it's Monday's the worst, you know
Mm
it's the early.
And it's after the weekend it seems a bit of a
Yeah.
bind to get up.
Well when it's so early, yeah.
I think  in summer I mean
Well i it's a lot to do with the, the  how light it is, I always get up a lot more easily I think when it's, it's not dark.
You don't mind getting up.
Think you wake, well you wake don't you, as well, if the curtains  
I did get up but 
 
ooh I felt real, felt a bit  yukkified , thought oh crikey  knitting didn't inspire me and 
oh dear .
Did you go to Andrew's this morning?
No er, er no he came  yeah  
I mean did he take you this, I should say, did he take you this morning?
And I, yes he came and so he says  I've got the keys to the flat he said, you don't want to come and look at it do you?
And I knew he wanted me to.
He wanted you to go, yeah.
Yeah but I know what he means when he says he can't   and I said to him I said ooh I feel a bit out of sorts this morning, sort of I don't know how you must feel having to go to work.
I said do you get fed up?
He said yeah .
I thought he must do.
Mm.
Well perhaps, is there anything he can titivate doing in the flat see 
Well he's got it, he's, he said ooh I can soon 
I mean I know that's not very
Not really.
really very interesting but perhaps just for a start it might 
Well I think yes mm 
Have they got a bed and all sort of thing?
Yes.
Yes.
I mean I said to him oh er  what he's really got to get really is a cooker  erm  cos I said to him, I, I said to him if you really want to try and move in next week then you haven't got another week's money to pay for that, you know
That's right.
I mean forty something pound, well that's 
Well he can , yeah
forty pounds towards your gas cooker isn't it?
That's right, cos they're not paying on the other one then are they?
That's right.
If he's not paying till next week, next
Not until Monday, I said to him I should move, get moved in this week.
I said you can move in  er  you know  I mean she's  he said well  would like a fridge and a little freezer on the top so I said well you can move in without that because you've got that fridge there  it's just the gas cooker really I 
Mm.
Oh he said oh I'd like to give it all a good  he wants to clean it  there's always something on the floor, it's like a  erm  lino, it's  probably but all bigger squared
Mm.
I mean you could clean that up and it'd be alright.
Is that all through?
Yes.
Mm.
Same all through but he wants  he wants, he wants carpet down.
He said oh I don't mind cleaning he said but, he's like Derek, I mean I, ooh I can soon clean  well he's a good, you know, cleaner  I mean the bath, whenever he, blimey if ever he cleans the bath it looks ten times better than when I  I do it.
So that perhaps will interest him for a little while.
Well I think, I said aren't you excited?
He said yes I said well  
Did he tell you that Mandy had lived there before?
Oh well  yes, oh yes I knew she lived there before, but he didn't say with another
No, I dunno why I said it at the dinner table yesterday really that was silly of me really.
No I, well I just thought   I don't know why  I don't know why my reaction was what it was


but I, I thought she'd never been very open with it 
No 
and I didn't want anybody to 
well it's just that Andrew had to you know, he, he, didn't, he d didn't said it, didn't say it in any  very, you know, he said it very  
Matter of fact.
Yes very, you know, so I mean I'm not to know that he'd not already told somebody else.
No that's ri oh no.
Erm i it was stupid of me yesterday, it was a bit silly.
Not really, well I was stupid to
Well I, I didn't
comment like I did probably, I didn't mean it or anything.
Well it's Mick really, you 
I don't want any
No
you know 
Well I don't think anybody  
No I don't suppose they would.
Cos he, he, well he said she only lived there for two months.
oh he said it, it was, he said it's a really funny thing er Mandy lived there, it's the same flat, she lived there  ten years ago.
I said  he said yes sh with, with her, when she was first married, but she only lived there a couple of months.
That was a bit quick.
Have you had enough?
said he found a gremlin.
Ooh I don't, tell him to keep it there then, and I don't believe him anyway.
Close the front door Katie.
I have.
Oh are you, no I meant, are you going out or staying in?
Going out.


Oh well I meant close it  
Close it when you're through it.
because  then I needn't get up.
Don't run down the steps .
Oh God what have I done here?
Well 
Yeah.
Well I think you see on that, as I'd sort of said to you before
Yeah.
made the same silly mistake I made before, go the wrong way.
Think I've learnt it and just keep making the sa yes cos she'd crossed out divorced on that passport form 
That's right.
I signed.
She hadn't lived there very long though had she?
No she said er, I didn't, I mean I didn't f I mean I never ask him anything
No
I never, you know, sort of asked anything after that, I just see what he tells me  sort of thing .
That's right.
You don't really know whether he wants you to or not do you?
Well becau well that, I thought well he'll te you know, he did say it very matter of factly 
I know, I, it's funny 
erm
doesn't it?
Mm.
If she's, well I mean  I knew she'd sort of had a relationship and
Well maybe he thought well that's, somebody, that'll s 
 
that'll s that's that fact out, maybe he thought I d 
Yeah 
you know, cos I 
No.
I mean thirty she is  
So she married quite young then, cos that'd have been 
Yeah 
about twenty wouldn't it?
Yeah   
No.
Ah but she perhaps is isn't she?
And I mean she's so sort of closed about everything really, I mean he's not the sort of  you know 
Well 
you don't get much 
said ooh, she's ever so excited  she's ever so excited that she's back round, you know, that way as well.
Yeah, she likes living there.
Well I suppose  home and
He's not terribly keen on it though.
Well no, actually what she said, said something to me, I can't remember what he said now and I said oh I said it's a start for you.
He didn't say he wasn't keen, didn't say as much as that 
No, not, no, no 
he ju I just can't think how he put it now but I said ooh it's a start 
Well 
for you I said and I should think  I said it's your, your own  erm
That's right 
the first time  really been together in your very 
 
own place I said I should think you really, you know
Mm.
I said to  
And they've started to get a few things together haven't they?
So they  quite nice.
I said yes well we'll have to pop round and see you when you've settled in.
like it,now but it's alright where you've been but it belongs to someone else doesn't it?
I mean at least that 
That's right.
I mean if he wants to put a shelf up or
That's right.
you know, or remove some  
And he can, I  
he can without any qualms.
That's right .
And I said well you'll have an interest to keep it clean I mean   I'm sure you just do it out of necessity when it's not your furniture.
I thought erm  Mick had spoken more about it, doing all her kitchen and everything than ever he'd
Done before.
done before but, but
Yeah.
in, in a way that
I know there's nothing there is there?
I felt a bit you know, er you can't sort of, do you see what I mean?
I mean 
I think 
Mm.
Derek said to me don't you think he'll ever go and live with her, I said no.
I think they would have done by now perhaps would you not?
I don't know.
I said no    you see  she's  she's a perfectionist, I mean   being a perfectionist  being  halfhearted erm, you can't help it sort of thing, I suppose that, you know
Well I know that from Adrian, it preve 
Yeah.
it prevents him doing anything 
I know.
C it's awful I know.
Because I mean I've, I mean I know we're moving on the dining room but you don't know what I've had because he's wanted to do this, he's wanted to have the paper 
I know.
but I knew Sheila that he wouldn't get done 
 
so in the end I said to him look we've  so really it could have perhaps done with, I suppose if we'd been sensible it could, because it needed, the gas fire needs to come out, it does need a lot of, still really needs a lot of things doing to it.
Mm.
But it never 
But I found in order to get the thing moving 
You've gotta start 
you know, so I'm, I mean I, I, you know, I know that, and I know he hasn't got the time so
Yeah.
if we'd have started de it'd have been another six months, no disrespect to Adrian but, you know, I, I just know the history of  how it would have progressed .
Yeah I know that, I know, I know.
I know because I, I mean  you see I know I'm like that and I know I, I  I have to look away sometimes with Derek 
And I know he's, he's having to, to comp I know he's started making a personal compromise 
 
I want  a wee wee 
And I want to do a poo.
Oh well  
Well you come upstairs with mummy.
Yeah and Katie can go downstairs.
Yeah, alright?
 
Ooh my sweetheart 
No and I don't think he ever will my darling.
 
He will.
He won't.
He will.
No he won't  
He will.
setting out to trick you.
He, he's got, he's got to granny in, in the garage.
Oh you don't believe him do you ?
He's a monkey for 
Dolly's laying down.
Oh she's alright, not too cold is she?
No cos she's got her big skirt on.
Oh that'll keep her legs warm won't it.
Yeah.
legs warm that dolly doll.
Finished.
You finished ?
You going back out?
I, I 
Go and ask Grandpa, oh you've done a little bit of a poo poo
Oh!
Where?
I don't think it's too bad.
It were a little windy-pop weren't it?
And i and a, and a, and it,
Well, well she was, she was standing outside, I mean I looked at her this morning and I've loo so I've sort of looked at her, and I was going to speak to her  and then this fella walked up and I thought, I, I mean I couldn't gauge whether, and I mean my, I, I was thinking what I was going to say anyway, I was going to say er you know sa is it Paula so you perhaps don't remember me but  I, I, and then I was going to say  I'm Adrian, Adrian  
  
Just a minute mummy's talking to me.
Look I'm talking to daddy, I've not seen him ye for a while.
You know and I said I, I'm Margaret   you know, Adrian from the City Council was  you know I, er sort of thing like that, I was trying to think how I was going to say it 
Probably  to speak to you first see if she recognized you.
Well I just thought to say hello, not because I want to  
No, no 
to her but  if I  so I can say hello to some people, you know if only  because er  little girl, the little girl in Miss  's class now I, I  to me that 
yes.
that she, what is her name, Charlotte?
Charlotte, yeah.
Yeah well I think it is them, cos I'm sure I heard her say Charlotte.
It's a special edition Escort five thousand two hundred 
So what's that, the S  that, that's the 
The special edition.
like what we've got now?
Yeah.
Five thousand two hundred?
Yeah.
Is this part exchange though?
Pl on top of part exchange, yeah.
So he's giving me five thousand three hundred part exchange so the car, that car, cost ten thousand five hundred.
Yeah.
Oh so he'll give you five thousand three hundred?
That's not 
Yeah 
too bad then is it?
No, that's a special edition  Sierra
That's a much bigger car  is it?
It's not much bigger it's 
No?
it's like a foot bigger than a ni erm about four inches  
I'm just thinking about getting it  getting it in the drive .
measured the drive but it's only, it wouldn't make any appreciable difference.
Or I can go for a brand new what I've had before, you know not the special edition
So how much is that?
Well that's five thousand eight hundred.
To pay?
Mm.
So how much do you owe on that other one now?
Three thousand one hundred.
So  I've done the sums roughly  it comes to a hundred and ninety pounds per month repayment.
Which is what  do we pay now?
About a hundred and twenty five.
But  worrying about the odd hundreds, for every hundred pounds extra or less it er affects the payment by two pound a month.
Well yes, no, I mean yes the odd hundred.
So in other words that
Er just I think it
for that sa it's four er er that's fourteen pound a month , the difference 
Er yeah.
between that?
Well ca I mean can we afford that extra though?
That's another fifty pou seventy five a month.
Do we, did we ascer ever ascertain when that other loan finished?
That other eighty pound loan.
No, no.
As to whether you've got much longer on that or not.
Have you not got the paperwork of that anywhere?
Well not if it's not easy to get to.
It's in the personal loans.
Oh God.
Talk about 
March eighty nine.
What, it was taken out?
Yeah.
For how long?
Five years?
No I think three or four.
March eighty nine, well that's three, coming up to three years then in 
I think it's four years.
Oh that's  a blow .
Are you sure though Adrian?
Because 
Yes.
Sure it's three ye sure it's
I think it's four years at least.
March eighty nine.
I've got the statements but I've not got the original paper.
Well it's certainly, well so that's  ninety, ninety one, ninety two  I wouldn't have thought it would be four years Adrian, they only ever do it three years or five years d don't they?
No.
Oh you can have it anything you like?
Yeah.
And how much was it, eighty pounds?
What, we pay a month?
Mm.
Eighty three pound thirty nine.
Oh no  yes.
Well I'm just thinking it could be three years cos I'm thinking what I borrowed  what did I borrow, fifteen hundred?
Oh it'll have it   three thousand two hundred was the loan.
Three thousand 
Oh I think it's, I think that's five years.
Oh what a blow.
Three thousand was it?
Blimey that got up didn't it?
Oh well.
Yeah so we're in a lot better state of affairs than er  well I must get on.
So when, when's this kind of deal open to?
There isn't a  you haven't got to have it, this car sort of this, these specials, when are they 
Erm
when have you got to, have you got to make a decision on those sort of 
No not really it's just that
Quickly I mean 
the car's sounding pretty ropy at the minute, needs a new exhaust.
No I meant this, this, these  this off well not offer but what, what deal he's 
 
offering you now here
Well you don't know, it depends on the car trade doesn't it?
If it picks up then  
In March time the new engine is coming out on the Escort.
I mean the Sierra, it's a good offer on the Sierra but it's, it's like the basic engine  and I do like a car that  you know, you can put your foot down and it  
What's that an eighteen hundred then?
It's a six 
No six
sixteen hundred Escort er engine in a Sierra which is a heavy car so it's
Oh it's not gonna go so fast then is it?
No.
If you want to put your foot down then I wouldn't have thought that was the car you wanted.
I'd have thought you perhaps wanted to go  
Another sixteen  well or  a Sierra with a bigger engine but then it's getting more expensive isn't it?
Mm.
Well why don't we, I mean at the moment the children are still
you know it's not as if we've got vast amounts of extra luggage if you go on holiday and if so you just have to have the roof rack on.
I mean they've got, we've got past the having to have the pushchairs in the boot now
Yeah.
erm stage  perhaps go for something like that for another couple of years and then yes, I mean when they're getting a bit bigger and they 
They're not really
and they take a suitcase each
Yeah
when we go on holiday 
I think perhaps another Escort.
Then  then go for that one perhaps.
Mm.
That's just  gut feeling.
Perhaps if we, if I went to a Sie Sierra it'd perhaps be nice to get one when I can afford one with the power to match the the size.
Yeah.
I think you might be disappointed in that
Mm.
because if you're expecting it to perform like, I mean it's not gonna perform like that if it's the sixteen hundred in a heavier body car is it?
It's g you know,i if you, if you want  it to respond well  I mean as well that i if you say that's a bit ropy that other one
Yeah.
you'll probably find a new car
Well the only thing 
you realize how  
two colours, well it's that, it's like a 
What?
metallic  er blue mauve
Oh.
er or  a orrible burgundy.
Yeah.
Yeah there's some nice new features and that on a standard 
Have they got automatic windows?
adjustable steering columns, seat height up and down, automatic front windows, car alarm  radio data er  radio
And what's that mean?
It means, it's the new system where as you're driving along, whatever you're listening to it automatically interrupts to tell you of any urgent road delays.
It's a special signal  or  you tune in, not to a certain frequency, but to Radio One and then wherever you go in the country it, it tunes in to the best transmitter.
Oh.
That's clever.
That's, that's, yeah that's the special edition which is the one er just, you know, to try and help you sell better  and that's the, that's the other possibility, the  
What's, is that the ordinary
That's the ordinary
sort of what you've got 
brand new specification.
Have they all got these funny spoiler things 
Yeah.
on the back?
And that's like an old specification tarted up to sell a few extra cars.
One point three engine then.
That, so it's not  
Well he said it were one point six but that says one point three and I really do sh well I want a one point six.
And what's that one?
Five eight?
Five thousand eight hundred.
There we are  sensible, family minded.


Integral roof rack.
And believe it or not it fits on, it'll fit on the drive.
Would it?
It's only   
it's a bit of an optical illusion isn't it?
When they, looks hugely long
Well here's the specification, length, Escort four    two six eight so it's about two point three, sorry two hundred and thirty millimetres longer, so it's less than a foot 
centimetres, less than a foot 
less than a foot longer.
Oh I don't, no   Ooh well,
I'll go to Central, see what they say.
The, I mean the other thing, have I, have I said that the new engine 
Well you said that 
there'll be a new engine in March in Escorts.
Mm, what, to have one of the new ones?
yeah more powerful, aluminium 
Do they automatically come now wh having unleaded petrol or do you still have to  
Yes  
Ooh I must look out when my M O T's  due.
I don't know whether it's February or March.
Cos I'm a bit worried about that er  
Yes  
What we've got two ?
Yeah we've got two.
Oh have we?
Yeah.
We've got two darling.
I had one at school.
Or buy two brand new Fiestas.


What I'd really like for us to have, and this is some time in the future, is one nice sort of saloon type car for best
For best ?
for best, yeah
Yes.
and then a little, a little runaround, well like one of these erm four wheel drive Daihatsus
Yeah, and then a Fiesta?
No two.
Oh.
Two, two 
Well you could drive a four wheel drive Daihatsu,great across those country roads.
Oh well I  going across those country roads  
Can make it sort of drive up mountains and things 
Get stuck in what's name wood.
So I will go to Central, see what they say.
Well do you want, would you like to come and look some time with me?
Yes if you want me to.
What's this about the gas?
It's the service statement.
Let's just take your coat and hat, ooh 
N no he's gotta read it.
They've gotta read it.
He's got to read it, right.
Yeah.
Now listen to what we're going to do now, we're going to  mummy'll get you some dinner in a minute, are you hungry?
Yeah.
What are we having?
What would you like?
Would you like a boiled egg and soldiers?
Yeah.
And then a little while after dinner  ooh, mummy's going to
Morning  
Hello.
carpets?
Yes
Thank you.
come in.
Dining room isn't it love?
Yes.
Just round here.
Sorry.
Erm  can you take it,take it round to the  in there as well.
And then, I don't know what you're going to do here but we are going to have a new hall and stair carpet  
Yeah  
Well I mean I don't know what you think is best, I mean er within this year we're going to have a new hall and stair carpet as well.
Yeah so the door strip has to go in there?
So when the door shuts you don't see it.
So yeah, what I'm saying is if, if we 
 
do have to have a little gap  
Oh right.
at the minute because we're going to be having a new one here anyway.
Yes.
Alright.
And then the other thing that you've maybe got to do is I've spoken to er your office this morning because our card actually has expired, it expired a year ago  this is how we're going to pay
Yeah?
erm and er in the meantime, we had some lino down on the kitchen last year and they keep saying they're going to send a new one and they haven't and they haven't.
So could you phone up er your office because I cleared the fact that we can pay with this card cos I thought you might look at this and say well look it's expired.
Right.
So if you could phone up them and  
Yeah.
And you've already had a word with them?
And I've already spoken to  
Right.
erm because we've got, I mean we've already paid  two hundred 
Yes I'll sort that out.
Okay so if I, and then if, how long is it going to, to take you to do that?
 
 
I only wondered because I've got to go out later, I need to get somebody else to come in and, and be here but if I think it's only going to be about that.
Should take about three quarters of an hour?
Right.
Can I get you a tea or coffee?
some tea if that's alright.
Katie
Yeah?
Do you like the carpet?
Yeah.
Have you had a look?
Yeah.
Looks very nice in there actually, I'll tell dad      Hello, can I speak to Adrian please?
It's Maggie, is that Eva?
Hello, just to tell you they've finished and gone now so I'm well within my time  schedule.
Looks very nice.
Yes, yeah.
No cos it, it was straightforward I think and doesn't look to be too much wasted, you, you know they leave all that so I'll just it a quick, a quick, really a very quick hoover but I can't get to the bit where the waste carpet is but er  yes it looks nice I think.
And there was no problem with the card and everything.
Okay then?
No, no   okay then, I'll see you later.
Yes.
Well I think it's better if I don't say anything really, but try to be there as soon as you can.
Okay?
Mm  Well  right okay then  right, bye .
Now then we'll have to go to Nana's in about  ten minutes Katie.