

Shashin, you better shout too much, that's no good
I have to
You don't have to
Why?
You can listen.
If you talk nice and polite people listen to you.
If you shout this is no good is it?
Yes it is
No
Why?
Because people ignore you more
This is fun
It's not funny
No it's not funny
Yes it is
It's not very nice.
It's very rude
I know but I like to  people are naughty
If people are naughty then you shout but if people are not naughty then you don't shout, you talk politely.
Do you understand?
No
You don't understand?
Why don't you understand?
I don't now
What is your problem?
I like to shout
He's got no brain up here
I got a brain and I got a cold 
You're not taking your tea properly  go in yellowy like mine
Black you mean
Yeah
Do you have to have braces then .
Do you think you'll need braces then?
He's alright, he's perfect
I don't wanna wear them stupid braces
Why?
Just don't wannu, it makes me look funny
Well I was gonna wear braces at one time
I wanna wear the w I wanna wear the ones that 
Just a plain wire across your teeth?
Everyone takes them out and then shows you.
They've got all spit on them and they've got food stuck in and everyone takes them out and they go, oh look this is my brace


It's disgusting
Yeah but if I had to eat I'd take them out, then I'd put them back on
You can eat with them but then you have to 
they go all dirty
Then you have to clean them
I don't want to clean them
Yes, you're lazy
I know .
If I wore those track braces I would've had I wouldn't have been able to clean my teeth properly
Can I just say something?
  

No.
Daddy, talk
An animal or a living thing or person or whatever.
I'd then put down the typical weight, a typical height, the main use, the usual colour   tell me some key to press  please?
B
B, thank you very much.
I'll press B.
And it's come up straight away with record number two which is all about spaniels and obviously I can keep on going.
Something that is interesting, erm, if I keep on going and you listen, record three, not very exciting, listen to the disk drive, four, five, ok six,disk drive , ok?
This computer is a pretty pathetic one basically and it can't hold very much information  programme and so once it's had five records fed into it's memory it's full up which is pretty pathetic given the size of each record.
But it's rec it's got those in and once it's got those five in, it then has to  you get five on.
So each time you want to do something it's  five, displays it and so on tell it to read five but it just fills up it's memory, it's little buffer with that much.
You go on through and si sorry seven is a pointer, eight is a Jack Russell which apparently is rather snappy and used for rabbiting, so I'm told, nine is Dalmatian , number ten's a labrador, golden coloured, guide dog main use and so on and then oh dear, it's finished, the programme's stopped.
So I've just got ten records on this file and I say those words carefully because you've gotta distinguish between record, file and field.
Ok, using that as an example,labrador, can someone please tell me what I mean by file, field and record?
Ok, file is the whole collection
I don't understand that 
All of that is one record.
Ok.
Each
each record is a complete  information about one item on the file.
Ok?
So we're left with fields.
What does field mean?
Yes?
It's part of the record, good
Ok, good.
It's , the field is the part of each record E G shall we say, main use.
Every single dog, when the record comes up, has got a field headed main use and then says something like guide dog, guard dog, rabbiting or whatever it is.
Ok?
So that is the way in which files are structured.
We have a file er on each of you.
I've got one here right in front of me.
This is my file and if I look up er, in a way this is a collection of files, isn't it? but one file I've got is called ten C S, computer studies, and each record is headed with your name and as well as your name I keep a record of your form or tutor group.
I keep a record of the book number that you are given, that's another record that I've written down here, and then I keep, within that record, I keep details of your marks all the way across, what I gave you for your erm attainment and effort grades  progress checks, your exam marks and so on.
So that is my file.
That's called ten computer studies file.
If I turn over I've also got my eleven  scient file, the group that I teach er science to.
Turn over further, there's a third file for my upper sixth physics group and so on.
So, they are separate files.
Each file has got, in your case, seventeen records on it, in the case of my physics group, only five because that's the number of pupils in the group, and then beneath each record it's got the main tutor group, book number  various parts.
Ok?
So, do you understand the basic structure of a file, the records that are in it and then the fields within each record?
Right.
Ok.
Now, how are we going to?
Er, this was a read programme for this file that I've already created.
What we're gonna look at is how you can create
Thank you very much
here, go on
No, honestly, I couldn't
Walking's better
No, you might puke up on the way
Stick you head out the window and there's puke going everywhere on the parked cars and people's faces
you know, being sick and it was all green and disgustingly ukky.
You actually saw it going  coming out of 
Really?
Yeah, and then we saw the man
I dunno, it depends if you read the book.
And then there was a bit where a man takes all his clothes off and then just jumps into the river and then there was a bit where she where she's having a bath 
 
It's cool
Does she?
Excuse me, it's my road
Is it?
Stop dropping litter on it