

What is that?
It's a microphone.
Yeah.
Don't touch that bit.
So you're gonna record people talking to you?
What?
So you're gonna record people talking to you?
It's recording here.
So,wh who are you gonna give it to?
What? university  or something.
Doing a study on 
university  it's crap.


Don't you.
Oh shut up.
Now you can go no, it's uni university in the country and 
They up here?
Yeah.
Are you doing it now?
Yeah.
Do this level thing does so when you go  la 




I'm gonna record 
hello  
A bit, bit concerned about my, my, my state of mentality.
Yeah, yeah Call you 
What?
okey dokey crap
Bugger.
Bugger.
Name, first name  bogie 


occupation  like  none.
housemaster 
Allegedly  No,
Age seventy plus.
Allegedly 
Oh look, seems different to what I was doing.
What were you doing?
Well I
Oh cool  this is different wicked.
what were you doing?
Er I was actually er doing conversations with all these tapes,
So you don't need to put your posh voice on this tape?
Hey, hey, hey.
I hope this really  university 
Bergen.
Burgundy?
Burgundy.
Bergen.
Bergen 
Bergen 
Bergen yeah, I heard it was really shit.
Yeah I was told by Mr  it was like one of the worst 
Didn't that didn't Mr  say that it was really crap
Don't know, I can't understand it  I can't 
Yeah,I get you.
The problem is.
What?
that is a babe.
She's getting married to erm  Nigel Kennedy or somebody, Kennedy's  front page, look.
Nigel Kennedy?
Oh, Kennedy  President?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Didn't know that.
I want some coffee
Coffee, I need coffee.
Chocolate, hot chocolate.
What's your honest opinion 
Crap  No, I like some of it, honestly I like some of it, but some of it's really shit, but it's sort of movement really.
If you've got a bad head 
just weird isn't it.
I mean sometimes you expect him to laugh and he doesn't laugh  like he says something funny and I say something funny back to him, but he doesn't laugh.
Pardon me.
Yeah 
Such a fat  waddles along 
I bet it's quite good actually.
You changed your R S project?
That's on the first question.
How many questions do you have to do?
Five.
Five questions?
How many pages have you done?look at the spacing out I mean you've probably got about three words.
Oh shut up what are you on about three words per line?
How l how long you had to do that?
Hello.
You've got a week and a bit to do four questions.
Five.
Five questions.
I bet he'll be spending all weekend, this weekend doing it.
Yeah.
really interesting offer 
Where?
Oh yeah 
Oh God 
It said special features  a beach.
Of a beach, a weighing machine actually.
probably got about two centimetres 
Beach is really good cos it's like all the beach is like a tiled area where you sit down.


And the painted palm trees on a
On a wall.
I know but they're all the same those places, there all  get bored with them in about five minutes.
Have you recorded it all?
I'm still cold.
If it is, if it is  Saturday, we won't seriously play rugby
It depends really pissed or frozen.
We will
You're telling me you wanna run around in a pair of shorts
He's not playing anyway.
I'm not playing.
Why not?
Why?
Dunno.
Been dropped.
Crap.
No, it's 
Who's taken your place, there's Chris Smith at full-back  on the wing
Yeah.
That's all right I suppose.
missing them.
Oh cos you've gotta have a good  in kicking 
Actually he didn he didn't kick too badly the other day.
Oh yeah, and last night Jimmy kicked it right into the middle of the field and that.
He didn he didn't kick it, he wasn't that bad it's just Jimmy 
No, he wasn't that bad but he, he just tried a bit like 
I know.
really simple gets steep as well 
coffee.
Is  your weakness.
Yeah, I don't mind.
What did you get?
Four As, four Bs and two Cs.
I got four As, four Bs a C and a D.
Who did you get the As off?
I bet you I got Physics, Chemistry, English Geog Geography.
See I told you man he gets an A with every woman teacher that he has.
Ev crook 
Oh, that is sick.
I might get one A from  really 
She said I was doing really well.
She said I was doing well until I fucked off to 
Yeah, it was really good.
I was doing really well and I'm really 
You're disgusting 
tests  every one else is getting fifty per cent 
Geog ninety-eight
Forty per cent 's enough
Here Jim 
Seven per cent 
Nick Pratt gets more than me.
So does 
Nick Pratt
Excuse me, excuse me  who came first in the Chemistry exam?
Could have been  on that.
Fat bastard.
So you're gonna just be a reserve for the A.
Mhm I wanna go to  because then I get a  and it takes me about half an hour to get home.
Yeah, well go, go down to the station.
If that if that mucks up then tough.
Why?
will have to ring my mum and we will probably told like  and my mum's working on Saturday I think.
Can't you just get a train into London?
Well that costs more, that costs about five quid and I won't have
No, its three-fifty.
Yeah, three-fifty it's erm  it's more than we would have  if we weren't playing.
Yeah, three-fifty gets through to London.
Then I've gotta another I've gotta pay another quid or something
underground London.
What, three pounds?
Yeah, three-fifty.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah  
 
Yeah, yeah, I've got that, sorry, yeah.
Well I can't do it now, I've got to pay something like six-ninety.
You've gotta pay two quid, two pound no three pounds.
Three ten on the tubes yeah.
It's only one-thirty for me.
I know, exactly, you're so sad.
Jock  skint.
Well it's not as if you've like come into loads of money when you suddenly turn sixteen is it?
I think you should be about eighteen.
Well they just  more money that's all.
People like me I can get away with it, I get 
No, I was just getting charged full fares when I was like thirteen.
What's this on?
Erm the buses.
Why?
Cos I looked, I looked about over sixteen.
Some drivers I did, some drivers believe me.
Yeah, I came I went up about a year ago, I remember when I went down to Hertford in the  yeah, I said I, I forgot to say what ticket  and they automatically give you an adult don't they?
Yeah, yeah, you save yeah, I know.
And I say can I go to Hertford please and they didn't ask me how old I was, they just like the next thing I knew I was whacked out this six hundred quid ticket.
I know, and you don't feel like arguing, cos there's like a massive queue behind you.
Yeah and then you got any identity please.
identity.
seriously  by the time  yeah, you get a bus out of here, say it's cancelled you leave at twelve o'clock.
Yeah.
You have to wait for a tr well first of all you have to we'll the miss yeah, at twelve twenty-eight or whatever
Yeah.
Well how are you gonna get are you gonna get a taxi  or you're gonna get a bus down into Hertford.
Bus, that's w 
What I do is I try and do a  I just get a bus erm
There must be going, I try and go late and get a lift from someone to Hertford.
Yeah.
What I do is I just get a bus at Hertford and walk to Hertford and normally it doesn't take long  it only takes about ten minutes 
Really, you gotta walk all the way along the dual carriageway don't you?
Yeah, it's easy that's what I do all the time.
Do you?
Takes five minutes.
Ten minutes maximum.
Yeah, how you getting back, you get the train back?
Dunno.
Because I, what train did you get?
Oh shit, I'm not getting a train back I'm  gonna come back by car.
Really, cos what time is the train that you got?
Whatever you do you're gonna have to get back at you're gonna have to start leaving  London yeah.
Yeah.
Start leaving about sixish.
Six.
Five.
I'm telling you it's really bad news.
You get you have to get back  obviously
Yeah.
Okay.
You've got okay you've got something like a six  I don't even know what time the train comes they change at different times, the one I've caught was at five past  nine train.
Five past nine?
Nine yeah, came up caught that just about getting in there
Yeah.
Okay so got on that train, thinking it would go straight to Hertford and it didn't.
Yeah.
So I had to wait fo at Enfield Chase for another bus and the bus from Enfield Chase yeah  you go along all these piddley little  so it's from erm ten it took me it took takes an hour-and-a-half on the bus.
From Enfield Chase.
Enfield Chase to Hertford North.
So that's an hour-and-a-half  around an hour-an-a-half and ** a-half around an hour-and-a-half and blown, yeah.
How?
Cos it's in side roads, so that's an hour-and-a-half okay, you could we waiting for your train for about an hour so that's two-and-a-half hours
Yeah.
And then you can be erm  actually the train journey to Enfield Chase takes about another half-an-hour, so that's two hours at least and  as well.
So I have to go something like a five past seven train or something?
Five past seven, eight thirty, nine yeah.
So I'm gonna get I'm gonna be at that thing by about seven o'clock if I get on the train by I doubt I very much doubt it I'm getting the train.
Yeah, cos I might, I might see you at the station if you get the train.
I, I don't think I will be.
better not be not getting back here at ten o'clock.
Cos I've gotta go back otherwise
Cos the juniors, remember the juniors can't  on terrace.
Yeah.
So all the teams must be away.
Think about it.
Yeah, got forty five and sixty, sixty 
What about forty five, I mean they're gonna  they're not gonna go on they're not gonna on twenty to win junior 
forty five are crap.
Forty five is like the Bs.
Cs.
Where where's,fifteen, thirty, oh yeah, cos A B C here is A B C away.
See, forty five 
Two, no it's two years, so you've got it t 
Yeah I know, it's two years, but it's still the seating you can't have seating  can you.
Fifteen and the thirty are like the A teams
Yeah okay, so if if 
Forty five and sixty are like B teams  
if the fifteen  thirty place on  well if the thirty are away then it goes 
Oh yeah, I suppose.
I suppose 
Why doesn't he turn up to any practices?
Erm  who?
Chris Smith.
He's just a lazy bastard that's why.
Can't be bothered basically.
Doesn't he get done in?
What?
Why doesn't any of the masters have a go?
Dunno, I don't think anyone notices that he's gone.
Yeah they must have known Chris Smith wasn't there.
Wasn't he there?
I dunno.
He's in school isn't he?
Yeah, he couldn't be bothered to play rugby at the beginning, I mean nobody missed about four weeks.
It's forced.
Yeah, Dougie told 
Yeah, Jock, got a really exciting day tomorrow.
day.
Good Oh.
Yeah.
Pretty cool, not.
Oh, I should be doing work but I can't.
You what?
Should be doing work, but I can't.
What do you mean can't?
Can't be bothered?
Can't be bothered yeah, basically.
Jock, no-one can be bothered to work, but they've just gotta do it.
I know, but sometimes I just get down and do it, but other times I just  can't if you know what I mean.
No, I don't know what you mean.
Shut up, bloody 
not nice.
I'm talking 
What do you er think of the 
Rough, what the little one?
Yeah.
She's all right I suppose.
you like the little little one hey.
Ooh 
Shut up 
She's American.
blown a fuse, and it's on tape 
Julian shut up, just cos you know just cos you  
Cos I like what?
Cos you fancy the bloody Viking.
The Viking no way 


Jock, you know the Viking that's your sister that is.
Shut up 


That's your girlfriend that is.
When's the last time you got a letter from Jamie?
Erm  couple of days ago.
How often do you write?
Erm once a week  sometimes that depends when I feel like it.
happily.
What?
You go there you'll  play rugby  and erm
Shut up that's a point I won't be knackered at all.
You won't be knackered at all I mean  bloody killed playing freezing conditions.
Yeah, but I this will be the first match I haven't played this season.
So?
I wouldn't mind, I mean I don't mind if Chris  cos I know he's better than me, but Christ Smith's crap.
Yeah, he was he's erm full-back for the  and erm he was pretty crap.
The only reason  was cos erm he was quick.
No and also is 
No, cos John Collier could have been in there, John, John played erm two matches when Chris  was injured.
No, what about  and  they were both
Yeah,that that's why 
Nicholson 
That's why I play.
chest infection and  bloody done his knee in or something.
That's why I was in the team for after half term.
Never actually played at 
I thought we never will.
You really crap yourself beforehand, but once you play you think great,the best.
Jock.
What?
You're sad.
shut up.
I'm not doing any more work, I can't be bothered.
Nor can I, I don't know what to do.
Just sad, I've got about eight projects.
The thing is, oh yeah what do you think of those women that came?
What scholarship  
I don't think they're that bad.
Yeah, everyone was going on at how rough they are, I mean you can't as I've said before you can't exactly expect them to be super models.
I know.
And anyway if they were super models who would be able to go out with one  so sad.
I know, I'd rather have someone who was
Reasonable
Reasonably good looking and a good laugh.
Yeah, cos then you know you've gotta chance of going out rather than or something then you haven't got a chance at all.
Sad.
You've gotta 
And considering that they're all supposed to be erm all the 
Yeah.
sad and scholarships and stuff.
not too bad.
Actually I saw so many women  saw quite a few women up there.
Not bad.
I reckon we're gonna have a good year this year next year.
Year what?
Have a good year.
Cos I mean we had two crap years hadn't we, well.
Two crap years diabolical.
Now this year might be all right at the end.
At the end?
already.
What?
We could get to  cos no-one actually talks about  very sad isn't it.
Yeah, well we never get a chance do we.
No, when do we do it?
I think the saddest people gotta be Lawrence.
Why?
Trying to pull those two pretty women.
Yeah, playing rug playing rugby.
Playing rugby  
 
Rugby on the afro turf  every day.
he's a laugh.
Who?
John .
On the, on the he was on the  and it was such a laugh it really was, good laugh.
What are you doing?
taken all the paper off.
what's funny Jim 
You recording?
Yeah.
comes in and goes er
Shut up, shut up 
And he goes erm I suppose  you know he goes, he goes 


No, Melissa, what have I done, shit what have I done I thought, oh my God, what have I done.
made her pregnant or something.
serious  not really and Alistair goes oh yeah, it could do and I went er yeah er he goes why and I went why and he goes oh well, she ran on the .
Melissa well that was ages ago.
And she goes and he goes erm sounded, sounded like a good sounded like quite a nice girl really.
Quite a big girl really.


Is that what she said.
And he goes  
How can you sound like a big girl 
I, I just didn't stay to ask to be quite honest I was shell shocked.


pissed himself.
Why 
When is it?
Tonight.
phoning about the disco.
I can't talk to her.
Why?
I don't wanna talk to her.
Why?you get get snogged at a disco.
When's the next disco.
second first fourteenth.
Y y yeah honest  December
December 
Yeah.
Yeah probably be another P A C  St Albans  disco.


All we talk about is swear words
Every other word is a swear word.
People who are listening to this have missed something 


They're all Norwegian.
Oh God, I almost crapped myself I thought I was going to be working till twelve I've now got no prep to do.
Yeah I'll do that.
No you'll do it, you've gotta do it properly.
Painting a  in half-an-hour and I haven't got any history  chemistry.
I haven't done any work.
I'm just talking to this stupid microphone.


and you've got a friend.
oh no, they're gonna think we're rigging it now 
the way Jimmy goes, Jimmy goes  understand why you always take the piss out of me for my voice 
Yeah he does doesn't he 
When I'm round Jimmy I  right Kevin.
I know yeah I noticed that in Alistair as well.
Is he going mad, he must be going mad.
Well on one Monday I went home, I can't remember what I said, I just came out with this really  I  and I said it really  
 
I wasn't actually putting it on either, I said  like that and  and I keep saying yeah after each, each sentence when I'm describing something to my mum like saying last match yeah, we won yeah, six nil yeah, eight nil yeah and it I keep saying yeah, yeah, my mum's going yeah, shut up my mum says I go yeah that's well nice and she goes erm goes well nice I said  
and I say well and I'm well cool 
and I keep on saying that I've said it like about so many things when we're at home and she goes, what is this you always saying well  with everything.
I know, it's like me.
around Jimmy more.
My parents they always say 
My mum hates Jimmy because of that.
My mum doesn't my mum no, it's like my brother, my brother  Jimmy's really nice.
Does he?
Like yeah, because like about what he did you know he was staying up with  and all this and like giving him money and looking after Andrew  so he goes for my parents Jimmy's really nice.
Well my dad reckons he's really nice anyway.
Dunno whether my mum does.
No.
My parents, my parents hate 
My mum, my mum and dad hate 
My mum, my mum keeps saying has  settled down yet and I said 


settle down.
Settle down.
I would say  for you.
I would say like a bit myself you know
Oh like.
You know like this and like that and like
Bit like that.
And my mum and my my dad starts going like, like, like and they go what you do.
You know about 
You wrote that letter yet?
Yeah.
By the way just for the tape she's a right fuck.


You know you wrote that letter and it said oh, I hope to see you in half term  and then, then said I hope not
Bollocks.
She said that?
I hope not, no, he said that, I ha that's bollocks and then what else he wrote he says I love you lots  I'm missing you lots.
Oh, no yuck all tape listeners  is a really fat ugly rough mother fucker.


Just remember.
Dream of the Norwegian Viking person.


It's not very nice.
I know, she's so rough I mean she's so fat.
I mean Jimmy sang who is it 
Jim screwed I mean
Jim says  is fat
Fuck  she is.
Keep fat.
She's a bit  bit on the
Yeah, there's a bit of meat on her
No but when she sort of comes out he says
Shut up.
Claire 
about up to my  waist type of thing.
Yeah, she's short and
Short, fat stumpy, round, covered in acne.
Yuck.
Breast, did she have a breast?
I didn't really see her, I  
Did she have a breast?
I know she had bad spots.
Did she have a breast?
Dunno she probably did she had everything else.


She had some disease as well.
She tried to talk to me a job, but we sort of joked away.
She used to she used to  she goes erm 
Yes.
It's like this yeah, hang around, meet 


She's fat.
She beats her hairy chest.
Yeah 
 

So disgusting.
Hairy armpits.
Hairy everything.
Hairy minge.


stuck
You'd lose your hands.


That's sick, she has problems going 
Oh shut up.
Disgusting.
She  quite rough.
Rough.
Well what about 


What about 
She's got some death wish.
I reckon Marie-Anne's the nicest girl he's ever fancied.
He's got, he's got, he's got a death wish on  He must be  takes the piss and I go.
He goes shut up, you taking the piss out of me.
I don't take the piss out of him he goes turns all silent, he goes like
Him and  him and  do you remember that?
Just think, someone that you fancy supposed to be someone in your dreams and stuff like that
Yeah.
Well yeah 
Someone you really, really like, I mean how can you really, really like ?
Paul does 
Oh yes Paul  they were sitting like at the end of the corner there's been 
Oh, no 
alcove and there was one in the  one far corner and  sitting on the corner together, they were holding hands going  every so often he hears .


But you know, Jimmy said, he said oh  just a friend now it's  I'm after.
 

Not.
Brady's going out with 
How do you know?
But she goes to  she goes to 
Who?


He leaves next week.
You're joking.
My God.
Yeah.
You told him?
Because Alistair, Alistair's known for about four weeks that she's got  
 
Cos he knew, cos he knew   