

Oh just how are you?
Alright now.
Feeling better now?
Yeah 
About the time I started me tape
What's it for?
Dictionary or thing, some come yesterday, anybody disagrees with being taped like I turn it off.
I get twenty five pound for it 
No 
Who've you had on it then?
Nobody
first one I've had, I hope it's recording  tape that, it is, well what you got to tell us then?
Nothing
Nowt?
Oh, haven't seen you for weeks and you've got nowt
I've been bad for two weeks
Wendy, housewife, age fifty   er how d'ya stop it?
Er
I get a twenty five pound voucher when she comes back next Friday.
For what?
Well just a voucher for twenty five pound to spend
Where you gonna spend it?
I dunno, dunno what it's for?
Just twenty five pound voucher, so  which town, village city did you record
How's Paul?
Well he's alright like, but er phoned us yesterday, I wrote it down what he told us in the book, in there, cos it's confidential  between him and the Co-op, but
so I'll turn this off
He collapsed at Debbie's on Wednesday night, well he fell, bumped his head sort of fall down  so the doctor come yesterday, tt, and he had to stop in bed two or three days and go at the doctor's for ten minute appointment and he  bloody test and to see why he's lost so much weight  cos his legs are like that.
I said to  well he was never bloody fat to start with  it,dizzy so 
Mm 
he says his daughter's here from South Africa  with her little'un, she's married to a Paki, but the marriage is like that.
No, what you buying  with
Mm, mm, I don't know, I think one of me tablets, me, for me heart, they give me a different tablet like, it was a same like Heinz Beans or Cross and Blackwell Beans
Aye.
and I think that's upset me stomach
Oh.
I've had sickness, no I haven't had sickness, I'm telling lies, I've had diarrhoea and then I've been constipated and then violent pains and terrible
Mm.
it's bound to be going into spasm or something
Mm.
so I don't know whether it is that tablet, it's eased off now 
Mm.
but it's all in me back
It's not that flu I don't think, Sam, Sammy Jo started with it, I mean she had the doctor out a week on Saturday, I mean she was ill and Sharon started  her Sunday dinner, a week on Sunday, she never had her dinner, Sammy Jo never, er why me and Elliott left some, then on Monday she was really bad and Elliott was
Mm.
and I knew started me on me chest, so I had the doctor Tuesday all of us, but they went in before me
I know, when I was in the  Sammy Jo were alright
Was it
Oh erm
last Tuesday?
yeah
Well where were you?
I was in the doctor's
I never see ya, I was sat
No it was early, Sammy Jo wasn't there, and I don't know whether they said Grant  or Elliott , it was about oh  twelveish
No, all went in together we, ten past five our appointment was for all of us 
Yeah I asked Sammy Jo, she said something about the Sunday 
Oh, five to er
Sharon had altered it or something cos you all went in at five to five or something
No made appointment
Yeah
Sharon hadn't altered it
What they'd already made an appointment for Sammy Jo well that's what 
Oh, oh oh that was for her ears
Mm.
yeah, but when come, come on Saturday she looked in her ears cos Sharon said she had to go back with her, she says I wait don't go  ears are cleared
Mm.
er and Sharon never alt er cancelled that, well they come out and they said they'd had Chinese flu so when I went into  and had me chest done, I says I've got the flu like, she says yeah she said  I says I, I know, I said they've got that Chinese flu she's be 
 
I says have I?
She says no, I says have I bronchitis?
She says no you've just got a very infect on your chest, but, I did have a cold that night, yeah sneeze 
No I haven't had a cold or anything on me chest
what with them being sick you see Sharon and the babe
Mm.
I dunno if Elliott were, but he was off work about a week  so
I have to go back again Tuesday
Yeah, folk here just never been out since New Year, then she had to work at the hospital Tuesday, well Bradley said if you don't feel fit enough phone up and we'll send a nurse to you  I said you're bloody mental, you ask for everything you get, I said instead of phoning the nurse in, ah  but I think Alison told me they both need a good, good bloody feed  they do  
Did she?
Ooh I, I mean being in a right mess 
Mm.
and I went with her last week, then she had to go again on Monday, but she went Saturday as well, then she had to go back up Monday the last, so she hasn't been  haven't seen her since  I've been gonna go up all week but the weather
Mm.
well I hadn't been out from Monday till yesterday  Sharon's at the hospital now with the babe 
mm  did you have a nice birthday then?
Ah yes and no
Oh.
yeah it was alright, I think it was me that was being a bit, got a bit het up in case anybody had too much and started you know 
Aye 
but it was alright 
I thought that was why you hadn't been round cos I never come
No
went to Stella's  er  mine last Friday you know?
Oh was it?
Mm 
Oh  happy birthday for last Friday Sheila
Fifty two, aye  er one date last Friday 
Ours came across with a card
Aye, ours did.
and I was busy in the kitchen when she come, oh are you having a party?
Yeah, oh dear  
I don't know about
well there you go 
 

and ours is thirty two pound a year Wendy
Thirty two pound a year?
I said I don't know how you dare sit there and say you haven't paid that Alice, she's paid a fiver  I says I'd be ashamed, I said I wish mine was only that, so she phoned up to make arrangements to pay it a pound a week  thirty two pound, that's all hers is Wendy, for the year
And sounds also she's getting that cold weather payment
She is, yeah  are ya?
Can't have it.
Why?
Cos I can't, only people
Why?
with children under five or on Income Support or
Disabled.
disabled, yeah
Why, you're classed as disabled
No I'm not  cos I only receive Invalidity
Does Phil not class as dis 
No 
Well Kay says it's not on Income Support, it's children under five, over sixty and er disabled
Yeah, Income Support with an underlying something or other 
Yeah 
she said 
as, that's the way it is, I said now Joyce is over sixty, she doesn't get it  our Kate and Sandra don't get it cos they haven't got a bairn under five like you know, Beverley gets it, Alex
Mm I can't I don't know 
Kay 
yeah I know
Kate did last time when they got it
I said well it's funny how a friend of mine gets it, she says well she must be on Income Support with an underlying something like an, a different pension on top of her Income Support, which she is isn't she?
Cos she got that fifteen percent disabled I think 
Yeah disabled yeah
that's why she gets it
yeah but she's on Invalidity though
Mm I know
still 
how I don't know, we can't have any rebate
No I know, it's all wrong Wendy
Mm, mm
it is  all wrong, cos I says to Stuart we had, we were at him Monday, I says why is it this year I says I get a, a thing to go to court on Monday, I says and yet last year I says I didn't pay mine till end of February  she says oh well they're getting stricter this year she says, oh you've got a court thing fifteen pound and I says yeah and she says paying that, I said no I'm not paying that  cos I pay what I owe, I said but I'm not paying the fifteen pound court cost
Mm.
well Kay said you should go and tell 'em I said I'm bloody not, I mean the rates isn't finished until the next month Wendy the fifth 
No no, so everybody should be given it up till then to pay anyway shouldn't they?
but she said if you haven't paid your first half, they demand the lot, which I know that 
Mm.
well I'd only paid me first month you see twenty two thirty
Mm, not paid any more
so  how much is yours?
A hundred and thirty eight
A hundred and thirty eight er
each
yeah I know, yeah  but theirs is forty something 
and Steven's is a hundred and thirty eight
Oh is he working then?
Aye  oh well he should get another forty for it
Yeah he did
Oh
and it's now a hundred and seventy seven I think
Mm  well her was only thirty two Wendy, I don't know  so she's only 
Well they just tell lies Sheila that's all 
she was on about it, I mean John hasn't got er, a bill and Tony hasn't like, well he's not down, but David's got a bill and he should be up court on Monday
Mm, why ain't John got one?
They haven't sent him one Wendy  they haven't sent him one, yet he had one the the time before 
Year before 
which I don't think he paid like, so I don't know
 

I don't know, I mean even her father's got his bill in the army Wendy
Mm 
so, but she said on the day when she come over and she getting a letter off the Social about what interest we pay on the house she's got, she says they don't pay any, she's, for last two or three years, they haven't paid any, she had to fill his side in and send all his side to Halifax or whatever, she's er
Have they?
and she says she's still as bad off now as when she went in to get the house, you know  the five thousand odd, she's would, she's, she's, I had a bit last, I, I wished you had it all, I said don't lie, I said don't tell me you haven't had it I says cos you have, she says yeah, I says what you done with it?
I says you've just wasted it, er tried to say she hadn't had it like, yeah  I  I'm not in  turn it off  you been hospital?
Eh?
It's a survey I'm doing, record people that come in on conversation and who's talking and
That's why I've been quiet for two hours 
Nana what it said
Ah, ah, don't touch, it's
What is it?
You have to sing into that, can you sing?
Yes we've been to the hospital mum and they said er he is at er okay
Oh are they?
No not really
Why?
The right one's okay but the left one's still got a bit of infection so they don't really know 
Have they 
so she's got to go back in a few weeks' time
Oh
to get it checked again, what you not talking for Wendy?


Don't you like being on tape?
Have you had a drink yet?
Not very good cafe this is it?
you're not a housewife are you?
Or are ya?
Houseperson 
I'm amazed, er what you got to fill in ma?
Just who it is and age, Yorkshire and what they are, friend, daughter or   if you're English or not or
Oh have you got to go 
Nana can I have biscuit?
no I take the
take the shops just I put on my thing and 
When have you got it like?
Next Friday, twenty tapes left, batteries 
it's alright for twenty five pounds
Hello can you just talk to me 
 
talk into me chest
She left 'em yesterday, nobody's been, just Wendy
Free to talk here
I don't think she's on here, we only had
just say hello Wendy
I had it pinned on the curtain, I thought well anybody will be able to er record into that will they?
Has Glen been?
No 
Nana can I have some pop?
Yeah, have
That's a nice
Coke
Get up
You been hospital?
Look in your ears?
And what did they say?
Her ears,drawn a picture didn't they?
Did they?
When they sang, when that bird sang in your ear, it went 
Bird sang in your ear?
 

Get off me
Mum I want some pop
Just wait a minute then
Got ya, got ya coat, mum pass me your coat
Watch me tape 
Oh what's that for?
right see ya bye Wendy 
Enjoy your taping 
Shout bye
Bye Sheila
Bye, see you later
Will ya?
Say bye Wendy  go on  say something
Did they come round with the mike?
Yes she come yesterday afternoon I sat and  I says I'll have a go, I says  then I had flu didn't I?
I says you gonna talk?
He says
Aye
he wouldn't talk  I says no names mentioned, well it is I have to put there and there like, but   Aye twenty tapes, you don't have to use all the tapes, like you know, just,for different languages 
Different what?
Different languages like dictionary you know and puts here whether you're Geordie or Irish and, that's why you have to put what accent they've got, see what different words you use  so you've 
 
never been to school again have ya?
Eh?
Eh?
Aye  you wanna say hello?


She said to me  you can go and get it out, honestly, you know the other day he could hardly s well y you could see but not nearly as good as this
Er
when was it Wednesday?
er
Really thick
Yeah
so I said erm  cos I've been in  so I says to her  cos you want some fags
Mm.
well I'll get the car and you can go out, I says you're not getting the car out and I'll not go  I said you can go
Mm.
anyway he walked, he was only away about twenty minutes you know  he wanted to get the car and for me to drive I thought well er 
Not in this weather.
I mean er, it wasn't necessary
No.
I mean today I'm not gonna open me shopping on the bus but I mean it's not nearly as bad as it has been 
No it's not 
I mean 
 
going in and coming out
It's, it's bad enough but
Yeah
you can drive you can see it anyway
Yeah
but Wednesday you could hardly, I said I'm not 
No 
I said you can go
cos I washed er Wednesday, cos Tuesday I was going out, go out to see the mother then drop off at your house, but
Oh we couldn't
cos Kenneth come up early on, he says it's like this night he says I'm not  properly, ah right, I says I might  I says were that like, I says, I says what time?
I says oh I dunno, I said oh Sharon'll fetch dad over, so we sat waiting for her and then they come
Well it doesn't start till nine anyway, so you could er if, I mean if he wasn't here by 
I thought you wanna be there 
quarter nine
you, you weren't there were you?
No
No
not
I thought you wouldn't be 
I can't afford it to, apart from that I mean and it was 
Yeah 
still on edge
Yeah
but I mean 
Yeah
so I dunno, if I want to go out in it, he's gonna have to go and get somebody else, I've got time off, I mean I've gotta go out tonight, I'm on me raffle, monthly raffle 
Yeah 
tonight and then I'm on me raffle next week, but after next, I mean I can stop in the next, I mean I was, I've never been out since a week on Tuesday  cos I wasn't on the raffle Friday
No
I never went out Sunday, I haven't been out Tuesday  I just thought you know good   still find the money for it still it's amazing how you do
No 
Did Sharon finish that cardigan that she was knitting?
Aye
Did she 
tried it on 
was that Jackie?
Yeah
Right
Aye she, just, she got some more pink wool Monday when we went to town, er like  like an 
Do you  
yeah like angora stuff
no
Cos Harry  wasn't in again  on Sunday
Yeah he was  yeah Harry  was erm
probably fell out with me
She got this pink wool like angora twenty five pence a ball, so she started that, then she come on er, no Tuesday, with that she bought some needles cos if she'd of had some more needles I could of done this one for er, now she's got the back and er sleeve done I think, half a sleeve done I think
So she's right 
It's green, it's alright, the only thing is  the band where you know you leave your loops on then, where it's joined at the back
Oh
where that one I haven't put on I just do the bands
Oh yeah
just the same  oh she bought a new pattern, but she says you can have that, it's only plain  so
Ah is the band not joined on?
Yeah, yeah it is 
Is it?
but I'm not doing it that way, cos you have to join it at the back
No, is the band not knitted on?
On there
Yeah
Why aren't you doing it that way then?
Well you have to join 'em at the back
Where?
What's 
You'll still have to join it at the back
how's that?
I'll just make a full band, stitch it on 
Join it in 
stitch it on through the bottom round
Ah, well you'll have to take it up there then, you'd be better off joining it at the back if you're gonna join it
Well you can see where it's stitched up the back, you can on Sharon's
Er not if you stitch it properly, get it through the loops, don't, just cast off slack and stitch them together, you not, you not be able to tell
Ah just er how I used to do years ago
I like it when the band's joined on 
Yeah but you only knit on the welt, then you put the needles on it spare pin, on a pin
No
You do
I'm talking about the ones, the ones what I like knitting er where you knit the band on all the time
Oh no they're not
Ah, that's what I'm saying
Oh I've never had one of them
them, baby cardigans I used to knit
Oh
you used to just, it was just knit
Aye, aye 
er like not rib, a band where it's just
just lines aye
Aye
where you knit all the time 
Aye 
no they're  you put your needles off your welt, you iron on er, er 
Is this for Sammy Jo or not?
Yeah, aye 
Well I showed,Sandra thought she couldn't knit didn't she?
Yeah
Look what she's knitting, do 
Aye she's put, she's knitted a jacket for herself
Oh has she?
and  knit a jumper for Michael an'all, when Michael's in she knits him a jumper, the jumper  
Best that way then you don't get sick
Eh?
It'll be better that way if you, like you're knitting with two different colours
Aye
won't it?
Yeah
Then you won't get so sick
Yeah  yeah  so ha
Oh dear, dear, I've just felt 
Aye, I've not been outside, so, Alison didn't go last night 
Did you go over last night though?
Yes 
Tony's bad so I, she stopped in, oh well, he would stop in if she were bad wouldn't he?
Eh?
Oh yeah, are you recording this ?
When he come, when his first one  on, said she bet  nobody, why Alice come last night at six o'clock but I didn't put them on, I was only at the, I take to the shops you know  you do, you have to put the name who you're talking to on 
What's it for then?
It's all about languages for dictionary you know like 
Oh you'll get some language off us, good job it's 
 
difference like Yorkshire, Geordie, Welsh or owt like that 
Could of been using me French  
and I says I have  one not to swear, so it gets rubbed out if it's too bad, you know  she comes back, she comes back next Friday, she left twenty tapes and batteries
Twenty
I needn't use 'em I mean


they're all marked and er
No he went out last night
I thought you wouldn't
Er you get twenty five pound voucher
What to do with it  oh getting 
I went where yest was it yesterday?
No the day before, a parcel come, I thought oh good  what was it?
It was Timmy's shoes and on, on the thing it's got, items so and so out of stock   
I ordered some things yesterday, they sent us another catalogue then, two skirts and two blouses
You can't wear what you've got
Aye well the blouses last, round buttons, down so I
Like that
skirts is elasticated, yes 
that erm really colourful one I got with elastic
Aye, a purpley and
I'm never comfortable cos it comes up here
Aye well one of mine is 
I 
that bluey one is, right,
half of them I think, I think it's a bit tight the elastic, it don't sit on your hips, aye it too
and it twists, my blue one and that
Oh it doesn't twist, but it
No that one doesn't
don't, uncomfortable
Yeah
If I didn't have a tummy it'll be alright, you know they're
Aye
of course it would, but it's not long enough to bag
Yeah, aye.
Oh I wish I hadn't to go out tonight
So I ordered them sixty odd quid I ordered a green, a jade skirt 
So it's nine o'clock 
half elastic and it's like pleats at the back and er blue, nearly blue pleating  and these two blouses, er I try, if they're not any good I'll send the buggers back
Oh aye 
I went to change me poll tax and er  I says to her, I says, I should be court to Monday oh she says you've got a fifteen pound court thing, I says aye, she says oh well that's fifteen pound, I says it's not cos I'm not paying it  I says I'm not paying the fifteen pound to the court, I says, I says how come last year I didn't pay right round to February last year  I said and yet I, your last payment's next month, you know, she said oh well they're stricter this year she says, she, if you'd pay the half year you'd of been alright
Mhm
you know, if you don't pay half year they come and demand the lot which I can't make that 
Yeah 
it's all  I said no it's not I said I paid me first er payment I said wrote it down on one of those papers
no
it was a hundred and seventy eight pound odd
That'll be for the issue of the summons that, fifteen pound
They're not getting that  well 
You're gonna have to sit talking cos I've taped that
Oh I'm gonna talk to myself
Oh 
Is that John's van there out the front?
Aye that white thing is years old
I thought, cos there's a car up road with it, must of been stood there like all the bad weather
Oh
ee and you want to see the colour of it 
Sorry about that
Has he?
Pa phoned yesterday
Still in bother?
No he's, he's being moved to troop fifteen
To where?
Troop fifteen
Oh
it's still a but it's a different camp, but I wrote this time because what he tells us I forget, I don't know if you'll be able to read it or not  so 
I said, well the, the kids we love it with George cos he's got a smashing sense of humour 
Oh aye, yeah 
he's a great kid and he's madly in love now
Oh is he?
Oh lovely lass, Erica really nice, been married before, but she had a terrible life 
Mm
no offence like, which was, they  our George I think
Mm
but er he's really happy 
Oh well
I says do you think you'll be setting up home together next, he said I don't know, maybe, it's a big step isn't it?
Like to lay a few pounds like
Mm 
you know, cos I mean he is 
Yeah 
lad
Yeah
our George
Mm
I said well don't go out till you're ready, as simple as that, if you don't think you're ready stop the way you are
Mm
that's important 
Aye
but he loves what he's doing, absolutely loves it  cos there's nowt for them here is there?
No
And that  nothing at all for them  no  
er  forty nine
Not yet 
No
forty nine 
A Geordie
A Wearsider
Oh
I'm not a Geordie
Well you're down as a Geordie
Did you see her on Take A Break  the snooker game she was from Sunderland
He says are you called a Geordie she says no I'm a  Mackem he says what's a  Mackem ?
She says  Mackem and Tackem I dunno but that's what people say
Oh 
I forgot where she lived  red light murders
Aye, outside the Blue Monkey Nightclub in the town centre
Oh
twenty three, somebody was it  he's  stabbed 
Aye
there were a lad on here today from Dunscroft, oh you'd have the telly on
I'd have the telly on,
er some competition  
sitting in from Dunscri Dunscroft, he was on  he won summat 
Oh  
last week
Oh
had the key
Oh 
was as drunk as the lord last night
Yeah
this lad was, now he was, coming in the bar, he sat just as you come in the door and then he moved to that long thing where we sit, well I go at the bar and Jackie was sat there  Jackie, I said time to be social, no I  cos I laugh, I were laughing me head off me and he's jabbering away move like that, his arms moving you know, then he sets off to sing, well,la, la  and Johnny said  shut up  I know Johnny  put his glass of beer on the next table to ours  and sets off to see Mickey, then he stands up this lad   sit down  you,must have thought for his beer, I think he was like, I says to Jack I says er you want to put  his trousers is all undone, you know sat and his trousers what and his jumper, so our Johnny went he said get that covered up and, but he pulled it down like that, and now he took 'em out he walked through the door and his trousers  were falling down  but
What is he very old?
No, only about I'd say late twenties Ed, you know, do know what it was though, he never had a drink he just sat there talking to himself, having a good chat to somebody , aye 
How is the mother have you head?
Oh  er Sandra went to see  see Jason or anybody  
Jane uses the car then on Friday didn't she when she's been hairdressers?
Yeah, unless I dunno if she's gone up home she's getting a lift off erm thingummy 
Doris
Doris and somebody weren't one of her lads getting engaged, I dunno if it was
Oh
like this weekend or, or what or what 
Er little Ronnie's had a baby girl
Ah has she?
three pound something
Ah bloody hell 
calling her Rachel
Oh 
 
oh she's got her lass ain't she?
Aye, I'd love to of had  a lass
Aye
Aye, but 
three pound odd


bloody hell
Aye, I don't know how many ounces it was, three pound something she was, yeah 
I dunno if it's  tape's finished or what
Well stop it and open it
Right don't everybody stop talking now cos I've put it on 
Michael, Michael give us a song, sing, sing a song, sing
do you want one?
Yeah, I've got these
What you got there?
See  five P, ten P 
There's no more left these plastic
What's the other one look, there's a black beard on in there
That's Sammy Jo's 
You can spend that you know
What?
That's real money, old one, you try and spend others or, five P, now watch that ashtray
Whose tickets, whose , whose class is it Nicola, yours or Michael's?
What me mam's got
Here are then, can have that one, don't lose that it's worth a lot of money
Don't take that to school
She can take it Princess Diana
Oh
there's one for you same as Nicky  I've got, here are, there's another one, different one to that, there's Nicola's, leave 'em there  I haven't got a Diana, the Queen Mother and the Queen left   talking about my girl, my girl  
Oh what's this?
Sing, Michael sing
No
baa, baa black sheep have you any  
no, no 
sing, sing
No
that's er
Brown
Kenneth
he can't, cats and dogs
Oh look a number one
Two R, what's two R?
A number one
That must be foreign
it's a number one
That's our penny, yeah there's two R I dunno what it is but it's full
Take me freezer bags
Give us a song Nicola
no 
I close my eyes 
I think she must've gone to town
drew back the curtains ah, ah 
I've done the back, sleeve half a side 
to see for certain 
Sharon's done hers, she's done the green one, she's on to the pink one
Professional microphones innit?
Stick on the collar
I found a pattern of hers, jacket in white in that bag what for a cardigan I wanted to do for school
No it's five pence
No I know, well  
 
have, what you doing?
Don't lose them, no you don't need them
What?
You don't need them
Well I do
you need them, you don't need none of them, don't lose them two big ones  cos I'll be after ya
No you won't  put this in, in that
I close my eyes 
Oh no, these are big ones
No leave those big ones, they're mine 
I put my
Quick tip them all out, tip them all out
 

Nana where did you get that?
Er a lady fetched it er  for us to do and she comes back next week for it, just to put it on when anybody's in, just a conversation, for new words for a dictionary or something
Oh 
I just have to put it on when we're talking and it goes on the tape you see
Then you can put it back, it will go any time won't it cos my mummy's got one but hers has got a radio
I have to turn it on
Oh  he knows twinkle, twinkle  you don't know twinkle
Yes I do
twinkle twinkle little star how I wonder 
twinkle, twinkle little star how I, star 
twinkle, twinkle little star how I wonder  
twenty nine
Mm, yeah,
Accent, Yorkshire  Yorkshire, Yorkshire
Talking about my girl  
Your mum's a Geordie 
A Geordie what am I a Yorkshire?
Mm, mm 
And Paul is
that's right
you wanna play wrestling
grandson
wrestling  submit 
Who is that, that lady?
submit, submit yeah 
give in 
what whoever's gonna speak
Mm 
submit
no
ah, you
ow 
sub submit
No
When you doing the shop like, next week?
I don't know, when we get some more money, loads of money and some things for 'em, I, I forgot what you call, newsagent 
bull fighters 
something like that what we make it into er
Er
where you get brochures and things to go on holiday, what?
don't know what you mean oh like er, like where you go to book your holidays?
Yeah, like on a trip to Marks and Spencers
Er pil give up
when we went to Marks and Spencers on our trip we went there an'all
Did ya?
er  what they call them places where you go and book your holiday?
Travel agents
Travel agents
Yeah
right 
You're a loser you are
I know I am  trying to think
 

I want it, it's my biscuit
Oh
Aye, if there's any
did you shop yesterday mam?
No I went tomorrow 
When did pa come back?
Last night
Mm 
Have them
I suppose so  mm 
Shall I put this back
Give us that cracker thing I put this, where's this, where your dad put the screws?
I don't know
On top of the thing there, look
Where?
I mean the
   

true  
Insy Winsy Spider  go on
No   insy winsy spider climbing up the spout, in  
down came the rain drops and washed the spider out 
No
sing Miss Polly
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick, sick, so he phoned for the doctor, quick, quick, quick  you sing it
Miss Polly had a dolly that was sick, sick, sick
No he don't
so they phoned for the doctor very quick, quick, quick  
Quick, quick, quick 
Said Miss Polly send her straight to bed
and he wrote on the label for a pill
he says I'll be back in the morning 
with my bill, bill, bill  he knocked at the door with a rat a tat 
with a rat a tat, tat   what else you know?
insy winsy spider climbing up the spout again
What else, what else do you know?
insy winsy spider climbing up the spout  
no  one, two, three, four, five, once I caught a fish alive, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, then I let him go again 
again  
why did you let it go because I caught my fingers so
That one
which finger did it bite, this little finger on my right  
Right 
You sing it  sing it
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick, sick?
Yeah, that one
Singed it 
Sing it again
Na
Na sing one 
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick, so he phoned for the doctor be quick, quick  
What else?said Miss Polly to the doctor 
No
What is it then?
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick, sick so he phoned for the doctor to be quick, quick, he phoned for the doctor to be quick 
he knocked on the door with a 
with a rat a tat, he phoned for the doctor 
Yeah, then what happens?
he knocked on the  
he knocked on the door with a rat a tat tat 
he knocked on the door with a rat a tat tat 
said Miss Polly put her straight to bed 
to bed he wrote on a paper a bill, bill, bill
I'll be back in the morning with my 
in the morning with my pill, pill, he knocked on the door with a rat a tat tat 
What's that other one?
Insy spider 
climbing up the spout 
We do it like that
Come on, you do it
Insy winsy spider climbing up spout, came the rain and   
Is that right?
Insy winsy spider climbing up the spout, down 
That's enough
What's the other one?
fish like?
Five little ducks went swimming one day
Yeah  five little ducks went swimming one day 
one day over the
hills and far away 
far, far away mother duck says quack, quack
four little ducks came swimming back 
came back  
four little ducks went swimming one day over the hills and far away 
over the hills and far away  
then the little duck said quack, quack
quack, quack  
What you saying here, what is it?
three little ducks came swimming back  three little ducks went swimming one  you sing it  one day over the hills 
over the hills and far away  that's enough
one little duck went
one
said quack, quack 
four
no  one little duck said quack, quack, two little ducks came swimming back
I've got a race
two little ducks went swimming one day over the hills and far away 
went swimming one day over the hills and far away  
one little duck went
tickle your ear
quack, quack  
the one little duck said quack, quack, quack and all the little ducks came swimming back 
I'm not on that one yet
That's what it is
That's last one
Yeah I know
I'm on number two  quack, quack, one little duck came swimming back, one little duck went swimming one day over the hills and far away one duck said quack 
far away one duck said  
quack, quack, quack, quack all the ducks came swimming back 
I got it
So you make a better door than a window?
No
caught a fish like 
why 
Why did you let it go?
because it bite my finger so 
my finger so 
which 
which  
finger
oh I, I can't hear ya
this little finger on my right  
What they gonna do to him then ?
right  
They gonna kill him?
Watch it 
Watch it 
I hope they kill him, say I've never seen
ah it's boring innit?
I think he should slice his face up very small 
What other one?
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick, sick again
Miss Polly had a dolly that was sick, sick, sick 
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick, sick, sick so he phoned for the doctor to be quick, quick, quick 
phoned for the doctor to be quick, quick, quick  
he said Miss Polly put her straight to bed, he knocked on the door with a rat a tat tat   you do it like that
Oh do you? sing then
not like that you do it like that
Like that?
Yeah
Okay, sing it then
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick 
Now you sing it loud
no
Do it like that
Like what?
ah, will you do it properly?
Yes I said
Have a job staying here
you've gotta go with daddy in a minute
No  no
Why?
on me own 
On your own 
Stay there
that milk and I'll get you another one
I wanna do all of them on me own   so he phoned for the doctor to be quick, quick, quick, said Miss Polly put her straight to bed he wrote on a paper for a pill, pill, pill 
I'll be back in the morning with my bill, bill, bill  
morning with my bill, bill  sing
I don't know it
Miss Polly had a dolly who was sick 
no 
sick
There was an owl whose names was Blanche perch bravely on a narrow branch  when she asked if she could fly, the others said into the sky high, high, high, so one fine day they came out  and stood on a branch all big and stout, she jumped, she thought that she could fly 
Ow  animal is a bit a finger 
Just leave it there
It don't go there
It does
It don't
What is it?
What is it?
Well
Nana what is it?
What is it?
What is it?
Microphone
It's nana's lipstick, put some lipstick on


you put some lipstick on, you've got to sing when you, when you put it on though, sing a song and put some lipstick on
No
I close my eyes, drew back  you sing, you put some on
No
Oh, put it back like that then
Is that, is the lipstick at back?
Yeah, but you've got to sing when you put it on
What did he do to him?
Try it on then
put it on you?
No, turn it on
It's on look, it's that colour lipstick
Turn that on what's in there
What?
that owt  in there
No leave it switched off
It's not off?
It is switched off
Where?
That thing
Yes leave it off
It's not off
It is off
It int like that
It is
It int  look at it, not like your face 
Boom
Boom  boom  do it boom, boom  I break your neck off
Er
I'll break your neck off
Ow
I'll break your finger off
ow, oh, ow, ow, ow
do it again
No it hurts
Done, it didn't hurt me  didn't hurt me, did it hurt you?
Ow, ow, ow, ow
Tell Becky to wear them break your fin your little finger
No  I break your finger off
no, no it hurts   I've turned thing round, I put it there
No leave it on top
I can put on it
it's too hot
it's too hot you, it's too hot, it's too hot
Right say ta, ta, say goodbye, say goodbye
Goodbye
Louder
No
Now say goodbye to it
No
Say goodbye
No
Goodbye
No
Quick
No
Say goodbye 
No
My palace  if I were a king it's more than a palace it's my everything.
As a Queen waiting there with the silvery hair.
In a shanty, in old Shanty Town.
a king it's more than a palace it's my everything.
As a Queen waiting there with the silvery hair.
In a shanty, in old Shanty Town.
Yes sir!
It's alright, it's a survey I'm doing.
Aye.
Got to get all these voices on it.
Just for languages for the dictionary.


Oh dear.
But not swearing.
They want some fresh language.
Fresh new words for the dictionary.
You can talk Charlie.
Just talk normally, you know it doesn't 
Aye, I know, I 
matter if there's any swearing on 
 
they'll cut it out.
Oh they, oh well  
 
He'll cut it out, yeah, yeah 
Aye, aye.
Aye, put a bleeper on it.
Aye.
I just have to have all your names down and your ages and what
Aye.
Yorkshire.
Are you Yorkshire?
Lincolnshire are you?
Where are we?
Just, just  I'm Yorkshire 
You are borders, aren't you?
But er  
Yorkshire.
well, yeah  
Yeah, but your accent 
Humberside, isn't it like.
is Yorkshire.
Used to be Lincolnshire.
Well I, I thought we were all in the Yorkshire region.
Aye, I always thought it was to with Yorkshire.
 
Yeah.
Cos, aren't they, they're on about  again, you know.
Aye, they are.
it's, it's Nottinghamshire.
Aye, up there.
I used to go in Taylor's, Taylor's  you can be in three different counties in his yard.
Three different counties 
Cos South Yorkshire comes so far do down Doncaster Road, don't it?
Aye, it does, then it says welcome to Humberside.
New, the new one is it?
You can tell  it gets very rough.
Aye.


Aye, the forgotten land  
Steady down.
innit?
Steady down.
Aye
Well, you know, if, if  they come like the bloody clappers there!
Oh.
Int there er, int there a gravestone or summat on that side  
Aye, with a pony and trap run away .
Many years ago he were coming home  
 
Oh yeah.
What, with an horse and cart like?
Yeah, that's where he got, he got struck by lightning.
He what?
Got struck by lightning.
Did he?
Yeah.
I thought  pony run away.
I heard 
Into that big dyke.
Into the stone or something?
Yes, it's still there!
I remember it when I were a lad.
Still there.
Still some people go and stop and have a look at it like.
Oh aye, it's still there.
Is it, is the writing and that on it?
Yes!
I mean years ago you didn't have barriers up.
I mean
It must've laid down 
No it's still stuck up.
Is it?
Yeah.
I've got some cyclists up at Haystock  but years ago I mean when they coming up there, it's a long road from Doncaster Market an an an deep old ditches 
Well you used to have some good effective carts there.
They was six, they was six or seven foot high when you were sat in them, weren't they?
Oh aye.
Come on Tom.
Didn't there used to be a cottage on that roadside where them big tanks is, didn't there used to be some cottages.
Used be a barn there.
Weren't some erm farm cottages there as well.
Aye, well, they, they, were only, they, they, they, were put up later them.
Like prefab things?
Aye.
Aye.
Crossroads and then you keep going 
Yeah.
and then it's all flat 
Aye.
Them on Doncaster road's been knocked down, haven't they?
All knocked down and then, and then you go to Jackson's place, don't you.
That were a poultry farm.
That's right, aye, aye, I've seen his 
and the  sells 
That's right, yeah, yeah.
How are you feeling 
Not very well.
No, look at the weather.
to get up here, I'll tell you.
Oh dear.
Bloody headwind and   and all that bloody air about and I can't get any.
You need a gas mask.
Aye.
He suffers from what you've got, you know  in Doncaster infirmary again with oxygen and he always carries one of them things, you know,
Aye.
but he's been in again.
You want one of them and you want to use it  just when you've got to use it.
Don't use, don't make a habit on it.
I used to, I used to be like that you know   terrible.
I've an idea what they're idea what they're going through.
There's a fellow  he was a deputy at   and he, and he died of that.
Are you on tablets for Angina.
Yeah.
Aye.
I'm on tablets, yeah, yeah.
When you can't breathe right, that's putting a strain on it, on your
Our mother-in-law 
Get a bit of pain 
You want to get some of them   you give two or three squirts  
I ain't been to no doctor's, well I'm lying  I had to go again, I had to like because I've been getting these here bloody , I must've had them ten or fifteen year or more and, cos I'm on these here tablets now for the old stomach like, and that like.
 
come and see me before you get any more tablets.
I've had two or three of them buggers but I think I'd better go this time as I can't get no more.
Is that why you drink brown ale?
Aye, I'm gonna drink bloody brown ale, yeah  oh aye, oh I couldn't drink that bugger.
I couldn't at one time.
Although since I've been on these tablets I can eat
A lot of acid in them
onion, owt like and apple pie owt like, I never had none for  living memory?
I used to drink mild once, that Warwick  was marvellous years ago.
It used to be best, it used to be best bloody ale, weren't it?
It were  
Mild.
Warwick, years ago.
Mild and bitter.
I was thinking it was 
What?
Bloody mild!
Mild and bitter 
you'd never mix that you'd be, you'd be sick first!
I was usually sick and all like, well that was  your stomach.


I'd put on me 
 

Not us, Doug!


bog there then!


It was only last week were my birthday, Charlie, last Friday.
I know, I, I had that promise on.
Oh ho!
take her to the club  
Bye!bloody filthy!.
Bye!
beard?
Aye, you know, er, you know, er  if I go through there I feel bloody filthy I do!
if you're on a ship but that's different.
Oh aye, aye, aye, aye, aye,
You know, it's bloody rocking about and you're on a ship and
Yeah.
Well I should say sea, sea air an all 
I've, I've got to get a shave every day
I have an all 
I am, it's cos I've been in the  drinking.
Aye.
I had  in last night.
In where?
Ah 
 
well he must've wanted to  
I said to her, I asked her cos she went down.
Aye.
She thought she'd bailed him out but she hadn't and er  she said she went down  she said aye  like, you know,
Soon after we left?
Yeah.
Well Julie's man's in there now.
You what, love?
You with Julie's husband.
Oh 
Been fighting, falling out
I always said can you go back?
Yeah.
I did, I always said he would go back in time.
I've still got same razor   
Lathered up, started to shave   when I come to clean it there weren't a bloody blade in the bastards had pinched it.


Pinched bloody razor blade?
You know old 
Aye, aye  aye.
Jimmy  used to be a pal of mine, used to go in there regular and he'd got one of these new electric razors
Aye.
and he's going like this  he says they're no bloody good these.
I says you haven't 
and he er and he had all his bloody civvies pinched.
He says, he says I went, he says I had to go out there stuck in me bloody army stuff.
He said I went up to the pub he says, here's this bloody mate of mine playing piano, he says he's got all my gear on!
Aye.
pinching it.
I was home on leave one weekend and er  I went up to er Scarborough  a fellow a car, it weren't my car I was home on leave.
And I took wife with me and  there was er  old fellow  I took him and all.
So we're going to Scarborough in this big yank's car and the fellow said if we don't, if want it I'll give you a fiver, for petrol like and that  it was quite a bit of money then.
So, got there, didn't want bloody car.
Coming back and a hell of a storm, coming onto York, York road, Flax, Flaxton 
Aye, yes.
road it were, always remember and all lights went out  so we pulled into this  the guest house but couldn't get in and next door was a pub  so cos an Army camp near some soldiers come in and says  in morning I says aye,he said what time are you going, I said  
Hey, love, there's a bob down here!
half-past six or seven o'clock
I reckon there's a shilling down there, I don't know!


So  when I got up in the morning this bloody landlord was here, full side of beef, oh, I said, I don't want that bugger  going home in that and getting stopped  Full side of beef!
I, I daren't have it.
Bloody full side, half of
Well how much was that gonna cost you?
Oh it wouldn't have cost nothing, it would cost me something if I got caught in them days  bloody ration.
 

Pick it up then, Les, she's not gonna pick it up.
Can't hear.
No.
Going to the loo.
Your next door neighbour were in last night.
Yes, er Charlie said so.
Thought he might come tonight.
I'll have to go to the loo.
there Charlie.
What?
just leave it there cos I'm going to the loo.
 
No!
It's only battery.
No swearing!
I don't  bloody gimmick!
Let's get on about 
Whistle  Charlie.
Whistle, I can't bloody whistle now!
Can't even hear now, Charlie, can you?
I can't, I bloody can't!


Be bloody careful cos you don't know what the hell's  going on this bloody,this bloody wheel's still going round, Doug.
used to have them in the pub and then to play it back and people didn't realise it was there voice you know.
Didn't realise it was there voice.
Oh dear.
There's many a time wished I'd had one of them buggers when I've gone to these meetings, union meetings and that.
Aye, aye.
That's right, yeah.
I'll tell you what  two years since I were working at  collieries.
he said be very careful what you say  have you down in evidence then.
Yeah, yeah.
Some bugger's, a young  got away with that money, hadn't?
Eh?
He's been crafty.
Wh wh what bloody police doing?
Well he's 
Well why didn't they get a mile away from where they put that money they could've, they could've been planned it away, a mile away all 
There were a thousand men out, Charlie!
Eh?
There was a thousand men on that!
Ah, ere get on this bugger and 
Ah, but he went up a railway track, didn't he?
Yeah, but if they'd have, if they'd have said look, we're onto erm a job now which would've been a big job and it looks like it finishing up in Yorkshire, finishing up in Lancashire, be ready if we give a call out.
Yeah.
You know, right you, we're in Yorkshire.
surround them 
Well that's what I said why didn't they surround it a mile away.
They didn't want to surround him just there and then where he could see them.
Get, get well away and he, and he had to go back  
But he's, he's had all the answers, hasn't he, he's
He's known the area.
Yeah.
Eh?
He must know the area.
Got all the answers.
Oh, aye!
Well he got up that railway track, I mean, bloody hell, they might've thought well that's one way he's gonna go.
It's only a mile away where that er red bloody pickle thing was.
Aye it is, it is, yeah, yeah.
I reckon somebody who knew the area very well.
Yeah, he does.
Nice big plan that  
Lassies today, they're getting them,th they're asking them to do too much.
I mean going round selling stuff and that sort of thing, they're asking them, they're doing a man's job 
They shouldn't around by themselves.
No, they shouldn't.
They were warned when that Susan Lamplaugh or whatever 
Ah, there was, there was 
went missing.
was there?
No.
No.
They were warned then not to let the woman go theirselves.
Yeah.
Bloody ridiculous.
Yeah.
Same as that er, what do they call him, Panther, wasn't he
Aye  weren't he?
Mm.
Hear no more about him, do you?
He got, what, were it five, five life sentences?
Summat like that 
But why
int it?
Yeah.
Why  
Why look at that bloody Sutcliffe how many did he do?
More than thirteen, him.
Aye, thirteen, weren't it that bugger.
Is that Sutcliffe?
Aye, thirteen.
he gets sixty-three years, you know, I mean what's the use of keeping a bugger like that for sixty-three years, it's bloody ridiculous, innit?
Oh, bloody hell!
I mean some of those old age pensioners bloody  
Oh, Muirlins, that's Muirlins, Muirlins, Lindorm's er different.
Well Bernie  oh maybe twelve months, maybe six months, I don't know, and er he, he made that big football pitch
I know, you told me, aye
for them and he said there ain't a bugger in England that's good!
He said we daren't do  dead level with spirit level, bloody turf!
I don't know how much turf they  to put on this here for a pris for a prisoner to kick a ruddy football on.
You know it's not right this
Well it's, I mean it's letting them know what's going off at other prisons.
There's half, half these  people come out of jail and they, and they've come out  and they're back in!
Yeah.
Cos they know the 
Yeah.
Yeah.
Get grub for nothing.
Three square meals a day, ain't there?
That jury lad that come here,
well that jury lad that come here telling us, he said, do you know, they've a better bloody  than what I had!
Their own room, television, bed the bloody lot he said.
They're in for punishment not nourishment.
What they should've done, instead of having all them machines on that moors they should've had damn bugger stripped to waist digging it out.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, they should like they do in America, give them some work.
That's it and let them, let them get on with it in the middle of bloody summer with a pint of water and say, look, that pint of water has to last you the day.
Yeah.
Their bloody tongues they'd have been, they'd have been as thick as these tables by end of day.
They would.
Oh yeah, aye.
Oh aye, yeah.
Now he's gonna get long sentence or summat 
He's gonna get a longer sentence?
Aye, he's gonna get a longer sentence  
I should think he is an all.
Yeah.
Bloody ridiculous!
Three year, three year he got, didn't he?
Yeah, three years
Killed two, killed two people there!
What in a car?
Yeah.
And he were gonna get three year!
Oh!
Cos the father and son shouted in the court.
He jailed them for the weekend, the judge.
There's them,
Yeah.
there's them Kray bloody brothers.
Well, I don't agree what they did, but they were only killing their own, their own kind, weren't they?
Aye, they were.
And they , and they got thirty-odd year!
When we went to Portugal  there was er a lass, we'd saved some money and I said, I said don't spend it all 
Well who were that big film star that were mixed up with them.
Oh, er Windsor, was it, Barbra?
Oh, Barbra Windsor.
Aye 
and all them they're all
Aye, they were all mixed up with them weren't they?
No, no, not that one, Doug, this were a big woman, weren't she?
And I believed she died, didn't she?
Didn't  come to her funeral?
Or did one of Krays die?
A big blonde woman she was.
Oh, Diana Dors.
Ah, Ronnie, Ronnie Knight.
Aye, Ronnie Knight.
Diana Dors's husband.
Oh that little bugger you were on about, aye he killed some bugger, didn't he, in, in a cafe and pissed off abroad.
They can't get him.
All right,
Aye, the bugger's still 
Right, go on.
But what, what are them er 
When I get home I'll have a cheese sandwich or summat   
I will have one of them Krays, you know that young lad whose,
Aye.
he's erm made one of the Krays his dad, have you read it?
Well his stepdad.
He's, he's from our village him, he writes to him and he goes and visits him.
Aye!
One of the Krays.
Hold on Doug, I'll get them.
Aye, he's only eleven years old, int he?
Yeah.
He calls him dad now.
I don't know how he smokes at all!
No 
Your mam used to be like that but she had  she had a cylinder of oxygen in the house as well.
You want to run round the block, Les!
maybe  better get doctor's advice on owt like that.
Les.
That's what I saying, but it's better seeing doctor, it's no good somebody, me coming in  
Oh no, but I,
You know
he should be on them now though.
You wanna, you wanna get, you wanna,
got them tablets, or the tablets for your breathing.
You try and get one of them buggers what blows you up, Les.
What, a blow-up doll?
Aye, them, them bloody oxygen things.
A bitter shandy.
Bitter shandy.
at any rate, for one.
Mm?
tonight.
Is that lager?
Mm.
Yeah.
Squeeze it.
you wanna see  when he gets busy  it gets lower than that.
 

You reckon them three buggers up there it's a good half way down a bloody pint, innit?
Eh?
Them three pints nearly half way down  innit.
Oh there's tricks in every trade.
Oh aye.
but it looks horrible when it's right up.
I've been to London.
It's bloody terrible is a pint in London.
I like a collar on.
Yeah, yeah.
Cos it's not appetizing if it's er
I remember  I remember years ago used to be,
I like to see tipping the bugger in like that.
used to be er, you know as you're going down to infirmary down from  you turn right on the  road don't you?
There used to be a doctor, called Doctor Bessie  lived there  You know where I mean, don't you?
Where pub is now on opposite side?
No, before you get to Cumberland.
Oh yeah.
First turning.
There's a house there and Doctor Bessie  used to live there, a woman doctor, and everybody started work at er   what they call it?
I C I er
International, International 
Well she had exa had to examine everybody.
Course there's er a big, big nigger come one day for a job and she says get stripped off.
She says, what's a matter with your toes?
He says, I developed toesillitis.
She says tonsillitis
Toesa
she said me tonsillitis
Oh, tonsillitis.


She said  well he said after that I got it off pneumonia.
She said, she said there's one thing you won't get diphtheria!
 
I knew what was coming!
I knew there was summat bloody coming here.


I knew there were a bugger coming then.
Like the five legs last week.


I never got head nor tail of that.
Five legs.
Oh dear.
bloody if you bring some without any tails on?
I'll bring them Wednesday!
I I'll put them in fridge.
Aye, I'll, I'll bring them down Friday night.
They're beau they're beautiful, they are.
Eh?
They're about that big
he ain't paid me that bugger, that reminded me!
I'll send him a bloody letter next, tomorrow, I'll send him a bloody letter.
Solicitor's letter.
Aye, I'll send him a solicitor's letter that bloody  
I haven't seen him in here 
Aye, he were in last night.
Ducks without tails?
He asked me how much 
Pardon?
Ducks without tails did you say?
Without  
but this is an old shop at  and they're about that big by that aren't they?
Aye, they are, Tom.
look bloody fabulous!
Oh.
They hadn't that veil on them like they used 
They are really marvellous!
I've never tried them, like, I dunno.
They make them in bloody big batches now  
Ah, but this is er a real old 
Aye, they will do, Ken.
shop and even the  you know.
Aye.
It's a fabulous shop.
Tom, innit?
Oh, everything.
Aye.
You know and it's not fat, not all that fat, you know, but   
 
when, when I were a lad 


Well I mean 
That's how I like belly pork.
Oh I like belly pork.
Aye
I like the crackling, you know.
You do?
Oh aye.
Well he brought me some without that on it 
Oh aye.
Bye god, it's bloody good that.
Oh I like it.
It were about  one pound thirty or summat  about that width 
Yeah.
and about that length.
I like the crackling on it.
And the steak and kidney pies, they're one sixty-five 
Pound of, pound of meat in them, Tom, there must be, there must be.
you know, and they're about that big all in, in this er silver foil.
Aye.
Aye.
They're cooked, but I mean they  just warm up  out of this world!
Well isn't a pork pie thirty bob?
I think they were thirty bob.
I'd better have a word with him.
If you see him, tell him!


You know these curd cheesecakes?
Yeah.
I love a curd cheesecake 
 
oh, they're so lemony.
You're know them copper curds?
Yeah.
Aye 
Mm, like old-fashioned  
good curd cheesecake.
Mm.
I can see them making your mouth water!
Aye!
What did you bring old Bernard last week?
No, that was the Stilton cheese.
Cheese.
Oh aye.
No, I, I was there an and they were selling  cheeses so, I have them every year really, and I'm just finishing one and I got one  I got five.
I bought five  kept another one for my sen and let Bernard have one  let er woman opposite us have one.
You know she's  she's a councillor isn't she?
She's chef here.
No, she's cooked here!
The chef, with a  
Oh!
Aye, aye, I know her.
Aye
Carol and er  Len, Len  had one.
Aye.
Three fifty a piece.
How much?
Three pound fifty.
Just over two pound.
Two pound forty-nine in Tesco it were, a pound.
Mm.
Stilton.
That size, thirty bob a piece.
One pound six.
bit of Guinness in her bitter.
Do you swallow that bloody smoke from them buggers.
Aye, can you stand them?
No, but I thought you seemed to be a long while getting the bugger out.
Ah Christ!
I don't know how you can swallow that bugger!
I never swallow smoke.
I don't know how he can swallow them there
I swallow enough bloody smokes 
 

Aye, when I first come in, I, I grabbed it, I grabbed that pipe bacca.
Aye.
It's only, it's only when you come out 
Aye, aye.
It's not bothering me now.
No.
Just when  when you  
you wouldn't come, would you?
Eh?
You wouldn't come if it bothered you.
Ah!
I tell you what I can't stand sme er smoke in a bedroom.
Cigarette smoke.
Bye god it's bloody terrible!
better?
No!
I know and I
Would you?


Well I'm glad I didn't come for my promise, Charlie, cos I smoke in bed.
Oh, well I'll excuse you that night.


Just the one night I would've excused you.
You'd have been smouldering next morning, wouldn't she Charlie?
Aye I would.
I would.
You can smell, you can, you can smell it 
Bye god,in a bedroom.
we live  above front room like?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Our Julie comes, I mean I smoke cigars in house
You can smell them.
Yeah.
and I can tell when our Julie's in.
Yeah.
Oh yeah, you can smell it.
You can in mine, yeah.
Aye.
and it, it gets up there!
Yeah.
You can bloody smell it, can't you?
Yeah, it does.
It drifts up.
Yeah.
Maybe you can smell the cigarette smoke and yet you're smoking them buggers.
Yeah, different, different smell, you see.
Different smell you see.
Aye, aye, aye.
Oh aye, aye.
Different smell!
Yeah.
Yeah.
that's different, different bloody different scent,
Yeah.
Mm.
smell.
See li li things like beer.
If you've been drinking beer you can  you can't smell beer on anybody else, can you?
No.
No.
No.
No.
If even you've only had half  
When I go to bed I go up with a cig.
You do?
And when I wake up, I light one and go down, yeah.
I used to do that but
I don't like smoke all night in bed
No, no.
but I, I have them with us, you know.
Year and year since I used to get up  make fire for Alice in the mornings, this is, must be ten or twelve year since, and light a cig up.
Well I must've passed out one morning.
Aye.
And now I've never smoked a bugger since before breakfast, never  
No, I do.
before breakfast, no.
I do.
I always go upstairs with a cig.
I don't light it then  and I light one in there.
Do you?
Yeah.
Then when I wake up I light up.
Oh, no.
Yeah.
You, know if anybody been ea smelling, eating onion and you, you blow on him   bugger off 
be away from you then.
See it's come to me maybe  eleven o'clock, half-past eleven in the morning.
Yeah.
You know, you
Aye.
Smell it.
Yeah.
Aye.
your breakfast and your lunch and 
Yeah.
you could still smell 
Yeah.
Bloody garlic's same.
Oh garlic
must be terrible that.
I mean, I mean  garlic  and chew the bugger  I think it does you good.
It is good, it is good for you.
doesn't half stink does that.
We were working  colliery  Oh Jesus!
Stink!
He used, he used to bring a gar he was at work everyday, little bugger and you know
Garlic.
eating.
Mm.
But you don't know what 
If you'd, if you'd had a little bit yourself you wouldn't, you wouldn't have smelt it.
No.
You don't, you don't know what's in that bloody stuff though, do you?
What garlic?
You don't.
It's all right, Charlie.
Is it?
Aye.
Well
It's good for you.
I've got some chi er cheese with garlic,
Aye.
garlic in.
Oh that with that green 
Spread cheese.
in it?
Spread cheese,
Oh.
The other week and I'd never had it before but er I liked it.
Oh Margaret had some the other day, she said do you want a bit of this cheese, it's green, it's some, it's some green, I said I don't want any of that  
Chives are, yeah.
bloody stuff.
Chives, yeah.
I don't want none of that bugger 
you wanna try it.
You might,
Nice, Charlie.
You might, you might take to it.
I might do but I don't 
Good, good for your stomach.
I don't 
It's good for your sex life!


Where can you get it from?
 

Parsnips is as well, Charlie.
Eat parsnips.
Aye, but I've been chewing them buggers this last six months but it hasn't worked for me  
I like parsnips though.
Yeah, I do.
Don't like them.
Aye.
roasted round beef, aye.
They're too sweet, Les, I don't like them.
I don't like them.
I've eat them, like but I've 
There's not much, much I don't like.
No, I'm not, no.
I've, I've tried er, er  er sugarbeet before now.
Aye, I've tried that.
Sugarbeet, aye.
Well they don't hurt you or owt like that.
No!
Well, I should say they not 
Same as mangoes.
They make jam with bloody mangoes, don't they?
Aye.
I should say sugarbeet ain't far off from a bloody parsnip.
No, no.
They take mangoes  I used to take these here loads  you know the little er  seeds,
Yeah.
jam seeds?
they're not going in seeds, they're all going to make  pieces of wood.
No, make seeds out of, out of , out of wood.
They mix it up and put it in that!
Aye.
He gave me a lift.
Did he?
No, I worked late.
I normally catch quarter-past-five bus and I get in about ten-past-six, but he wanted me to work late and I says, well how late?
He says, it will not be that late and I'll take you home anyway.
So I didn't put me coat on, had me coat over me legs.
Aye.
Are you?
What's up with you?
Weird you are.
I'm in the house all day.
Oh.
You should've phoned me up.
Well, I went to the town earlier on with Debbie.
I've not got your number.
And you?
Is it?
And yours 


Aye.
I always go there as well 
 

is that what she said?
They depress me watching these programmes.
Why?
Cos I could with a bit.
Looking at all package deals today Tenerife, erm eighteen nights, hundred and five or summat but you had to go sixth February.
Mm.
Really cheap package deals.
 

I said to John last night  he's going to London on fifteenth, oh well, the fourteenth if we're back on Sunday.
I says, you're definitely going then?
He says, yeah, he says, why?
Oh, cos I'm going out with Paul that weekend, I says, I just wanna make sure I can definitely arrange it all and he went  are you?
About half-six.
Yeah, cos I thought you were working afternoon  borrowed his bike
Yeah.
and used the other bike.
Yeah.
I watched football and then went out  
I went there about  one o'clock.
We went to 
is that what you're on about?
Yeah.
Oh.
Cos he went to football instead, spent morning playing football
Shit!
cos he come about one o'clock.
shall take that one out?
Never go out in the week.
We don't go out at all now, do we?
Been out for ages.
turned back cos of fog.
He had to turn back cos of fog.
I've seen, I've seen Spud 
Yeah, Spud still went out.
They, we, when Spud went out we thought that they weren't still coming.
No, they rang Chelle's to get my phone number
Yeah.
but when they were ringing I were on phone to John's mum because there were someone hanging about house, so I talked to John's mum for ages on phone and then Debbie rang, didn't she?
Mm.
so as he'd been trying to get through it was always engaged.
In the middle of nowhere at this phone box.
So they travelled home, about time they got home it were too late to be ringing.
I said that, didn't I?
Mm.
I said if I'd known they aren't, they, they weren't coming I'd have gone out.
No, not yet.
I think I'm going back to college in September, take a nursing course.
Is your mum going with them?
No, I didn't think she would.
I was thinking about her 
yet our  finishes at school at quarter-past-three she could go and pick him up but no they want me to do it.
My Auntie 
Is she?
Mm.
So who's going then 
but my Auntie Jean's not going in cos it'll upset her an all.
She's just gonna sign papers an that.
Me mum don't think she'll settle.
She wanted to come home and see the dog.
You know what she's like with the dog  
What are they doing with the dog?
an all.
Have they?
Sure you don't want a drink?
Go on then, Paul.
Coffee?
Yeah.
Er have you got a cold drink?
Water.
milk?
Milk.
Some wine?
Oh no.
tastes of alcohol in that   What is the Windthorpe for then?
Is Windthorpe just for when they got old.
Aye.
It's incontinent, you know.
Well my Nanny, you know me Nana, don't you?
Was always tottering up and down with glasses on?
Aye, yeah.
She's erm, ta, she's got Alzheimer's and she's getting really bad, she's getting a danger to herself and she's got to go away to  tomorrow.
Has she?
She doesn't know what she's talking about half the time, she doesn't know who anybody is.
she used to talk to me, well in the summer an that, you know, on about  she's, I don't know 
Oh, she thinks she's just come home from   
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I thought that, you know.
You have it with sugar, don't you?
No, I don't have any now.
And on about  you know.
Yeah, she thinks erm her Mum and Dad's still alive  
That were  what she said to her that day and she says to you, if you carry on I'm gonna have you put in that orphan's home.
Yeah, she's gonna have me put in an orphan's home 
Well that's how,you know, she's going back  years ago.
Well that's what it is.
This disease, it like, it destroys all the brain cells, you know 
Yeah, mm.
all the memory cells and it destroys recent ones so she can't remember things from recent but she can remember things from years and years and years ago, it's really funny.
Cos if any of our family went up some she would know  some she would like, Michael and, and er Rob live away, she says they're not her sons
Mm.
You know.
You know, but, she knew who I was, like.
Then our Sandra went last Saturday  and she didn't know who she was.
Yeah.
She always knows me Auntie Jean because me Auntie Jean what favourite from being young
Aye.
and like me Auntie Jean has to go down three and four times a day sometimes.
But she thinks me Mum's one of the nieces whose a tart and an  alcoholic.
That's what she's always saying to your mum, ain't she?
It's a shame 
But like now she's a da a real danger to herself.
Sh she floods kitchen and
Mm.
Does she?
Yeah, she flooded kitchen the other week, didn't she?
I know she was always on about she's frightened in there on her own  
Mm.
Well kids stay all the time but they've been using it as a doss house, you know,
Yeah.
got friends to go in messing about all the time and they've,al everything that she had that were decent they've ruined it all.
Yeah.
Oh.
Yeah  
That's what I  
Thought it were one he fetched down.
No,
I never realised  Chris owed me a fiver for me wage  and I says to him I had to pay me bill for me food for week and it was like six quid.
And I says to him, have you got a fiver?
And he went, you what?
Looked at me like that.
That fiver you owe me out of me wage.
Oh yeah, sorry.
He would've tried to get away with it.
I weren't having none of it though.
How much do you get there a week?
Not enough.
How much?
Erm me basic should be forty-three, but I get fifty-five to sixty plus if he's  I get commission depending on if I work late.
Well that's not very often this time of year.
Before Christmas I were getting  seventy some weeks, weren't I?
Building up to Christmas it were like, in between sixty to seventy, but this time of year I'm just on me rock bottom.
It would, which is like fifty, fifty five.
Have you done all your training?
Have you got your paper an that.
Yeah.
Aye.
Yeah it will be, won't it?
She's getting a bit fed up 
Is she in college full-time then?
No.


Were you?
No.
Were you part-time?
I used to go in one, one day a week.
Bar Friday she goes into hairdressers  
Yeah.
Bus stop, the   you know where  
Oh yeah.
Duke Street.
Yeah and
There's a hairdressers up, upstairs.
stairs, yeah.
No, there's a Co-op one on one side, one above Co-op and then on other side erm  is it called Jean's, or something like that?
I'll tell you the one
Yeah, is it just a little door that leads up to it?
I think so, I'm not sure.
Oh!
Hair by someone it is.
Deborah works there erm, she used to work at Debbie's shop, summat 
Jane.


Jane.
Jane 
Oh.
No, no Jane 


Jane  is it the same one as that?
Jane  she works there yeah.
Yeah it's just a woman's name or  
cos it's next door to paper shop so
Jackie's or Tracy or summat like that.
Summat like that, yeah.
Yeah.
I, I liked it at college but I'm glad I went just one day a week because 
It's moved now though, you know, it's not
Yeah, it's in Church View int it?
Yeah.
Because I think you find that when you go all time, when you come to go into a salon I think you find you're slower, do you know what I mean, because you're not used to
Yeah.
salon routine.
But in saying that, I, I wouldn't of minded if I had to go to college full-time cos I enjoyed it.
Can't see her!
Got a phone call this morning off, you know magic?
Who?
What did they say?
Said they wanted a poster.
I answered.
She asked for Mr  so I says who is it?
She says  something about 
And did you for something?
Yeah, well  erm, see I advertised it all round cafe as well that I'd sent for it as well.
it might've been someone from cafe phoning up 
I says he's in the Army.
She says yeah, I know, but he give his home number.
I says, oh well, I say I don't know.
Just see if he wanted a poster.
She said, oh, he'll probably get in touch with us.
I said yeah.
I didn't dare say he was in cos 
No.
it was somebody
 
 
I've only got 
Have you?
Yeah.
I've got a brochure as well.
It's supposed to be 
woman phoning from 
waiting list weren't they?waiting list.
Have you told her?
No.
Oh.
They're on holiday.
Take what?
for a holiday?
Wouldn't surprise me though, really.
I don't think it's 
Don't know.
I'd like to go, I think it would, but I'd like to go to America cos that's where it ori originated.
I don't class it as, as Disney World.
I class 
No, it's not Disney World, no.
Yeah but I class like
Mickey Mouse 
That one there.
 

Yeah.
No.
Did you?
No, I bottled out at last minute.
  
Me Mum and Dad split up didn't they just before 
I remember that.
Me erm me Mum and Dad split up just before didn't they and couldn't afford it.
She's down to her target weight now.
She's gotta do another two weeks at er, at er at er same weight 
At the same weight , innit?
and then she's life-long member.
And then they allow her got a stone and a half over before she has to start paying again.
But I don't think she ever will now.
She's really good, int she?
Yeah.
Don't you think Sam's slim?
 


I, I think, eh?
Don't you think Sam's slim?
Well 
Sam.
You didn't when you come home last time and you were 
Oh yeah  
 
I think they look after them when they've lost a lot of weight, you know.
Aye.
 
Some of the look poorly , don't they?
I mean, she looked after, to me they, they do.
When you see them 
Me, me, I think me Mum  
And Beryl, Beryl er 




Yeah, she does, doesn't she?
Mm.
she says, did you join Sheila?
I says join what?
She says Weight, I says I didn't say I was.
I says er  I wouldn't spend money on to lose weight.
I says 
Mm.
She says what if you're desperate?
I says I still wouldn't
Mm.
pay three pound odd a week.
It, it worked out, my mum at first thought it weren't too bad cos she got in with one of these special offer things.
Aye, yeah.
But towards end when she only, she only had a pound to lose and she paid about six week on run to go to get weighed to tell her she was exactly same weight.
And that's all she were doing going and getting weighed like.
So, she said, up to Christmas she says I'm gonna give it two more week and if I ain't last it I'm jacking it in.
Mm.
And everyone was saying well it was a shame you've got this far.
She said yeah, but it's a lot of money when you think
Well I, it is.
oh she's going to get weighed an that.
I mean Edna joined, you know me mate Edna?
Pardon?
You know me mate Edna?
Er
I think you've seen her, gingery hair.
I probably will do.
Sh she said when  joined she said, oh I wouldn't join, pay money.
Yeah.
But she joined like.
It's like me Mum said.
At first it were good because it were incentive for her to keep going because she'd, you know, paid so much but toward the end, she said, it were getting ridiculous.
You know, for one pound she were paying like three quid a week or whatever.
Yeah, I know.
Plus they had these raffles where you take 
Aye.
something.
I mean I
You might as well get your 
I lost mine when I was 
Mm.
It's what erm
It's all beer.


Six pints
 
 
Well, better than getting half every time, innit?
 
Aye.
I think that's what my excuse, I've got a beer belly.
if I never drink nor smoke what else would I have?
That's what me mum always said.
It's only bloody luxury I've got in life, smoking.
it's all in life.
Keith said I'm gonna change me but
That's what I'm gonna do.
Go on a cruise liner.
Mm.
Aye.
That's where your money is.
Actually someone were telling me
You don't get a lot of money.
Yeah, you don't get much at all.
No.
Cos  board and everything's free.
Ah, but you don't want a lot after that, will you  
Well you don't because you get, if you think,
gym instructor.
if you think you're going on a cruise liner it's obviously gonna be, you know, fairly well off people.
Mm.
So, I mean, they tip you so they don't pay you as much.
Not really 
Jamaica.
I'm still coming.
On your what?
last week, that's all.
That's right.
As soon as I get out of the Army.
Get married.
they kick you out and buy you a caravan.






Two hundred and fifty
Three days.
Three days.
right, Archie, he's erm, on his own, own he's er, think his wife died years ago, he saved and saved and he went on a big cruise, do you know what I mean?
I think he were going for a, a month, a month and a half summat like that, and he said it were out of this world.
He said he felt like a king.
Mm.
 

Who's she?
She's put
Judith Chalmers.
She's put, she's got wrinkles now hasn't she.
She used to have 
Well, when you get old you get them.
So you're gonna have to, one day, Paul, you'll look over the breakfast table and see wrinkles on me face and you'll think, Oh, did I marry that?
 

I bet John's dad in bar now.
Where's he gone?
 
Tenerife.
It'll not be that hot 
For a holiday?
there now, will it?
On his own?
Yeah, fairly.
Yeah, but not that hot.
His mate, Tommy.
Where's your lad living?
He's not my lad   
The lad lives at 
How many girlfriends have you got?
Just Sam.
Oh, is that all?
Where?
Supposed to be going down on weekend of fifteenth but when she phones on Thursday I'm going to tell her to come during the week.
we'll all go out.
Why?
Cos I don't.


No.
She's funny.
What she look like?
You've asked me if you could, if she could come  
I wanna say, where's she staying, Paul?
She's staying in that caravan he's got in field there.
Aye.
She's, what she look like?
Bet she's double of me.
She is.
But she's got ginger hair.
Oh!
 
ginger hair!
 
 
It's red!
No.
 
Bad tempered.
Ooh!
 
I hate ginger hair.
My first boyfriend had ginger hair.
No.
Well Craig were more blonde when I first 
Aye, Craig did used to look quite blonde, didn't he?
He were, yeah.
Wendy's just got Sky, hasn't she?
Eh?
Wendy's got Sky in today.
I went round, I got the lecture.
Wendy got Sky?
Yeah, today.
I got the lecture.
Oh.
Yeah.
Thought I would.
Who's Wendy?
Wendy.
Oh, right!
What's she saying to you?
You're stupid, you're bloody stupid!
She was going it must be that bad if you want  you want to run off again.


I like Minnie Mouse cos I've got some shoes like her.
Got me Minnie Mouse shoes on, ain't I?
Thought you had to bring shoes into conversation  
 
More bother to me since he went in the Army.
More worry.
Miss what?
seen them both today.
 

remember him?
Yeah.
Well I don't know his name was 
That's what I remembered.
Can't remember it now.
Can't remember any of it.
 
Yeah.
She jumped
She, and could, found she could not fly and laid there looking at the sky.
Sky, I, I, I, I.
That's correct.
 

When's your nana going in shelter?
Is it tomorrow you were saying?
Yeah, she's going to Rossington, somewhere in Rossington.
It's like, I say, it's got a, special for alzheimers.
But she's got a dog and like with that being with her constantly it's, so it's been what she's always remembered,
Aye.
so like after a few days I can her saying, oh, I'm gonna have to go, I'm gonna have to feed dog and they're having it put down, they're having it put down.
When they having it put down?
All, all family, you know,before like, we felt whatever happens to her we'll have it.
Now it's come down to it, they're all assholes in our family, to put it politely.
this is a 
Well it's 
no swearing house.
With me Nana it's like  I think, I don't think it'd live without her.
No, cos they fret like 
I think it'd, it'd fret but it wouldn't have hurt one of them to take it on.
Like me Uncle Mick's not got a dog, me Nana's not got a dog, me Auntie Frances not got a dog.
We've got one any way so we couldn't have it, but they're, they're gonna have it put down.
Jack Russell  
It's only when it bites Sam's feet,innit?
Yeah it always goes for me, don't it?
Without fail I walk in the house and it goes for me ankles.
And you're sat there and you're like kicking it away and it goes worse.
And she'll say, won't she, don't don't kick me dog, even if it's going for your ankles!
down the road?
Yeah.
Mm.
I dread it when she walks in house cos I always think she's gonna start having a go at me, but she's never said owt to me yet, has she?
She just lo she always looks at me and laughs.
you see.
How old is she?
Erm, she'll about seventy-six, seventy-seven.
What's that?
Eighty-one, eighty two?
Get you.
Aye, it's dreadful.
Eventually she'll forget how to feed herself, how to go toilet  bedridden.
she won't be herself.
Mm.
She said to, yeah , she said  like round house.
Yeah.
But they don't know whether it's her or kids cos like me Uncle Mick's kids, they're dirty scruffs.
Mm.
Mm.
You never know what they'll be doing.
Well,asked them to do it, you know,
Mm.
even when Sandra was doing it she'd still 
Yeah.
Well me Auntie Jean and me Mum got passed once, like they'd been going down and scrubbing it from side at bath and everything.
Yeah.
That's what was happening to
Upstairs in pillow cases as well.
Mm.
And I, I think that will be kids, that.
She said  when you, you remember your Jean down, int she, and she says to your mum, do you have sugar?
And your mum says yeah, two.
She fetched the drinks and there were two tea bags in there, weren't there, instead of sugar.
Aye, she would get meals-on-wheels for her dinner and then one of the lasses would leave her summat for tea, sandwich 
Mm.
or summat, you know.
Put it in the fridge and it was still there the next day, you know,
Yeah.
she'd forgotten it.
She, she would,meals-on-wheels didn't sh , weren't she but we stopped them cos she were
She were giving it to dog!
And she weren't paying either, was she?
Well, no, they were, me Mum an that paid any way.
No, I thought she were giving them a pound and then taking change off them, she were getting change off them or summat weren't she.
Oh, I  
I remember your Jean saying.
And she was ordering stuff for Nana, you know, fruits, sweets, crisps all sorts of things, upstairs and downstairs and chocolates in, you know, she'd just go up the shops and buy them.
Yeah.
The bananas  I mean last, last year  er Michael come from  and they were 
Well, it's funny cos like, she'd, me Mum an that's been taking her shopping down and she's been buying it herself and like me Auntie Jean, she goes down three or four times a day sometimes and then she goes down again and it's all missing!
Yeah.
And they say that they think she's hiding it but there's no where to be hiding it.
But like I said, I think kids an that are taking it so
Yeah, it's a shame when they get like that though, then to be put in a home.
Well me Mum were really upset cos she said it's like losing her twice, cos I've lost her once not knowing any of us who we are,
Yeah.
and then when she goes.
Yeah.
I think me Auntie Jean's, she'll go off her rocker because she is  like I say, me Auntie Jean's only one that she ever remembers cos like me Auntie Jean takes the meal, like every meal down for her and 
Yeah.
money for light and they've been having to keep her pension and like giving her so much at a time because it's been going missing with all the money!
 
Yeah.
Just left her so much?
Yeah.
You know.
A shame that.
Mm.
You know we went up new year, after new year to see her er, it were, a lovely, nice Christmas tree in the foyer.
Oh it was lovely.
Lovely bedrooms they were but she'd keep saying she wanted to go out like, you know.
But they've asked her, haven't they?
They've said wouldn't you like to be somewhere where there's  people you can talk to an that and she said yeah, didn't she?
Mm.
But it's
Yeah.
like, when she gets there she's gonna be panicking about one thing and another int she, I think.
Well they sort of said that what, hopefully, she'll like be there for a couple of days and she'll never think she's been anywhere else, she'll think she's been there all the time.
But I don't think she will.
I'll tell you
But they don't wanna tell her the truth 
No, they're not.
Shall I put that on your bit of paper?
 

Is it tape two then?
Not that one.
Where you write
on other side where your fingers are.
Tape two, side A.
So I want that one, don't I?
Aye, you'll want side A then, yeah.
That, they went to look at some in 
 
they went to look at some homes in Thorne, didn't they?
And one of them they says, well when we get new arrivals in we sedate them!
Mm.
For first week or so, didn't they?
They'd been and looked at a few and there,
They said they were disgusting, didn't they?
there, were one of them where they were walking round we with wet pants, you know,ol old people an that.
Have they to pay for her?
Pardon?
Have they to pay?
Have they to pay for her to be there?
Erm, I don't think they have, have
No.
I think it's er
Dunno.
I think she's erm they like take so much out of her pension but she's not gonna need owt any way and then erm  I think government or whatever put rest.
Yeah, they put so much
Yeah.
Yeah.
No, I don't, I don't think none of the family's got to er pay up.
Sh they're like all clubbing together and giving her some money to go in with cos she's got to have some money to go in with.
Yeah.
Aye, they get so much a week.
Pocket money like.
Mm.
Like there's nowt to buy really.
This one erm it's really good cos they've like, got nice little rooms and tellies in room and like, if like, they come and they're trying to like clean up, the cleaners'll like, give them a cloth so they'll think they're helping an that.
So it shouldn't be that bad.
Aye she should be all right.
When's your birthday, Chelle?
Mine's gone.
You've missed mine.
Are you nineteen now?
Twentieth January.
Is it?
Oh, thought it was the twenty-fourth.
Mm.
Beginning with mine, mine twentieth, it were your Michael's twenty-sixth, weren't it?
It were me boyfriend's thirty-first.
Got our Lindsay's Thursday
Remind me to get a card on Wednesday.
Then it's yours.
When's yours, Paul?
Thirteenth.
Thirteenth?
Day before 
 

I hear you're courting, Shelley, then?
Yeah erm, he's coloured like, he lives in Huddersfield.
Oh.
Oh what did your Mum say to you tonight?
Are you going with our black Mister.
he says, cos me boyfriend were supposed to be coming down and I were telling our Michael he says, oh, he's black.
And he rang you up, didn't he?
I were on phone to her and Michael took the phone off and he went Shelley, she said what?
Your boyfriend's got black on his face hasn't he?
he lives in Huddersfield, though.
I'll get you it, your Mum's got no money.
Well they'll lift further up when you've got your  
 
What do you want?
Oh no.
Well measure from your pole to your skirting board.
No, I want one.
curtain.
So what do you need for curtains?
He's at work again.
Higher.
Higher!
What do you need for curtains?
Some hooks.
Curtain hooks.
And when she heard it yesterday, we played it back on there, she was going all shy you know?
Aye 
She didn't like the  have to put down er what relation they are to us you know 
oh aye , aye
and their ages 
aye when when we did that one in our garden our Danielle she only eighteen months 
Mm 
she's chuntering on to her granddad  and she's pointing to the brussel sprouts you know in the garden 
Yeah 
the, the stalks, there's only the stalk left, cos it, it was between Christmas and New Year so 
Yeah 
Arthur wasn't in the garden like
mm
and er  she's chuntering on to on to her granddad and he pulled a stalk out like that he said brussel sprouts, she says brussel sprouts granddad




Aye
Oh they were worse at  it like how he did it, you know
Yeah 
when I used to go up you know for a pint of snowball he say  pint of snowball , some of the, what they call 'em 
Mm, what's them  she was on about or something?
That's  I said to her, I said I dunno, what are they fruit?
No they're feeding, the cattle feed, stock feed
Oh, the same what  I says I don't know what they're on about, they're on about garlic, well I know about garlic 
Every morning
Aye
If I go to my baker  I'll er, I'll fetch one back and I'll show ya, they, they used to grow a lot during war to make jam on  to subsidize folk to make jam and stuff like that you know 
Mm, mm 
they're er they're not like a turnip 
mango, mangoes
Yes, yes
Oh I've heard of mangoes
Yes 
 

Oh well I'd better go and get me pork pies, they'll be ready now
Oh were they not made  what's that flashing for?that's when I like them when they're juicy made
when you going back to school?
To pick young, to pick young lasses up
he wouldn't go, he wouldn't go to school when er 


now there, there's youths that's hung round that, hung round school gates they ought to be prosecuted
He did go to school
Only when you made him
Did he hell
he didn't go voluntary
He bloody did
I did I used to like school
Did ya?
He did, he went to school all of mine go to school 
 
Did they like school though?
Yeah 
Yeah I loved it
I thought, I thought he er didn't like it 
I'm best out of lot,lot
How 
Were you breast fed?
Breast fed babies are the brainiest 
No none of them were breast fed 
It's a load of bunk that is 


it was only you I had breast fed all the 
I ought 
others had the bloody bottle there's no 
I ought to I ought to've been the bloody brainiest in country me


He went in through the  school gates when he were five
Er Willy 
be
I used to, I used to go to school gate, me mum used to hang it through


in between railings
Willy  used to come from school and she used to come up me mum's house with a, so could have a suck of the tit  he would've come from school and you'd expect him the night at me mam's house
there were a, an old woman 
 
in village, not far up us and er I were getting round me mum and pulling on her skirts and  and this old woman says, get him fed Frances, he wants a bit of pap, get him, get him picked up and give him a bit of pap and that'll shut him up 
Aye
but er we used to 
aye it were 
get on this village you know
You're on here with the pap you know
You do realize don't ya?
Ooh, my head 
What is it?
It's fuzzy
Oh 
me head  lack of fresh air I think 
Did you get them brassieres for Reggie?


Aye, I've not  I've got them here, I left them
I hope the buggers is convenient
He wants some
Big'uns
long
Long-line
he's gonna be Wishy-Washy is he?
Na, na, in a play
Play
Who is it er
Reg  the duke
Oh aye
and he wants some long-line, well I did have some, but I don't know if I've still got them
I nearly said, I nearly said when you were er 
He wants big'uns, you know 
I nearly said when you wanted er, when he were on about when I were saying your lass is big enough cos she is well built int she?
Aye but she hasn't, she might of he wants a long-line 
Well them ones in factory as like
You know long-line, what you used to keep your spare tyre in
Oh yeah aye 
Yeah I had, I used to have one 
I did 
I dunno if it's still in the drawer
I dunno if I've still got it
I had I, I always wore them you know
Aye
I went to hospital once for me, I had me veins done, the doctor came round and
Yeah
no, no him that use the anaesthetic
The anaesthetist, aye
I had it on under me nightie just, pulled the bottom of it, he said what's this?
Yeah
I said it's for, oh what do you think it is?
We had a good laugh then
Mm, used to keep your spare tyre in you see
Oh
I went with out with them like
Yeah
I did have one in the drawer though, I don't know if it's still there
Oh you ought to have a big'un then  keep your spare tyre in 
Don't wear them now
 

Aye  it's all you want, nobody else's  oh she's on again   paint the house 
she's spoiling it 


breaks all the conversation up, televisions, no good 
Be lost without mine I think
I wouldn't get fed up, no
see if 
an'all
got fed up 
Well once through the week
has he got some money?
Aye I'll go if you've got some money
Don't
Aye, I don't know where there's nowt on
no
They're due on
I don't know
at seven, seventh of November our last one was 
Yes well I'll go up, go
Oh the others are due now aren't they?
Oh, aye Sheila
Okay, say like
The mess on that carpet wants cleaning 
Go and get some water go and get the cloth quickly 
never heard of er 
Sheila have you?
go and get a cloth 
Go and get the cloth please
I don't want to 
Hurry up so I can clear your gravy up, go on  go on
don't want to
Go and get the cloth 
get the cloth 
floor cloth
No 
Right then you're going home, come on get your cardy on  one, two  come on
Under the sink 
oh
the stack system what you left
Oh 
keeps fine for you love
yeah
er I thought your chain was loose there  the way it was hanging 
No it's  come on wipe that
Well I dunno what right is, and that's definitely right
Put Luke in
well 
 
Eh David's got a dog kennel ain't he?
What he had his dog in
Who?
David  what he had at top of the garden, he put his dog in there
Yeah 
supposed to make me one
eh, oh, elm, oak
Oak, ash
oak
elm, oak, ash they're the only ones I know are free
It is  though innit?
I think so aye 
Must be
yes 
they might have it 
Mummy
Put your cardy on then
Let's see your cardy on  
 
what about your pink one?
 
Oh aye 
Have you finished your pink one?
then it'll have to be dripped-dried
Yeah
Have you finished your pink one or wha no 
No been  on it, like it's got all any, all numbers down side what you use for which  
Has Nicola got one of these what you knit her one?
No, I haven't knit her one, I knit you 
Apparently like all numbers I used to only use B three and A one
Can you knit a new one?
I thought that's all the programme 
Me?
had on it, but it's got about eight on it 
Who says?
but none of them work


Aye 
only 
What colour?
work but only one works now
This colour
That colour?
Oh 
Eh, posh ain't ya come here love, let's, let's have a look at it?
Come here
Can't turn  
now which way you've got it on?
 
You want to put it right on her shoulders, cos she's not got it on properly
She pulls it down anyway more than that 
Let your mum put it on properly so it looks nice, yeah, lovely that
Look nice with a polo neck or a T-shirt 
Does it?
No I couldn't be bothered to do mine last night
Then you wanna get some of that, we were on about it yesterday
Aye it's Britannia 
Britannia and you'll get a jumper and a cardigan out of it and it's beautiful, it's only about three ninety nine in the window, the big balls 
Come on then 
it's inside
You know where Jenny gets her knitting machine 
but it's super in, no  no not them
 
oh, aye and I
they're just big balls 
Yeah I know what you mean now yeah 
They're just like er a hundred 
Yeah
and they've got a lovely beigey mixture, like aran-type wool
Mm
lovely int it?
Be nice
I'll have a look
say 
Expect  innit 
Yeah 
expensive
beautiful wool and they've got the plain type 
The pink's horrible isn't it though?
Mind them on the  Corns will be alright as well
It's thin though Sheila
Oh aye
it wants double knitting you see
well you can get double knit
Not on the  Corns I don't think, I've never seen it not in that
Well you can  double knit on your knitting machine
Not on ours you can't
Oh you can on mine
Eh?
Can you?
Yeah  in that pattern book, yeah
No I don't think you can on mine well I've never come across 
Come on then Sammy Jo 
You ain't got the book like, have you got the book with it?
Have ya?
No
Right, go toilet first 
no you can on mine like 
Ah 
I'm taking me pram to Alice's
Your pram, it's no good, not taking your pram  I don't think so  it's no good   Got a nice piece of pork in  
I've finished my coffee again, it must be that cup  in it,w is yours still hot?
No 


Yeah, Stuart's card  did you get a card off ?
No 
They must've forgot
Yeah, why it's not a 
Eh?
Talking to Sharon out there
Oh, thought she'd gone
 

Yeah  it's about three weeks
Mm
when I won that pork  er she gives us it
Ah
and she says I'll keep it till the week after
to eat to buy the meat, I'm thinking meat cod
No she buys the meat one week then the veg
That's right
then the week after I, I won the beef 
Aye so that 
you see 
Aye  so it's Sharon's turn to buy it, can, Elliott cannot get cheap stuff from the, where Ian works?
No, no
That's odd isn't it cos the chicken factories do don't they?
Yeah , no, cannae get owt, don't know why  er  
Well I've got one chair, ha, stripped and washed on the line 
Oh, these, oh
really are scruffy
yeah I went in for me fags and that lass she stood, she said I'm waiting to see what you saying  I says forty, I says I get forty every day and by Friday 
Is it her with the glasses?
No
Oh
Friday 
I  I never come over there did I?
No, and I were filling me thing out  she says oh fill that one out an'all, so got thirty pence off
Oh good
but she never give us another one
Why didn't you ask?
I know but it
I mean it doesn't matter to them does it?
No 
Oh there was a bloody mine I don't know if they  ninety nine  were they?
I dunno, aye it was in the paper weren't it?
Aye we were gonna chuck it, cut it out yesterday it was about twenty five pence or thirty pence wasn't it?
Save your 
Cos some of them 
Oh aye 
take your coupons here 
I know 
the product aye 
and I keep forgetting mine on the back windowsill
Yeah
Oh I bent the  
and that  with the glasses, has she packed in
there's nine 
you know the little one with the glasses she's  about fortyish
Oh fortyish
Well I'm not very good at the ages like I mean she could be older
Molly?
No
No  glasses 
only a little'un thinnish
short hair?
Aye
Oh she's not forty, she's only a young lass, she's pregnant mind
Oh no 
if it's the one I think
oh no
No?
No
There's one little  fairish, fairish hair, short I think she's  
 
Aye, oh no I dunno she were pregnant no, I dunno 
This one's got glasses on mind, we always have a laugh with her, there's her and Ann  on the till  and er  
Sue Sue's gone
Who's Sue?
Er  short hair, grey thin
Might be her gr glasses?
Aye
Aye 
Aye might be her right
Aye
Aye she's gone
she's Connie int she?
Yeah Sue, er Julie one of the supervisors  curly hair dark curly hair 
Black 
Aye
thin?
I think she was
Very thin
she was in the office, for, she's gone
Did she come and find the price for your  wool?
Er went to find the price for your wool, the red jacket thing on
Oh I dunno if it's er
black hair?
No
Not that old
Aye he's got black hair, she's got black hair  come and wait 
bad
yeah, his throat, aye
Aye, went to get the price for your wool then
Aye might of been her then, she's only a young lass
Aye
Aye
thin, wore the red
Aye probably her then, er
and Chris that's three
Chris
Ah
Sharon, I think she said Sharon, I will see another day


Aye Pat
What about that lass that lost all that weight?
Well she was  she served me the other day, Dawn
Mm
Tuesday must of been Tuesday if it was the other day
Oh, mind some of them could be working a week's notice, but Chris didn't, he finished that week 
I don't think any of 'em have had
ah they're not 
oh no, cos Val was telling us er


he er, well yester was when Val served us, she says there's nine
well she says for what 
not been there a long time
Aye, she says what they're getting Sheila, she said I've just cut me hours down they, they were working thirty nine and they've cut me down to thirty two, just like part-time thing, like you know 
Mm 
so
oh well, they must've worked it out and find out she's gotta be better off keeping her job
mm, well Ann's still there and her other oldish woman
Is Molly there then?
I dunno Molly works 
Molly wasn't in yesterday was she?
I haven't seen her  I haven't seen her, have you been to Kwik Save lately?
Have you seen Molly?
You know Molly big fat Molly?
Molly's on tills I think
Have you seen, have you seen her this week?
Have you been in?
I think mam said she were in on Tuesday
Oh
Monday or Tuesday
I say I've not seen her
cos she's 
Oh, aye 
she used to have bank counter job though didn't she?
Mm
Aye she used to be at the bank 
Aye, but there's nine been made redundant  Chris, Val says there's, there's nobody in and they have 
And all have er, a cut three hundred working hours
Aye
so  they've done it with nine then eh?
Yeah
All the full-timers then, eh?
Mm  I'll turn that off now