

XXIX BELFAST FESTIVAL AT QUEEN'S 4–23 NOVEMBER 1991 FREE PROGRAMME BELFAST 1991
WHO'S WHO
FESTIVAL DIRECTOR'S MESSAGE
Welcome to our 29th Festival!
I say that on behalf of the permanent year-round staff at Festival House (3.5 people for the Festival and 2.0 for QFT) but also on behalf of the professional staffs of the Grand Opera House, the Lyric, the Arts, the Ulster Orchestra, the Ulster Hall, the Ulster Museum, Stranmillis College, the Old Museum — in fact, all who help make the Festival the great event it is.
But may I add a special welcome to the unsung heroines and heroes who are not permanent staff, but give up their time — and in some cases their entire annual leave — to work for the Festival when the high pressure time arrives.
I mean the Festival box-office staff and the unseen technical staff and — well, in short, the Festival would have collapsed long ago, had it not been for a wonderfully large number of people who join us year after year — just because they love the Festival and want to do their best for it, and work all hours for it.
They are great people.
This year, for the first time ever, we have changed the format of our programme by listing events under categories.
We hope you will find this helpful — though, inevitably, there are some events which defy simple classification.
But if you prefer to study events by venue — well, the grid plan is there to help you.
If the read the entire programme, as we hope you will, you'll find certain themes emerging.
We have a very strong German theme this year.
Three German events of distinction (Hamburg Ballet ,Musica Antiqua of Cologne and the Richter Exhibition ) led to a link with the Mozart anniversary, and then on to a splendid series of concerts, in which we offer some of the very best of the German ‘classical’ tradition from Bach to Brahms.
Add to this Barbara Dennerlein 's Jazz Trio (Munich).
And then, by total coincidence, the RSC added a play set in Vienna, and another set in Hamburg!
Japan, too, is highlighted as part of the huge Japan Festival which is running for three months in Northern Ireland and throughout Britain — but, yes, it was another coincidence that Scottish Opera chose to offer us Madama Butterfly !
But, whether themes emerge or not, the Festival's aim remains constant — to bring you outstanding performers in every category of our programme.
You will find many old friends who are special Festival favourites.
(But by the way, don't look for Michael Palin 's name in this year's programme, even though he has come to us every ‘odd’ year since 1981.
He sends his apologies, but is currently in the middle of another epic journey for BBC TV — this time North to South!)
You will also find a splendid array of fine performers who are coming to us for the first time — many surely due to be favourites of the future.
Very high on our own list of favourites are, of course, our sponsors.
In the public sector, both Queen's University and the Arts Council of Northern Ireland remain our staunch and indispensable friends — as they have been since the Festival started, and since last year they have been joined by the Belfast City Council .
We are equally thankful for our no less indispensable friends from the private sector, whether they be our Principal Benefactors or those who choose to support a particular event they fancy.
And, specially for this particular Festival, we warmly thank three further sponsors — the German Government , the Japan Festival , and Belfast 1991 .
With all these people working for the success of the Festival, the rest is up to you!
Your support is the most important of all.
From 11 September please book lots of tickets!
Michael Barnes Festival Director    
SPONSORS
FESTIVAL SPONSORS
The Festival is an annual promotion for the public, organised by the Queen's University of Belfast in full association with the Arts Council of Northern Ireland .
The Festival acknowledges gratefully the support of Belfast City Council and assistance from the Visiting Arts Office of Great Britain and Northern Ireland .
We are grateful for the contributions of the German Government , the Japan Festival and Belfast 1991 .
The Festival also depends on the generosity of many other sponsors, without whom it would be impossible to mount a festival of this kind.
DONORS
The Esmée Fairbairn Charitable Trust
Willis Wrightson Harris Marrian Ltd
SPONSORS IN KIND AND DONORS
Isaac Agnew Limited
Beck's Bier
Buckley Scaffolding Ltd
Crymbles Ltd
IBM United Kingdom Ltd
Moses Hunter Ltd
Northern Ireland Airports
Old Bushmills Distillery
P&O European Ferries
Prompt Data Ltd
Wesley Pentland Travel
Queen's University Travel Centre Ltd
Radio Rentals
The Belfast Festival at Queen's has an international reputation for excellence.
We depend on support from a wide range of sponsors in the commercial and private sector.
If you or your company would like to learn about the benefits of association with the Festival please contact:
Musica Antiqua, Cologne
‘As a baroque chamber ensemble they are unrivalled in terms of technical mastery and sheer vitality…
Richard Goebel and his colleagues are not afraid to shake off the dust and restore the brightness, the vividness of the original…
Rarely does one hear such creativity in the recreation of music of the past.’
(The Independent )
We are happy to welcome the renowned Musica Antiqua on their first visit to us, to give the first concert of this year's Festival.
And ‘first’ is a word that suits them, for many recognise them as the finest original instrument group among baroque performers of the present day.
They will offer us Mozart 's music as he would have played it and heard it in his own day.
‘Authentic’, in fact.
The programme they have created is fascinating.
It proves — if proof were needed — that genius is born, not made, and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was certainly a genius.
The programme charts the early progress of that genius, born in Salzburg in 1756.
Mozart's father, Leopold — himself a musician — recognised that his son was an infant prodigy and took him away from Salzburg on a concert tour of Western Europe which lasted well over three years.
It included the presentation of Wolfgang Amadeus to King Louis XV of France.
In London (in fact in a little house in the village of Chelsea) Mozart wrote his first symphonies, when still not yet nine years old.
Like the others, K 19a (rediscovered not long ago) was much influenced by the most successful London musician of the time, J C Bach — son of J S Bach.
London liked Mozart, both as a performer and composer, and the extended visit was financially successful.
Back home, and nearly eleven, Mozart composed his delightful second harpsichord concerto.
Again he was much influenced by other composers such as C P E Bach, and he used their themes too — which was common practice in the 18th century.
But the concerto, none the less, is completely Mozartian in character, and perfectly assured.
Its middle movement is ‘romantic’ before its time.
Naturally, Mozart wrote it for himself to play.
What is a cassation?
There seems to be no exact definition, but serenade or divertimento would be equally appropriate.
The first cassation seems to conjure up the beauty of music in a summer garden at night.
No one has ever matched Mozart in this kind of music.
And this particular cassation is entrancing.
The final work of the concert goes back to Mozart's international tour.
The fifth symphony was written for Holland, but composed in London.
Who else has had five symphonies of his own played to international audiences by the age of nine?
Haydn didn't write his own first symphony till he was in his late twenties!
Don't miss this beautiful concert.
And don't miss its partner on 17 November, when Howard Shelley and the London Mozart Players, on modern instruments, play great music from Mozart's teens and early twenties in Salzburg.
Presented in association with The Goethe Institut, Manchester 
Sponsored by the Northern Ireland Tourist Board 
BBC Symphony Orchestra
To give it its full title, ‘Variations on an Original Theme (‘Enigma’)’, was written in 1899 in the short space of four months, when Elgar was 42.
It was his first great success.
Ever since, it has remained a popular favourite — surely the most popular of all major orchestral work by a native Englishman, and widely regarded as the very essence of the spirit of England.
However, Elgar's style was not strongly linked with previous English musical traditions.
Rather, it is the influence of the German tradition that is more apparent in ‘Enigma’— particularly through Brahms, who used variation forms in many of his finest works.
It was, therefore, apt that the first performance of ‘Enigma’ in London was conducted by the internationally renowned German, Hans Richter, who loved the work and championed it.
Richter had also conducted the first performances of two Brahms symphonies.
Brahms took three years to complete his second piano concerto, and he was 48 when it had its first performance (1881) with himself as soloist, in Budapest — then the twin capital, with Vienna, of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
It is a massive concerto in four movements rather than the usual three — the addition of a scherzo emphasises that the work has the characteristics of both a concerto and a symphony.
It can be regarded as the culmination of a great German tradition of piano concertos, which had started with Mozart.
These two great and favourite  works make a splendid programme, certain to be superbly played by the full-strength BBC Symphony Orchestra and David Atherton , whom we are welcoming to the Festival for the first time.
Conductor and orchestra have had a long and fruitful association — starting in 1963 when David Atherton became the youngest ever conductor at the BBC Proms in London.
Both orchestra and conductor have a long list of international commitments every year.
So, too, of course, does John Lill , and among his 1991 engagements have been all five Beethoven Concertos — to be followed later by the two Brahms — with the Hong Kong Philharmonic conducted by their Musical Director, David Atherton!
John Lill now has over sixty concertos in his repertoire, but we know he retains his special affection for Brahms, and he is soon to record both concertos for the second time.
He is a great exponent of Brahms.
He is also a great friend of the Festival, and it will be a delight to have him with us again.
Please note that there is no overture in this programme, and it will probably not be possible for latecomers to be admitted before the interval.
Sponsored by British Petroleum 
Ulster Orchestra
Weber was a key figure in the growth of German opera, and the link between late Mozart and early Wagner.
‘Oberon’ was commissioned by Covent Garden, and conducted there by the composer himself in 1826.
The libretto was hopeless, but the music was excellent.
The brilliant and tuneful overture is full of the joy of life — but within two months of the first performance, Weber died in London at the age of 39.
Mozart completed his clarinet concerto only two months before he died, but there is no shadow of death in it.
Mozart was the master of the concerto form, as is already apparent in some of his earlier works, to be performed at this year's Festival.
This, his last concerto, was the first great concerto for the clarinet, and nothing has come near to matching it among all of the wind concertos written since.
The concerto was composed for one of Mozart's friends, a clarinet virtuoso.
We are delighted to welcome Michael Collins , the young Irish virtuoso, to play this marvellous work.
Brahms took about fifteen years to complete his First Symphony, and when it was first performed in 1876, he was 43 — an extraordinary late symphonic debut for a composer who had been publicly proclaimed as a genius by Schumann when he was 18, and who had gone on to justify public expectations with such works as the ‘German Requiem’, which had given him financial security for life.
By the age of 43, Beethoven had completed eight of his nine symphonies, all of them performed and published!
Why did Brahms take so long over his symphony?
We know that he himself referred to the daunting shadow of Beethoven's greatness — and we can assume that public expectation was just as daunting, given that he was regarded as Beethoven's heir.
But what surely daunted him most was facing his most exacting critic — himself.
It was remarkable in the circumstances that the First Symphony sounds as though it was written all at once in a burst of sustained inspiration.
After he conducted it himself in Vienna, it was hailed as ‘Beethoven's Tenth’— wrongly, for this is a great and splendid symphony that is essentially Brahmsian.
Most important of all, the great success of the First Symphony cleared away all the inhibitions which Brahms had suffered.
What happened?
In the next year, 1877, Brahms started and finished his Second Symphony in a couple of months!
Both the Ulster Orchestra and the Festival are happy to welcome George Hanson , the young American conductor who is crossing the Atlantic for this concert.
He has won many golden opinions in the US, where he is resident conductor of the Atlanta Symphony.
He won the Stokowski Prize for conductors outright in 1989, against a very large field.
Sponsored by British Airways .
The London Mozart Players
Harry Blech founded the London Mozart Players in 1949.
Jane Glover succeeded him as Artistic Director in 1984, and has successfully broadened the policies of the orchestra by bringing in chamber music of the 19th and 20th centuries, while maintaining a strong commitment to the Haydn/Mozart period.
The orchestra broadcasts regularly for the BBC.
And 1991 is also the sixth year in a row that they have played at the BBC Proms.
They regularly tour Britain and abroad.
In this year alone they are playing in Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore, in France, Italy, Spain and Germany, and then Brazil.
We are very happy that the Volkswagen Tour has enabled us to welcome this renowned orchestra to the Festival for the first time.
Howard Shelley is both conductor and soloist, and will conduct the concerto from the keyboard, as Mozart himself did.
Howard Shelley was appointed Associate Conductor of the London Mozart Players last year.
He is a most distinguished Mozartian, and this year is recording all 27 of the piano concertos for Chandos Records.
He is, of course, already a favourite in Northern Ireland, and has had excellent partnerships with Yan Pascal Tortelier and the Ulster Orchestra.
All the Mozart to be played in this concert was composed in Salzburg, at a time when he was increasingly disenchanted (Mozart himself used much stronger language!) with the restrictive provincialism of the Archbishop's city.
But you would not know this from the music, which is delightful and radiantly happy.
The Symphony No 29 was written in the later part of 1773.
Mozart was then coming up to his eighteenth birthday, but already a mature master, and No 29 is both a great symphony and an enchantingly beautiful one.
The Divertimento was a form of music much in fashion for aristocratic receptions, but Mozart raised his own to much higher planes, as in his K251 Divertimento, written in 1776.
It is in five movements, and is graced by a major role for the solo oboe, giving it almost the character of a concerto.
Shortly afterwards, Mozart composed his ninth piano concerto — a form which he was making very much his own, and, yet again, demonstrating his astonishing mastery.
Don't think of it just as an early work.
It is a masterpiece.
Elgar 's famous Serenade completes the programme, and surely everyone will be happy about that — not least the orchestra itself, who love it.
All in all, this is a most attractive programme.
And if you are just starting to approach ‘classical’ music for the first time, or introducing youngsters to it — don't hesitate.
Supported by Volkswagen in association with Isaac Agnew Ltd, Belfast 
Belfast Baroque Ensemble Priory Singers
The Belfast Baroque Ensemble , who gave such a memorable performance of the Bach Double Concerto at last year's Festival, return this year with soloist Beverley Scott in Bach 's magnificent Violin Concerto in E major.
The orchestra finish the first half of the programme with Mendelssohn 's String Symphony No 11 in F. The Priory Singers , under their director Harry Grindle , perform some unaccompanied choral pieces before joining with the Ensemble for Schubert 's Mass in G major — perfect music for the perfect acoustic of the Elmwood Hall.
Paul McCartney's Liverpool Oratorio
The world premiere of Paul McCartney 's Liverpool Oratorio was given by the RLPO at Liverpool Cathedral on 28 June this year and we are delighted that Alan Tongue and the Northern Ireland Symphony have been granted the privilege by the composer of conducting the Northern Ireland premiere during the Festival.
It will be remembered that Alan Tongue brought the very successful first Northern Ireland performance of Andrew Lloyd Webber's Requiem to the Festival in 1985.
Obviously the two works are very different: Paul McCartney started out without a classical music background, just with a guitar, some songs and of course a phenomenal gift for making the simple things in music work.
The 95 minute work, which is a collaboration between the 49-year-old rock star and the renowned American conductor and composer Carl Davis, is a richly melodic and lavishly orchestrated piece for symphony orchestra, choir and four soloists.
A BBC documentary has been made on the original performance and EMI are issuing the album in the autumn.
‘McCartney has here pulled off something both viable and memorable…often his music works on a genuinely big scale.’
(Daily Telegraph )
‘…his ear for melody and the intuitive grasp of counterpoint that is evident in the almost Baroque bass lines he plays on Beatles recordings serve Mr McCartney well here.’
(New York Times)
Closing Concert
Ulster Orchestra
By coincidence, all three of these works by great Russian masters were revised by their composers, years after they were first performed.
In each case it is the revised versions which are to be played in this concert.
Tchaikovsky completed his Second Symphony in 1872, at the age of 32, when he  seemed to be a happy man.
He revised the work very thoroughly, and much to its improvement, in 1880 — two years after completing not only ‘Eugene Onegin’ and the Fourth Symphony, but his disastrous marriage as well.
The Second Symphony is still widely known as the ‘Little Ruissian’ because of the folk songs from that area which Tchaikovsky uses in the first and fourth movements.
It is a nickname which is surviving against very heavy odds — for ‘Little Russia’ is not Russia at all.
It is the Ukraine — which is not little, but immense!
Rachmaninov completed his First Piano Concerto when he was 18, and studying piano (very successfully) at the Moscow Conservatory.
His revised version of the concerto was composed in 1917, by which time he had achieved an international reputation both as composer and virtuoso pianist.
While not as popular as his Second Concerto (what is?), the First is a fine romantic work.
And, since Rachmaninov wrote it for himself to play, it demands a tremendous technique from the soloist.
Needless to say, we all know that Barry Douglas has just such a technique!
Stravinsky was commissioned in 1909 by Diaghilev to compose a new work for his famous ballet company to perform in Paris.
The result was The Firebird, a great triumph for both the ballet and the composer.
Stravinsky was then 28, and much influenced by the gorgeous and sumptuous orchestration of Rimsky-Korsakov, with whom he had studied for three years.
Stravinsky then created a suite from ‘The Firebird’ in 1911, for use in concert halls, but produced a revised version in 1919, and yet another in 1945.
It is the 1919 version which is most often played, and it offers a beautiful synopsis of ‘The Firebird's’ magical music.
We agree with Yan Pascal Tortelier that this is a wonderful programme for the closing concert of the Festival, and we're sure that conductor, soloist and orchestra will ensure a thumping success!
(Please note that the interval in this concert will come after the Tchaikovsky symphony.
There is no overture.)
Sponsored by AIB Bank 
Nikolai Demidenko
‘Nikolai Demidenko is recognised as being one of the most immensely gifted pianists of his generation…in 1985 he played with the Moscow Radio Symphony Orchestra to a packed Ulster Hall during the Belfast Festival at Queen's.
Since then his career in the West has gone from strength to strength.’
(Geoffrey Crankshaw,Musical Opinion , London, May 1991)
Any festival would be proud of a comment such as that above, showing as it does that Nikolai Demidenko 's first great success in the West was with us.
But it is no secret, for Demidenko himself loves to speak of that memorable occasion, and its importance for him.
Thanks are due to our audience at that concert — they immediately recognised that this was a new star, and applauded him to the echo.
Since then, Demidenko has been welcomed back to the Festival regularly and now that he has settled permanently in London, it is all the easier.
But he still maintains a special affection for Northern Ireland, and this has led to an exciting project initiated by the Arts Council, in association with Queen's University and the Festival — Demidenko will give six recitals in Northern Ireland (not just Belfast) plus six masterclasses for five young Ulster pianists, in the 1991–2 season, finishing in May.
And, appropriately, the first recital and the first masterclass (see P 41) will be given at the Festival.
In the recital series, Demidenko (inspired by a series given by the great Anton Rubinstein in Russia more than a century ago) will explore the development of music for piano from the 18th century to the 20th.
The first programme, to our delight, fits the Festival's German theme perfectly.
Haydn and Mozart are already strongly represented in our programme this year, and rightly, but it is delightful that Demidenko will also include C P E Bach and Weber .
Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach (1714–88) was the fifth of Johann Sebastian Bach's twenty children and the most talented and innovative.
He had a most successful career, finishing with twenty years in Hamburg as successor to Telemann.
With an even more resounding name,Carl Maria Friedrich Ernst von Weber (1786–1826) was a key figure (particularly in his operas) in the movement from the classical to the romantic.
He had been a pupil of Haydn's brother, Michael.
And Haydn himself had been influenced by C P E Bach.
And Mozart…well, suffice to say that this excellent programme makes great musical sense — and delight!
‘This is one of the most phenomenal discs I can recall.’
(Hugh Canning in the Sunday Times , May 1991, on Demidenko's latest recording)
(Subscription tickets for the series of six recitals are available from The School of Music, Queen's University, price £30 (£20))
Vanbrugh Quartet
‘The Vanbrugh can boast not only technical security and a marvellous unanimity of intent, but also a remarkable insight into the music they play,’(The Times )
‘I have the greatest admiration for the Vanbrugh Quartet…their integrity and commitment ensure their continuing success.’
(Martin Lovett, Amadeus Quartet )
In 1988, the young Vanbrugh Quartet won the fourth London International String Quartet Competition.
Their home is Cork, and they are the resident quartet for RTE.
They are also closely associated with University College Cork, which makes it particularly pleasant to welcome them to Queen's for their first visit.
The Vanbrugh have already played in the Americas — north, central and south — and in a number of European countries, including the Menuhin Festival in Switzerland.
They broadcast regularly for the BBC and have made a number of CDs, with many more in the offing.
The repertoire of the Vanbrugh Quartet stretches from Haydn to the present day, and that span is reflected in the programme they are playing for the Festival.
Two distinguished living composers — one Irish, one Welsh — are set between two great masters of the past.
The Mozart was composed in 1786, the year that ‘Figaro’ was first performed.
Dvorak 's ‘American’ was so called because he composed it in the United States in 1893, the year when his ‘New World’symphony was first performed, both great works deriving from the same inspiration.
John Scott
(Organ)
Dr John Scott makes a welcome return to the Province from St Paul's Cathedral London, where he is Director of Music.
The youngest ever organ soloist to appear at the Proms, in 1977, he is especially noted for his brilliant performances of twentieth century works and of masterpieces in the great Romantic tradition.
As well as international solo engagements he appears as a concerto soloist with all the great British orchestras.
Presented in association with the Friends of the Mulholland Grand Organ.
Orion String Quartet
Refreshments will be served.
Presented in association with Castlereagh Arts.
For tickets and further information contact Tullycarnet Library (tel 485079).
Adelphi String Quartet
Four members of the Ulster Orchestra,Ottoline Maas (violin),Jonathan Griffin (violin),Philip Walton (viola) and Morag Stewart (cello), formed the Adelphi Quartet in 1985 and their busy recital schedule throughout the Province has evoked increasing enthusiasm.
Their programme for tonight's ‘Music at Ten’ recital, in which they are joined by Ruth Zagni (cello), comprises the last movement from Janacek 's ‘Intimate Letters’Quartet and Schubert 's Quintet in C major Op 163.
Yoshikazu Iwamoto
Tonight we welcome to Festival Yoshikazu Iwamoto , one of the most outstanding exponents and Master Performer of Shakuhachi (Japanese bamboo flute).
Currently Fellow in Japanese Music at the University of York, Yoshikazu Iwamoto has given numerous concert and workshop performances throughout Europe and America, and recently took part in the UK 2000 Festival in Tokyo.
The programme this evening will include both classical and modern compositions for shakuhachi, and duo pieces for piano and shakuhachi on which Yoshikazu Iwamoto will be accompanied by Jonathan Gregory , Organist and Director of Music at Saint George's Church, Belfast.
Mr Gregory will also perform harpsichord music of the baroque period.
The character above is Matsuri, the Japanese word for festival.
It is a computer-generated image based on the calligraphy of Kobo Daishi, the 9th century monk who is said to have invented the Japanese phonetic script.
Presented in association with the Japan Festival 
Rococo
Eleanor Dawson (baroque flute),Julia Black (baroque violin) and Rachel Thomas (baroque cello) first met through their work with the Baroque Orchestra of Ireland.
They formed the ensemble ‘Les Gouts Reunis’ to bring baroque and early classical chamber music to a wider audience and have performed in Dublin and Belfast.
All three perform regularly with orchestras or chamber ensembles, playing on original instruments in Britain, Ireland and Europe.
Tonight they perform Haydn 's ‘London’ Trio No 3 in G major,Stamitz 's Trio in G minor, a movement from a Bach solo cello suite,C P E Bach 's Duet from ‘Musikalisches Vielerley’and Haydn 's ‘London’Trio No ‘in C major.
Carmina Quartet
The Carmina Quartet is based in Switzerland.
It was founded as recently as 1984, but within only three years the four young players had established an international reputation — a reputation which is now extraordinarily high.
They are in great demand all over the world.
In the 1990/91 season alone, they appeared four times in Paris, and seven times in London.
It is generally agreed that Haydn was the father of the string quartet, and he set the highest standards: the quartets of Beethoven and Schubert could hardly have been written without his brilliant examples of how it should be done.
The three quartets in the programme are all among the greatest and they were all composed in Vienna within forty years — Haydn (1788), Beethoven (1807), Schubert (1826).
It was a key period, when the classical was moving towards the romantic.
More important, each of the three quartets is sublimely beautiful.
‘One of the most remarkable quartets I have ever encountered; I have no doubt they are destined for greatness.’
(Financial Times, 1987 )
‘The Carmina Quartet…proved every bit as remarkable as the advance publicity claimed.’
(Daily Telegraph, 1991 )
Sponsored by IBM Northern Ireland 
Hunt Duo
Belfast born sisters,Fionnuala (violin) and Una Hunt (piano) have been playing chamber music together from an early age.
Trained at the Ulster College of Music and the Hochschule für Musik in Vienna they have performed extensively throughout Ireland and in Europe, and have broadcast on BBC Radio and Television, ITV and RTE.
It is a pleasure to welcome two members of a distinguished Belfast musical family back to the Festival.
In tonight's ‘Music at Ten’ they perform Britten 's Suite Op 6,Hamilton Harty 's Irish Fantasy and Fauré 's Sonata in A Op 13.
Miha Pogacnik
(Violin)
Miha Pogacnik was born in Slovenia but now resides in Germany and the USA where he travelled initially on a Fulbright scholarship.
Every season he appears in over 100 concerts on all five continents and at major international festivals, including the ‘IDRIART’ festivals which have been taking place since 1983 to encourage people to come together from east and west, and in America from north and south, through the international language of the arts.
This world-class violinist does not make recordings; he prefers to bring his music direct to the listener: ‘One more recording of Beethoven's Violin Sonatas is not going to change anybody.
The only way to do that is by acting individually.’
His accompanist Maria Noller-Namitscheva was born in Bulgaria and is currently a member of the chamber ensemble of the Hamburg Philharmonic State Orchestra.
Aylish Kerrigan ‘Haupstadt Berlin’
We round off our German theme of this year's Festival in welcoming back the mezzo-soprano Aylish Kerrigan with her accompanist Andreas Kerstein .
They perform in tonight's ‘Music at Ten’ a celebration of the musical history of Berlin, once again to become a capital city, with music by Kurt Weill from Berlin of the 20s and 30s, a celebration of Marlene Dietrich in Berlin (see also the RSC's production of ‘The Blue Angel’and QFT's screening of the movie), and a selection of cabaret songs depicting ‘Berlin in exile’.
Scottish Opera
This will be the first visit of Scottish Opera to Belfast since 1985.
It will also be their first ever visit to the Festival.
To celebrate the occasion, they could hardly have offered a more attractive programme — two of the top favourite operas of all time, plus a full-scale concert of the most popular music of Vienna.
Scottish Opera are bringing us their full company of soloists, chorus, and orchestra.
Madama Butterfly (Puccini)
sung in Italian with English supertitles
Madama Butterfly was given a new production by Scottish Opera in 1987.
It was highly acclaimed, revived in 1990, and again this year.
It was also successfully invited to Covent Garden.
The production, created by Nuria Espert , is not set at the conventional house on the hill, but in a tenement block in Nagasaki, in the post-war period.
It is an extremely large and impressive setting, emphasising the gulf between East and West which is at the heart of Butterfly's tragedy.
But it is not ‘pretty’ in the traditional sense.
After all, Butterfly's fate was not pretty.
‘A triumph, a superbly strong, fine-tuned piece of musical theatre’.
(Financial Times )
‘Espert's stunning production’.
(Evening News , Aberdeen)
‘Sir Alexander Gibson, a seasoned conductor of the work, paces this ‘Butterfly’ with complete feeling, rising to its emotional peaks as surely as he responds to its moments of delicacy’.
(The Scotsman , Edinburgh)
Carmen (Bizet)
sung in French with English supertitles
Carmen was first performed in Paris in 1875, a few weeks before Bizet's early death.
There is nothing else quite like it in all opera.
It is far too long since it was last performed in Belfast.
We are delighted that Scottish Opera have cast Jean Rigby in the leading role — she is one of the very best exponents in the world today of that extraordinarily demanding role.
Arthur Davies plays her tragic lover, Don José —‘ringingly passionate’ as he has rightly been described.
Graham Vick directed the Scottish Opera production of Carmen in 1986, when he had already established his name as one of the major innovators in opera (it was he who directed the stunning version of Wagner's ‘Ring’ in the Whitla Hall at last year's Festival.)
The costumes are traditional, but the setting (with a revolving stage in the middle) is stark, and the lighting fiercely dramatic.
As he himself said, he wanted to take the ‘picture postcard’ out of Carmen, and present its essence.
‘Marvellous…unmissable.’
(Sunday Telegraph )
Please note that the performance (including two intervals) last for 3½ hours.
We have therefore set the starting time at 7.15 pm.
A Night in Vienna (Strauss, Lehar, etc)
with the Scottish Opera Orchestra and Chorus
Scottish Opera promises a ‘delightful evening’ of music from Vienna — and that is putting it mildly, for they have chosen a stunning programme of the very best of the best loved highlights of Viennese operetta.
The evening begins with one of Suppée 's fizzing overtures, ‘Pique Dame’, followed by two numbers from his operetta ‘Boccacio’(1879).
Next comes Heuberger 's ‘Chambre Séparée’,(‘The Opera Ball’, 1898), and a selection from Carl Zeller 's ‘Der Vogelhändler’(1891).
The rest of the first half of the programme is given to Franz Lehar , with his great ‘Gold and Silver Waltz’, followed by a selection from his evergreen success, ‘The Merry Widow’(1905).
The second half of the concert will be given entirely to Johann Strauss II .
The aptly named waltz, ‘Vienna Blood’, is followed by a selection from ‘The Gypsy Baron’(1885).
And then, as you would surely expect if not demand, we come to the greatest of all operettas, ‘Die Fledermaus’(1874)— starting with the famous overture, and going on to excerpts from the party scene of Act II.
And, if you applaud hard enough (very likely) there could be a very special encore!
Supported by Belfast 1991 ‘A Night in Vienna’ sponsored by TSB Northern Ireland 
Sikulu The Warrior
Sikulu is a terrific musical, packed with song and dance, and bursting with energy and joy.
We are immensely proud to be bringing it to the UK for the first time.
(And, yes, we've seen it!)
‘Sikulu’ was first a smash-hit in South Africa, with standing ovations every night.
In May, 1991, ‘Sikulu’ came to Europe for a continental tour.
So far, it has visited Austria, Spain, France, Germany and Denmark — with standing ovations all over again.
As we go to press, it is currently the toast of Amsterdam.
Later, it will go to Italy — then to Belfast.
You loved ‘Ipi Tombi’ at the Grand Opera House in 1981?
‘Sikulu’ is much better!
You love ‘Joseph and the Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat’?
You'll love ‘Sikulu’ in just the same way!
The Company
There are forty performers — all wonderful.
‘We include many different tribesmen and women.
We are Tswanas, Northern and Southern Sothos, Shangaan, Xhosas, Zulu, and some of us come from Swaziland.
As a team, we work together…
We have created much of the show's dances, costumes and music.’
The Story
The dialogue and the songs are all in English, and they tell a touching and simple story.
Ubhejane is a boy who leaves his village in search of his father, Sikulu, who had left the village years ago to defend the rights of black South Africans.
Ubhejane goes to Johannesburg and is stunned by its great variety of black people — from business men, to miners, to the angry townships.
Movingly, he finds his father, and the reason for his long absence.
The ending is happy — but not yet complete.
The story is told chiefly through song and dance, which is 90% of the action of ‘Sikulu’.
Music and Dance
Music and dance is the way the story of ‘Sikulu’ is put across, and what a variety it offers!
From traditional African to Jo'burg variety — work song (gumboot), disco, jazz funk, hot gospel — and back again to a sensational African celebration which will leave you shouting for more.
The Press
‘An explosion of rollicking buttersmooth song and dance, a real rocker.
The music throughout is magnificent…the best African musical so far.
It's amazing, it's wonderful, and it deserves to be seen by everyone.’
(Sunday Times , Johannesburg)
‘Sikulu, The Warrior’is a really perfect piece of music theatre, half Cotton Club, half Cape Town, and the mixture of song and dance radiates from the stage like pure energy…it is astonishing how African folk and modern harmonies blend so beautifully.’
(Abendblatt , Hamburg)
‘You must not miss it.’
(Die Welt )
Cavalcade of Song
There are some Festival events you can't have too much of!
Such is the case with ‘Cavalcade of Song’, presented by the Northern Region of the Association of Musical Societies (‘AIMS’).
Consistently over the last number of years this has been one of the events to sell out most quickly in the entire Festival programme.
And no wonder — with sixteen societies taking part from all over the Province and over 200 singers on stage.
This year Musical Director William Cairns focuses on some of the great chorus numbers from some of the greatest musicals of all time.
Opening with the music of Strauss, Ivor Novello and Gilbert and Sullivan, the show takes a breathtaking race through the highlights of ‘The Student Prince’, ‘The Sound of Music’ and ‘Porgy and Bess’.
And that's only the first act!
The second half will include Jerome Kern's ‘Showboat’, ‘Kiss Me Kate’ and ‘Carousel’, culminating with the music of Andrew Lloyd Webber and hits from ‘Miss Saigon’and ‘Les Miserables’.
Production numbers are choreographed by Peter Kennedy.
Thursday evening sponsored by Marks and Spencer Friday evening sponsored by David Patton & Sons (NI) Ltd 
Saxtet
‘Saxtet’are Nigel Wood ,Andrew Tweed ,Lionel Ferer and Gerard McChrystal , four young saxophonists, based in Birmingham, who have toured throughout Europe, to the US and the Caribbean.
Two of the group, Andrew and Gerard, come from Northern Ireland.
‘Saxtet’ present a unique musical entertainment incorporating arrangements of classical music and jazz, which have evolved naturally from its members' wide-ranging influences and tastes.
Not only do ‘Saxtet’ perform music previously unassociated with the saxophone, but they include a selection of their own unique compositions.
‘Saxtet’ have cleverly combined outstanding musicianship, boundless energy and visual as well as aural stimuli to create an exciting performance that has become increasingly difficult to define.
Their programme includes new works by Nigel Wood and Lionel Ferer, arrangements of Rameau 's ‘Gavotte’,Mussorgsky 's ‘Night(mare) on a Bare Mountain’ and Bartok 's ‘Romanian Dances’,Gershwin 's ‘An American in Paris’and ‘42nd Street’by Harry Warren .
‘Saxtet scotch the myth that jazz is the saxophone's only natural home.
Its arrangements…are immaculately scored…
Saxtet are top of the classical pops — and much more besides.’
(The Scotsman )
‘Outstanding saxophone virtuosity’(The Independent )
‘Saxtet raised the roof’(What's On )
The BBC Big Band
The BBC Big Band was born in the 1960s out of the amalgamation of the Revue and Variety Orchestras into the New Radio Orchestra, after a BBC executive had heard New York's famous and versatile Radio City Symphony Orchestra.
In the late 70s ‘Big Band Special’ blossomed into the present long-running weekly series on Radio 2 which celebrated its 500th edition last year.
Perhaps the greatest attraction of the band is due to the extremely wide-ranging nature of its repertoire and the virtuosity and versatility of its members.
Top arrangers such as Gerry Mulligan and Bob Brookmeyer along with the best British writers have written scores exclusively for it.
We are delighted that the BBC Big Band has been able to come to the Festival as part of BBC's ‘Radio Goes To Town’— they will return briefly for a lunchtime programme with David Jacobs in the Ulster Hall on Wednesday!
(See p 41) Special guest will be Georgie Fame .
James
An Irish premiere:James plays Belfast as the penultimate date of a sell-out UK tour.
Established in 1981, this Manchester band supported ‘The Smiths’ in their 1984 tour.
Now ranked at the top of the Indie band scene, they have sold out in hours to 25,000 in their home town.
1991 has been their year, achieving mass recognition with the stunning ‘Gold Mother’ album and the Top-5 chart hit single ‘Sit Down’.
What better way to debut Belfast than at the Festival?
Presented in association with Wonderland Ltd 
‘Jibbing Finger’
The politics of disability explode onto the Festival scene as performers from London based Stream Records are joined by local artists in an evening of musical entertainment and protest.
Some of the musicians are people with disabilities, others are not; what they share is a collective outrage at the handicaps a lackadaisical world puts on disabled people through attitudes and actions.
Look out for some well-known local troubadours among the English faces on stage, as injustice is challenged through biting wit.
Presented in association with the Northern Ireland Council on Disability .
Proceeds in aid of the work of NICD.
Festival Ball
We apologise to all those fans of the Festival Ball who complained so bitterly last year that there wasn't one!
This year it is restored to its rightful place of honour and popularity in the Whitla Hall, and we have a special guest attraction.
Those of you old enough to remember the No 1 Chart Hit of 1968 ‘Israelites’ will need no introduction to Desmond Dekker .
His record sold five million worldwide and was followed with ‘It Mek’ in 1969 and ‘You Can Get It — If You Really Want’in 1970, heralding the breakthrough of Jamaican music on to the world scene.
Desmond Dekker is still playing to capacity crowds and you will recognise his unique sound on three national TV campaigns.
And it's irresistibly danceable!
Irresistible too is our other guest band this evening, the NIMA Festival All-Stars , a special combo selected for the occasion of some of the best, if not the best, musicians in the Province.
Sponsored by the Northern Ireland Musicians' Association .
The Hamburg Ballet
A Midsummer Night's Dream
‘John Neumeier and his Hamburg Ballet have produced a fascinating and beautiful work, strengthening the already strong impression that this is not only Germany's finest dance company, but one of the most interesting anywhere’.
(Herald Tribune)
To be the finest ballet in Germany means to be ahead of such great companies as Stuttgart and Berlin.
Hamburg now has one of the great ballet companies of the world, thanks to John Neumeier (Director since 1973) and the wonderful international team he has built up.
They are regularly invited abroad, but this will be their first ever visit to the UK, and they are coming exclusively to us.
The visit would not have been possible without their tremendous enthusiasm for our invitation, and we particularly thank John Neumeier for his determination to bring over one of his finest works.
Neumeier has gone right to the heart of Shakespeare's great work, and he has brilliantly chosen both the dance styles and the music to suit the three dramatic groupings of the play.
The aristocratic world of Duke Theseus and his court is represented by ballet in the grand manner, with the beautiful incidental music of Mendelssohn culminating in that famous Wedding March.
For the supernatural fairy world of Oberon, there is the mysterious and evocative music of Ligeti, with an extraordinary dance style to match.
For Bottom and his friends, called ‘mechanicals’, there is wonderfully apt mechanical music — played on a barrel organ on stage, and including such popular favourites as — no, it would be a pity to spoil the surprise!
A Midsummer Night's Dream is a magical play.
Neumeier's Hamburg Ballet version is totally magical as well.
It fascinates, enthralls, amazes, and delights.
You will laugh when it is funny.
And you may shed a tear or two — for the sheer joy of it all.
It will probably be among the most wonderful experiences you've had in any theatre.
Be there!
Including one interval, the performance lasts about 2¾ hours.
The visit of the Hamburg Ballet has been made possible by the generous support of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Supported by Visiting Arts   Ulster Youth Dance
The Rite of Spring
In 1990, under the artistic direction of the internationally renowned choreographer Royston Maldoom ,Ulster Youth Dance made its debut at the Belfast Festival at Queen's.
This exhilarating performance by the 86-strong company of ‘The Wheel of Fortune’ inspired by Carl Orff's ‘Carmina Burana’captivated the capacity audiences.
This year, ninety young dancers drawn from all over the Province, again under the direction of Maldoom, will create ‘The Rite of Spring’— based on one of the most powerful and exciting scores written for dance in the 20th century.
The violent rhythm of Stravinsky 's music together with the choreography by Nijinsky provoked a theatrical scandal at the premiere of ‘Rite of Spring’ in Paris in 1913.
Since then Stravinsky's work has been hailed as a masterpiece.
Maldoom's version was first performed at the Theater Manufaktur, Berlin in August 1989 and was acclaimed by the German critics as ‘one of the most significant to date’.
The young Ulster Youth Dance company has already shown that the dancers have the ability to match the dramatic intensity and sensitivity of this great work and to bring it triumphantly to life.
Ulster Youth Dance is organised by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland and sponsored by Marks and Spencer .
Saburo Teshigawara & Karas
Dah — Dah — Sko — Dah — Dah
Saburo Teshigawara and his company are young, vital, entirely modern and tremendously exciting.
They are hugely popular and admired in Japan, and they already have a spectacular international reputation.
They have been highly successful in the United States, and in many European countries.
They were one of the major successes in London's Dance Umbrella Festival of 1989.
Forget about kimonos, this is Tokyo of today.
Teshigawara's vision of that extraordinary city (much larger population than London, but in a much smaller space!) socks it to you with dynamic energy.
He has been known to use a rotary sander to put over his message, not to speak of dancing on broken glass — and no damage done!
You are unlikely to see sanders or broken glass in this entirely new work, currently in preparation in Tokyo.
But you can confidently expect something pretty extraordinary.
Last year, our own Festival Director talked with Teshigawara in Tokyo, after watching one of his rehearsals.
The result was that Teshigawara made Belfast the first priority of his UK tour for the Japan Festival — not an easy thing to do, given that the settings will take two whole days to set up, with a further day for transporting them from Britain.
The Stranmillis College Theatre is ideal for Teshigawara's work, given its big stage.
But please remember that there are only 300 seats — so book early!
Supported by The Saison Foundation, The Commemorative Association for the Japan World Exposition (1970), Tokyo Metropolitan Culture Foundation & The Japan Foundation .
The Old Museum presents All Ireland Festival of Theatre for Young People
Dynamic and accessible new writing from Belfast, Dublin and Cork.
Three of Ireland's foremost educational theatre companies present high quality theatre for audiences of all ages.
Replay Theatre Company presents
‘Permanent Deadweight’
by John P Rooney
Between 1848 and 1850 more than 4,000 female orphans were sent from Irish workhouses to Australia.
Their subsequent history as hired servants is one of exploitation and abuse.
This new play, directed by Brenda Winter , is set in the withdrawal unit of a Belfast school in 1991 and explores the lives of four contemporary school girls who realise the parallel between their lives and those of their counterparts 150 years earlier.
Replay Theatre Company, based at the Old Museum, are the North's award-winning Theatre in Education Company.
Team Educational Theatre Company presents ‘Sing Sam, Sing A Sam’
by John McArdle
The play is an exploration of the search for spiritual value in today's world.
It explores in a metaphorical way the ideas of performance, ritual, religion and the image-making machinations of the media.
Funny, tense and thought-provoking, the play is directed for Dublin-based TEAM by their Artistic Director Patrick Sutton , designed by Ben Hennessy with original music by John Dunne .
Graffiti Theatre Company presents ‘Infidel’
by Roger Gregg
Graffiti Theatre Company are based in Cork.
Their Artistic Director,Emelie Fitzgibbon , directs this specially-commissioned play which is set against the background of the Medieval Crusades.
‘Infidel’ explores the causes and consequences of war and violence, paralleling the historic clash of religious fundamentalisms with modern equivalents.
Cheek by Jowl present their 10th Anniversary production
‘As You Like It’
by William Shakespeare
‘Since being born in 1981,Cheek by Jowl has gained a reputation both in Britain and abroad for the extraordinary verve, versatility, devotion and inventiveness that characterises its style’.
(Drama Magazine )
‘One of the most exhilarating things to have happened in English Theatre’.
(The Observer )
Cheek by Jowl was founded in 1981 by Nick Ormerod and Declan Donnellan — a partnership which has recently been called ‘the most exciting in British theatre today’.
(The Independent )
In a remarkably short time, they have established an outstanding national and international reputation.
Donnellan won the Laurence Olivier Awards of 1987, for Best Director, and of 1990, for Most Outstanding Achievement.
He has recently been appointed Associate Director of the Royal National Theatre, while maintaining his work for Cheek by Jowl.
In their ten years, Cheek by Jowl have played in 260 towns spread across five continents.
They have been frequently invited to international festivals, but this will be the first time they have visited our own festival — we have been waiting patiently in a very long queue!
Cheek by Jowl's reputation is based on a series of fresh, revealing, highly intelligent and beautifully designed treatments of classic plays.
Notably the plays of Shakespeare.
Their ‘Midsummer Night's Dream’ was nominated for an Olivier Award.
Their ‘Twelfth Night’ won it outright.
It is, therefore, highly appropriate that they have chosen ‘As You Like It’for their tenth anniversary production.
As in ‘Twelfth Night’, there is a great deal of sexual ambiguity in ‘As You Like It’, and Cheek by Jowl have decided to produce the play with an all-male cast.
This is not, of course, the first time that the play has been performed in this way — in 1967, for instance , the National Theatre mounted a brilliant all-male ‘As You Like It’, with Ronald Pickup as Rosalind and Anthony Hopkins (!) as Audrey.
But, of course, all Shakespeare's plays were originally played by men and boys only.
Hence the ambiguity.
Like Viola in ‘Twelfth Night’, Rosalind was played by a boy, who was pretending to be a girl, who was disguised as a boy…
Shakespeare knew what he was doing when he called the play ‘As You Like It’.
The Elizabethans certainly did like it, and it has been a popular favourite ever since.
As we go to press, Cheek by Jowl's new production has not yet started rehearsals, so we can say no more than that the company tell us it will be in the ‘uproarious tradition’ of their previous Shakespeare comedies, and that's good news.
However, they warn that the production will not be suitable for young people under 16 .
‘If there is one company that can be said to have influenced British theatre in the eighties it is Cheek by Jowl…the effect of a Cheek by Jowl Shakespeare is to make you think about the play again.
You leave the theatre with lines ringing in your head that you had never noticed before’.
(The Independent )
Royal National Theatre
‘Blood Wedding’
by Federico Garcia Lorca
At last year's Festival, the Royal National Theatre came to the Stranmillis College Theatre with a classic Italian farce by Dario Fo, and they sold out completely well in advance.
This year, the National is bringing us an even more famous Spanish classic, and early booking is recommended.
Lorca's most famous play is Blood Wedding .
It was first performed in Spain in 1933, when Lorca was only 35, but already of international reputation.
It tells a dark and passionate story of love and hatred, as a young bride elopes with her lover on the morning of the day she was to be married to her childhood sweetheart.
The result is tragedy and death.
Lorca himself died violently in the terrible events of the opening of the Spanish Civil War in 1936.
This entirely new production, due to go on to the Royal National Theatre in London, remains true to the essence of Lorca's play, and as vibrant as the heat and colours of ‘the land of sun and shadow’.
It will make an apt partner for Scottish Opera's ‘Carmen’ in the following week.
The Royal National Theatre's tour is sponsored by British Petroleum .
We are grateful to BP in Northern Ireland for their generous extra funding for this visit to Belfast.
Sponsored by British Petroleum 
Lyric Theatre presents ‘Pygmies in the Ruins’
After last Festival's sold-out revival of Sam Thompson's ‘Over the Bridge’, this year the Lyric Theatre is presenting a major new play by Ulster writer Ron Hutchinson .
Set simultaneously in Belfast 1991 and Belfast 1871, ‘Pygmies in the Ruins’ confronts the nature of Ireland's near pygmy enthralment with its own past, through the experience of Harry Washburn, a police ‘scene-of-the-crime’photographer.
For Washburn 20 years of visual carnage has meant increasing mental instability and a compulsion to uncover the truth behind a murder that occurred 120 years before.
Now resident in California, Ron Hutchinson's stage plays include ‘Says I, Says He’, ‘The Curse of the Baskervilles’ and ‘Rat in the Skull’which won the John Whiting Award and was subsequently adapted for television.
He has written extensively for radio including ‘Motorcade’, ‘Risky City’ and ‘Troopers’.
Writing for television and film includes both series of ‘Birds of Prey’, ‘Connie’, ‘Dead Man Walking’, ‘The Josephine Baker Story’, the Emmy Award-winning ‘Murderers Among Us — The Wiesenthal Story’ and ‘Prisoners of Honour’, to be screened in the New Year.
Presented in association with Belfast 1991 and BBC Radio Drama .
Trestle Theatre Company present ‘Crime of Love’
‘She was a screen idol who fell in love, a goddess who sinned, a mother who wouldn't let go.
She couldn't escape the Crime of Love’.
When Trestle came to the Festival for the first time in 1986, they were just beginning to make their name, and were virtually unknown in Belfast.
Yet they became an instant success, and their following visits established them as among the very top Festival favourites of the 1980s.
For those who have not yet seen them, let it be said that Trestle work always in masks.
You might think that this would be a barrier to the audience — very far from it, for you could swear those masks were moving faces!
Whether touching or serious, or hilariously funny, Trestle always enthral their audiences.
‘Crime of Love’is Trestle's latest production, so new that it has not yet started rehearsals as we go to press.
But they tell us that it will be set in the world of cinema, and will plunder a rich vein of cinematic style to tell the story of a disgraced film star with a secret, a dilemma, and a host of bad memories.
The play is set in the mid-1950s, and it explores the themes of lust, jealousy and guilt in the melodramatic style of that period.
It certainly sounds like that when you look at the quote we've put above, which is just like the blurb of a 1950s movie poster.
It also sounds a bit like the late Joan Crawford — but that's just a guess!
As well as all this, there will be appropriate references to the style of the silent cinema.
‘In essence’, say Trestle, ‘it's a tragedy, but the story is told with all the wit, humour and theatrical panache that Trestle has produced before’.
That's all they'll say.
But it certainly sounds terrific!
‘The Dock Ward Story’
This exciting new play traces the history of the Dock Ward area of Belfast, from its origins to the present day, in an evening of song, dance, music and drama.
The brainchild of two local men —Patrick McCoey and Mickey Kelly — the scale of the project has far exceeded their expectations.
Everyone wanted to be involved!
A group of local writers, historians, and story-tellers, including ‘Sailortown's’Denis Smyth , guided by a team of theatre professionals, combine to celebrate the lives of those who lived, and still live, in Dock Ward.
A cast of eighty, a choir of two hundred, specially composed music for chamber orchestra and bodhran chorus — just some of the elements in this huge and vital undertaking.
It celebrates the past, it challenges the future and expresses in one voice the community's belief in itself.
‘The people had a voice.
The people lost their voice.
The people are finding their voice’.
Roy Hutchins in ‘Whale Nation’ and ‘Falling For A Dolphin’
‘Whale Nation’is a solo performance of Heathcote Williams' epic poem, a spell-binding tribute to the planet's largest, oldest mammal and a lament for its massacre to produce oilskins, fuel and lipstick.
In a production shorn of every theatrical device except voice and body, the audience is invited to enter the wild world of the whale, full of grace, fun and beauty.
‘From space, the planet is blue.
From space, the planet is the territory
Not of humans, but of the whale’.
‘Falling for a Dolphin’is an ode to one of the earth's most magical and intriguing creatures and describes the extraordinary encounter between a man and a dolphin off the West coast of Ireland.
The experience leads to a change, in the same way one is changed by falling in love.
Roy Hutchins ' thrilling new one-man show portrays the enchanting world evoked by the poem; it captures the beauty and character of the dolphin in a production which is moving, humorous and challenging.
This award-winning double-bill has had sell-out tours across Europe, Australia and New Zealand.
‘Whale Nation’ has been produced for television and radio, and received the Royal Television Society Award for Best Arts Programme and a Perrier Award at the Edinburgh Festival, where ‘Falling for a Dolphin’won a Fringe First.
‘If you could see just one show at the (Edinburgh) Festival, it would have to be this one’.
(The Guardian )
See also Workshops on page 40)Red Shift Theatre Company presents
‘The Hammer’
‘The Hammer’is a macabre and comic tale of greed, power and lust where the audience witnesses a concentration of all the most fundamental ingredients of theatre moving from grand opera, to intimate drama, to cinematic storytelling.
Criss-crossing Europe and switching between time periods spanning 500 years, this new production by Red Shift is an action-packed thriller which follows three reluctant detectives — a clerk to Henry VIII, a Jacobean architect and a modern interior designer.
Linking them together is one common elected purpose — the alluring and sometimes desperate hunt for a hidden hoard of holy relics.
Their stories appear to rupture time, bringing them within a hair's breadth of one another.
Haunted by visions of death, each finds purpose, desire and a horrible end within sight of the treasure.
Famous for touring exciting work by some of the country's leading young writers and translators, Red Shift returns to its equally successful territory of in-house production.
Jonathan Holloway (writer and director) and Adrian Johnston (composer) have created memorable work with their award-winning adaptations (three Edinburgh Fringe Firsts and a Charrington London Fringe Award) of Webster, Shakespeare, Dostoyevsky and 50s American Sci-Fi.
The production team is further boosted by the recruitment of award-winning Iona McLeish who will be working with resident-designer Charlotte Humpston , who recently received the ‘Time Out London Theatre Award’ for ‘Heresies’at the RSC.
This eagerly awaited in-house project promises similar acclaim to that which has greeted previous productions including ‘The Duchess of Malfi’—(1981 —‘99.9% pure theatrical magic’Time Out ), ‘The Double’(1986 Time Out Critics' Choice) and ‘Timon of Athens’(1989 —‘One of the most beautiful shows I have seen’, Germaine Greer,The Late Show BBC2).
Other recent Red Shift productions include ‘Frida and Diego — A Love Story’(1989 — Fringe First Winner, ‘Theatre as intended, dangerous, exhilarating and irresistible’,The Guardian ), and ‘The Life and Times of Fanny Hill’(1991 —‘spits fire and humour and creates imaginative theatre…’
The Guardian ).
The RSC/BT Tour Royal Shakespeare Company 
‘Measure for Measure’
by William Shakespeare
‘The Blue Angel’
It is always a great pleasure to welcome the RSC to the Festival, and this year they are offering two very special productions.
Trevor Nunn is directing both productions.
He is among the best directors in the world and among the most in demand.
This will be the first time that his work has come to Belfast and the two works he has chosen will show two of his greatest strengths — Shakespeare and the musical.
Trevor Nunn was appointed Artistic Director of the RSC — their youngest ever — in 1968, and has had many brilliant successes with Shakespeare at Stratford, the Barbican and abroad.
As for the musical — well, it was Nunn who directed the original London and Broadway productions of ‘Cats’, ‘Chess’, and ‘Starlight Express’, and, among others, ‘Porgy and Bess’ at Glyndebourne, and ‘Les Miserables’for the RSC — now the most performed musical in the world, and winner of no less than eight Tony awards on Broadway!
‘Measure for Measure’was written when Shakespeare was about 40, and already famous and prosperous.
It was performed before King James and his court at Whitehall Palace in December 1604, a month after ‘Othello’ had been similarly honoured.
These two plays have some things in common, not least the destructive power of sexual passion.
And each play has a plausible villain, making it tempting to think that Iago and Angelo were both played by the same actor.
But unlike ‘Othello’, ‘Measure for Measure’ ends happily — or does it?
It is an ambiguous play, but a fascinating one, and is probably best described as a black comedy.
‘The Blue Angel’will make an extremely apt partner for ‘Measure for Measure’— as no doubt Trevor Nunn intended.
It is a musical play, and has been adapted from the satirical novel of 1905 by Heinrich Mann — brother of Thomas Mann, and as fine a writer.
The plot concerns a highly respectable German schoolmaster, Professor Raat, who visits a nightclub (The Blue Angel) with the idea of catching out one of his morally wayward students.
But when he finds there the charming young cabaret singer, Lola, he decides that it is his moral duty to save her…by marriage!
Of course, this same story was adapted to make one of the most famous of all films, Josef von Sternberg's ‘The Blue Angel’, made in 1930.
Marlene Dietrich played Lola, and the film made her an overnight international star (please note that this film will be shown at QFT — see page 33).
However, in this new musical play by Pam Gems (among her previous RSC successes was ‘Piaf’) more of the original novel is included than was possible in the film, and Trevor Nunn's production will be full of famous songs of the period.
‘The Blue Angel’ is, of course, set in Germany, while Shakespeare, rather surprisingly, made Vienna the scene of ‘Measure for Measure’.
We can guess that Trevor Nunn will take creative advantage of that connection, which is extremely apt, by coincidence, for the German theme in this year's Festival.
Maria Bjornson 's settings for both productions are striking and highly dramatic, enabling the action to be played at more than one level, based on a raked stage.
The stage itself will be higher than last year, and so too will the lighting gantry.
It promises the best RSC layout yet for the Whitla Hall.
The RSC's Regional Tour 1991 is sponsored by BT.
We are grateful to BT Northern Ireland for their generous extra funding for the RSC's visit to Belfast.
‘Skylark’
When you're alone in the city the night can be endless.
There's a moment when you decide to find someone.
No matter what.
‘Skylark’is a dark and dangerous love story, where the most dangerous place in the world is between a man and a woman.
Juxtaposing action on stage with projected 16mm celluloid fantasies, a smart, imaginative new theatre emerges.
On stage a man and a woman try not to fall in love.
On film everything is possible.
‘Griffin is the most alive, funny and sexual presence this reviewer has seen’.
(LA Weekly )
‘Dark and enigmatic to the last, a skilfully paced, mesmeric performance’.
(The Independent )
‘A work of pure joy…technically splendid…tender and absorbing’.
(The Scotsman )
(See also Workshops on page 40)
The Third Stage Company (Daisan Butai))presents ‘The Angels with Closed Eyes’
Daisan Butai are based in Tokyo.
They are the darlings of young theatregoers in Japan, and their tickets always sell out completely within hours of going on sale!
Their new play begins on a sandy beach with ten happy people who have all escaped from their commitments.
One of them has escaped from a particularly unusual commitment — he was once an angel, but has chosen to become a human being, for the love of humanity.
He, and all the others, want to build a society free from oppression.
But they come to realise that they are imprisoned by a transparent but impenetrable wall, which can never be crossed.
They are living in a concentration camp, called ‘reality’.
The action then moves far into the future.
This extraordinary story was inspired by the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the disillusion which followed.
The angel visiting Earth comes from the German film ‘Der Himmel über Berlin’ by Wim Wenders.
From this it will be gathered that Daisan Butai's play is very much of the present day and the world we live in.
Supported by the Saison Foundation, the Commemorative Association for the Japan World Exposition (1970), Tokyo Metropolitan Culture Foundation and The Japan Foundation.
Charabanc Theatre Company 
‘Bondagers’
Richly atmospheric,‘Bondagers’is set against the sprawling landscape of the 1860s borders farms.
It combines original music and dance in a spirited evocation of the women bondagers.
The play is inspired by the stories of the women bondagers who worked vast agricultural lands in East Lothian and the borders areas of Scotland.
A bondager was hired annually by a male farm worker or ‘hind’ who had to provide a woman to work with him before he in turn was hired by the farmer.
Bondagers were paid half a man's rate for the same work.
Stunningly visual and full of rich language,Sue Glover 's funny and moving new play follows six women as they laugh and work, flirt and fight their way through a long hard year on the farm.
However, when the hinds and farmers begin to demand reform of the bondager system, the impermanence and insecurity of the bondagers' lives is brought into sharp focus.
Winner of the 1990 LWT Plays on Stage Award.
The cast includes Elanor Methven, Carol Scanlan, Paula McFetridge, Lynne Cahill and Michèle Forbes .
The Bridge Theatre presents Donna Dougal in ‘Baglady’
Frank McGuinness is one of the most powerful dramatists of our day.
Sometimes he writes about his native Ireland, sometimes he doesn't — but that is not the point.
What distinguishes his plays is the total commitment to human beings, and it is the tragic destiny of so many of them which brings out his finest writing.
This was clear in ‘Observe the Sons of Ulster Marching Towards the Somme’, which was so memorable a success at our 1985 Festival.
It is just as clear in Baglady .
‘Baglady’ is a tragedy of immense power.
It is a play for only one performer, and it lasts for less than an hour.
But don't think of it as a miniature.
In fifty minutes or so, you will have an extraordinary experience: you will know nothing of the baglady to begin with, but you will know everything you need to know by the end.
And you're unlikely to forget what you have learned, as you ponder the wreckage of a life, and the remnants of a soul.
‘Baglady’ has been acclaimed wherever it has been performed.
Reviewers have used such phrases as: ‘An extraordinary, unnerving and unforgettable performance’.
‘It is such a short piece with an immense emotional impact.
It has already firmly lodged itself, like some haunting vision, in my mind’‘…a riveting piece of drama’.
It won a Fringe First at Edinburgh in 1989.
We are extremely pleased that it is coming to our own Festival, as part of its Irish tour.
Please note that we have arranged a special performance on Saturday at 5.00 pm — to help our patrons who wish to come on after a matinee, and/or go on to another evening performance.
Out and Out Theatre presents ‘…
Out of Mind’
This highly acclaimed production, set in the basement of the Old Museum, explores the hostage situation in the Lebanon.
One of the resident theatre companies at the Old Museum,Out and Out , devised the show using extensive research on the situation of hostages and former hostages, including John McCarthy and Brian Keenan.
Written and directed by Steven Stagg , this is intense, moving and inspiring theatre accompanied by an exhibition of relevant work by the Company Artist, Paul McCullough.
‘The words are simple, the acting brutal, bruising, physical, the direction tense’.
(The Guardian )
‘Out and Out Theatre…one of Northern Ireland's newest and most innovative theatre companies has captured the heart and the horror of captivity’.
(Belfast Telegraph)
Dillie Keane in her entirely new show ‘Citizen Keane’
Last year, Dillie created a one-woman show called ‘Single Again’.
She did a total of twelve weeks in London, and was sold out at all performances.
She followed with three weeks on the Edinburgh Fringe, got a Perrier Award nomination, and sold out again.
At our own Festival she sold out a month before the performance.
Now Dillie has got a whole new show to delight you.
Songs and sketches find her playing anything from a charity ball organiser to a TV agony aunt (Irish, like Dillie herself).
Good Queen Bess does a rhythm and blues number, and there's an hilarious send-up of a soft porn movie (Swedish).
In short, Dillie is witty, versatile, highly entertaining and very funny.
Do remember to book early!
‘Dillie Keane is in cracking good form in her new show.’
(The Stage )
‘…a cross between Victoria Wood and Joyce Grenfell, but ruder.’
(The Independent )
Wednesday evening sponsored by Bank of Ireland Friday evening sponsored by Textflow Services Ltd .
Hole in the Wall Theatre Company
‘Perforated Ulster’
A brand new show for Festival's late nighters where news is discarded, views are dismembered, plots are thickened, and the issues are clouded.
No political stone is left unturned as the Hole in the Wall Theatre Company dismantle history, reorganise current events, and provide an alternative version of Northern Ireland and the rest of the world.
As they take a mad look at the madness, a curious sanity emerges through the laughter.
The company consists of a home brewed pack of writer/performers, and their unique blend of poignant humour with mad zane.
Currently bending the air waves on Radio Ulster, and regulars on BBC's ‘Talk Back’ programme, they've gigged the North and brought houses down at the Edinburgh Fringe.
Their recent blockbusting Belfast 1991 production at the Group Theatre left everyone clamouring for more.
This is that.
The Hole in the Wall Theatre Company is Tim McGarry, Damon Quinn, Michael McDowell, Nuala McKeever and Martin Reid .
Perforated Ulster is being recorded for transmission by the BBC, BBC production and direction by Joan Boyd, Colin Lewis and Charlie Warmington .
What the papers have said about the Hole in the Wall Theatre Company:
‘witty and subversive’(The Times )
‘The funniest nights Belfast has ever seen.’
(Sunday News )
‘A mixture of Monty Python, The Young Ones, and James Young.’
(Irish News )
Kit and The Widow
Kit and the Widow are two men who are both extremely witty comedians and also very talented musicians.
They come from what is certainly one of the very best comedy nurseries in the entire UK — the Cambridge Footlights — and they have followed, with enormous success, the generations of Peter Cook and Jonathan Miller, John Cleese, Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie.
Already, they have appeared with great acclaim for five years in succession on the Fringe of the Edinburgh Festival — so successfully, that they were finally invited to the ‘official’ Edinburgh International Festival — the first cabaret artists since Marlene Dietrich to be so invited!
That was in 1988.
They have played the London Palladium and the Victoria Palace.
Since then they have made themselves widely known from radio and television.
But most important of all, they have just completed an astonishingly successful West End season in London.
Here are just a few examples of the rave reviews they got this year:
‘When they are good they are very, very good and when they are horrid they are even better.’
(Daily Mail )
‘Trade in the Miss Saigon tickets and see this five times instead.’
(City Limits )
‘This is one show I did enjoy immensely…together they make a sophisticated irresistible team.’
(Evening Standard )
‘Devastatingly funny.’
(The Times )
‘I laughed immoderately.’
(Financial Times )
Wednesday evening sponsored by W & G Baird Ltd 
Ennio Marchetto
Ennio Marchetto exploded on to the international comedy circuit in 1990 and was hailed as the cult hit of the Edinburgh Festival, since when he has delighted theatre audiences worldwide with his unique and highly-developed show featuring a multitude of paper showbusiness characters.
Six foot two and built to match, the 30 year old Venetian produces a preposterous parade of impersonations.
With a dazzling array of cardboard cut-out costumes, mime and fantastic physical mimicry, he immortalises the likes of the Mona Lisa, Elvis Presley, Madonna, Pavarotti, Tina Turner, Marilyn Monroe and the Queen.
All at a frenetic canter.
Origami will never be the same again!
‘Marchetto's show thrives on wit and surprise’(Sunday Times )
‘Ennio Marchetto, impersonator extraordinary’(Independent on Sunday )
John Hegley
John Hegley 's outstanding versatility as an all-round comic entertainer encompasses his incomparable performances of his own poetry, his inspired antics as one half of ‘The Brown Paper Bag Brothers’, and his role as singer and musician with the cabaret music outfit ‘The Popticians’.
His high profile as a comedian, poet, singer and musician has a lot to do with the regular weekly poem he writes for the Weekend Guardian , recent appearances on radio in ‘Kaleidoscope’ and ‘Loose Ends’and the ‘Time Out’Cabaret Award, but it is in his live stage act that he can best be appreciated as an hilarious dead-pan comic.
The pop Poet Laureate of the cabaret circuit, Hegley chooses subjects from McDonalds to the Gulf War, from spaniels to spectacles — taking on a whole range of everyday tragedies —‘the other day I met a bloke lying on the pavement he'd just had a stroke and I thought a man in his position might appreciate a joke so I said stand back please I'm a comedian’
‘One of the most polished acts currently on the cabaret circuit’(Observer )
‘It's honest and it's very, very funny’(City Limits )
‘I actually laughed out loud’(John Peel,Radio 1 )
Sean Hughes
At 24 Sean Hughes was the youngest ever comic to win a Perrier Award.
His show ‘A One Night Stand with Sean Hughes’ transferred for a sell-out run at the Palace Theatre and then went on to play to capacity crowds at the Duke of York's Theatre in the West End.
Now, after a sell-out UK tour, appearances in the Melbourne and Montreal Comedy Festivals, a US tour and television on ‘Friday Night Live’, ‘Jonathan Ross’ and ‘Paramount City’, he's 25.
And very welcome back in Belfast.
His busy year has included a film (Alan Parker's ‘Commitments’) and he is due to make a TV series in the autumn.
Sean Hughes' new show combines theatre with the best of stand-up comedy; his comedy is thoughtful, droll and impeccably observed.
‘Massively talented…screamingly funny’(The Independent )
‘Hilarious’(Melbourne Times )
The Blues Band
Paul Jones, Dave Kelly, Tom McGuinness, Gary Fletcher and Rob Townsend —The Blues Band — have an impressive track record as members of Britain's premier hard-rocking R&B band.
Since their formation in the late 70s, the band has earned a formidable reputation as the last of a dying breed of roadhouse rock, blues and R&B artists whose poignant simplicity and passion for the music have, with each gig, generated a euphoric and dedicated following.
Between 1980 and their split they notched up five albums and their entire back-catalogue has been re-promoted and released on CD for the first time.
By public demand their split became merely a brief sabbatical, and since being reunited the Blues Band have been playing their cocktail of traditional blues and original material around the globe.
Their enthusiasm remains as infectious in the 90s as it was over a decade ago and we proudly welcome them to the Guinness Spot for their first and keenly anticipated visit to Belfast.
Anthony Kerr Quartet featuring Stan Sulzmann
Dermod Harland Quintet
Tonight we pay tribute in the Guinness Spot to the wealth of jazz talent emanating from Northern Ireland in a reunion between two old friends who performed their first professional engagement together.
Anthony Kerr , now based in London, returns with four of Europe's top modern jazz musicians performing compositions by Anthony Kerr and Stan Sulzmann, in addition to interpretations of the standard jazz repertoire.
Anthony Kerr (vibraphone) has worked in Europe with Louis Stewart, Georgie Fame and Kenny Wheeler;Stan Sulzmann (tenor sax) is a featured soloist in Kenny Wheeler's latest big band and known for his work with Clark Terry, John Taylor, Phil Woods and Gil Evans;Wayne Bachelor (bass) leads his own quartet and has worked abroad with Courtney Pine, Steve Williamson and Jean Toussaint;Stephen Keogh (drums), now resident in Barcelona, is best known for his work with Louis Stewart, Hal Galper, Charles McPherson and Peter King.
Dermod Harland (tenor sax) was former lead tenor with the Irish Youth Jazz Orchestra (of which Anthony Kerr was also a member) and his Quartet have supported Scott Hamilton in the Guinness Spot, where Dermod was invited to guest with Humphrey Lyttelton in 1987.
The Quintet, formed in 1990, plays the music of a range of composers including Thelonius Monk, Dizzy Gillespie and Kurt Weill, and is made up of:Linley Hamilton (trumpet/flugelhorn),Nick Scott (bass),Brian Rice (drums) and Foggy Little (guitar).
Terry Lightfoot and His Band
The Terry Lightfoot Band is one of the elite group of jazz bands from the ‘trad revival’ of the 1950s and 1960s that is still as popular as ever.
Led by one of the finest clarinet players of that era, the band now has a broad repertoire, ranging from the traditional New Orleans and Dixieland styles of small band jazz to the music of the swing era of the 1940s when swing, boogie and jive were kings.
Tonight's programme features music from all these styles.
The Terry Lightfoot Band is:Terry Lightfoot (clarinet and alto sax),Ian Hunter Randall (trumpet),Phil Rhodes (trombone),Barney Bates (piano),Pete Skivington (bass), and Johnny Armatage (drums).
Bobby Watson/Victor Lewis & Horizon
Very few alto players have produced as dazzling a body of work and gained as much respect from their peers as Bobby Watson .
Musical director of Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers from 1978 to 1981, where he joined a select musical fraternity in the band's history that included Horace Silver, Benny Golson and Wayne Shorter, he was joined in the front line by Wynton Marsalis, whose brother Branford took over the saxophone chair after Watson left to concentrate on ‘Horizon’ and other projects.
He balanced this hard bop experience by joining the 29th Street Saxophone Quartet and refined his ensemble playing skills performing more traditional jazz with Panama Francis and the Savoy Sultans.
When asked why he chose ‘Horizon’ as the name for the ensemble he formed in 1980, Bobby Watson answered: ‘Because I define the word as ‘a vision that's both moving forward and forward looking’— that's what my concept of the band is’.
Victor Lewis, co-leader of the ensemble, is one of the finest current jazz drummers and came to international attention through his long association with Stan Gertz, whose preferred accompanist he always was.
This outstanding all-American band consists of:Bobby Watson (alto sax),Terell Stafford (trumpet),Edward Simon (piano, synthesiser),Essiet Essiet (bass),Victor Lewis (drums).
Bill Frisell Band
Bill Frisell 's earliest influences were Jim Hall, Wes Montgomery and Jimi Hendrix, and in his own playing he combines the various aspects of their styles to form an amalgam of jazz finesse, rock explosiveness and avant-garde experimentation.
Before becoming a guitarist he played clarinet and uses advanced technology to approximate the breathy sound of a wind instrument.
He then became the resident guitarist at ECM and therefore has played guitar for everyone in the modern movement: for example, Paul Bley, Mike Gibbs, Eberhard Weber, Paul Motian and Jan Gabarek.
As Nick Coleman (Time Out ) wrote of a recent gig at the Town and Country: ‘Unmissable really’.
This second all-American band in our programme consists of Bill Frisell (guitar),Wayne Horowitz (keyboards, bass) and Joey Barron (drums).
Barbara Dennerlein
Brilliant young Austrian organist Barbara Dennerlein received consistently enthusiastic reviews for the release of her album ‘Straightahead’ in 1990, with a win in the Downbeat poll under the category of ‘talent deserving wider recognition’.
Her follow-up ‘Hot Stuff’, one of last year's best-selling CD albums, is a giant step forward, with a mixture of Latin rock and jazz with many different colours (and featuring saxophonist Andy Sheppard).
The ongoing obsession with synths and samplers has almost obscured the once major role the Hammond organ played in popularising both jazz and soul.
Organ jazz has for a long time been club-trendy but it has taken until now for a new artist to come through to match the likes of Jimmy Smith and ‘Big’ John Patton with whom she shares a clear affinity in her choice of rhythms and blues inflections.
Now she's here, and it's Barbara Dennerlein.
With Christopher Widmoser (guitar) and Mark Mondesir (drums).
Peanuts Hucko and the Anglo American All Stars
Festival is delighted to welcome to the Guinness Spot that legendary clarinettist Peanuts Hucko , whose career reads like a who's who of jazz luminaries.
He joined Glenn Miller's Army Air Force Band and from the mid-40s played with Benny Goodman, Eddie Condon, Jack Teagarden and Earl Hines.
He played with Louis Armstrong's All Stars at the end of the 50s and led his own band at Eddie Condon's in New York in the mid-60s.
He settled in Denver where he worked with Yank Lawson and Bob Haggart in a group that later became known as the World's Greatest Jazz Band.
Former vocalist with the Goodman Band,Louise Tobin (now Mrs Hucko) joins a splendid line-up of four American and four British musicians of outstanding quality in straight-ahead jazz.
Peanuts Hucko (clarinet),Glenn Zottola (trumpet),Roy Williams (trombone),Danny Moss (tenor sax),Mark Shane (piano),James Cirillo (guitar),Len Skeat (bass),Mark Maniatt (drums),Louise Tobin (vocals).
Sheila Jordan
Claudio Roditi
The Bill Mays Trio
Tonight and for the following two nights we are privileged to welcome a quintet of American musicians specially brought together for the Guinness Spot in association with Frank Tate.
Sheila Jordan is one of the finest singers in jazz history: Charlie Parker once referred to her ‘million dollar ears’.
Her career began in Detroit where she sat in with Charlie Parker and Dizzie Gillespie and on moving to New York she became the most important vocal interpreter of Parker's music.
In 1952 she married Duke Jordan, later studied jazz theory with Lennie Tristano and in 1962 produced Blue Note's ‘Portrait of Sheila’, one of the definitive albums of the company's catalogue.
She has since toured extensively in the USA and parts of Europe, but has made very few appearances in these islands.
Audiences have therefore been deprived of a singer as much at home with ballads as up-tempo bop and whose singing, in the words of George Russell, ‘made my skin crawl’.
Claudio Roditi who hails from Rio de Janeiro but is now based in New York, is a trumpet and flugelhorn player who first came to international attention with his appearance on Charlie Rouse's ‘Cinnamon Flower’.
A player who weaves together the music of his Brazilian roots with influences as diverse as those of Harry ‘Sweets’ Edison and Miles Davis, he has now produced three albums of his own and established a distinctive voice in the straight-ahead idiom.
Bill Mays was born and raised in California but has been resident in New York since the mid-1980s.
He has accompanied some of the greatest names in jazz: Sarah Vaughan, Frank Sinatra, Mel Torme, James Moody, Sonny Stitt, Art Pepper, Phil Woods…and the list goes on and on through more than thirty albums.
Dennis Mackerel is one of the finest young drummers in the New York scene.
Formerly Count Basie's drummer in his last great orchestra, he recently took over the drum chair at the Village Vanguard for the famous Monday night sessions featuring the Mel Lewis Big Band.
Frank Tate will be well known to you all, not only as a fine bass player, but as the architect of many special groups that have appeared in the Guinness Spot.
For his work with a host of musicians from Marian McPartland to Ruby Braff he has received many accolades, but one that we know he likes was made in the London Spectator recently: ‘Tate turned out to be that rarity of rarities, a bass player whose contributions actually made musical sense.
I thought he was excellent.’
Teddy Edwards
Charles McPherson
The Bill Mays Trio
For tonight and tomorrow night we bring together with New York's Bill Mays Trio two superb American horn players.
Teddy Edwards,is one of the legendary figures in jazz saxophone.
He began as an alto player in the 1930s playing with such musicians as Teddy Buckner and Jimmy Lunceford, before taking up the tenor saxophone at the request of Howard McGhee in the mid-1940s.
In 1945 he made his famous recording ‘Up in Dodo's Room’ with McGhee's group which, in the judgement of Fats Navarro was the first recorded tenor solo in the bebop idiom.
Since then he has toured and recorded extensively, and is known for the strong blues influence in his ballad and up tempo playing.
Charles McPherson is also an alto and tenor saxophonist, but first attracted international attention for his work with Charlie Mingus from 1960 to 1974.
Since then he has toured and recorded extensively and in the 1980s began to experiment with collective improvisation, the results of which can be heard on his album ‘The Prophet’.
Many of you will remember his outstanding gig at the Guinness Spot in 1989.
The Henry McCullough Band
We bring the Guinness Spot to a close with a local musician who has had a long and distinguished career in the country and blues divisions of rock.
Henry McCullough , having had a grounding in Irish showbands in the early 60s, subsequently joined — can you believe!—‘Eire Apparent’ in 1964 and toured extensively with them.
Since then he has played with a succession of famous names in rock history, including Joe Cocker, Tim Hinkley, Frankie Miller, Roy Harper, Paul McCartney, Ronnie Lane etc.
A fine guitarist in many styles, his band combines professionalism with wry humour and a straightforward honesty of purpose (so often lacking in music of this kind).
‘Good time rock with a smile’ is how we would describe it.
Tonight his band consists of James Delany (piano),Liam Bradley (drums),Percy Robinson (pedal steel) and Ro Butcher (bass).
Puck Fair
with special guest Jimmy Faulkner Maighread Ní Dhomhnaill
An exceptional evening of music and song opens the 1991 Harp Folk Club Season.
Puck Fair is a trio of accomplished Irish musical emigrants who came together in the United States to perform music which has been described as a unique fusion between the spontaneity of jazz and the driving rhythms of traditional Irish jigs, reels and hornpipes.
Dublin-born master flautist Brian Dunning and ex-Stockton's Wing bodhran virtuoso Tommy Hayes were soon joined in Portland, Oregon, by Bothy Band founder Micheál O Dhomhnaill , and immediately the stage was set for a musical collaboration which has taken the band all over the world.
On this, their second Irish tour, they are joined by ex-Hotfoot guitar wizard Jimmy Faulkner .
When brother Michéal and sister Triona left Skara Brae back in 1970 to form the Bothy Band,Maighread Ní Dhomhnaill decided to stay in her day job, get married and bring up a family.
Singing was her first love, though, and she returned to the Gael-Linn studio earlier this year to record a new album of songs in Irish and English — with the help of a host of fine musicians including brother Michéal and producer Donal Lunny.
It's a delight to welcome Maighread back to Belfast to herald the release of that album.
Kieran Goss and Frances Black
Kieran Goss from Mayobridge in County Down ranks, without doubt, as one of the best contemporary songwriters in Ireland.
Frances Black , based in Dublin, is one of the country's finest singers — what better combination of talent to provide a perfect evening of song?
Kieran needs little introduction — a law graduate of this very university, he has chosen, instead of wig and gown, the open road and the guitar case, happily with tremendous success.
His debut album ‘Brand New Star’ was released recently on CD in Japan, he tours extensively here, across the water and into Europe and he travels to the Far East for the first time in December.
Frances Black, another great singer from that celebrated family, is now firmly established in her own right as a performer of considerable presence and talent.
As well as two albums with the Black Family, she also forms part of the Dublin-based a cappella band Fallen Angels, and is now in great demand following the success of the debut album from Arcady, ‘After the Ball’.
This superb musical partnership, which began less than a year ago, is now firmly established — indeed Kieran and Frances have just completed their first album which is due for release in the New Year.
BBC Radio Scotland and Radio Ulster present a live joint edition of ‘Travelling Folk’ and ‘Folk Club’
with Archie Fisher and Phil Campbell and a host of guest musicians and singers from the Festival.
‘Love is Teasin' and Love is Pleasin'’
compiled and presented by Jane Cassidy and Maurice Leyden
A warm welcome back after two years to Jane and Maurice with another evening of music, song, verse and folklore.
As well as their universally recognised ability as performers, this Belfast couple have together written a number of most entertaining shows, two of which, ‘In Praise of Ulster’ and ‘Belfast Town’were first presented here in the Harp Folk Club.
Helping Jane and Maurice to follow the course of true love (along paths smooth and not so smooth)— will be three of the Province's leading musicians —Rod McVey (keyboards),Nollaig Casey (fiddle), and Neil Martin (uilleann pipes and cello).
Melanie Harrold & Olly Blanchflower
Niamh Parsons & Loose Connections
Breaking off from a hectic touring schedule in Scotland, Melanie and Olly slip across to Ireland to play one date here at Festival.
Although they have worked as a duo since 1987 and have built up a great following throughout these islands and abroad, their respective musical experiences go back much further.
Melanie emerged on the professional scene as Joanna Carlin and had two solo LPs to her credit before joining the Hank Wangford band in 1980.
Four years and a name change later she once again took to the road as a solo performer.
Olly's background, first on the electric instrument and subsequently on the double bass, took him around the jazz and blues clubs of the London circuit for over ten years before he teamed up with Melanie.
Their first cassette, ‘Live in the City’, was released on CD a few months ago.
Another excellent bass player will be on stage tonight as Niamh Parsons teams up with husband Dee Moore and a five-piece band —‘Loose Connections’.
Niamh's beautiful clear voice was first heard here in the Harp Folk Club last year in ‘Turn Down The Lamp’.
Since then her work with the band has taken her on a Scottish tour which included the Edinburgh Folk Festival, and she also performs with the four other ladies who make up Belfast's first close-harmony vocal group ‘Cuigear Ban’.
In between all this activity, she took time off to have her first baby in July, and to record her first CD, which will be launched here tonight.
Warmest congratulations, Niamh!
Steve Tilston and Maggie Boyle with special guest Nomos
It's unusual for Festival to extend an invitation to an artist to return for a second consecutive year but that is what's to happen tonight and we make no apology for it.
Liverpool-born Steve Tilston is a musician ‘par excellence’, playing guitar and arpeggione (that's a 19th century bowed guitar which he has single-handedly revived!).
Often described as a ‘songwriter's songwriter’, all six of his solo albums have received critical acclaim at home and abroad.
His partner Maggie Boyle is an Irish traditional singer and flute-player.
Taught by her father (a native of the Donegal Gaeltacht) and guided by Monaghan singer Oliver Mulligan, she became a doyenne of the London Irish music scene.
She is just back from the States where she was on-stage singer with the Cincinnati Ballet's production of the folk ballet ‘Sergeant Early's Dream’, with musical partners The Chieftains.
Steve and Maggie have toured extensively and together present a unique blend of traditional and Tilston material.
Maggie makes her first visit to Belfast — greatly excited by reports of the warm welcome which Steve received here last November.
‘Steve, in case events have conspired to conceal the fact from you thus far, is that very rare combination of singer, songwriter and guitarist who actually excels in all departments.’
(Folk Roots )
Just a few hours before this programme went to press we spotted a tremendously exciting traditional band at the Lorient Interceltic Festival in Brittany and invited them to join us tonight.
Nomos (Greek for melody, they tell us!) are four musicians from various parts of this island who find themselves living and playing in Cork.
On concertina is Niall Vallely of the well-respected Co.
Armagh musical family;Gerry McKee hails from Antrim but has spent what seems like a lifetime playing his mandocello in Clare;Liz Doherty from Buncrana is on fiddle, and bringing up the rear is Wexford bodhran beater Frank Torpey .
Traditional music at its very best!
Festival Ceilidh with The Panama Band and exhibition dancing from The Belfast Set Dancers
The return of the ceilidh to Festival — in grand style.
Although based in Edinburgh, not one of the quartet is actually Scottish, but all have been playing dance music in that city for many years.
Appropriately enough, it falls to an Ulsterman,Ian Hewitt from Donaghadee, to call the dances, and play drums and assorted percussion.
Harry Kogon is in charge of piano accordion and flute,Graham Dixon is on Northumbrian pipes, and the band is completed by Neil Chadwick on guitar.
And, by the way, don't worry if you don't know your ‘Gay Gordons’ from ‘The Waves of Tory’— Ian will look after you.
While the Panama Band takes a well-earned break, the Belfast Set Dancers and their musicians, who received a tremendous welcome at the Girvan Festival in May, will dance some sets for us.
‘Turn Down the Lamp’
There's a new look to ‘The Lamp’ for 1991 as we enjoy a selection of contrasting stories, from North and South of this island, and the singing of a young lady from the West.
Sam McAughtry , who first took his seat on this stage back in 1985, will delight us with his humorous and heartwarming tales of life in the Tiger's Bay district of North Belfast, while the best-selling author of ‘To School Through the Fields’Alice Taylor , comes to us from County Cork with stories of life as a youngster on an isolated farm in that county in the '40s.
Completing the trio will be a newcomer to Festival, a young lady from one of Ireland's best known musical families,Aoife Clancy .
A daughter of Bobby — one of the celebrated ‘Brothers’— Aoife has recently returned after two years spent singing in Australia, and is sure to delight us with her songs, both traditional and contemporary.
An hour or so in the best of company, the bar is open, and all for £3 — what more can we do?
‘Flow Gently Sweet River’ David Hammond
with Arty McGlynn, Nollaig Casey and Neil Martin
Stories, songs and verse in the company of singer, film producer and writer David Hammond .
Taking as his theme the great rivers of the world, the Ganges, the Jordan, the Mississippi, the Clyde — and of course the Boyne — he weaves a tapestry evoking both sorrow and joy.
These rivers sometimes run red with blood, sometimes they cleanse and sometimes baptise.
They are highways for dead souls moving into paradise and often carry emigrants deep into the heart of a new country.
The sweet murmur of their water can provide balm for troubled spirits and their banks offer sweet shelter to nurture true love.
Joining David will be Arty McGlynn (guitar),Nollaig Casey (fiddle) and Neil Martin (pipes and whistle)
Vinnie Kilduff, Ide Tynan, Steve Cooney Phil Campbell Band
Three members of leading Dublin band ‘The Rocking Chairs’ come North to present a unique arrangement of original and traditional music and song.
Vinnie Kilduff , accomplished on tin whistle, guitar, mandolin, uilleann pipes, bodhran and piano, has played with a host of bands including ‘In Tua Nua’, U2, The Waterboys and Clannad and his recent solo album ‘The Boys from the Blue Hill’ is simply stunning.
Ide Tynan , like many others in Irish traditional music, was classically trained and sang as first soprano with the RTE Philharmonic Choir.
She joined ‘Rocking Chairs’ three years ago, and more recently has toured extensively with ‘The Fallen Angels’.
Steve Cooney , the almost legendary ace guitarist from Australia, has worked with all the Irish greats — Stockton's Wing, Jimmy McCarthy, De Danann and Christy Moore — to name but four — and he's constantly in demand as a record producer.
Phil Campbell , presenter of ‘Folk Club’ on BBC Radio Ulster, has just emerged from Spring Studio in Rostrevor with her first album of contemporary songs, and comes to the Harp Folk Club with husband Tom McFarlane on percussion and three other hand-picked musicians to showcase this debut offering.
It should be a night to remember!
‘Skylark’
Traditional Irish music and song at its very best rolls down the curtain on the Festival folk music programme for another year.
Skylark , one of the leading groups in this field, bring together the various strands of their respective influences to produce a vibrant and exciting sound.
From the singing tradition of North Antrim comes Len Graham — unquestionably one of the best interpreters of the Irish folk song in the land.
Gerry O'Connor , whose recent CD ‘Time to Time’ has received great critical acclaim, is regarded as one of Ireland's finest young generation fiddle players, while Máirtín O'Connor , formerly with De Danann, is simply outstanding on accordion.
Completing the line-up on a mandocello, guitar and keyboards is Garry Ó'Briain; — a much sought-after musician in the traditional sphere.
Together Skylark have been bringing this music far beyond these shores, to Europe, America and even Australia, so it's a delight to welcome them back to the Harp Folk Club after an absence of five years.
Queen's Film Theatre
Scorchers
In another scoop, Festival presents this excellent new film starring the great Denholm Elliott not to mention Faye Dunaway, Emily Lloyd and James Earl Jones .
Set in the steamy swamps of Bayou La Teche ‘Scorchers’is part comedy, part deadly serious drama, in the story of two curious relationships — one in which a newly married husband can't get his young wife into bed and in the other a preacher's daughter can't get her husband out of someone else's!
The situation reaches fever pitch in a bizarre climax in which the characters' cries and laughter ring out through the hot, humid air of the bayou, where men and women wage yet another round in the tug of war between love and lust, innocence and experience.
Written and directed by newcomer David Beaird , this is your chance to discover an emerging talent.
Cert 15. 90 mins.
Cold Heaven
Opening the film festival is Nic Roeg 's latest spine-tingling film ‘Cold Heaven’, director of the classic psychic thriller ‘Don't Look Now’.
Set in Mexico, California and New York, this film finds Roeg in supreme command of the powerful and allusive style of film making, which has been so influential on other film makers.
Based upon a novel by Ulster author Brian Moore , Marie Davenport (Theresa Russell ) is unfaithful to her husband Dr Alex Davenport (Mark Harmon ) with terrible consequences.
Marie's lover Daniel (James Russo ) wants her to leave her husband.
Before she is able to break the news to her husband that she is leaving him, Alex dies in a hideous, and strangely convenient boating accident.
‘Cold Heaven’ is at once a popular movie and a deeply serious film.
Quite simply Nicolas Roeg's best and most important film to date — an ideal festival choice.
Cert: 18. 105 mins.
The Blue Angel
‘The Blue Angel’was made in Germany in 1930 in both German and English versions, and because it became a world-wide smash hit, it remains one of the best-known and best-loved movies of all time.
The director was Josef von Sternberg , the songs by Friederich Hollander (including ‘Falling in Love Again’).
The star was the world-famous Emil Jannings who had won an Academy Award in 1928.
But the movie was stolen by the then little known Marlene Dietrich , playing ‘naughty Lola’ the cabaret girl of the Blue Angel nightclub, who destroys the life of a respectable schoolteacher (Jannings).
Not the svelte, slim, sophisticated Dietrich created by Sternberg when they both went on to Hollywood together, but a rather plump and slovenly Dietrich.
Please note that the Festival is also offering the Royal Shakespeare Company's new stage version with music, of ‘The Blue Angel’.
Different, but just as entertaining.
See both!
Cert: PG.
98 mins.
Riff-Raff
Stevie (Robert Carlyle ), a young Glaswegian just out of Barlinnie prison, travels to London to find work on a building site.
There he meets a group of lads from Liverpool.
Though wages are low and living in London is difficult, he encounters Susan, a would-be singer (Emer McCourt ).
As Stevie and Susan learn to live with the ups and downs of life in London,‘Riff-Raff’, directed by Ken Loach (he of ‘Hidden Agenda’) builds a portrait — sometimes gritty, often funny — of life as it is lived at the margins.
Cert: 15. 96 mins.
Berlin — Symphonie Einer Großstadt
As Festival takes on a special German flavour, here is a rarely shown and magical cinepoem from the archives.
Walter Ruttmann 's film from the apogee of German Expressionist cinema uses the cinema in exactly the way a poet uses language to give a dynamic, reverberant and meaningful portrait of one of the world's great cities and its people.
The film will be shown accompanied by appropriate music from the period.
Cert: PG.
69 mins.
City of Hope
Corruption, and the way that it extends from the top to bottom of society in American cities, is the subject of ‘City of Hope’, John Sayles' new film that was shown at the prestigious Sundance Film Festival in America and in the market at Cannes.
‘City of Hope’ is his best film in ages — in fact since ‘Baby It's You’.
Again the star is Vincent Spano — Sayles' archetypal Italo-American youth.
As the film opens, he quits his ‘no-show job’ provided by his father who is a major builder in a large American city.
In this city, everyone seems to have their finger in the gravy bowl, but there are greater and lesser evils that Sayles teases out very entertainingly through one of the finest scripts of its type.
Imagine the very best episode of ‘Hill Street Blues’ inspired with the depth of ‘King Lear’and you have something of the flavour of this wonderful film.
Cert: 15. 120 mins.
The Nasty Girl (Das Schreckliche Mädchen)
German cinema has had a low profile of late, with the most feted film being ‘The Nasty Girl’by Michael Verhoeven which took the Silver Lion at last year's Berlin Film Festival, and received an Oscar nomination for best foreign language film.
The subject is Bavarian author and historian Anja Rosmus, who is thinly disguised as fictitious character Sonja Wegmus (Lena Stolze ).
Sonja uncovers a number of scandalous facts when she does some research for an essay competition — the title she picks is ‘My Home Town in the Third Reich’.
As she becomes increasingly involved in the town's past, all sorts of problems ensue, including death threats from neo-Nazis.
Cert PG.
94 mins.
Jazz 1
One of the rarely used facilities enjoyed by QFT is to be able to show films from the National Film Archive.
With the ‘Guinness Spot’ closed tonight, here's a treat for jazz aficionados.
Between 1947 and 1955 a man called Will Cowan made a long series of short documentaries on the popular Jazz artists of the era.
We have chosen two programmes of fifteen minute films featuring these artists:Rhythm Masters (1948) featuring Stan Kenton, Jack Teagarden, Louis Prima;Symphony in Swing (1949): Duke Ellington, Edwards Sisters;Lionel Hampton and his Orchestra (1949);Deep Purple (1949): Gene Krupa and his Orchestra;Sweet Serenade (1950): Tex Beneke and his Orchestra.
(See also Sunday 17 November for Jazz 2).
The Ballad of a Sad Café
This debut feature is directed by Simon Callow , is a story of triple-unrequited passion in which fairy tale and myth come to the fore.
Set in the Depression era, in a dusty southern mill town, Ms Amelia (Vanessa Redgrave ) is an eccentric store owner, whose unconsummated marriage to local bad boy Marvin Macy (Keith Carradine ), has him set on revenge against her.
Marvin finds his weapon in Amelia's cousin Lymon (Cork Hubbert )— the tragic triangle resulting in a fist fight between the estranged husband and wife.
‘Redgrave gives a performance of storming physical and emotional conviction as Miss Amelia, the heroine of Carson McCullers’ strange fable.’
(The Independent ) Cert 15. 100 mins.
The Children
Tony Palmer's The Children includes not only a wonderful performance by Kim Novak but a starring role for Ben Kingsley , and parts for Robert Stephens and Britt Ekland , and will doubtless appeal to our Festival audience.
The story, based on a novel by Edith Wharton has been called a heterosexual ‘Death in Venice’, but it is far more than that (you may equally regard it as a grown-up ‘Sound of Music’)!
Ben Kingsley plays Martin Boyns, a middle-aged engineer at the turn of the century who feels that life has passed him by, and his one chance of happiness is in marrying his longtime friend, Rose Sellars (Kim Novak).
On a boat journey to meet Rose, he encounters a gaggle of children who are not all one family but the children, step-children and ‘adopted children’ of an acquaintance (Geraldine Chaplin ).
They spend a happy time in Venice, but eventually Martin departs.
The children, however, keep cropping up in his life and a growing emotional tie develops with the eldest, Judith (Siri Neal ).
Cert.
15. 115 mins 
Young Soul Rebels
Winner of a prize at Cannes, and the most unexpectedly entertaining movie of the year is this very dynamic story set in London during the Silver Jubilee year of 1977.
In East London two young blacks Chris & Caz, set up a ‘funk’ radio station broadcasting from a back-street garage.
Elsewhere in the locality, a mysterious stranger is murdering young homosexuals.
Through appropriately garish colour and a well-articulated, if occasionally slightly predictable script, the resolution of these two events makes for enjoyable and unusual entertainment.
Cert 18. 100 mins 
Trust
This biting comedy of suburban middle America, centres around Maria (Adrienne Shelley ), an ordinary teenage brat who gets pregnant.
On hearing the news, her boyfriend promptly dumps her and father has a fatal heart attack.
To top it all her mother disowns her, so she is left to wander the streets, when she meets Matthews (Martin Donovan ), who has also been driven from his home.
The two exiles fall in together and set out on the adventure of becoming a suburban couple.
Cert: 15. 109 mins.
Diary of a Madman
This adaptation of the classic Russian novel by Nikolai Gogol is RTE's first ‘home-produced’ feature, shot on location in Co Wicklow.
It tells of a lowly and insignificant civil servant Poprischin, who falls in love with his boss's beautiful daughter Sophie.
Frustrated by his lack of social acceptance he retreats into a world of fantasy and self-delusion…with tragic results.
Poprischin was first played by the same actor Tim McConnell (who also wrote the screenplay) in the Dublin Theatre Festival 1987 where he won the Best Actor Harvey Award, and in 1989 won the off-Broadway OBIE.
Director/producer Ronan O'Leary and RTE executive producer Liam Miller (and possibly Tim McConnell himself) will be in attendance to discuss the film after the 9.00 pm screening.
The 6.45 screening will be preceded by a short film ‘Writing in the Sands’by Amber Film Productions.
Cert: PG.
77 mins 
Edward II
Freely adapted from Christopher Marlowe 's play of the 1590's, this contemporary version of Edward II by Derek Jarman , tells an extraordinary story of tragic love, fierce ambition and barbarous revenge.
Newly crowned as King of England, the youthful Edward II (Steven Waddington ) bestows gifts and titles and all his devotion upon his lover, Piers Gaveston (Andrew Tiernan ).
In neglecting his wife, Isabella (Tilda Swinton ), and the responsibilities of state, Edward makes enemies of the earls and bishops, and more specifically of Isabella and Mortimer (Nigel Terry ) who join forces against him.
The spirit of Marlowe's work is in perfect accord with the unique talent of Derek Jarman, one of Britain's most highly regarded film-makers.
This powerful and visually ravishing film should not be missed.
Cert.
18. 90 mins 
Close My Eyes
Writer Stephen Poliakoff has made an exciting cinema debut with ‘Close My Eyes’— the story of an obsessive love that unfolds during a sweltering English summer.
Clive Owen and Saskia Reeves star as Richard and Natalie, a brother and sister who find themselves irresistibly drawn to each other.
Overwhelmed by their love, they struggle to overcome their addition, not wishing to hurt those around them and not able to part.
Natalie, who is married, additionally has the problem of keeping the situation from her husband, Sinclair.
This operatic story is brilliantly presented.
Cert: 15. 105 mins.
Jazz 2
The second in our Jazz series (see November 10 for Jazz 1), featuring the following artists:Salute to Duke Ellington (1950): six numbers played by the Duke Ellington Band.
The Bridge
Saskia Reeves , last year's December bride, stars in another rural idyll with ‘The Bridge’.
She plays Isobel Hetherington — a young woman with three daughters — who takes up residence in a seaside resort during the hot summer of 1887.
Her powerful beauty is immediately recognised by the painter Philip Wilson Steer (David O'Hara ), and he decides to capture her on canvas.
To Isobel, Steer is all the things that she desires — art, freedom, passion; while for him, she represents inspiration and romantic love.
Directed by Ulster-born Syd McCartney , the story that has certain similarities with ‘Elvira Madigan’ and some glorious cinematography, make this a likely smash hit with Festival audiences.
Saskia Reeves, Syd McCartney and David O'Hara will be in Belfast to discuss the film after the performance.
Cert: 15. 108 mins.
Truly, Madly, Deeply
Britain's answer to the immensely popular ‘Ghost’ is this light-as-a-feather piece, set in outer London.
It is a story about love and loss and marks the directional debut of writer Anthony Minghella .
Nina,(Juliette Stevenson ), lives a civilised, ordered existence in Hampstead, working in a translation bureau.
Her tragedy is that her boyfriend Jamie (Alan Rickman ) died young and this event has disturbed the balance of her mind.
She keeps hearing him and seeing him.
This doesn't surprise her analyst, but as the reality of these apparitions increase, ‘normal’ life becomes subsumed in her fantasy.
Cert.
PG.
106 mins.
Avant Garde I — International Women Film-makers
This is the first of a rare, three-part series of short films, in conjunction with the London Film-makers Co-op.
(See November 20 and 22 for the other two films).
So for something a little bit different…read on.
‘In Narcissus’ Pool’by Orla Mulcahy is an experimental film, seen through the eyes of a camera woman.
Ireland 1988, 12 mins;‘I Dish’by Jane Parker is ‘a fractured account of the catching, cooking and devouring of fish and…turns into a disturbing violent metaphor for the animosity between a young woman and man’.
(Time Out).
1982 .
16 mins;‘Kali-Film’by Brigit and Wilhelm Hein , which deals with contemporary taboos about the liberated woman.
Germany 1988. 12 mins;‘The Ties that Bind’by Su Friederich, is built around a series of interviews with the film-maker's mother.
USA 1984. 53 mins.
Cert 18.
Total 93 mins 
The Object of Beauty
Starring John Malkovich (from ‘Dangerous Liaisons’) and Andie McDowell (from ‘sex, lies and videotapes’ and ‘Greencard’).
‘The Object of Beauty’, skilfully directed by Michael Lindsay Hogg , was financed in a similar way to Kenneth Branagh's ‘Henry V’.
Malkovich and McDowell play a couple of high-living Americans who find themselves suddenly penniless and stranded in London.
A story of greed, mistrust and ultimately, commitment, ‘The Object of Beauty’ revolves around the relationship between the two lead characters.
Brilliant acting and an attractive comic style make this an ideal festival choice.
Cert.
15. 102 mins.
Avant Garde II — Exploding the Conventions of Cinema
The second in our avant garde short film series (see November 18 & 22 for parts 1 and 3) will include:—
‘Pièce Touchée’ by Martin Arnold , a winner of prizes from a number of festivals including Cannes — it takes a short scene from an American B movie and manipulates it into an erotic dance to hilarious effect.
1989; ‘Mayhem Part 6’ by Abigail Child , is a homage to film noir, soap opera thrillers and Mexican comic books generating the action.
1987, 20 mins, bw.; ‘Decodings’ by Michael Wallins also a winner of several film awards, is a ‘psycho-sexual-emotional portrait of himself’.
1989, 15 mins; ‘Faust IV’ by Stan Brakhage , is a developing theme of a modern Faust as he strives to become at one with the reason of his being.
USA. 1989, 37 mins.
Cert 18.
Total 88 mins 
Dream on
Amber Film Productions was set up in 1969 as a collective group of technicians, documenting working class life in the North East of England.
Their new feature film ‘Dream On’is a delightful blend of magic fantasy and dream, which treads a knife edge between humour and tragedy.
Peggy O'Rourke (Pat Leavy ) arrives in North Shields on her motorbike from Donegal to see her son, pub owner Bert.
Clairvoyant Peggy interferes unashamedly, and shows the women in the pub darts team — who immediately warm to her — Julie (Anne Marie Gascoigne ), Rita (Maureen Harold ) and Kathy (Amber Styles ), that they have the power to change their lives if they really want to.
‘…
Amber Styles gives an extraordinary performance as a woman forever willing to give her man another chance.’
(The Guardian ) Cert.
15. 115 mins 
Prospero's Books
Peter Greenaway , unarguably one of Britain's major directors, often engenders extremes of enthusiasm and antipathy.
With a bravura performance from Sir John Gielgud in a free adaptation of Shakespeare's ‘The Tempest’,‘Prospero's Books’seems most likely to meet the former.
The film faithfully follows Shakespeare's plot, characters and text and recounts how the Duke of Milan, after twelve years of exile on a magical island plots a revenge and reconciliation on his enemies.
There are, however, four fascinating particulars that have been changed: all the dialogue of the major parts is spoken by Prospero (Gielgud) himself as the revenge is here only in Prospero's imagination.
Secondly, the magic of the island is here composed of Renaissance learning, imagery and classical mythology.
Thirdly, the film is structured around the volumes which Gonzalo hurriedly put into Prospero's boat at the start of the play.
Finally, the film extends the action beyond the end of the play and narrates what happened on the voyage home…
Cert.
U 122 mins 
Avant Garde III — Diverse Humour
The final programme of the avant garde series (see November 18 & 20 for parts I and II), includes:—
‘Little Stabs at Happiness’,by Ken Jacobs , featuring Jack Smith.
1963, 18 mins;‘The New Improved Institutional Quality: In the Environment of Liquids and Nasals a parasitic vowel sometimes develops’, by G. Landow , 1976, 10 mins;‘Yyaa’by Wojciech Bruszewski was shot in Poland and is an individual ‘primal scream’ of protest, 1973, 5 mins;‘The Cartoon Theatre of Dr Gaz’by Jeff Keen is an experimental animation and live-action film with Dr Gaz, Babyjelly, Madame Hex.
The Breathless Investigator, DirtDog, & A Rt Ace the Painter of History, 1977–9, 12 mins;‘Swamp’by Simon Casel/Lou Max is a document made from a state of compression and a loss of soul, 1985, 20 mins.
Cert.
18.
Total 65 mins 
Barton Fink
Without any doubt the best modern film in this festival is the Coen Brothers' ‘Barton Fink’, winner of the Palme d'Or, Best Director, and Best Actor (John Turturro ) awards at Cannes, the biggest clean sweep by a single film since ‘La Bataille du Raille’ in 1946!
Turturro plays the eponymous Fink, an avant garde New York playwright who accepts a lucrative Hollywood contract.
On arrival he books into a ‘distinctive’ downbeat hotel.
The occupant of the next room (John Goodman ) makes a lot of noise and turns out to be a serial killer.
Fink's boss — a crassly stupid studio chief — sets him to work writing a ‘wrestling picture to star Wallace Berry’.
Fink, not surprisingly, gets writer's block and at some stage the film becomes his fevered imaginings.
Half the fun is working out where bizarre reality parts from realistic fantasy!
Cert.
18. 116 mins  
‘The Singing Kettle’
‘The Singing Kettle’is a musical theatre show for children from 4 to 10 years of age.
The accent is on participation and members of the audience are invited on stage to help illustrate songs.
Adults are always welcome and their response is just as enthusiastic as younger ‘Kettle’ fans.
‘The Singing Kettle’ has opened its lid to thousands of children in Germany, USA, Canada, Ireland, Australia and Hong Kong as well as in theatres throughout Britain including two visits to the South Bank in London and, for three years in succession, they appeared at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford.
‘The Singing Kettle’ are Cilla Fisher and Artie Trezise , who alternate as lead vocalist, with Gary Coupland providing exciting accompaniment on accordion, keyboards, trombone and saxophone.
Cilla and Artie were already seasoned folk musicians with a Melody Maker album of the year behind them before the amazing success of this children's show —‘a pantomime without the boring bits’, as they describe it.
Now after five albums and two TV series they are well known to thousands of children throughout Britain, and their songbooks have become standard music-lesson texts in schools in Scotland.
For many children this fun-filled show, with its bubbling mix of sing-a-long songs, rhymes, music and jokes, is their first taste of theatre and live music:
‘One of the very best children's shows in the world’.
(Folk Roots )
‘Singing Kettle’ has a natural authenticity and it's wonderful fun’.
(The Scotsman )
BBC Radio Goes To Town
BBC Radio focuses attention on the Festival this year by broadcasting a whole range of radio programmes from Belfast across the wavelengths, on Radio 1, Radio 2, Radio 3, Radio 4 and Radio 5.
Most programmes will come from the Elmwood Hall, but other venues will be used.
The BBC welcomes audience participation at these recordings and live broadcasts.
Admission is free to all events (except BBC Symphony Orchestra and BBC Big Band), by ticket available in advance from the Festival Booking Office.
Doors will open 30 minutes before the advertised programme time and admission will only be possible up to 10 minutes before the programme.
Watch out for the ‘Radio Goes to Town’ Information Centre at the front of the Elmwood Hall.
The Daily Service
Gloria Hunniford (Radio 2)
Gloria and special guests live on Radio 2.
It's Your Radio 2!
A chance to air your views and put your questions to the people responsible for the programmes you hear on Radio 2.
Gloria Hunniford chairs the debate.
Tuning Up (Radio 3)
Presented by Chris de Souza .
Live music from Gerard McChrystal (saxophone) and Kathryn Lenehan (piano).
BBC Big Band
‘Travelling Folk’(Radio Scotland) and ‘Folk Club’(Radio Ulster)
Sound Advice (Radio 5)
A weekly programme in which listeners with questions about their rights can talk directly to the expert advisers who will be a part of Radio 5's own Citizens' Advice Bureau.
Listeners will also be invited to react to items on the programme with their observations and comments.
Radio Ulster Lunchtime Recital
BBC Symphony Orchestra (Radio 3)
This Family Business (Radio 5)
Radio 5's Johnnie Walker presents a live show debating current news issues that affect family life in the 1990s.
David Jacobs (Radio 2) with the BBC Big Band and Rosemary Squires 
Admission Free
Lunchtime Arts Forum with John Drummond 
Punters' Night (Radio Ulster) with Gerry Anderson 
The Health Show (Radio 5)
Angela Rippon presents a live magazine and phone-in programme — an open line to keeping fit and staying healthy.
New medical developments, alternative therapies and treatments, one-to-one consultations with some of the country's leading medical experts — a comprehensive national health service on radio.
Money Box (Radio 4)
A question of money?
Louise Botting and Vincent Duggleby answering your questions on personal finance.
Talkback (Radio Ulster)
Kaleidoscope (Radio 4)
Music, poetry and special guests from Radio 4's daily arts programme.
Any Questions (Radio 4)
presented by Jonathan Dimbleby 
Sunday Half Hour (Radio 2)
The Radio 2 Arts Programme
Loose Ends (Radio 4)
‘Loose Ends’ might be five years old now but it is Radio 4's zappiest, most innovative and hippest chat show on the air.
Every Saturday morning Ned Sherrin presides over an hour of entertaining and provocative talk, exchanging ‘bon mots’ and badinage with the guests.
Now ‘Loose Ends’ attempts a spectacular double first from Belfast.
It will be the first time the programme has ever been done outside London, and the first time it has been done in front of an audience.
Today's guests will include Emma Freud and John Walters.
Yarnspinning
with special guest Jack McCann .
Refreshments will be served.
Presented in association with Castlereagh Arts.
For tickets and further information contact Tullycarnet Library (tel 485079)
‘The Local Lads’
Brian Kennedy discusses a miscellany of Belfast artists — Paul Henry, J H Craig, Frank McKelvey and William Conor.
Ulster Museum/Northern Bank Lecture 
‘Dogs and Lamp-posts’
Jeremy Paxman , presenter of BBC2's ‘Newsnight’, journalist and author of ‘Friends in High Places’, will talk about the relationship between journalists and politicians.
‘Flowers from the East’
Mike Robinson tells the story of the Arita Imari and Kakiemon Japanese porcelains which influenced early European wares and the prestigious Nabeshima and Kutani wares which are less well-known in the western world.
Penguin Irish Evening
A popular feature of previous Festivals have been the ‘Irish Writers’ Evenings’, where we have brought some of the outstanding writers and poets in this island to read from their work.
Penguin Books have an illustrious list of Irish writers and we are pleased to invite some of them to read from their work.
At the time of going to press, invitations have been accepted by Bernard Mc Laverty, Jennifer Johnston , and Michael Holroyd , biographer of George Bernard Shaw and Lytton Strachey.
Further guests will be announced nearer the date.
‘Green Energy’
This year's Silvanus P Thompson Lecture, organised by the Northern Ireland Centre of the Institute of Electrical Engineers Younger Members Section, is delivered by Professor D Lidgate .
‘Music and Architecture’ by 
Maxwell Hutchinson
Maxwell Hutchinson , Past President of the Royal Institute of British Architects and Chairman of East Midlands Arts, presents an informal musical entertainment exploring the relationship between music and architecture with the aid of the grand piano, the synthesiser, the electric guitar and a box of electronic tricks.
Presented in association with the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society .
‘The Royal Botanic Gardens Melbourne’
Dr Philip Short gives this illustrated lecture for the Irish Garden Plant Society on the history of the Gardens and native plants of Australia.
Dr Short is the senior botanist of the Melbourne Botanic Gardens and is the Australian botanical liaison officer for the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew .
His research has taken him through the alpine and arid zones of Australia; botanical history is one of his many interests, and he specialises in the ‘Compositae’ family.
The Sir Tyrone Guthrie Memorial Lecture, 1991
We have invited this year's distinguished speaker, but cannot announce the name until the visit is fully confirmed (likely in September).
As usual, admission is free, but by ticket only.
Please include your application for tickets on your postal booking form, or obtain them from the Festival House box-office from 15 October.
Workshop with Roy Hutchins
Roy Hutchins is a solo performer who played the comedy and cabaret circuit before touring with ‘Whale Nation’ and ‘Falling for a Dolphin’.
These theatre workshops, exploring techniques used in his shows, will include solo performance, devised theatre and working with voice and body for maximum theatrical effect.
Please book through Old Museum in advance and wear loose, comfortable clothes and soft shoes.
Everybody welcome.
Workshop with Annie Griffin
Annie Griffin came to Britain from New York in 1980 as a student and since 1986 has been devising and performing original work for the theatre.
She has won awards for her solo shows and was a founder member of the production company Gloria.
‘Skylark’ is the first show by Pirate Productions which she formed in 1991.
These two linked workshops explore the techniques used in ‘Skylark’ to devise and perform original work for the theatre, and should not be missed by anyone committed to developing their work as performers.
Participants are asked to attend both sessions.
See above for details of booking and advice on clothing.
BBC Radio Ulster Lunchtime Concerts
Three entertaining lunchtime programmes of tuneful American music to be recorded for Radio Ulster's ‘The Classical Show’.
Admission free — no tickets required.
Tuesdays at 1.15 pm.
John Finucane (clarinet)
Danusia Oslizlok (piano)
Music by Bernstein and Steve Reich.
Masterclass with Nikolai Demidenko
This is the first in a series of six masterclasses, initiated by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland and Queen's University in association with the Festival, to be given by the distinguished Russian pianist,Nikolai Demidenko .
The series of masterclasses will provide a unique opportunity for five young local pianists to study with one of the most poetic and intuitive of the younger generation of Russian virtuoso pianists.
(The first of six recitals illustrating the development and evolution of the piano repertoire from 1700 to 1950 will be given by Nikolai Demidenko tonight in the Elmwood Hall — see page 8).
Belfast Gas Works
This exhibition of photographs, represents a valuable collection of glass plates dating from the 1830s.
Also on show will be water colour paintings and drawings of the gasworks by Jim Russell.
David Crone
During the Festival the Fenderesky Gallery at Queen's is organising a major one-person exhibition of David Crone's paintings.
During his active career as a painter and teacher David Crone has contributed a great deal to the advancement of contemporary visual art in Ireland and has gained a considerable reputation as one of the most important Irish artists at home and internationally.
With the assistance of the Arts Council of Northern Ireland a full colour catalogue of his works with an introduction by Dr Brian Kennedy will be available during the exhibition.
Ross Wilson
An installation of new works 
Gerhard Richter
This collection of small oils, watercolours, and prints is drawn from one of the most varied and demanding bodies of work produced by a contemporary artist and serves as a valuable introduction to Gerhard Richter's imagery.
Richter is not a conventional painter: he is an artist who happens to use paint as a medium.
An inheritor of Marcel Duchamp's anarchic estate, he regards all forms of artistic orthodoxy with deep scepticism.
For example, Richter makes paintings of photographs, makes prints of photographs of his paintings, and paints abstract pictures that look like commercial colour charts.
Richter destroys photography's routine claim to truth and verisimilitude; he denies the supposed mutual exclusiveness of the figurative and abstract.
Posing questions to which there are no satisfactory answers, Richter revels in the absurdity of all artistic activity — and continues to paint.
Exhibition sponsored by Deutsche Bank.
Shankill Revisited
Using old photographs, paintings, models and artefacts, this exhibition examines the history of the Shankill area of Belfast.
Per Barclay
‘Come To Dust’
— an exhibition of batiks and sculpture by Anna Cheyne.
Anna Cheyne studied painting and sculpture at Kingston School of Art and at the Slade School of Fine Art, London.
Her work has appeared in many exhibitions throughout the British Isles and she was an invited participant in this year's Royal Hibernian Way Sculpture Trail for Dublin City of Culture.
In this exhibition her theme is derived from Shakespeare's Fidele; ‘Fear no more the heat o’ the sun’.
A highly individualistic vision, coloured by time and experience, focuses on everyday objects suggesting associations tinged with both the sadness of ageing and the insights of maturity.
Canon Grainger — Magpie Collector
Canon Grainger, Church of Ireland rector in Broughshane (1869–91) amassed a huge collection of natural history and archaeological objects.
This exhibition shows the best of them.
Artist in Residence — Philip Flanagan
As artist-in-residence at the Ulster Museum Philip will model portrait heads, in clay and plaster, which will be cast in bronze.
Come to the Engineering Hall of the Museum and watch the sculptor at work.
Sponsored by Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry in association with Belfast 1991.
A Secret Garden
A unique exhibition on the secret world of mosses and liverworts — tiny plants with a reluctance for publicity but with a beauty and fascination all their own.
The exhibition is lavishly illustrated with colour photographs and features a moss garden composed entirely of local Ulster mosses.
A Bradford Museums Service travelling exhibition.
Dan Dowling
An exhibition of paintings.
During the exhibition Tom Morgan's third book of poetry ‘In Queen Mary's Gardens’ will be launched which features a painting by Dan Dowling on the cover.
Irish Silver for the 90s
Various works of contemporary Irish silver which were selected from an open submission competition include pieces by Kevin O'Dwyer, Peter Donovan and Brian Clarke.
The competitors were asked to base their designs on ideas of function, while also producing works which followed the lines of modern domestic interiors.
The exhibition was organised by the Crafts Council of Ireland and sponsored by the Company of Goldsmiths, Dublin, and S Johnson Matthey Ltd.
Irish Art and Modernism 1880–1950
This exhibition, the first of its kind devoted to Irish art, will chart the development of modern painting in Ireland from 1880 until 1950.
The exhibition, which is also being shown at the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art in Dublin, will comprise 132 paintings and sculptures drawn from public and private collections throughout Ireland, England, France, Switzerland and the USA.
The exhibition will be accompanied by an associated book and catalogue written by S B Kennedy of the Ulster Museum.
Exhibition sponsored in Belfast by Northern Bank.
The Japanese Tea Ceremony and Ikebana
Sumie Takahashi
In the 1980s, we had a Japanese Tea Ceremony in the Elmwood Hall and it was a great success.
We are very happy to have the ceremony again, and welcome the expert,Mrs Sumie Takahashi , who is coming over to us from London.
The ceremony is uniquely Japanese, and is performed as a stately rite.
It lasts about 90 minutes.
Perhaps the best way of describing it is that it will put you at peace with yourself — which is what is intended.
Ikebana is the famous Japanese art of flower arrangement and it will be seen in the Elmwood Hall this same evening, further enhancing your enjoyment of the Tea Ceremony.
We are most grateful to the Japan Festival in Northern Ireland for this event.
Ikebana is presented in association with Ikebana International (Belfast Chapter )
Music Sale
Records, tapes and music books while stocks last!
Sotheby's Oriental/Islamic Advisory Day
Sotheby's in Ireland present an Oriental — Islamic advisory day, along the lines of an Antique Roadshow, where members of the public are invited to bring along their items to be valued by the Sotheby experts.
The Sotheby experts will be Jackie Bing (Islamic and Asian art, including rugs and carpets),Nabil Saidi (manuscripts and miniatures),Jeremy Rye ,(ceramics).
The valuation charge will be £2 per item, payable on the door, and tea and coffee will be on sale.
Sotheby's Evening of Antiques
Sotheby's will have on display a number of antique items and the audience will be asked to estimate the nature, origin, date and value of each.
These entries will be judged, in a lighthearted manner, later in the evening when the three experts speak about them.
The ticket price includes a fork supper and glass of wine.
Sotheby's are generously giving their services free for both these events and proceeds will go to The Ladies League, The Royal Hospital for Sick Children.
Book Fair
The annual Belfast Antiquarian and Second-hand Book Fair is now established as the key date for book collectors from all over Ireland.
This year the Ninth Book Fair coincides with Belfast 1991 and the range and quality of books will be better than ever before.
Collectors, bibliophiles and browsers will find a warm welcome from the many dealers when the fair opens at 10.00 am precisely.
How to Book
Dates, times and prices are shown beneath the entry for each event.
All events that have a booking code (shown in the top right-hand corner of the centre grid) are bookable in advance through the Festival Booking Office.
This year again thanks to Bull HN Information Systems and Prompt Data's Theatrepack , we are linked with the Grand Opera House computer booking system.
Festival events at the Grand Opera House are bookable on the same postal booking form, which should be sent to Festival House.
TICKETS CANNOT BE EXCHANGED OR MONEY REFUNDED.
Postal Bookings
Tickets for all events will be on sale by post only from Wednesday 11 September upon application to: Festival Booking Office 25 College Gardens Belfast BT9 6BS
When sending a postal booking form to the Booking Office please ensure that you include:
a completed Booking Form
method of payment (cheque, postal order, credit card details)
a stamped self-addressed envelope (min 6″ × 4½″)
Cheques and Postal Orders should be made payable to BELFAST FESTIVAL AT QUEEN'S.
Please leave the amount in figures on your cheque blank and for the amount in words write ‘A sum not exceeding…pounds’(your maximum upper limit).
If paying by Access, Visa or Diners Club Credit Card please make sure that the address given is the cardholder's registered address and quote the expiry date of your card.
POSTAL BOOKINGS WILL BE DEALT WITH STRICTLY IN THE ORDER IN WHICH THEY ARE RECEIVED.
Please be sure to offer as many alternatives (performance, prices, dates or times) as possible, as our booking office staff will make every effort to accommodate you should your first preference be sold out.
Counter and Telephone Bookings
The Booking Office opens for Counter and Telephone Bookings on Tuesday 15 October at both the Festival Booking Office in College Gardens and at the Grand Opera House Booking Office in Glengall Street.
Hours: Monday to Saturday 9.45 am–5.00 pm.
Telephone: Festival Booking Office (0232) 241919
Please note that all events in the Festival which are bookable in advance can be booked at either the Festival Booking Office or the Grand Opera House Booking Office.
Tickets reserved by telephone must be paid for by post (please enclose a stamped addressed envelope) or in person within one week of booking or three days before the event, whichever is the sooner, otherwise the reservation will automatically be cancelled.
Concessions
Unless otherwise indicated, concession prices are available (as shown in brackets) to Students, Children 15 and under, 60s and over, and the Unwaged; documentary evidence of entitlement may be requested.
Student Stand-by Scheme
For certain events substantial discounts will apply to full-time students only.
These will be available by personal application only on the day of the performance, subject to availability.
School Events
For performances of ‘The Singing Kettle’ at the Arts Theatre on Thursday 21 and Friday 22 November, one teacher's ticket will be issued free with every 15 tickets.
Japan Pass
For just £5 the Japan Pass discount card saves you up to £5 off each of 125 Japan Festival events nationwide.
Sample the many delights of the Japan Festival 1991 — the greatest arts festival ever held in the UK with more than 350 events in over 200 locations nationwide.
In Northern Ireland you can save: £1.50 off tickets for Asako Wada (Downpatrick Leisure Centre 18 September), £2 off stalls tickets for Bunraku (Grand Opera House 8–9 October), £2 off full £8 tickets for Teshigawara (Stranmillis 14–16 November) and Daisan Butai (Stranmillis 20–21 November), plus savings at Japan Festival events in other centres.
Access to Festival Venues for People with Disabilities
The Festival has available a short guide to the venues used for Festival events.
If you would like a free copy please contact: Marketing Department Festival House, 25 College Gardens, Belfast BT9 6BS (tel. 667687), or the Northern Ireland Council on Disability, 2 Annadale Avenue, Belfast BT7 3JH (tel 491011).
Festival staff are always willing to deal with any enquiries or give advice.
Computerised Tickets
Please note that the time printed on your tickets is given in the 24-hour clock system — for example 7.30 pm = 1930 hrs.
On the Night
While there are certainly some events in the Festival for which it is essential to book in advance and to book early, please remember that there are usually some tickets left for most events on the evening of the performance.
A regularly updated list of sold-out events is available from Festival House from the opening of Counter and Telephone Booking on Tuesday 15 October.
The Ticket Desk at each venue is usually operational from half an hour before the performance.
Remember — it's always worth turning up even for the most popular events, but we suggest that you check with the Box Office on availability first.
Festival on Air
For the latest Festival box office information consult Ulster Television's Oracle page 248 available 24 hours a day.
Also on Ulster Television, ‘Six Tonight’ will feature regular Festival previews presented by Gary Gillespie.
BBC Northern Ireland's ‘Inside Ulster’ will include a daily Festival round-up.
BBC Radio Ulster will present ‘Festival Desk’ at 7.50 and 8.50 am with reviews and previews of Festival events.
Don't miss ‘The Good Arts Guide’ on Wednesdays at 1.30 for special Festival guests.
Downtown Radio will keep you up to date with Festival news on the ‘Breakfast Show’ and on ‘Drive Time’after 5.30 pm and Classic Trax Radio will host a daily Festival slot on the ‘Mid Morning’show between 9.00 and 12.00.
Guinness Book of the Belfast Festival at Queen's
A limited quantity of our souvenir booklet detailing the history of the first 25 Festivals is still available from the Festival Booking Office, price £2.95.
Japan Festival Programme
A magazine giving full listings of all events nationwide.
Over 100 colour pages of articles and information on Japanese life and culture.
Price £2.50 plus 50p postage and packing from the Festival Booking Office.