

We have had several letters from readers extolling the virtues of ponies, and how many are having enormous fun with them.
Ponies are, of course, considerably cheaper to keep and the hardier types that live out all year round cut out a huge amount of work, too.
Many find the rhythm of a larger horse more comfortable but turn to page 31 to see if you can be converted!
Pulling and shying are two problems that we have all experienced with our horses at some time or another.
Jane Wallace has some excellent advice on page 36 that will help you cure, or at least cope with, these infuriating problems.
Many owners toy with the idea of breeding their own foal from a much-loved mare.
We have a new series for the first time breeder by Jane van Lennep taken from her superb new book First Foal.
We all like ‘to do right’ by our horses and this often involves the over-feeding of supplements, either because the horse doesn't need them in the first place or because we tend to think ‘a little bit extra will do him even more good’.
In fact the overfeeding of supplements can be extremely harmful.
Our equine nutritionist Zoe Davies offers some sound advice on page 41 to ensure that your horse really is getting what he needs.
In our ‘readers' experiences’ this month we hear from Julie Harvey whose sister died as a result of a riding accident.
Our heart went out to her and I'm sure that yours will too.
If anyone would like to share their story with other readers, whether it's happy, sad, amusing or just a bit out of the ordinary, then please write to us at the usual address.
Please type your story, if possible, and include a selection of clear photos which will be returned to you.
Keep up with those New Year resolutions!
If anyone has any interesting ones then we'd like to hear them.
See you next month.
Want a word…?
DESPERATELY SEEKING BELLA
Dear Kate,
PLEASE, please can anyone tell me where my beautiful gentle and much loved mare called Arabella (Bella) is?
She is a bright bay Anglo Arab 15.2hh 11 years.
Freezemark 2G80 (saddle area).
Bella has a distinctive heart shaped star on her forehead and an ‘Isle of Man’ snip running down her nose and into the topside of her right nostril.
She was sold in Middlesex (Southall area) on Wed 21st August, and I believe she may still be in the Middx, Berks or Bucks area.
I have been Ill recently and her sale has badly upset me.
I really want to know she is loved and cared for.
PLEASE PHONE GILL: 0628 669857.
RIDER INSURANCE
Dear Kate,
Recently it occurred to my mother and me that it would be foolish to go riding alone without any sort of personal insurance for the rider.
I do not own a horse, but do have riding lessons at a local riding school and occasionally ride my friends' horses.
The only types of insurance that I have come across are for horse owners wishing to obtain insurance for their own horse.
Is it possible to acquire a rider's insurance only and if so, could you suggest which insurance would be best?
I would be grateful for any advice given.
P.S. Excellent magazine.
Pet Plan has a policy called RIDER PLAN (FREEFONE 0800 282250) which would be ideal for you as it aims at regular riders who do not own their own horse or pony.
You're very wise to get yourself insured.
WEIGHTY MISTAKE!
Dear Kate,
Recently, I had cause to approximate the weight of my horse.
I remembered that Carolyn Henderson had recommended the use of a formula, in the November edition of Today's Horse, for approximating a horse's weight.
After having carefully measured my horse's girth and length from point of withers to top of tail, I discovered with some astonishment that my horse weighed 954 million pounds.
Could this explain the feed bills?
You're absolutely right Stephen, the formula should be W =  — gremlins in the computer again!
I apologise for any confusion caused.
— Ed.
MORE INFO
Dear Kate,
Having just purchased a lovely thoroughbred mare, I have been considering various events I could take up.
Your article on Blood Free Sports in this month's Today's Horse, was excellent, with info' on addresses, horse welfare, dress, etc.
Other sports that I would like either to see articles about, or receive info on from you are long distance riding and novice eventing.
These covered in the same way by you, with addresses of local associations, horse welfare, etc, would be much appreciated.
P.S. The photo of Turnip, watching as ‘Equibrand’ was used on her hooves, was brilliant!
(Dec. '91, Todays Horse).
We'll see what we can do!— Ed.
KAREN STRAKER WEDS
Top eventer and past contributor to Today's Horse, Karen Straker, recently married Andrew Dixon.
Our congratulations and best wishes go to them both.
THE DANGERS OF GADGETS
Dear Kate,
I have just read the article in  November's Today's Horse on gadgets by Carolyn Henderson and I would like to say that in my opinion she has done a very good job pointing out the dangers of people with their own horses who resort to gadgets to get an outline and not to time and schooling.
Gadgets are useful in professional hands and used in the right way, but in the hands of a novice they can be dangerous.
How many times have you seen a horse with his head tied in with draw reins at a show and as soon as the gadget is removed his head shoots up or down in an effort to stretch the neck.
It is refreshing to read an article when the writer is not afraid to state the fact, even if it may be unpopular with some people.
Please keep up the good work.
Kate Healey reports on
THE SPIRIT OF OLYMPIA
Olympia — that tremendous festive show-jumping occasion, is now in its 20th year.
It produces the  country's best international show-jumpers, with invited riders from France, Germany, Switzerland, Spain, Ireland, U.S.A., Holland, Austria, Sweden, Finland, Belgium and, for the first time in recent history, South Africa.
Whitaker Domination
The first day's jumping began as many hoped it would — with a win for superhorse Henderson Milton.
The week quickly became a Whitaker benefit, but Milton was worryingly out of luck, tipping a fence in both the main classes.
Horses like Milton show the sport at its finest — creating wildly enthusiastic crowds and media attention of the right kind.
Show-jumping desperately needs a few more character horses.
The other Whitakers, Michael and wife Veronique, did their best to provide them, with Henderson Mon Santa and Flarepath.
They jumped to a superb one-two in the Volvo World Cup Qualifier, the only two who jumped a double clear.
For once it was Veronique in front, on Henderson Flarepath, a horse Michael lent her two years ago, after selling her top horses, Cogshall Spot On and Jingo, to Ian Fox.
They now have a marvellously sympathetic partnership and Veronique has no intention of giving Michael the mare back!
Nick Skelton was also in the news during the week.
On the first day he announced his new sponsorship deal with Everest — a return to the firm who supported him in the 70's when he rode for the Edgar yard.
Nick celebrated with a close second on Everest Major Wager — to who but John Whitaker!— in the first day's speed class.
The next night he improved to win the evening's Crosse and Blackwell Christmas Carol Stakes, on the talented Everest Werra.
He had only ridden the horse for four months, since she was bought by Sue Welch from Paul Schockemohle.
‘She's a very careful mare ,’ said Nick, ‘but she can gallop into her fences too.
She can be difficult though, as she is a bit head strong and hasn't got the best of mouths .’
Her jumping ability is not in doubt though and, along with his other promising horse, Everest Limited Edition, who was given an ‘learning experience’ at Olympia, Nick's main aim is the Olympics.
Werra is also an expectant mother — with two embryo transfer foals waiting to be born to German surrogate mares.
Disappointing Puissance
The Puissance was a disappointment for the near capacity crowd.
Nino came through to the third jump off but only one, Germany's Frank Sloothaak, on the high jump specialist Optiebeurs Golo, could go clear again.
The final day's £30,000 Grand Prix again went to the Continentals.
Eleven came through to the jump off, over a highly technical track that caught out both Milton and Werra.
Frenchman Roger Yves Bost, a member of the French World Gold Medal winning team in 1990, scorched round in a time more  fitting to a speed class.
Runner-up David Broome — at 51 proving he is still a major world threat — could only get to within just under three seconds of Bost's time.
Continued from page 6
Olympia is also the high point for twenty of our leading young riders.
They competed for the Henderson Young Show-Jumpers Award, with many overcome in the first round, including Points Table winner Andrew Davies.
None of the six jump-off riders could repeat their clears and the class went to the fastest four faulter, Yorkshire's Joanna Dennis on Cottage.
Joanna began her senior career on her ex J.A.
pony Norman's Choice very successfully, and took the individual silver in the last Junior European Championships.
Close behind was Worcestershire rider Giles Turner, 19, on the French bred Mavis Davis — who came from Nick Skelton with only £4 on her card.
Giles, a stylish rider who was very unlucky to roll a pole off the last fence, is one of the many youngsters desperate for sponsorship.
He deals, breaks and rides out for a local National Hunt trainer to keep in the sport and would be delighted with any financial help — large or small.
Not All Show-Jumping
Olympia is not all show-jumping.
It is also the final of the Marley National Pony Society Mountain and Moorland Ridden Championships, and thirty quality native ponies made a splendid sight in the vast Grand Hall.
Many were overawed by the occasion though, with one of the Highland entrants taking exception to the crowd's enthusiastic applause.
One breed that seemed capable of handling any distraction was the Connemara and it was from that section that both Champion and Reserve came.
Winner was the free-moving Tiereel Mystical, in her first ridden season, owned by Bailey's Horse Feeds and produced by Mrs Morgan, owner of the successful Greenacres Riding Pony Stud.
‘We had the mare to break early this year ,’ said rider Barbara Gallimore, ‘and knew as soon as we saw her that she would win Olympia.
We just didn't expect it so soon !’
Second was the superbly elegant Grayswood Village Sky Lark, another Connemara who performed with great aplomb.
One to catch the eye was Badger of Dykes, winner of the Highland Best of Breed Award and a fine advert for his breed.
Professionally ridden by Nicola Norman, the pony also loves his hunting with the Blackmore and Sparkford Vale.
The displays captured the crowd's attention too.
Western rider Bob Mayhew showed just how unimportant reins need be, producing a range of movements, including rein back, leg yielding, sliding stops and ‘spins’(a never ending pirouette performed at alarming speed) with virtually no rein contact, and using body and leg aids alone.
The Soma Samurai, Japanese Warriors on horseback, performed for the first time outside Japan, with odd man out Michael Jay.
He is English and the only non Japanese to hold Samurai rank.
In working life he is a Boeing 747 pilot and he also gave an in-depth demonstration on the blood curdling medieval art.
Olympia ends with the famous ‘Fancy Dress Relay’, where showjumping stars let their hair down.
Nick Skelton and John Whitaker ‘performed’ as the male strippers Chippendales — but for once more people wanted them to keep their clothes on  than take them off!!
They were only upstaged by Tim Stockdale and Philip Heffer, who dressed as Show-Jumping ‘Groupies’, with poor Franke Sloothaak proving he can run fast when he needs to.
Who won the Relay?
Did anyone notice?
After the 3,500 bottles of wine and champagne drunk during the week, probably not!
Veronique Whitaker and Henderson Flare Path in winning form.
Sexy or what?
Show jumping's answer to the Chippendales.
Nick Skelton and the talented Everest Werra.
Tiereel Mystical, owned by Bailey's Horse Feeds and produced by Mrs Morgan, became Moorland and Mountain Champion in her first season.
FIRST FOAL
Jane van Lennep examines the reasons for wanting to breed a foal and explains how to evaluate your mare.
There are very many reasons why people who are not professional horse breeders decide to breed.
It usually starts because a much-loved mare is no longer able to work under saddle but could perhaps produce a foal.
If a good mare becomes incapacitated, say, due to an accident through no fault of her own, then breeding from her could be practical.
If, however, the truth is that after years of struggling with her uncertain temperament, and your own fading nerves, you have decided to breed rather than face parting with her, then it is not a good idea.
Never breed for profit.
Breeding horses is a good way to lose money, but rarely to make it.
Even professional breeders are in the habit of making a loss.
Around 20,000 Thoroughbred mares produce 10,000 potential race horses per year.
Half of these make it to the training yards, and not all of them, by a long way, will ever make it to a race track.
Only one will win the Derby.
Most ‘retire’ before they are four years old.
Frighten Yourself With Costings
It is a good idea to frighten yourself with some costings before you start.
The mare's keep has to be considered, as well as that of the foal.
She should be up to date with her vaccinations, and should be swabbed before going to the stud — vet's visit plus consultation and advice, the swab, postage, lab fees — see how it adds up?
There will be keep charges and probably more vet's fees at the stud, as well, of course , as the stallion's covering fee.
Check if this carries VAT — it comes as a nasty shock if you are not expecting it.
Some stallion owners may want a second payment in October if the mare is definitely in foal.
Again, check all of this before committing yourself.
Regular worming (every six weeks or every four if your pasture is not regularly rested) is vital.
Fortunately, in-foal mares usually ‘do’ well and will not cost more to feed until the last three months.
You may find your insurance bill goes up, however.
Get a quote from the vet for night visits in case he or she is needed at foaling.
Find out how much foal registration fees will be and whether or not you need to join any breed society.
Unregistered foals could be worth less and may not be worth breeding for sale.
You may need a bigger stable, safer fencing and a stock of supplies for foaling emergencies — such as bottles, teats, a foal rug and replacement milk powder.
Do your sums first, then the shock will not be too great later.
Never look on a foal as a ‘free bonus’ and remember that, as in all things in life, you get what you pay for.
Higher stud fees tend to produce more valuable foals.
If you cannot afford to become a breeder, forget it now.
The Mare
So you think you are rich enough to carry on.
Congratulations!
You are on the way to one of the most rewarding experiences of your life.
However, you must be very honest when looking at your mare, because dubious mares breed dubious foals.
Good temperament is vital.
Your foal will be in her company for many months, and will be very much influenced by its dam's temperament and behaviour.
Cross, aggressive mares often rear like-minded foals.
Mares that cannot be caught teach their foals to dodge humans too.
All stable vices, such as cribbing or weaving, are best avoided.
Never, ever breed from a mare that has given you any cause to fear her in the stable.
The ideal broodmare should like people, be tolerant of all manner of handling, and be sociable with other horses.
She should be viceless and willing.
Soundness is also very important.
Ideally, a broodmare will have proven herself under saddle — a test of temperament as well as soundness.
Unsoundness which could be due to hereditary factors would be a good reason for rejecting the mare.
Certain types of conformation can predispose a horse to the development of diseases or problems such as navicular disease, ringbone, spavin, whistling or roaring.
Wobbler syndrome may be inherited.
If your mare has a problem and you are not sure it could be passed on, then talk to your vet.
Conformation is highly inheritable and faults such as very sloping pasterns and small joints, which increases susceptibility to joint, tendon and ligament injuries, should be looked at very critically.
Any unsoundness should be fully checked out, to convince yourself that not even the possible tendency to develop that unsoundness is likely to be passed on.
Conformation also affects the future ride and look of the horse, as well as its  soundness.
If not really bad, certain conformational faults need not bar a mare from breeding but it is important to be aware of them in order to make sure the stallion you choose is strong in the areas where the mare is weak.
In this way, many faults can be corrected.
Conformation Defects
Long, dippy backs can cause problems depending on the extent of the dip.
An inexperienced breeder should consult a vet or an experienced breeder for advice on whether or not their dipped-back mare would be suitable for breeding.
If the back dips, it is likely that the uterus does too, and therefore it will not drain well after foaling.
Dippy-backed mares are thus more prone to infections and can be difficult to get in foal, especially if they also have poor perineal conformation.
The anus should be immediately above the vulva and in the same plane.
If it is sunken, with the vulva curving out below it, the chances are that the mare will have an infection that is difficult to clear, as droppings will have contaminated the vulva.
In addition, a mare with this conformation may suck air in through the vulva, which increases the risk of infection.
Poor vulval conformation may benefit from Caslick's operation; a minor operation performed under local anaesthetic which lessens the chances of infection, and improves the chances of conception.
Again, the vet should be consulted on this matter.
She may be difficult to cover and may be an unthrifty mare, hard to keep in good condition — it is often severe weight loss, past or present, that sets off this kind of conformation.
A broodmare needs to be roomy, with a good barrel, plenty of length from hip to hock, and sufficient width in the pelvis for foaling to be trouble-free.
Mares with a tendency to filled legs will suffer more when in foal, particularly during the last few weeks of pregnancy.
You may not want to risk breeding from such a mare, especially if she is getting on in years.
Age
There is a lot of debate about the age at which it is reasonable to begin a mare's breeding career.
It must be sensible to delay breeding until the mare has had a chance to prove herself as a sound, willing ride.
Although biologically capable of getting foal at two years old (or even younger) most breed registers bar foals that were conceived when either parent was under 24 months.
Even professional studs do not make a regular practice of covering mares that are under four years old.
The ‘average’ broodmare then has an ‘average’of one foal every two years until she is 14 years old or so — the average age when she completes her duties.
Should you wish to continue using your mare as a broodmare, you may be advised to put her in foal every year because some believe that this actually makes it easier for a mare to conceive.
Some mares (the exception rather than the rule) will go on breeding into their twenties.
If a mare is fit and healthy, with a normal oestrous cycle, there is no reason to suppose she will have problems in foaling, but it seems fair to suggest that teenage mares be checked out by a vet before you start working out names for the as-yet unconceived foal.
Sound, healthy mares tend to have sound, healthy foals, whatever their age.
Many mares have foals in their teens, often because their competitive or working life finishes and having foals becomes their next career.
Unlike people, mares do not have a menopause, although fertility does decline considerably with age.
Some reasons for non-production in mares
1
Mare not covered —
did not come into season;
owner's decision not to cover;
would not stand for the stallion;
vet's advice (injury, disease, age).
2
Mare covered at the wrong time.
3
Stallion infertile.
4
Mare temporarily infertile —
infection —
overweight;
underweight;
5
Mare permanently barren.
6
Mare conceived but the foal was lost —
hormone deficiencies —
infection;
foal defects;
accident.
7
Foal born dead —
infection;
congenital defects;
malpresentation.
8
Foal died since birth —
congenital defects —
accident;
nervous defects;
infection;
inherited defects.
This extract is taken from First Foal by Jane van Lennep published by J.A.
Allen at £14.95.
First Foal is a delightful, yet highly practical, book for the first time breeder.
Sound, healthy mares tend to have sound, healthy foals.
Good temperament is vital.
Your foal will be in the mare's company for many months.
Never breed for profit.
Next month: choosing a stallion.
BABY TALK
John Henderson compares the problems encountered by the young horse to learning a new language.
If I could speak French like François  Mitterrand I probably wouldn't have the empathy I do for young horses.
As it is I can hold conversations of about the standard that a three-year-old Parisian can manage (well, a slightly retarded three-year-old) so I can understand the problem a young horse has.
I mean, if someone asked you now if you wanted a cup of tea, you would instantly visualise just that and say ‘yes please ’.
If someone asked you in French you might have to think about what tasse  du thé means before you visualised a cup of tea and said ‘Oui, s'il vous plait ’.
‘Translating the aids’
So it is with a young horse: they have to ‘translate’ the aids because they do not yet think in the same language as the rider.
When you think about it, it's amazing how they do learn what the different aids mean.
At least when you learn a new language someone can explain in English what words mean and how grammar works.
In addition, the poor horse has spent his first years learning how to balance himself and be able to charge round without tangling his legs up.
Suddenly we come along and say he's got to do it all over again with several stone more perched on top.
If you think that's easy, try running round the garden with a child on your shoulders and see how ungainly you become (if you can't find a handy child, try a straw bale).
Now, ask the child to invent their own signals for stop, go, left and right (this doesn't work with a straw bale).
How long will it take you to work out what the signals mean without the child telling you?
Quite a time, I suspect, and you are an intelligent human being with the power of reasoning.
Though, come to think of it, anyone who goes rushing around with a child or, worse, a straw bale on their shoulders must be a few bricks short of a stable.
I realised the similarity between a horse and someone learning a language after a visit to France: people sometimes had to repeat phrases before all the words clicked home.
The next time I had to ask our horse to do something I recognise the same process going on in his tiny mind.
The first time I asked he engaged his brain, the second time he wavered a bit as if understanding he should be doing something, though not what he should be doing, and the third time he translated it successfully.
The trouble is that this can present psychological problems if, like me, you are not one of those people who has been riding since you first told some condescending aunt from your pushchair ‘It's not a horsy, it's under 14.2hh ’.
My wife Carolyn was like that and does all the language teaching in the sandschool then every so often announces a newly learned skill.
I then try to get him to do it, if I don't discover it by accident.
‘Horses have made me feel like I'm talking Japanese backwards, which doesn't do a lot for your confidence.
The psychological problems arise because those not born to it tend to assume that if the horse doesn't do it when asked, the rider can't be asking properly.
There have been times when horses have made me feel like I'm talking Japanese backwards, which doesn't do a lot for your confidence.
You start to wonder if he find things hard or if you're doing something to unsettle him.
The only way you can stop getting paranoid about it is to get someone else to watch and tell you if you are doing anything wrong.
You also have to take care if you get onto an older horse afterwards.
You give a good firm aid that would have your youngster wandering gently  off to the left and suddenly find yourself falling off the side because the old hand did a sharp left turn!
The problem with accents
Accents are also a problem.
Imagine how you would  fare if you were learning English as she is  spoke in Oxford and met a Geordie.
If you speak a language well, accents are a minor problem, if you don't they might as well be speaking ancient Egyptian.
In horsy terms, that means that if you don't ask for canter in exactly the way he's been taught, he just carries on trotting round wondering what you meant.
This will have two effects: either the rider gets angry or he suffers an immediate confidence failure.
In my case the third effect is that someone shouts ‘Stop leaning forward!’
Mind you, it's not always your fault.
There is a horse equivalent of ‘budgerigar ’.
It is said that a British ornithologist asked his aborigine guide what the birds were and the guide said, in aboriginese, ‘good food ’: I suppose we're lucky he didn't say ‘birds, you dickhead ’.
Horses have a similar ability to misunderstand.
Our Skipper went through a phase of thinking that the half halt meant go faster.
As you know, you do a half halt before asking for a transition, because it's more polite than shouting ‘Oi !’, but Skipper seemed to forget about the legs bit and would go into whatever pace was faster than the one he had been doing.
This could be alarming to oncoming drivers in narrow country lanes, not to mention whoever was on top.
‘You do a half halt before asking for a transition because it's more polite than shouting ‘Oi!’
We also once had a not so young horse who took a while to understand the requirements of turn on the forehand.
When, by George, he'd got it, he was so pleased with himself that if you weren't quick enough you'd get a turn on the forehand every time you stopped, which could be disconcerting for following drivers in narrow country lanes.
Eager to please
These two incidents also show how young horses often seem to think about what they are learning and are eager to please.
Time and again Carolyn has tried to teach the horse something which he didn't seem to get quite right but the next day one of us has asked and he's done it.
It is almost as if he stood in his stable and worked it out while chewing his haynet — a bit like solutions sometimes come to us while we're soaking in the bath.
(Maybe if horses had bathrooms they'd learn quicker).
But whatever else young horses do, in general they want to please you and are so very trusting about it.
The sad thing is that when you see a horse that is frightened of doing things or is nasty, you can often see where its willingness to please and its trust were abused as a youngster.
We had a horse who had been broken with the wrong sized bit when his teeth needed attention and under a saddle with a broken tree which rubbed his back.
It took him only a few weeks to realise that not all saddles hurt, but he never stopped being difficult in his mouth and was rarely eager to please.
But why can't people realise that the early days for a young horse are as vital as our own early learning experiences?
How many more of us would be fluent French speakers if our first French teachers had done a better job?
I can hold conversations of about the standard that a three-year-old Parisian can manage.
‘It's not a horsy, it's under 14.2hh’.
Horses have made me feel like I'm talking Japanese backwards.
READERS' EXPERIENCES
TRIBUTE TO CLARE
by Julie Harvey
This is a tribute to my sister, Clare, who lived and breathed horses, and who later died on the horse she loved more than anything.
Five months later I have a friend and companion who will never be sold or replaced; a friend who knows more about Clare than anyone else.
I started work early this year in a Nursing Home, and worked some pretty unsocial hours.
It was then that my sister, Clare, encouraged me to ride the family horse again.
I hadn't ridden for three years.
I agreed and really enjoyed it.
Southall, who is 14.3hh, is a real gentleman.
The riding became more regular and I wanted to ride more often than I could.
At that time Clare, who was a British Horse Society riding instructor, was teaching freelance, and she heard of a 15hh palomino called Herbie who was being offered on loan.
Clare, knowing the woman who owned him, arranged for me to ride him.
He was great, a handful, but I liked him, and anyway Clare said she would give me lessons to help me cope with him.
He arrived at the beginning of May and I was thrilled with him, although he was sometimes naughty and difficult to catch.
Clare had to catch him for me, all 5ft 1in of her.
I was getting married on July 7th to John, who is now my husband.
Mum and Dad were worried about how I would cope, but Clare said everything would be all right.
She was a tower of strength, giving me lessons on a weekly basis.
We actually went to an indoor show and I jumped Herbie in a Novice class.
We didn't do very well, but Clare was really proud.
The Accident
Then on June 15th I went to John's from work and was told Clare had had an accident, but he couldn't tell me how serious.
I arrived home and my parents were standing in front of the fireplace.
I knew it was serious.
She had been riding along a road with a little girl and Clare's small pony Kizzy on a leading rein.
Southall, who never puts a foot wrong, reared up in front of a tractor.
Clare fell, which was unusual, and landed badly.
She hit her head just below the brim of her riding hat.
Clare died the next morning, and while she was on the life support machine, although she wasn't conscious, I promised her I would never sell or loan out Southall.
We received many letters when she died, and one was from a girl called Janine, a 17 year old taking A levels, saying if she could help in any way she would willingly do so.
I took her up on this, and the first thing we did was to bring Southall and Kizzy home.
A friend had been looking after them.
Herbie also went home to his owner.
I was very upset.
It was nerve-racking to ride Southall again — some people thought I would give up.
Unsettled
They arrived home and were very unsettled.
Southall was grumpy and unsociable, not like him.
We rode in the field for the first two weeks, and then I had to face the roads and the tractors.
I tried not to let my fear go through the reins: it was very hard.
Janine conquered her fear before I did.
I was married a month later; Southall and Kizzy were at my wedding — Clare wasn't.
I didn't have another bridesmaid, nor did I have Southall in a cart, which Clare had been training him for, as a surprise for me.
Her dog, Midge, was also there.
We even took her on our honeymoon.
Five months later I have at last gained my confidence on Southall; most of it is the trust and respect we have for each other.
I can now go past a tractor with only a little twinge.
Southall waits for me now when I arrive and make a fuss of me — I can even hug Kizzy.
I am hoping to do fun rides and shows this summer.
There are no regrets about keeping Southall or Kizzy.
My life has changed and I live around the horses and wouldn't change it for the world now.
I still miss Clare greatly and there isn't a day goes by when I don't think of her.
I am sure she knows what I am doing and is very  proud .
Clare and Southall a couple of years before she died, age 20.
Southall and Kizzy in their field last summer.
Southall and me.
‘Clare died on the next morning, and while she was on the life support machine, although she wasn't conscious, I promised her I would never sell or loan out Southall.’
EQUINE PROFILE
Stella Havard speaks to David Broome about the brilliant but ill-fated show jumper PHOENIX PARK
‘He should have been the best horse I ever had, if only he'd had decent health !’ from owner David Broome, this was quite some testimonial to the abilities of the brilliant grey show-jumper, Phoenix Park.
Now sixteen, the Irish-bred gelding was bought from Canadian rider, Torchie Miller, as a seven-year-old.
‘I saw him at Calgary and  liked  him, so I bought him ,’ said David.
‘My sister Mary gave him the stable name ‘Arthur’.
I must admit I didn't have any confidence in the name, we once bought a goldfish on holiday and called it ‘Arthur’, and it never made the trip home…’
Arthur has been the ride of Nick Skelton for the past couple of seasons, winning Grand Prix 's in Dublin in successive years, and at Wembley won his only two starts, the Leading Showjumper and the prestigious Henderson Masters class.
These are only a few of his victories, for he is a consistent and careful horse with more than his fair share of intelligence.
But in 1984, Arthur succumbed to an obscure lung complaint that almost killed him, the first of a long list of lay-offs throughout his career.
‘He really was at death's door ’, recalled David, ‘He'd jumped nineteen clear rounds in a row, beginning with three brilliant ones in the Victor Ludorum at Wembley.
There was an equine ‘flu scare on and I was advised to give him a booster, which I did.
Suddenly he was winning nothing, and got dreadfully Ill, getting water on his lungs.
I got home from hunting one January night, with snow on the ground and found him down and out in his stable.
I rang my vet, John MacEwen, and told him, ‘Arthur's going to die tonight.’
He said, ‘I think you're right.’
So I replied, ‘Not in my stable, he's not!’
It seemed so stupid for him to be literally drowning in his own box.
So we managed to get the lorry out and I got on the ‘phone to Bristol University.
John MacEwen said he'd follow me in his pick-up, and that the journey would probably kill him, but it was a chance I had to take, he was definitely going to die if I left him there.
‘So off I went, and when I got to the Severn Bridge, I thought to myself, ‘I can go straight on and take him to Potter's and get about four hundred quid carcase value, or turn right for the University and probably have nothing…
I turned right.
An hour and a half later, I arrived at the University, put down the ramp expecting to find Arthur dead, and there he was hanging over the partition, looking for the show…
I honestly believe that journey saved him, getting his adrenalin going because he thought he was going to jump…’
Not that this miracle was the end of the tale.
The University decreed zero hope for recovery for Arthur, though they tried everything they could, and one of the personnel devoted his whole life to Arthur during the six months he was hospitalised there.
Against all odds, he regained his health, and Mary pampered him back to fitness for David to win a National Championship on him.
‘Then he went lame, and had a carbon-fibre implant in his foreleg.
Then I was jumping Brando and Royale as my best horses, while this superstar was stuck in the stable…
He could have been the greatest horse in the country, he beat Hugo Simon and Gladstone by a couple of seconds when we won the World Cup in Amsterdam.
When Arthur was sound again, I had Countryman and Lannegan, and somehow I didn't enjoy riding him so much because every time he jumped, I was afraid he'd be lame.
It was better that Nick took him over when he was a horse short for Birmingham, they get on so well.
‘He's pretty straightforward most of the time, but he will nip darned hard when you're tacking up and mean it!
And travelling he sometimes panics on boats if he gets short of air.
But he's got so much ability, and scope to spare.
He's got a hell of a strike rate.
If only he hadn't had his retirement during his career!
‘To ride he's very sharp thinking and super-quick, I've never been able to turn as sharp into a combination on any other horse, because he's got all the scope in the world.’
They say that ‘nothing happens to the bad ‘uns ’, but it seemed unbelievable that misfortune should strike Arthur yet again directly after his triumphs at the Horse of The Year Show.
Having earned a rest, he was turned out in a paddock where he had grazed regularly.
Uncharacteristically, he decided to gallop about, and freakishly collided with a shed, badly injuring his hock.
‘It was the Sunday after Wembley, and I was watching the highlights on the television, when Nick rang up in distress saying, ‘Arthur's broken his leg!’
We called in the German specialist Dr. Krono, who did a reconstruction with carbon-fibre, and he was confined to his stable.
We don't know if this has finished him, we're playing it by ear.’
And fate had not yet finished with Arthur.
‘I was having a day's shooting in Essex, when Nick got hold of me — goodness only knows how he found me.
He said, ‘Arthur's dying of colic.
Do we shoot him?’
Shoot Arthur, for God's sake?
No, I said, open him up and see if anything can be done.
So he was operated on, and the vets found he had a misplaced colon, put it right and stitched him up.
So the poor old boy had two major operations in three weeks, but he's getting on fine now.’
Naturally, with his lung problems, Arthur has to be bedded on dust-free paper and fed on Horsehage rather than hay.
‘He really is a cute devil!
Alwin Schockemohle used to say that the palms of his hands always sweated when he was near a good horse, and when Arthur was about his hands were permanently wet.’
So who would the star-crossed Arthur be if he were a human being?
‘It's hard to say.
He's obviously an unfortunate athlete like Steve Cram, but the one thing I do know is that he is the best friend any vet could have!
I keep telling John MacEwen that he's built half his practice on Phoenix Park !’
Hopefully, like the Phoenix, Arthur will rise from the ashes of his latest misfortunes and regain his form at the top of the show-jumping tree.
Carolyn's Diary warts and all!
In seven months Skipper, the four-year-old whose progress we have been following, has learned an awful lot.
Carolyn Henderson signs off her diary on an optimistic note for his future.
After three weeks out in the field Skipper looked like an overgrown teddy bear.
We started the gradual process of bringing him back into work, hoping that he had been through all his disasters in one go: first he cut himself and had to be stitched, and then he got kicked on the hock.
At first I thought the kick was going to leave him with a permanently capped hock, but luckily Lynn Russell (the friend, show producer and dealer who sold Skipper to me) had all the answers, as usual.
She said that putting him on bute straight away would reduce the inflammation and alternate hot and cold compresses would also help.
They did, coupled with massaging non-staining iodine ointment into the fluid-filled point of the hock.
Four days later the badly capped hock was back to normal and Skipper was sound.
Shedding His Woollies
Getting some of his long winter coat off was a priority.
John, my husband, volunteered to clip him (to be honest, maybe I volunteered him!) and we decided on a blanket clip.
This would enable us to work Skipper without him sweating up, but would still give him protection on his back and loins.
‘I had fallen into my old bad habit of asking Skipper if he'd like to do something rather than telling him.’
John used chalk to mark out the lines of his clip, and then was away — almost.
Our new clippers came with fine blades, and though the handbook said these would be suitable for most horses, Skipper was obviously not in that category.
They couldn't cope with a teddy bear.
Luckily we had bought them from friends who ran a nearby saddler's shop; unluckily they only had coarse blades in stock for our make of clippers.
We tried them, but one sweep of the blades was enough to show that the ‘track marks’ would have left Skipper looking like a corduroy horse.
Panic stations!
Things like this never happen in the ‘how to clip your horse’ magazine articles.
Fortunately a friend on the yard came to the rescue by lending us her clippers and  soon the hairy monster looked much smarter.
Skipper Had Grown Up
It didn't take much to get him back into proper work; the pleasant surprise was that the three weeks holiday had done him a lot of good.
He seemed to have grown up, and was much more established in things like the beginnings of lateral work.
It was almost as if he had spent three weeks thinking over what he had been doing and worked it all out.
Our lessons with show jumper and trainer John Bunyan continued, and every time I learned something more.
John is always fair to the horse he is training, but expects the horse to be fair in return…as Skipper found out.
I felt so sorry for the horse while he was cutting his teeth that I pussyfooted around, falling into my old bad habit of asking Skipper if he'd like to do something rather than telling him.
Old Big Ears soon took advantage, and our canter transitions were a shambles.
John nipped the problem in the bud in one lesson; he got on Skipper and soon had him doing walk to canter and canter to walk.
If he didn't answer the leg, he got a quick reminder from the schooling whip — something I should have done but had chickened out of because Skipper's reaction to a schooling whip had been to throw some rather impressive bucks.
Riding him the next day, it was as if the handbrake had come off.
He was much sharper off the leg and could suddenly canter!
Touch wood, that attitude has continued now that I'm being more positive and less of a wimp.
Jumping
Skipper showed a pleasing boldness in his jumping, which was still often done from trot.
At home he didn't spook at bright blue barrels, a wall or planks, so we decided it was time for our first party.
A local shows centre, Duckhurst Farm, holds clear round jumping on Saturday afternoons.
The fences start off small but are solid and brightly coloured, with lots of fillers, and the school is big enough for the largest horses.
Not wanting to jump in at the deep end, I hired the school the day before and went with Karen, a friend who wanted to give her experienced but spooky horse an indoor schooling session.
Skipper worked nicely on the flat, so John built us a six inch cross pole to trot over.
We trotted calmly into it, hopped over it — and I can only rely on Karen and John's description of what happened.
‘Like something out of Tom and Jerry ’, was how John put it.
Apparently Skipper landed, felt extremely pleased with himself and threw an enormous buck with a twist in it.
I remember thinking something unprintable as I flew through the air and remember wishing I'd worn a body protector as I landed very hard.
Like an idiot, I hadn't worn it because it was ‘only’ baby showjumps, not cross-country.
Skipper stopped dead and looked down on me with a definite ‘What on earth are you doing there ?’ look on his face.
Cross and sore, I got straight back on and trotted him into the fence again.
This time, and thereafter, he behaved perfectly.
He was definitely impressed by Karen's lovely grey mare, Wilma, who is a born show jumper.
Wilma finished the session by cantering into four foot fences and popping over them as if they were no bigger than our two foot nine ones — which made me realise how far we have to go.
Next day Skipper's ‘Auntie’ Jackie, with whom he stayed when I first bought him, took us back to Duckhurst Farm in her lorry.
As Skipper came off the ramp and saw the other horses there he grew to 17.2hh and I began to wonder if this was a good idea.
I got on before I could change my mind and we bounced around for a few minutes.
The nicest thing about Duckhurst Farm's clear round afternoons is the atmosphere: they are meant to encourage horse and rider and the owners were happy for me to trot round for five minutes before we faced the first fence.
Luckily the course was a flowing one and suitable for horses as well as short striding ponies.
If there has been tricky manoeuvres I would have ignored the set course and followed my own, turning a circle if necessary: this was a schooling round, not an attempt to win a rosette.
Our First Rosette
After a few minutes work on both reins Skipper was going forward, with his brain between his ears.
I admit I was sending up a silent prayer as we trotted towards the first fence, but I needn't have worried.
Everything went beautifully.
He was bold into every fence, but didn't pull, and even managed to canter the little one-stride double (sited just after a corner and with 24ft between the elements, it was the ideal opportunity).
We had a clear round, a rosette, and most important of all — a bit more confidence in each other.
Now we're going to say a temporary goodbye, because over the next few months we need to consolidate all that we have learned.
Progress will be slower, but hopefully it will continue.
I can't believe that it is only seven months since Lynn told me she had a four-year-old who was ‘a really nice sort .’
As far as I'm concerned, that was the understatement of the year — we'll let you know how we're getting on after Skipper and I have enjoyed the summer together.
Skipper in June.
Skipper five months later.
He has grown from 16.2hh to just under 17hh.
He is deeper through the girth and his topline has developed, especially behind the saddle.
His dad, the Irish Draught stallion, Skippy, stands 17.1hh so he may still grow.
What a clever boy!
Skipper poses with his first ever rosette.
All this hard work is very tiring!
‘Panic stations!
Things like this never happen in the ‘how to clip your horse’ magazine articles.’
‘Apparently Skipper landed, felt extremely pleased with himself and threw an enormous buck with a twist in it.
I remember thinking something unprintable as I flew through the air’
WHAT A CHARACTER!
As with humans, horses' temperaments, or characters, vary enormously.
Jane Lucas describes the different types and the importance of your horse's temperament suiting your needs.
Many pages of equestrian text books are taken up describing the ideal physical conformation of the horse, and how to judge good conformation when buying a horse.
However, little attention is devoted to temperament which is, at least, equally as important as conformation.
Time and time again we see horses with limited physical ability, but a big heart, out performing the physically talented horse.
But what is temperament, and how do we define what is a good one?
Temperament can be described as the general consistency with which an individual reacts to certain situations.
It causes the differences between individuals which cannot be accounted for by intelligence or learning.
Rather than talking about a ‘good’ temperament it is better to talk about a ‘suitable’temperament, ie. the horse is suited to its intended purpose and the personality and experience of his rider.
The placid and sensible character of the beginner's cob would be unsuitable for the racecourse, for example.
Types of Temperament
There are many variations in temperament and it is difficult to classify them into strictly defined groups.
However, Pavlov, the famous behaviour scientist, listed four main groups of temperament types, which are useful as they relate to the animal's response to learning and difficult circumstances.
They are:
1.
Sanguine : this type has a well-balanced, strong temperament, and is usually lively.
They learn quickly, and keep trying even in confusing and conflicting circumstances.
2.
Phlegmatic : this type has a placid nature and tends to be lazy.
When faced with a confusing situation they usually just switch off.
3.
Melancholic : these are timid and easily frightened.
They are prone to nervous breakdowns if overstressed mentally.
4.
Choleric : these tend to be over-reactive.
Their reactions in difficult situations is often violent and sometimes savage.
It is obvious that the first type of temperament is the one most desirable for a riding horse.
The second type can be dull to ride, but are suitable for novices as they will not react  to conflicting aids, which is why they are often found in riding schools.
The third type needs careful, experienced handling.
The breaking and training process will need to be longer than usual and extra care must be taken to ensure that new lessons are clearly taught.
If this is the case, then this type of horse can turn out to be a sensitive and responsive ride, but may always be spooky in unfamiliar circumstances.
The fourth type is probably the most difficult, and is definitely not suitable for a novice, due to its violent reactions.
Again, careful handling can reduce many of the problems associated with this temperament, but these traits remain present and may be triggered when the horse is stressed.
Luckily, this seems to be the least common temperament among horses.
What Determines Temperament?
Temperament seems to be the result of three different factors — genetic inheritance, past experience and present environment.
The genetic influence is borne out by the characteristic temperaments of various breeds.
Different types of horses have evolved temperaments to cope with their native climate and environment.
Arabs need to be fast and alert to survive in exposed desert lands, while Highlands have to be sensible and phlegmatic to cope with mountainous terrain.
Where man has bred horses for his own purposes their temperaments will differ according to their required role, making racehorses excitable, whereas carthorses will be placid and reliable.
This hereditary factor means that there is often a connection between the physical appearance of an individual and its temperament.
One example of this is build — heavily-built horses (bred for slow work) tend to be more calm and sensible than lightly-built ones (bred for speed).
There is much controversy over whether temperament is linked to colour — most people are familiar with the assumptions that chestnuts are hot-headed, bays reliable and blacks evil-tempered.
Scientific experiments with certain species, such as rats, have shown that there is some association between colour and temperament, regardless of breeding or upbringing.
One theory to explain this is that the pigmentation of the skin may affect the sensitivity of the nerve-endings, so that chestnuts may be more sensitive to outside stimuli than  say bays, therefore making them more likely to over-react.
The horse's genetic programming can be modified, however, by its upbringing and experiences.
A naturally placid horse will show signs of nervousness if it is brought up in a rough home, while a naturally nervous horse which has always experienced a sympathetic and secure home will be quite placid.
However, the effect of experience on temperament is still limited by the horse's genetic traits — for example, if both the naturally placid horse and the naturally nervous horse were brought up in the same rough environment, then the placid horse would still be less timid than the nervous one.
Another factor influencing temperament is the current environment the horse is kept in.
It is often noted, especially by farriers and vets, that many horses in the same yard have similar temperaments  ie. they are affected by the management of the yard.
Calm, orderly yards tend to be filled with relaxed, calm horses, in contrast to the nervy and difficult ones in chaotic and rough yards.
This is why it can be difficult to judge the temperament of a horse you intend to buy.
In a well-run, calm, familiar yard even a nervous horse may seem quite laid-back.
However, when he is transferred to a strange yard with different handlers, even if it is a good establishment, his natural nervous temperament will reappear, explaining why so many new owners think their horse may have been drugged when they bought it.
Judging Temperament
There are many ‘old wives’ tales that relate horses' temperaments to their physical appearance — such as all chestnut mares are excitable and unpredictable.
As mentioned earlier, there is some connection between temperament and factors such as build, colour, breed etc.
However, these are generalities which should not be allowed to prejudice us.
I am sure we all know horses that are exceptions to them — thoroughbred chestnut mares that are calm and placid and bay cobs who are nervy and excitable.
The most accurate way to assess an individual's temperament is by observing his expressions and behaviour.
Some of the most significant clues at first glance are:
Eyes : Rolling eyes that show the whites are often thought to be a sign of viciousness — in fact, they are an indication of wariness and suspicion, which is only occasionally accompanied by aggression.
Wide-open, constantly moving eyes signal nervousness and alertness.
Half-closed, dozy eyes usually belong to a placid, lazy horse.
Ears : Pricked ears denote alertness, constantly twitching ones nervousness, relaxed ones placidness.
Nostrils : Tension around the nostrils usually indicates fear.
Posture : Placid horses usually display a relaxed posture, with a low head and tail carriage.
Nervous or aggressive horses will adopt a tense carriage with a high head and neck.
When observing the horse in the stable, note the following:
Does the horse come to the stable door to investigate you, and perhaps give you a friendly nuzzle?
Does he lay back his ears and threaten to bite?
Or does he just watch warily from the back of the box, or even ignore you?
When you enter does he approach you, or does he back off?
Do his quarters swing towards you — a possible sign of aggression?
The state of the stable and bedding can offer many clues — look for signs of chewing and kicking.
Disturbed bedding could indicate box-walking, usually the sign of a nervous or restless horse.
When trying the horse under saddle, or in hand or on the lunge if unbroken, try the following tests:
Is there a difference in the horse's behaviour when being ridden away from, as opposed to towards, the gate or other horses.
Most horses naturally slow down slightly when asked to move away from this sort of attraction, but a marked reluctance to go forwards could indicate nappiness.
What happens when you introduce something new to his familiar environment — for example, placing a brightly coloured cloth or jacket on the paddock fence, or hung over the pole of a small jump.
Does he investigate the object curiously at first and then ignore it, indicating a bold nature?
Or does he refuse to go near it for the rest of the session and become unsettled?
Try teaching the horse something new to him.
This will vary depending upon its age and level of training, but can be done with any horse.
With an unbroken horse you might try reining back in hand, while a mature horse might be asked to try half- pass for the first time.
What is his reaction?
Does he pick up the idea quickly or, if he does not, does he stay calm and keep trying until he does?
Or does he panic and get nervous or violent?
Or does he just switch off and ignore you?
These points will, I hope, give you some guidelines to judging the temperament of a strange horse, whether you are looking for a suitable horse to buy, or deciding which way to handle a particular animal.
The horse should be suited to its intended purpose and the experience of its rider.
Showing the whites of the eye is a sign of wariness and suspicion rather than viciousness.
Does the horse come to investigate and give a friendly nuzzle?
The horse's environment and the way in which it is handled will affect its behaviour to an extent.
Life with Mary
In the second part of our brand new series, Mary Thomson describes what she has been up to, and charts the progress of her promising baby, King Basil.
During November and December I turn my horses out completely.
My grooms, Annie and Tina, leave and go to work in the offices at The Donkey Sanctuary, a large charitable organisation up the road with over 3,500 donkeys.
They get extremely busy pre- Christmas, so it fits in well.
Both the horses and girls come back into work on January 1st by which time both parties are refreshed and raring to go!
I have not got enough land for the  horses' longer holidays, but with friendly farmers around I am able to rent two big ‘safe’ fields which are a couple of miles away from home.
I visit the horses twice a day, taking titbits to encourage them to trot to me so I can make sure they are sound!
I check for any cuts, bumps or loose shoes.
They have their hind shoes removed, just in case they kick, but I leave their front shoes on to protect their hooves.
This winter I did not start giving them any extra feed until the second week of December.
I think they stayed plenty fat enough until then because
a)
none of them are full thoroughbred, they are all ⅞thbred so therefore a bit hardier.
b)
the fields they are in have masses of grass, are level and have plenty of shelter, and
c)
I stick to a very strict worming programme, worming them once every six weeks.
When I started feeding them I built them up to a wedge of ‘Horsehage’ each — which they love.
It is convenient to take in the back of the car, and is dust free and high in fibre —if the weather gets bad I will also give them a feed of Spillers ‘Cool Mixture’.
The so called quiet time seems to fly by for me.
I have a chance to catch up with all my paper work, do a bit of teaching, work on any horses, and go looking for more if need be.
Romanian Mission
This year a group of us event riders, went on a return mission to Romania, straight after the final event of the season.
We took essential supplies and equipment to six orphanages in the Bucharest area, in a convoy of two horseboxes and three container lorries — the improvements since last year within the orphanages were extremely encouraging, making our efforts seem very worthwhile.
Being a top sports person requires a certain amount of selfishness, so this mission was a wonderful opportunity to help other people for a change.
With Lucinda Green's enthusiasm, the 12 of us involved  raised £80,000 this year, and ended up taking over 40 tonnes of supplies, with a tremendous amount of support from the ‘horsy fraternity’.
Boris and Basil
I had two horses in work during November and December.
Boris came in and started walking exercise after a scan, by Sue Dyson at Newmarket, revealed that his strained suspensory ligament (which happened at Badminton in the spring) had sufficiently healed.
Basil, my five-year-old has also been working, as he has a great deal to learn to ensure he will begin his eventing career in March filled with confidence.
I bought him in the summer as a very green five-year-old, who had never been off the farm where he was bred.
I worked him quietly through the autumn, teaching him how to work in the correct outline, maintaining his balance and an even rein contact, progressing to transitions, turns, serpentines and learning about length bend, rhythm and total obedience.
He has been a joy to produce as he is a very willing, ‘happy’ horse who thoroughly enjoys learning new things.
Having a natural balance and loose, elastic movement has helped enormously.
Once his flat work was fairly established I went on to his jumping, first working with trot, then canter poles, insisting on straightness and even temp of stride.
Then on to trotting over single fences with placing poles, moving on to building a grid, then on to cantering individual fences.
Once he was popping happily round a spooky 3′6″ course with tyres, polythene bags and barrels as fillers, I took him to his first indoor showjumping competition.
His education so far has also included getting used to heavy main road traffic, a day's hunting, playing in and out of our local river and being clipped.
He was petrified of the clippers at first.
I had to go into the stable each day equipped with clippers and some nuts.
After a few days of being talked to, and stroked with the clippers running, he became confident enough to let me do a full clip (including his ears!)— which just goes to show that patience, firmness and plenty of encouragement are essential when producing a young horse.
‘Basil has been a joy to produce as he is a very willing, happy horse who thoroughly enjoys learning new things.’
PONY POWER
Ponies are enjoying a new boom in popularity — amongst adult riders and handlers.
Carolyn Henderson finds out how pint-sized performers can take on and beat the big boys.
There is a commonly held belief in the horse world that a good big 'un will always beat a good little 'un.
In some cases that might be true; modern international show jumping course are so big and so technical that they demand a horse with the size, scope and power to make the heights and spreads.
But in the real world, where most of us enjoy our horses and look on them as part of the family, pony power can really score.
More and more adults are discovering that ponies can give as much fun (if not more) than horses, and can do twice as much for half the price!
Some people still think that the only horse worth owning has to be 16.2hh and incredibly good looking.
They rush off and buy such an animal without taking their riding experience and ability into account, let alone the money, facilities and time they have available.
Keeping a big horse is expensive; I know, I've got one, and when I worked out what he cost me to keep I got to £50 per week and stopped because it was too frightening.
Yet a friend with a 14.1hh Welsh Cob says his costs average out at £12 a week; admittedly she has her own land and he lives out most of the time, but he really earns his living — last year they did everything from Riding Club events to a few days hunting.
Weight Carriers
Native or near native ponies are hardy, tough little weight carriers.
Highland ponies, for instance, were originally bred to carry shot stags weighing up to 14 stone, so can cope easily with most adults.
Your only problem might be if you are very tall and worry about what other people think.
A Highland pony could carry the average six foot man easily, but he would still look long legged on him even allowing for these  ponies' generous girths.
Ponies nearly always have the bonus of excellent temperaments and are much more agile than horses.
A pony will often find a ‘fifth leg’ when a big horse will fall flat on his nose, and although you don't see any small ponies at the top in eventing, many riders like a bit of pony  blood in their eventers ‘to help them think more quickly ’.
If you fancy your chances at bigger shows but can't afford to buy or keep a top class horse, think about a registered Mountain and Moorland for a fraction of the price.
You could do in-hand and ridden breed classes, and M and M working hunter pony classes — and who knows, you could even end up qualifying for Olympia.
If the idea appeals to you but you're not quite sure what's involved, visit your nearest county shows and watch the pony classes.
Talk to the exhibitors, too: as long as you pick the right moment you'll find they are very happy to talk about their ponies.
Just be prepared for Connemara enthusiasts to tell you that theirs is the only breed worth bothering about, Welsh Cob experts too insist that nothing compares with a good Section D and Highland/Fell/Dales etc exhibitors feel exactly the same!
Every breed has its own society and these usually keep lists of ponies that are for sale from their breeders.
The major breed societies and their representatives are listed in many good books and in publications like the Horse and Hound Diary.
While it's always nice to know a pony's background, you can have just as much fun with a Heinz 57.
Stars have risen from the most unlikely backgrounds, as Pauline Norton's Bubbles proves.
Pauline, who lives near Tonbridge, Kent, first saw the 12.2hh Cremello mare when she was rescued by friend and breeder Jackie Klein.
Jackie was asked if she would take a Thoroughbred mare who had been abandoned in a field and give her a home as a brood mare — but part of the deal was that she also took the pony who had been left with her.
‘When I first saw her I  thought  ‘What on earth is that?’’
Pauline recalled.
‘Her mane and tail were all matted and she had no manners — when we first put her in a stable she box walked and tried to barge out as soon as you opened the door .’
Pauline, who always had back problems, felt so sorry for the little mare that she took her over from Jackie.
At the time she thought she might have to give up riding, and decided that if she had Bubbles broken to harness she could have some fun driving her and doing some in-hand showing.
Those early ambitions have been achieved — and they were only the start.
Bubbles, who Pauline rightly describes as ‘the ultimate multi-purpose pony ’ has won prizes for dressage and showing, is driven regularly and has produced a lovely colt foal who should make a nice working hunter pony.
The mare (whose show name is Miss Piggy because of her pink nose and greediness) does not look like  most people's idea of a dressage horse.
Yet last season she regularly beat big horses in unaffiliated Prelim and novice competitions, including intermediate eventers.
Her partner on these occasions is 20-year-old Jo Griffin, who runs the livery yard where Bubbles and Pauline's other horse, Sarah, is kept.
Sarah, a 16.3hh grey thoroughbred mare, really does look like a dressage horse — but Bubbles thinks that she is definitely number one!
At five foot one and a half, Jo is the ideal rider for Bubbles.
She is very proud of being the first person ever to sit on her; Pauline broke the pony and the two have done all the training since, with professional help in the later stages from instructor Mal Kendall.
‘When we first started doing dressage people couldn't believe it ,’ said Pauline.
‘Then they saw her marks and couldn't believe that, either !’
‘Mal loves her.
She's always been trained on classical principles, and we've proved you can train anything that way.
Bubbles is actually very clever; it took her five minutes to learn how to leg yield.
‘Now she can do half passes, shoulder-in and pirouettes.
We want to affiliate her in horse classes — I know she won't be able to manage lengthened strides very easily because of her conformation, but we hope we'll get up to Medium level.’
Two years ago Pauline decided to breed a foal from Bubbles, and after getting the all-clear from her vet sent the pony to the 16hh thoroughbred stallion Proa.
Proa is by one of the Aga Khan's stallions, and he and Bubbles produced a colt who was originally called Kermit.
Pauline sold him at weaning and he is now another family's pride and joy.
He stands over 13.2hh now and has just the right mixture of quality and substance.
When Bubbles isn't being a mini dressage horse, she is busy as a driving pony.
She is a familiar sight round the lanes near the stables, trotting along with her exercise cart, and even works for a living by fetching her own carrots from the local farm shop.
‘We've had such a lot of fun with her ,’ Pauline says with obvious affection.
‘I could never sell her.
We have come up against some prejudice in the dressage, but the nice thing is that at the end of the test sheets you often see the same comment from the judge —‘What a super pony!’.’
Ponies can give as much fun, if not more, than horses.
Ponies nearly always have the bonus of excellent temperaments and are much more agile than horses.
If you fancy your chances at bigger shows think about a registered Mountain and Moorland for a fraction of the price.
Pauline and Bubbles enjoy in-hand showing.
‘Last season Bubbles regularly beat big horses in unaffiliated Prelim and novice competitions, including intermediate eventers.’
Jo and Bubbles have done well in dressage.
Bubbles and Kermit.
‘Your only problem might be if you are very tall and worry about what other people think.
A Highland pony could carry the average six foot man easily, but he would still look long-legged on him even allowing for these ponies’ generous girths.’
‘To the Rescue’
Gordon Wesley BHS (SMT) DABRS answers more of your questions.
CARELESS JUMPING
Dear Gordon ,
Q. My horse is very careless with one (or perhaps both) forelegs and most of our jumping disappointments stem from him dipping a leg down.
This is what my friends tell me from a side view.
Any advice?
He is six years old and very forward going and appears to love his jumping .
A. I am going to consider your horse as being young in mind and body (Have you by any chance access to a jumping lane or alley?)
I would say that your horse simply does not fold his forelegs correctly.
Perhaps he is bringing his forearm forwards and leaving the lower leg hanging down.
There are TWO reasons for this: weakness or inexperience.
This problem can be solved by shortening distances between jumps or between the elements in a jumping lane.
When you shorten distances between elements in a line of jumps, the horse simply has to bring its hocks under more than it is currently doing…while doing so the horse has to shift more weight from its forehand to its quarters, which are thus lowered and ‘engaged’.
By reducing the weight on the forehand your horse will be in a better position to use his muscles in the forehand with greater ease and freedom.
With time and practice he will fold his forearm correctly, with less chance of hitting his jumps.
I hope you protect your horse's legs with boots whenever he jumps.
Spreading an oxer progressively will also help to improve matters — see my sketches.
You do need to put this matter right as a horse with a dipping foreleg will generally be more prone to ‘pecking’ i.e. tripping on landing after a jump.
ANY COMEBACK?
Dear Gordon ,
Q. Is there any comeback in law is a horse reveals faults which were not declared by the previous owner at the time of the sale?
Does the law discriminate in those cases between vices and unsoundness?
Name and address withheld.
A. What a stinker you have posed me!
They are subject to a ‘warranty’.
This means that the seller has to make certain undertakings to the buyer.
If you look in the equine magazines, the ‘Horse and Hound’ in particular, you will see ads for horses which read for example —‘Warranted sound ’and ‘Warranted free from vice ’.
This means that everything stated after ]the word warranted is guaranteed.
If the statements are proved untrue, the condition of contract is broken.
The buyer is then entitled to repudiate the contract within a reasonable time and get his or her money back or return the horse and claim damages.
There is a clear distinction in law between unsoundness and vice.
BARON PARKE in Coates V Stephens, 1838, is often quoted and reads:
‘The rule as to unsoundness is that if at the time of sale, the horse has any disease which either actually does diminish the natural usefulness of the animal, so as to make him less capable of work of any description of which in its ordinary progress will diminish the natural usefulness of the animal, or if the horse has, either from disease or accident undergone any alterations of structure that either actually does at the time, or in its ordinary effects will, diminish the natural usefulness of the horse, such a horse is unsound.’
Navicular disease, pedal  ostitis , broken wind, coughing, spavins and other conditions producing lameness are typical conditions of unsoundness.
UNSOUNDNESS IS A QUESTION OF USEFULNESS.
A vice is a bad habit or some kind of strange temperament in a horse or pony not normally expected which renders it — dangerous, or less useful or liable to decline in health.
Weaving, crib-biting, biting (general vice) and kicking are typical vices.
Read the following parts of the Sale of Goods Act 1979, get a copy from your local county library…hope this will help.
Law of ‘contract’ Section 2(1)
Right to sell/true ownership Section 12 (1)(a)
Sue for damages Section 13
‘Let the buyer beware’ Section 14(1)
Merchantable Quality Section 14(2)
Fit for Purpose Section 14(3)
The Price Section 18
Transfer of goods/ownership Section 61(1)
STABLES V STALLS
Dear Gordon ,
Q. I am planning to purchase some ‘ready-made’ stables.
Before doing so can you advise me on the argument of stables v stalls.
I have two barns I am planning to diversify into horse/pony accommodation.
Can you offer any advice?
A. There are four criteria to bear in mind.
Is what you plan —
a)
Right for horses and ponies?
b)
Labour-saving for your staff?
c)
Aesthetically pleasing i.e. pleasing to the eye?
d)
Safe?
Horses need plenty of fresh air, reasonably high roofs for stable air to get away and space to live in!
They do not like to be threatened.
This does not imply that stalls are bad, but loose boxes with feed mangers facing each other(through bars) are bad.
Horses and ponies need a peaceful environment, free from daily strife and tension.
An old fashioned stone yard is ideal, but a good clean well built modern set of stables can be just as good.
It is the routine and tender loving care of the staff that create the best atmosphere.
Employee considerations do influence the final answer.
Young horses and ponies winter well in numbers in barns.
Old farm cart sheds, cleanly converted, do make good stables.
Mares in stalls make mucking out a large number easier.
Geldings tend to be much wetter, therefore are better put in well drained stables.
In conclusion I would suggest the following should help as you have not told me what your horses/ponies will be used for.
a)
Small or cobby good natured ponies do well in covered straw yards
b)
Big horses and cobs do well in stalls BUT must have daily work/exercise
c)
Horses which have a day off per week and stand in need to be in loose boxes (stables)
d)
TB mares can be wintered in stalls but need daily exercise e.g. a horse walker
e)
Highly strung horses do better in loose boxes (stables) either in a barn or in a yard
Detailed design should be SAFE, LABOUR SAVING AND FUNCTIONAL.
A horse usually dangles its legs through weakness or inexperience.
Crib-biting is typical of a vice, by definition a bad habit which renders it liable to decline in health.
Horses need a peaceful environment, free from daily strife and tensions.
FEELING FRESH!
Jane Wallace looks at two common problems which will be experienced with most horses at some stage or other: shying and pulling.
This month I am going to cover two problems which most horses will produce at some time or other.
These are often displayed when the horse is fresh or feeling rather well: shying and pulling.
A horse, being a herd animal, is naturally suspicious and his first instinct is to run from danger.
If a horse sees something frightening when being ridden, he may either refuse to go pasts it, try to take a wide berth round it, or whip round suddenly.
This object may be something which he sees from a distance and so gives the rider due warning that he will probably shy.
Alternatively, he may suddenly see something out of the corner of his eye which makes him jump sideways very quickly, so giving the rider little chance to take avoiding action.
Some horses are more spooky by nature than others and infuriatingly will spook at some seemingly insignificant object, but will walk past the most terrifying looking lorry or jump an enormous fence without a second thought.
Learning About Life
A young horse will take time to learn about life and about what is a genuinely frightening experience.
Most (although not all!) horses do become less worried about strange objects as they get older, but some old horses are just plain silly about some things, but it is mostly a bit of a game to them and if ignored, they soon settle down!
I have found that shying is best combated by taking as little notice as possible.
King's Jester used to be a very spooky horse and would shy at the same jump, stacked in the corner of the school, every single day and if anything was moved to a different position, he would behave as if it were about to leap out and get him.
This sort of behaviour is very irritating and eventually I resorted to giving him a kick.
Well, that set us back about a week at least!
Everything then was twice as frightening, so I returned to the gentle patting and quiet treatment with which I had tried to persevere before, and slowly Jester forgot his ‘fear’ and got on with his work.
Chastising
By chastising a horse, we only make a tense situation worse.
The horse is not sure of what to be more nervous, the object or his rider.
Soon, the horse will associate shying with a reprimand from his rider.
If the horse is tense (the first stage is calmness, remember) then everything is lost — suppleness, free forward movement and so on, until the whole issue is blown out of proportion…just for the sake of the horse not wishing to pass close to something trivial.
It is better to cut the corner, maintaining rhythm at jumps and then gradually edge towards the fearsome object bit by bit.
If a horse shies, he is fundamentally ignoring the rider's inside leg, so rather than worrying about the horse shying, it is more important to concentrate on exercises which make the horse move away from the leg such as leg-yield, shoulder-in, enlarging and decreasing the circle.
There are some horses who are really just avoiding working by shying at everything.
I try to think that my drive forward is stronger than the horse's desire to draw back, because the moment a horse thinks about shying, he stops going forward.
It is interesting to note how a horse will shy more on one rein than another depending on which is his stiff rein.
The stiff rein indicates that the horse is not carrying or pushing as much with that inside hind leg and so it is easier for him to shy (and so stop going forward), if he is not working as well in the first instance.
I am not suggesting that any horse should be allowed to indicate where HE wants to go, but patient, firm and strong riding will build up confidence and obedience more than a big stick and spurs.
In everything, a compromise is the answer and by not expecting the horse to go too close to a potentially spooky object, kidding the horse that you never intended him to go near it, will avert an argument or tension.
I am all in favour of an easy life for horse and rider wherever possible.
If a horse is very spooky and really does not ever settle down, there is a possibility that he may have defective eye-sight.
This is particularly likely in a horse who shies suddenly when he is frightened by something he cannot identify.
Your veterinary surgeon will put your mind at rest if you ware worried, but invariably a spooky horse has nothing wrong with him at all!
Pulling
Pulling is a totally different sort of problem.
the degree can vary from the rider feeling that he is having his arms pulled out to the good feeling when the horse is keen to get on with his business — this is described as being well up to the rider's hand.
The horse pulls for a variety  of reasons.
As in the latter case, the horse may be in eager anticipation of what is to come!
A fresh horse may pull from exuberance and will settle down once the fizz has gone.
Pulling must not be confused with leaning, when the horse is heavy in the hand by being on his forehand.
These two reasons are understandable and forgiveable (provided you can remain in control!)
A more sinister reason is that the horse is in fact running away from pain.
This, unfortunately, is one of the most common reasons.
It is hard to understand why a horse will try to run away from a pain caused by a bit or a rough hand, but the fact is that they do.
It is obvious that a horse will run from a stick, spurs or fear of the rider, but it is hard to accept that he will try to pull on the bit if that very action increases the pain.
A horse will pull all the more against a bit which causes him pain or if his mouth is split in the corner even though pulling makes it worse.
Back pain will also make a horse run away.
Normally the horse who pulls with his ears back is unhappy and running from pain whereas the horse who pulls with his ears forward is just eager.
Understanding The Cause
To solve the problems it is important to understand the cause.
If a horse stops pulling once he has settled down and works sensibly and correctly after say, 20 minutes of ‘whoopee’ then it is a matter of working through the exuberance stage with as many exercises in the form of transitions and ‘things to do’as possible to occupy the horse's mind and so try to make him concentrate on his work rather than other exciting stimuli.
The more the horse has to think about, the quicker he will settle down.
If he is asked to only trot round in large circles, he will have plenty of time to think about life being fun, whereas if he is ‘worked’ he will have to concentrate his mind on the job in hand.
Whatever the case, the number one lesson to learn is that a horse cannot be prevented from pulling by merely pulling back at him.
Do not forget the old adage ‘It takes two to pull’.
The only way to lighten a heavy forehand, which is basically the trouble, is by using a strong leg up to a giving and taking hand, thereby giving a series of strong half-halts.
These coupled with transitions with a firm but quiet insistence that the horse should not pull is the correct approach.
Sometimes the horse may need to be stopped quite firmly, but a yank will only aggravate the situation and make the horse anxious, so creating another problem of tension to cure.
During the half-halts, be strong with leg and positive with a blocking hand, then relax and sit quietly with a light contact, repeating this until the penny finally drops.
This may take some time but patience will be rewarded far more than a loss of temper.
As with any evasion, the horse cannot  be expected to know that he is not supposed to do it.
As riders and trainers we must explain to the horse what is acceptable and what is not.
We must try to prevent him from erring in the first place; easier said than done!
We were once sent a polo pony to get fit for the coming polo season who was terrified of his mouth.
He used to be ridden in a twisted mouthpiece double bridle and yet still he was very strong.
We rode him in a rubber snaffle with a cavesson noseband and provided you did not pull at him, he was as light as a feather.
If a horse does pull from anxiety, it is always worthwhile trying a milder bit — in an enclosed space, he cannot go far if it does not work.
Pulling from pain or nerves is closely associated with tenseness — readers should refer to one of my previous articles on problems for helpful suggestions.
Pain In The Back
Running from pain in the back is a problem which can only be handled with understanding.
A vet, may be able to suggest some treatment to help ease tight muscles causing the pain.
Check that the saddle fits correctly and is neither too low on the withers or spine.
A good thick numnah is imperative and a Poly Pad is invaluable as this will disperse the pressure of the saddle and Poly Pads come in various thicknesses too.
Some horses are naturally more sensitive than others and the rider's weight causes them to hollow and stiffen.
With these types of horses, try to sit very lightly and note how they work on the lunge without the weight on their back compared to how they work under a rider.
We once had a horse who was as quiet as a lamb on the lunge and worked very well, but the moment he was ridden, he became very tense, grinding his teeth and constantly trying to run away.
This became worse and worse and eventually he had to be put out of his misery.
A post mortem showed that his spinal processes were severely damaged in the wither region and the weight of the rider was intolerable for him.
This had become a degenerative condition due to a fall early in his career.
As with any problem, try to correct it by schooling, but accept that an aid may be necessary.
In this instant, a stronger bit might help with the strong horse to stop him running through the rider's hand.
Unless the rider can control the energy his legs are creating, the horse will never learn to use his hocks, but will plough onto his forehand.
However, that is another problem!
Jane with her young horse Charlie.
‘The more the horse has to think about, the quicker he will settle down.’
A horse that pulls with his ears forward tends to be just eager.
Some older horses can be just plain silly and if ignored soon settle down.
‘Some horses are more spooky by nature than others and infuriatingly will spook at some seemingly insignificant object, but will walk past the most terrifying looking lorry or jump an enormous fence without a second thought.’
Give the horse plenty to think about so that he concentrates on his work rather than other exciting stimuli.
Check that your saddle fits correctly as horses will often run from pain in the back.
‘We were once sent a polo pony to get fit for the coming polo season who was terrified of his mouth.
He used to be ridden in a twisted mouthpiece double bridle and yet still he was very strong.
We rode him in a rubber snaffle with a cavesson noseband and provided you did not pull at him, he was as light as a feather.’
Patient, firm and strong riding will help build up the confidence of a spooky horse.
Supplementing the Rations
Equine nutritionist Zoe Davies MSc looks at the rapidly expanding supplement market.
The supplement market is rapidly expanding and there are now over a hundred different products on the market, with new ones arriving on a regular basis!
Why do we use supplements for horses?
Basically, the traditional straight cereals such as oats, barley and maize are not well balanced ‘nutritionally’ for horses.
The end products which arrive in your bag of feed vary tremendously in nutrient values.
These values are dependent upon such factors as soil type, weather conditions, storage etc.
Also the horse requirements for nutrients varies with age, workload, stage of life cycle etc.
Obviously, the cereals do not vary in their contents to take this into account.
We therefore have to make adjustments to these cereals if we are going to provide the horse with the nutrients it needs.
Balancing basic food ingredients
Grass is not perfectly balanced for all types of horses all year round either.
Its nutritional quality decreases markedly in the winter months and also when we have drought conditions such as we had last summer.
Supplements therefore are designed to make up the basic food ingredients and balance them to keep the horse healthy.
Some supplements also aim to help horses which are working particularly hard to cope with the increased stress.
Some supplements contain many different nutrients and are known as Broad Spectrum’supplements.
These contain both minerals and vitamins and some also contain amino acids.
Other supplements are much simpler in terms of the number of nutrients they contain such as Limestone Flour which contains Calcium Carbonate.
Also some supplements are based on one particular nutrient such as Vitamins A, D and E.
Although we are more aware of the requirements for the horse, we know that  the ingredients are variable.
We therefore add a supplement so that we know that the horse is definitely receiving vital micro nutrients (these are nutrients required in very small quantities).
In other words we ‘roughly’ balance the feeds.
It is not possible for most horse owners to finely tune their horses diets, this is left to the nutritionists and even then this is not absolutely precise, after all we cannot regularly analyse every horse owner's grazing, or feed.
This is one reason why compound feeds are more balanced, because nutritionists can regularly analyse individual ingredients accordingly, by adding a suitable vitamin/mineral premix.
Many supplement manufacturers now adhere the US National Research  Council's ‘Nutrient Requirements for Horses’.
This lists the horse's nutrient requirements according to the latest research.
Chemically Unstable
Some vitamins are very unstable chemically and therefore have to be protected by being coated with another substance.
Because vitamins and trace minerals are required in such minute amounts, they are diluted in a much larger quantity of an inert substance known as a carrier.
A common carrier is wheatfeed.
The nutrients have to be evenly mixed with this carrier to ensure that they are well distributed throughout each dose.
Minerals are not added as straight ‘Copper’ or ‘Zinc’or ‘Iron’.
These are all added in their salt form (remember your O level chemistry with salts and bases etc) such as Calcium Carbonate, Sodium Chloride, Sodium Selenite or Copper Sulphate.
These salts need to have a high ‘Biological Availability’ ie the horse has to be able to efficiently digest and absorb the minerals.
Iron from ferrous sulphate, for example, is more available to the horse than the iron in ferrous carbonate.
Which Supplement Should I Choose And How Should I Use It?
There are so many on the market that many horse owners tend to use the cheapest supplement they can find, but this may not be the best.
There are several criteria to look for when choosing one for your horse.
1.
Choose a product which has been formulated to meet your particular requirements.
For example, if you are looking for something for your in-foal mare, choose a supplement which has been made specifically for this purpose such as Medi Equus stud formula.
If you are looking for your eventer then choose a formula aimed at the high performance horse which should be higher in Vitamin E.
Most broad spectrum supplements have been formulated based on average pasture and cereal values and their most likely deficiencies.
2.
Look at the contents.
Read the labels and if possible try and work out the different levels of vitamins etc.
Some companies will tell you how much of the nutrients are contained in the whole tub!
This may look a lot but when you work out the amount per dose it's a very different story.
Also, see how many of the vitamins are included in the specification.
Is biotin included, and many of the other B vitamins?(a list of all the required vitamins and minerals are given below).
A good supplement should also contain Lysine and Methionine.
These are essential amino acids.
3.
Follow precisely the  manufacturer's instructions with regard to dose levels.
Do not think that your horse will do better if you add more than the recommendations, the fact is that too much is more harmful than too little.
Make sure that you introduce the supplement gradually and feed daily, not weekly!
4.
Do not cook supplements or pour boiling water over them.
As I mentioned before, vitamins are chemically very unstable and they certainly do not take well to this sort of treatment.
5.
Choose the form of supplement to meet your particular needs ie supplements come in many different forms:
Powder:This is the most common form and should be fed dampened, so that if the horse blows through his nose, he doesn't blow the powder onto the floor!
Liquid:This helps to keep the dust levels low, but many of these formulations go ‘off’ sooner.
If air is excluded such as in those liquid supplements in wine box style, then this is not a problem.
Meal:This has been mixed with a carrier such as wheatfeed and is easy to mix.
It may be slightly more palatable.
Briquettes or Blocks:These are handy for outdoor use and horses can help themselves if and when they need it.
Unfortunately some horses are greedier than others and will help themselves when they don't need it!
6.
Always check the sell by date and make sure that the vitamins are still viable.
Some shops do keep supplements on the shelves without realising that the date has passed.
Even if the date has not been passed check that you have plenty of time to use the tub up.
7.
Use a pack or tub which is easy to reseal and has an air tight seal, this will last longer.
8.
Store the supplement in a cool dark place, light and heat can destroy vitamins.
9.
If you do not understand the instructions then write to the manufacturer concerned, it is very important that you know how much to feed.
10.
If you have a performance horse, be wary of prohibited substances.
All supplement manufacturers are aware of this problem and should take steps of avoid contamination.
Some of the herbal supplements are more difficult as they may naturally contain non permitted substances.
11.
Be wary of seaweed supplements for breeding horses.
They can be naturally very high in Iodine and can cause problems, particularly in foals.
Food values can vary enormously and will be affected by such factors as soil type, weather conditions and storage.
‘If you feed a powder supplement the feed should be dampened, so that if the horse blows through his nose, he doesn't blow the powder onto the floor!’
The nutritional value of grass decreases markedly during the winter months.
If you use a powder supplement, damp the feed to prevent the horse from blowing it away!
John Alexander helps you set your eyes on the right
HOLIDAY HORIZON
‘Riding schools only seem to teach riding on the level ,’ complained the owner of a major Welsh centre in a letter.
‘As soon as we start to canter downhill riders start to freak out .’
And he added, even more pointedly, ‘BHS dressage techniques don't help much on the side of a mountain or in a peat bog .’
He's right, of course.
It's not only riding skills that count when considering a holiday, but the ability to cope in unfamiliar surroundings.
This and the social side, if any, is what can make or break a holiday.
It's no use going on a six day trail ride, with six hours daily in the saddle, if all you want is some gentle hacking in a scenic setting, with perhaps a few longer pub rides as an added bonus.
Nor is it any use going with non-riding friends or family, unless riding is just one part of a sporting package which also includes walking and fishing for example, or even wind surfing or canoeing.
Fulfilling Expectations
Fortunately most equestrian expectations can now be fulfilled.
A more demanding public — hopefully prepared to pay the proper price if horse holidays are to survive — have produced a flexibility in which accommodation matches equestrian standards, and individual needs of riders are increasingly met.
Naturally the more challenging the holiday the higher the price, especially if the reward for six hours in the saddle — with perhaps some of it spent in the rain — is a hot bath and the creature comforts of at least a hotel.
Some, like the Castle Riding Centre (Tel: 0546 3274) tune their trail rides to suit your pocket: the main ones use hotels, with others you stay at the centre or with local families.
Self-catering is also available.
Riding clinics, economy riding holidays and mini-breaks also help to extend the price range; golf, hillwalking, mountain biking and fishing, even ski-ing and shooting, helps attract non-riders.
Similarly the Trans-Wales Trail Rides , based on  Cymfforest Riding Centre, Brecon (Tel: 0874 711398) include not only the main ride but also a six days riding, seven nights accommodation, Black Mountain Ride, which works out cheaper.
Trail riding weekends run from September through to May.
Either way trail rides immerse you totally in the scenery: in Argyll it's the sight of a lone red grouse, flapping furiously in the face of a flurry of hooves, the moorland landscape dotted with azure blue lochs; in Wales valleys, waterfalls, reservoirs and forest — that traditional blend which makes Wales, centrally located, an ideal riding location.
But trail rides also mean facing long climbs, often dismounting and walking, aching limbs at the end of a long day, and in the case of Argyllshire sufficient jumping ability to take your horse over the occasional stone wall.
Highland Horseback (Tel: 0466 85 277) offer ‘Britain's Longest Trail Ride ’ 200 miles from Aberdeenshire in the Eastern Highlands to the Atlantic Coast of Western Ross.
This covers nine days, though a shorter four days riding, five nights accommodations, is available.
There's more of the same in the West Country where North Wheddon Farm (Tel: 064 384 1224) near Minehead offers centre based holidays for the experienced, featuring the burnished hills of Exmoor, highly suited for exciting riding.
All of these are geared towards small groups of adult riders whose ages generally range from those in their early twenties up to fifty, sixty and even beyond.
A weight limit, I'm afraid, of around 13 stone, applies to most trails and generally other forms of riding holidays.
Nor need the scenery always be dramatic: the languid countryside of Norfolk lends itself to exploratory trips with Albion Rides (Tel: 0603 87125).
The local flora and fauna is outlined by owner Tina Sutton, with a unique ride in the grounds of Blickling Hall, a red bricked Jacobean house belonging to the National Trust.
Four and a half days, or weekend offers are available, based on bed and breakfast or hotel accommodation.
The West Country
If you simply want a riding holiday, based on a centre with perhaps some instruction as well then the West Country is a good bet.
Cornish centres like Moss Farm Riding , Blisland (Tel: 0208 850628), near to Jamaica Inn, Bodmin  Moor,Poppever Riding Stables , near Looe (Tel: 05036 3010) and Old Mill Stables (Tel: 0736 753045) with St Ives close by are typical of these.
Others, like The Quantock Riding Centre , Klive, Somerset (Tel: 0278 74 374) offer farmhouse accommodation which could well suit a family holiday.
So choose wisely and not simply on price alone.
Nervous riders are taken on by Blue Well Riding Centre (Tel: 0267 202274) at Pencader, Dyfed, limited to four guests only on the Monday to Friday courses.
Accommodation varies from luxury hotels to farmhouses.
Other specialist courses are run by The Avenue Riding Centre , Malvern, Worcestershire (Tel: 0684 310731) who show there's more to Western style riding than meets the eye, and Red House Stables (Tel: 0629 733583) for driving, of which a three day introductory offer is the most popular.
Mini-breaks
If time is precious, mini-breaks may make sense, though as with all riding holidays, the price remains relatively high, many, of course, being based on high-class hotel accommodation.
The New Forest, its heath and woodland once the happy hunting grounds for Kings, is just such a case — with the four star New Park Manor (Tel: 0590 23467) at Brockenhurst, for one, having its own BHS approved stables.
The scope for riding, especially for the experienced is enormous, with Flanders Farm Riding Centre , Sway,(Tel: 0590 682207) also sporting a Caravan Camping Club site, though you can also stay at a hotel or farmhouse.
Adult Only Weeks
But unless you want a family holiday, opt for the off-season with adult only weeks — now common practice.
This includes many trekking  centres, who, too often subject to disparaging remarks, can be well run and given decent horses often provide the best way to explore rugged terrain, highly unsuited to fasts riding.
A good source here, and for children's and teenage holidays, is the Ponies Association handbook.
Star ratings, based both on equestrian and accommodation standards, run from a white one where there are well kept horse and ponies only to a purple one which offers farmhouse fare of a high standard, and where riding facilities include an indoor and outdoor riding school.
Instructional holidays likewise can be traced through the British Horse Society or the Association of British Riding Schools.
Regional trekking and riding societies can also help.
And if you want to be a little classy, the Mark Phillips Equestrian Centre at Gleneagles Hotel, Perthshire (Tel: 0764 62231) has a two nights half board programme, with a choice between instruction, riding or even carriage driving.
Opportunities for canoeing, mountain biking, archery and abseiling complement the riding programme at The Mendip Equestrian Centre , Lyncombe Lodge, Churchill, near Bristol (Tel: 0934 852335)— already the site for Avon Dry Ski Centre.
Similar play is made by Parc-le-Breos Riding and Holiday Centre (Tel: 0792 371 636) which blends riding with field studies and walking, thus attracting a wider audience.
Fishing and surfing is also available nearby.
Beginning with a small trial project in autumn, 1989,Saddle Travel (Tel: 0497 821356) have captured those seeking unescorted rides for the experienced, with mid-Wales probably one of the few places suited to what, in this crowded country at least, is, for obvious traffic reasons, a rare type of holiday.
Yet, I was assured, 20 years of experience goes into the planning, with every bit of detail given on route maps.
Half board accommodation is arranged, and rides to at their own pace.
And for those with their own horses,Bridle Rides (Tel: 0865 880 176) provide accommodation and meals, along with route maps and notes of the local flora and fauna.
Around 1,000 miles in the Cotswolds, Dorset, the Cranbourne Chase and Ridgeway Downs area of Wiltshire and Berkshire are covered.
The British Horse Society, too, are bringing out an update on their Bed and Breakfast for Horses booklet.
So whether a regular or casual rider, dressage or other discipline freak, or indeed an owner, rest assured there's a holiday just for you…
What They Cost:
Trail rides : From around £250 for an extended weekend break (four days) to include B&B accommodation, up to £700- plus for seven nights, based on a luxury hotel; nearly £800 for a nine day, ten nights, ride.
But the price is inclusive, with few incidentals; remember, however, the cost of getting there.
Riding holidays : Centre based, to include a general mixture of hacking and instruction, around £200 to £300 a week; incidentals depend on the amount of social life.
From full board at a centre, at local guesthouses or farmhouses to self-catering.
Around £150 for family holidays, allowing for a few days reasonably riding as part of the package.
Extra riding by the hour available.
With specialist holidays allow around £250 plus for a week, full board, learning Western riding; more if you are taught privately.
A three day driving course at Red House Stables is around £150, excluding food and accommodation, up to individual five days costing in the region of £450.
Mini-breaks: Around £150 upwards for two nights, half board, plus riding and perhaps lessons and lectures.
By yourself : Around £40 a day inclusive of accommodation, meals, grazing, route maps etc (Bridge Rides); from around £250 for five days unaccompanied trail ride with farm and hotel accommodation.
Are your eyes set on the right holiday horizon?
‘It's not only riding skills that count when considering a holiday, but the ability to cope in unfamiliar surroundings.’
Cooling off in a Scottish loch: riders from the Castle Riding Centre, Argyllshire.
Time for a canter: riders from North Wheddon Farm enjoy a Somerset setting.
Enjoy a stage coach ride while learning to drive at the Red House Stables, Darley Dale, Derbyshire.
Let's drink to a successful holiday…and there is no reason why not if you select with care.
‘A weight limit of around 13 stone applies to most riding holidays.’
The Troutbeck area of the Lake District.
In Sickness and In Health
The Today's Horse vet Mark Lucey BVM&S, MRCVS, looks at the latest update on TENDON INJURIES IN HORSES.
The treatment of tendon injuries in competition horses is much argued about amongst horse owners and equine veterinary surgeons.
Every horse owner seems to have their own theory or treatment which has worked on previous injuries and the veterinary profession cannot agree on a common treatment.
I suppose this just goes to show that all treatment currently in use have some benefit but no one treatment is significantly better than all the others.
The British Equine Veterinary Association has held several meetings devoted to the discussion of tendon treatments which has produced a lively debate on the subject.
Now that the firing of horses' legs has been banned by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons for soft tissue injuries, this has effectively removed that type of treatment.
However, I hear that the Irish Veterinary Association still supports firing and some racehorse trainers are threatening to send horses over to Ireland for treatment.
Research Work
Professor Alan Goodship at Bristol University is currently doing extensive research work on tendon injury and repair and has presented several papers on his work.
He has set up a centre for research into equine exercise physiology and equine sports injury at Bristol University College which hopefully will increase our understanding of equine sports injuries.
Tendon injuries affect about 30 percent of horses involved in National Hunt Racing and is probably the largest cause of wastage in racehorses.
At a gallop, the amount of strain on a  horse's fore tendon is very near to its maximum capacity and any further loading leads to progressive damage to the tendon fibres resulting in extreme cases of tendon rupture.
It has been found that the stretched tendon becomes hotter within the inner core up to 10–20°C warmer than the fibres on the edge of the tendon.
Boots or bandages may exacerbate this overheating effect in the core of the tendon.
The superficial flexor tendon is the most commonly damaged tendon, as it takes the load earlier than other tendon structures in the forelimb.
The central core of this tendon takes the highest strain and in a typical speed injury, the  inner core breaks first leaving a classic black hole effect in the centre of the tendon, seen on ultrasonic scans of the damaged leg.
Professor Goodship has also found that in extended trot, the suspensory ligament comes under a high loading stress and this may help to explain the high incidence of suspensory ligament injuries in trotters.
Varying Tendon Strengths
In comparing the strength of tendons between animals, research has found that the absolute strength of tendons varies widely in the thoroughbred population.
Some horses' tendons can be twice as long as others.
However, at present, tendons strengths cannot be measured in vivo (while the animal is alive).
Hopefully, further research may lead to a way of quantifying tendon strength and thereby possibly being able to identify animals at risk from tendon injury prior to starting training.
This would be a great help, instead of just relying at present on judging conformation in the hope of reducing strain on tendons.
The physical process of tendon repair is now well documented and efforts are being made to find drugs which speed up or modify the repair process.
The fibres of a healing tendon are initially arranged microscopically in a criss-cross pattern with little strength associated with this scar tissue.
As repair progresses, the cross links between new fibres increase, the fibres align in a more parallel fashion and finally the fibres regain some of their limited elastic qualities.
One drug, called Adaquan, is on trial at Bristol for evaluating its use in tendon repair.
It is being used in the acute phase of a tendon injury and it seems to reduce inflammation and reduce the detrimental effects of swelling after an injury.
Unlike cortisone, which also reduces inflammation, Adequan seems to stimulate the production of new tissue in a damaged tendon.
However, to have any effect, it must be used very soon after the initial damage.
Tendon Splitting
Work done in the USA has lent some support to the tendon splitting operation as a treatment for some tendon injuries.
Dr Rick Henninger at Ohio State University performs tendon splitting within 7–10 days of a tendon injury.
It seems to reduce tendon swelling and when viewed microscopically, tendon repair seems faster in these cases after surgery compared to those treated by more conventional non-surgical means.
In one series of cases reported by Dr Henninger, only 19 percent of horses treated surgically had a recurrence of tendon injury, compared to 63 percent of horses which had a recurrence of injury following non-surgical treatment.
In serious cases he also performed an operation called superior check ligament desmotomy, which involves cutting the superior check ligament just above the back of the knee, which has the effect of reducing loading on the superficial flexor tendon.
One feature of tendon repair of which there is no doubt, is that it takes longer than you think for tendons to repair well.
Also, a damaged tendon is never quite as strong as an undamaged one.
Monitoring of healing is best done with serial ultrasonic scans as this is the best way of producing an image of what is occurring in the centre of a damaged tendon.
This can be combined with gradually increasing exercise regimes which help stimulate stronger tendon repair.
Only through further research will our knowledge of athletic injuries in the horse increase, and hopefully treatments will become more refined and more successful.
No one wants tendon injuries.
They interfere with the horse's well-being, his athletic training programme and his earning capacity, as well as further value.
Human athletes have a recognised safe zone of physiological training parameters to help reduce training injuries.
Ideally, research may be able to build up similar values for equine athletes which could be used by riders and trainers to avoid injuries.
Interestingly enough, boots or bandages may exacerbate the overheating effect in the core of the tendon.
At present, correct conformation is all we can rely on to reduce the strain on tendons.
‘A damaged tendon is never quite as strong as an undamaged one.’