

Shandy
And then Ida's rung to say that er our buyers have just rung him to say they've a, got the cash, agreed and its all sorted out.
So basically your moving in about four weeks time
No, we've got to exchange
by then, we'll have done it by then, but
So that means party time.
no it will not mean party time  but any way that's not bad
You're for ever stuffing your face
did you know that?
You got erm, you're off next week aren't you?
aha
Well you'll have to be here for the surveyor
alright?, the only thing is last week, Jean said that when the surveyor came last time they took all the carpets up  so you might, they might have to do that
you'll have to protect the dog cos  he might not like seeing his carpet pulled up, mm
mm, mm
That is disgusting
okay
Why?
Because
exchange of contracts
So what nineteen thousand paid?
mm 
mm could prove difficult  but how can you pay that much off?does if, I suppose if they
I think we have, I think it's done as a, as part of a new mortgage I think.
what's there to put, took an extra twenty thousand on from the beginning?
So are nan and granddad totally for the idea and everything and moving now?
Yeah say so.
Er we going to have a look round the house one more time?
No Richard, not before we exchange contracts and we actually move in I don't think.
Why?
Well we might do, might too, full contracts signed just to get some measurements.
The measurements are already there
No, not accurate we don't know the size of the windows and curtains do we?
Ah, can you imagine trying to curtain that big room, the dining, the ballroom bit
Drawing room
Drawing room, whatever it's called, it's huge, it has windows all the way round, it has bow windows innit?
No it's window er blind window with a bay window at the side.
You have to keep the erm,, what's the name of the stuff?
Er floor tiles down, wooden floor tiles.
Not floor tiles, they're wooden flooring
What do you mean wooden floor?
Floor tiles.
Not tiles
So what are they?
They're wood strip flooring
Are they expensive?
the actual flooring
They expensive?
Well
If you polish those up we can keep them
I'm going to
so we're not having carpets down?
no, rugs, large rugs
Well, then, exactly that's not going to cost much is it?
Er yeah, yes
Cost less than carpets
No Nigel looked, looked at er, er rug and it was erm  sort of like ten by six and that was three hundred and fifty pounds
Yeah, expensive, but you get that from work
Not a lot of it
it's not a great deal, hassle, but the garden's gonna look good when we've finished it, get in the straight first day in we'll hack down the back tree.
Nanna wants to have all the er plants picked out of the greenhouse and erm have them all in the trays and up to us by the end of May before they go away on holiday.
Where they going?
Erm  forgotten now, somewhere rural Spain
Oh god
you know it's not, not, it's not like Benidorm or anything like that it's  it's somewhere like, it's about seven miles away from the sea, but as I said they
Seven?
Well they don't want to go to the sea, erm
Ah
they've got, they've got a swimming pool so that's all they need
I suppose so 
and lots of nice walks around, things which
How long are they going for?
Dunno, about a week, ten days I think
Yeah, that's not bad.
but they want to go, bring all the trays of plants over
A hundred, hundred odd 
before before they go, so, so the greenhouse is empty
so all hundred odd?
Oh, they have more than that I think.
So in other words they're gonna bring its new place?
Mm, well if we move, hopefully we wou would of moved by then.
So how we gonna get hundred a hundred odd trays down to us?
Have to hire a van?
No, nan and granddad can bring one lot up and my mum and dad can fetch a few bits  and then just keep bringing bits back, I mean
Yes, I suppose so
it's not that much of a bother, the pain is having to dig them all in that's the trouble 
Has he done loads this year?
Well at least they haven't done as many as they did, they did last year but they, it looks a lot to me
Oh, why haven't they done as many as last year?
Probably because they had quite a lot left over and didn't
They didn't, we used them all
I know but
we'll certainly be needing them this year, cos the garden's bare.
Yes, we went round up to the manor house
God it's expensive there
I know, they've got some lovely things
aquarium are
Oh we didn't bother going in the aquarium
Oh
erm 
it's nice 
there was some really nice things, there was erm, some of those lovely erm variegated erm, what do you call them things?
Plants 
Weeping figs , weeping, weeping figs, we had one at er Hertford Road and it died 
It died , oh that big thing we had outside?
No, the one that was, no not that one, that, that's another nice one, but, no it's er, in the side of the erm
Mm
the fireplace, you know the, where the planter was 
I, I know the one yeah
that one there and it died, mind you it didn't get enough light that was really why
Probably cost a fortune all the plants at Ruxley, Ruxley is not a good place to go
Oh there's some smashing things there though
Yeah, but look at the prices though
Well I know but it
cos they, that's the only good garden centre around that's, that's why they cost so much
No Pole Hill's nice
No, it's not as big there 
we were gonna go down there, but erm nan and granddad had been down there about a fortnight ago and they said they hadn't got a lot out yet, they said they wouldn't be out for about another three weeks, so about 
Mm 
next week, but Ruxley had quite a few seeds out and erm, Nana was gonna buy some and then she said er, she, she'll leave it, she'll go down to Pole Hill first cos they said they'll be out 
 
and they're, cos they're slightly cheaper and then if they haven't got any next week then she'll go back up to Ruxley and get them there instead.
She only saves a matter of fifteen P and gets it all back on the petrol
Well, er, this year instead of sowing their tomato seeds right from, from seeds
Well that's stupid
she's not going to this year, she's erm, in Ruxley there, there was a little pot of seed that had been sowed and they were ready for pricking out, and er one little pot I think was ninety eight P, but there must of been fifty plants in there easily
Yeah, but she had that many last time
Well er I was gonna say we don't need, we 
she had five hundred sort of flowers 
don't need that many, whereas last year she had so many tomatoes and tomato plants, she didn't know what to do with them
We don't even eat the damn stuff
thank you, so erm she's going to erm  she'll just pick out some of these then, erm watch it, the ones that she doesn't, the plants that she doesn't need she'll give to Dave, his erm school, his spring fair whatever you call it
Oh, he always gets extra priorities doesn't he?
Little David, her apple 
Oh yes 
in her eye
No, she's, he's not the apple of her eye, at all.
Did she miss me?
Caroline apparently asked erm Nana if the boys were coming up
Ha
but Caroline's half term is not until the week after next
Week after next?
it's David's the next week and Caroline's the week after
Oh
cos she's only got about four weeks before, she goes back and erm
Well she hasn't she's got different 
it must be three weeks since she
exams time, date, I think we're having it the earliest of the lot, for some stupid reason because Mel doesn't appear to be having them till late either.
Why when's hers?
Her's is late May, they start
You'll find quite a few of yours will be May
No the majority of mine will be finished by May the twenty fourth
I think, I think you're kidding yourself
I'm not, it's only over a two week period, they're jammed in, I'm getting in several days, all I have is three exams
I still think you'll find you'll have some in May
No, no
Well you'll have to wait and see won't you?
No, not many at all but, yeah, that's ridiculous Caroline's down then
But it means that she, she has a, a week's holiday and I think she's back for about three weeks and then breaks up again at school
Mm
er Easter, so and then she'll have I think three weeks Easter
Mm
and then I think she's back for, erm  I think she gets back, she misses one Monday this Bank, Bank Holiday, that's, that's four days and then, she does, I think she's got another two, three weeks and I suppose she'll be, well she'll be doing GCSEs anyway
Mm
so she's hardly going to be there
Mm
it's a funny way of doing it really
Well Mel, Mel's been er holiday is this week, next week coming
Mm, got Dave's in next week?
erm off today as well, so  that's why, but that, that's I suppose is late as well
Well erm quite a few of the London children were off
Mm, there's a lot of people who've erm, I mean a lot of s all the T V companies are putting programmes on for next week
Mm
for people, kids being off, so it's obvious the rest of the country's off that week, and so it's probably only a few limited schools 
Dorset , Dorset always has the early
is a pain in the arse, warm in here
Mm
innit?
So er it's stupid  well there you go, what's for dinner by the way?
I haven't decided yet
Mm, cos Morris is coming down isn't he?
Oh I know, it'll only be fish fingers and chips or fish steaks and chips
Oh not chips again, please not chips again
Well I haven't been here to have chips Richard
I've had four lots of chips this week and I'm getting fed up with chips
You like chips you keep telling me
I've had three lots of pizza this week and I'm getting fed up with pizza
Well that's up to you Richard, you can't eat, you had chow mein last night, what did you have?
I had chow mein last night
Well that's right then
but I had pizza yesterday, lunch
Oh lucky you
Not lucky me I can't stand it after a while.
You don't have to eat it Richard, could of had er sandwiches.
We went fishing by the way
I know you come back in the afternoon 
pathetic , it's gonna freeze up again this afternoon down at Bournemouth, gonna have fish off the pier, go for some bees, but I couldn't be bothered  but  there was nothing, it was too damn cold, it must of been minus five with the wind chill factor
Mm
absolutely horrendous, oh by the way you didn't thank me for getting those yoghurts did you?
I asked Colin anyway
Well he didn't remember, I did
Gee whiz thank you
Well you wouldn't of got them if it wasn't for me
No go and make us a cup of tea would you please?
Mm, get one in a minute
No, get one now please
Yeah alright, alright
Don't be silly, and erm  he just, he just said er  that erm  that I've, either he put the phone down from talking to me  the agent, our agent rang him, tell us that our buyer has got the cash agreed.
I know
I don't know whether I told you, I can't remember or not 
Yes you have
Oh, you could of said
he's in a foul temper isn't he  today?
No he just doesn't like being taped
Oh its stupid
Just talk look
What with a mouthful?
come on you
I don't wish to talk thank you very much
Oh you're a doctor you're supposed to talk
Richard would you like a chunk of cheese?
No thank you
Not quite
of that, I'll have another one
Who's that whistling?
Who you giving
er
told me not she's taping anybody else, tape it as a Walkman, but I don't know how she can, because you're not allowed to what
you're basically supposed, goes Longman's, Longman's dictionary
But the, the dictionary of the nineties you see, they give one to every age group, but not unless, there's no point in giving one to anybody particularly 
No 
because, I mean
they're basically  
they're gonna be talking in a language about
our present era aren't they?
But erm  you get paid twenty five quid for doing it, so
Tapes not bad
it's worth about that
 
They started , they started in one place and they just
there, I mean, ha
Well she collared me yesterday, unfortunately, so I've gotta do it until 
Unfortunately , well just a minute, well Richard I need that money, yeah, it's five pound now
Well so do I, I need a lot of money, a lot a lot of money
So do I  good job granny sent me ten, ten pounds
Money is the root of all evil 
Dad, please.
Save it
Don't write my name anywhere near his
ah hey
So you're basically going to erm, you're not going to get rid of me
I'm going to swell at
yes, I'm not going, I'm only, I'll still be here at the weekend
Ha ha
no, I'm not leaving, I'm still here for
Oh good, oh
It's, we're having a tent in the back garden
Oh get, you're not are you?
No I'll commute every day
Every day?
as if , er Saturday and Sunday
And all holidays?
Yeah 
Oh I don't see why you just sleep out in the garden or something
Ah
and you can study in there
what I'm gonna do
What?
no, I mean commute, good morning Jane
Don't speak then
Hi Richard
Oh thank you Jane
nice to know somebody's going to be polite this morning
I said hello Richard, I said hello Richard where's my money?
no
Jane that's what mum's doing some
Oh how sad 
Can I say really horrible things now?
No you're not supposed to because it's still recording, you basically be polite and
Oh Richard I love having you round here, when you come in like a light in the dark  how I enjoy your painting, your polite conversations, the way that you move it's all so
True


magnifico
Oh thanks a lot 
Oh you're disappointed now aren't you, that I, coming back, it's really upset you
That you're coming back?
Yeah
Yeah
I'm not going, I'm not leaving
Why not Richard?
no way 
Can't you?
Do you really like living round here?
Yes, I have a job here
Yes, but you don't get paid
do you pay Richard?
No
Good
no I didn't, I stopped paying because 
if you want to waste your money that's up to you 
It's really 
your work 
because he's playing table tennis all the time now


I've really enjoyed doing it 
This is like a lady slob  
If I don't do any work over the weekend they all moan at me, if you don't because you're always round here nothing is said
He don't get paid
But I work very hard during the week
What a load of rubbish
So do I
I don't work hard at , but never mind
Don't, don't you all agree that I work hard during the week?
No I don't, sweet
Sweet nothing
Er, er, are you going to sort of give me a timetable that I can read through to the phone and that it's not booked up
What?
What?
 
Mm 
three quarters of an hour last week 
Shut up Richard, that's a sore subject
Yeah, we noticed
Yeah, yeah, shut up
and then this, this, the phone went and I picked it up and this squeaky voice at the end of the phone said
I thought who the hell's that
Wasn't that me?
Yeah that's Jane 
Yeah that's 
Jane didn't say anything
Jane did say something
oh well I'm glad
Just 
oh it's nice to be, he say glad and happy I was moving
I thought you never  
 
and then, then, then he got confused because
What happened?
Jane kept talking to him, but it sounded remarkably like David
Oh well
who was, who was it David?
Was it Clare?
No?
It doesn't bother me
Who was it then?
Somebody for me
It was
dad ringing
It damn 
No it wasn't , it was Simon
it damn well sounded like David to me
Oh
It was, it was my friend Simon
It certainly didn't sound like your friend Simon and he certainly didn't put on a silly voice like that silly twit did
No, that's his normal voice, ow 


so erm
sugar
No
Do you want it?
No 
Not really 
Why not?
Can somebody tell me where the sugar is please?
It's in the sitting room by Louise
what the hell's it doing in there?


What did you say Richard?
I've saved my money as much as possible
What for?
I'm opening my own business so I need a lot of money
Opening what?
Opening your own business are you?
Yep
What in?
Aquatic retail 
What 
Do you mind bringing it back here
it wasn't me it was Louise
Clare
Yeah
yeah, this is a good thing for the tape innit?
What?
 
What you going to call this one, domestic bliss?
 
I, oh yeah  


So er what do you think I should call my business?
Richard
I dunno, she's trying to


But erm
What you should call your business?
How do I know that that bath towel needs washing?
What shall you call your business?
Erm
Ha Static Aquatic


Well it's more likely to be yours as well you see
My business as well is it?
have to persuade you
Oh I see 
Dad's going into business?
Can I be a shareholder?
if you pay some money, yes
Well that's what shareholders usually do
He can be, he can be a fish
if you like
Yeah but when do I get my sh my money back?
Ha, you don't 
When I make a profit 


Profit, how much?
Do I get more profit than I paid in?
 
Depends how well the business is doing
We shall get, we shall, we shall
Well, well I'll become a shareholder after I've seen how  
 
What, what will happen is that, is that Richard and I will be, will be found in er in some sort of, two million pound yacht off the, off the Canary Islands, sort of 
Ha, you get ready to jump, plunge off the side 
in, in what you might call hot water
I have faith in your erm  in your business instinct Richard, but not, but not enough to put money on it till I see them
Oh that's quite honest, it's perfectly normal, but erm, I'm trying to persuade your dad to buy forty percent of the shares
What?
What a load of rubbish
no, one percent
that'll only cost you a small amount 
Ha 
small amount of
A small fortune 
Bull
What?
Bull
Bull what?
that won't cost a little bit
It will cost a little bit
Like how much?
You can call it 
Don't know yet


Like how much?
he could sort of call it
Fish
Dick's Tickle


Could call that yeah
That's a good one, that's a good'un, I like that
No it's a
no
No, no
I like that one, yeah
Dick's Tickle's good 
That's a good one
Dick's Tackle 


Please don't come here


Er I'm gonna have an interview with a guy next week about some stuff, so I should find out, I have had three replies from the fifteen I've sent out, I sent out another five last night this is 
What, what to?
Companies
What for?
Information on
What about?
er you serious about this?
Of course I am
Are you Richard?
I think he's mad
Of course I am
Er Jane are you washing Chloe?
Shampooing her?
I hardly think so, seeing as I'm going out in approximately two minutes 
She's had , she's just come in with that 
Well you two can do it when you get back from the walk, just left me to do it
No I doesn't I do it when I get back 
No, you do, more than halfway through or something 
want to do it as soon as possible no point in going 
Of course it does 
heading off to the vet
 
of course it's serious it's costing me two and a half grand at least 
Eh?
I'm not joking, spending a fortune
You are?
Yeah
And you're expecting dad to spend that as well?
No, don't be stupid
Dad
Is dad paying about forty pounds then?
What you will?
No dad
I don't know how much he's paying, I don't even know if he wants to do it yet, it's me who's got to talk to firms
I've gotta think of a name though, I like that actually
What?
The boyfriend
No
I like that, that's good
You won't get any of my share if you do
You won't get any customers let alone her
customers?
What are customers?
Oh customers or I thought you said  gostermers 


I thought
 

That's quite good for you, yeah, not bad  oh good it is recording, erm
How are you paying?
Is this your Walkman then Richard?
No they gave it to me
They give you a Walkman, they give you tape, they give you batteries, I told you all that Jane
Do you get to keep it?
No
You've got no mind at all, she doesn't take anything in, she's like a sieve
So I give you the address the, the tel telephone number, you can ring her up
Thank you, I don't know if I can be bothered for twenty five pounds, no I would if she asked me, but I don't know if I'll bother ringing up as well 
Oh god
What for?
What for?
I can't just ring up and say hi two of my, well a friend and an acquaintance


are doing this, this thing, can I do it?
Let's face it we all do
Well
do it the same time because we're in the same class and speak to all the same people and we'd get all the same results
So what, you get twenty five quid for it
It's not a
that's what I'm gonna do, stupid
I reckon that you'll get mega bucks because you're
 
 
I reckon you'll get mega bucks because you're a
Oh god
all that chronic jargon for you  
 
What for?
This is the erm, the er, the, the choice of
Don't mention the name
of, of the, the
 

no it's not, mum says you've got to fill in a form and say who's talked and how old we are and 
Yeah that's, that, but doesn't realize who it is when
No
Did you have to sign the Official Secrets Act?
No
My name is Tamsin   
 
Dad's not allowed to take it to work unfortunately so
Why not?
Cos he can affect some, all the stuff is secret
ooh
It's a pain
it's the same with dad then isn't it?
Do what?
Dad couldn't take it because it's confidential
Yeah, right
Mm
Ah Louise here comes the star of the show 
Hello  
The star of the show, the idiot of the place
come in please then
You're looking very smart
No she don't she's right repulsive
Richard just because the tape's on doesn't mean to say you've got to lie
I wasn't lying
Richard you're a liar
Are you leaving all this mess
I'm not leaving any mess
I've not left any mess, don't look at me I'm not the messy one
Mess
Bye Chloe I've got to go
mum
Oh, I start doing a different language then
chance will be a fine thing
What?
Mum can you get my
I go never to return
Are we off now dad?
Off?
Off?
Absolutely
Here
Now then Richard, by the way tape this person
no I didn't
When they ring this erm  these chats or whatever
Yeah
er quite a lot of the time we cause so much fuss the blokes are ringing here.
Well dad that's the best way of doing it
Well it's not because, because I object to the phone being taken out of commission for that length of time 
Oh yeah so yeah so do I, oh exactly
I think that's downright rude
And it is a problem
and er, and er other people can't ring in, they just give up if they 
Yeah 
you, if you try once or twice fine, but you just give up.
I must of tried probably fifteen times last night to get through.
Well that's, that's just, just can't predict and, to have it going on time after time after time, it's bad, bad form for, for the phone, and the bill and all concerned
Yeah
but to me it's just, it's just slack behaviour as far as I'm concerned
Yeah
if you see each other several times during the day
Exactly
I think, then what on earth does he want to be on the phone for that length of time for.
Oh I agree
Okay if you want a private conversation well go and have a private conversation, but borrow, borrow the code of silence from or get smart or something
Exactly, yes, true 
Mm 
oh yeah, yes, I agree, if
for too long it does add up
It gets up my nose
I'm not altogether surprised, but
I do it every now and again, I want a private conver conversation with one of the, one of my colleagues 
No question you're doing, exactly needed 
but I mean you I erm 
You have to it is your phone
unfortunately that, that, tends to be therapeutic, I, whereas, well they've just got these, these business like these, these two silly blokes who erm
You've got Jane as well 
What?
Jane and Clare now is it?
No Jane's not, but she well
She speaks to her friends quite a lot 
they start to ring their friends up when they've just left them during the day, fine 
Well that is stupid
if you want a bit of information, if you want to find out what page you're supposed to be doing your homework from or 
It's alright if it's a three minute call like you say
Fine, I don't mind
Yeah
but it just goes on and on and on, over what did so and so said, oh no 
Yeah 
dear, dear 
exactly
just natter and natter all the time 
I don't start doing it , I, well don't blame you, yeah.
You see I get erm 
Well just downright rude
I think it's ridiculous of Alistair but he, it is his business, you see, I'm gonna use the phone a hell of a lot when I get mine going, but I will 
But in that case if you're going to have that, then you've a right to have two lines in the house 
Exactly 
and use one as a business line 
Exactly 
and one as a pleasure line 
Exactly and that's what I'm gonna do, exactly
if there's anything you can do 
Yep, I agree, exactly and that's the only way you can do it cos then you, you don't get any problems that the call's been er interacting
Yes
exactly, it's the only way you can do it and I wouldn't do it any other way, because I don't bel I don't, I don't think it's fair, if I was using the phone continually I'd get rather annoyed, I mean that I'd, they'd have a right to be annoyed, but as I don't I think it's ridiculous so I'm not hardly surprised at all, so I think it's stupid as you say, but there you go.
Er perhaps put a pay phone in, but of course 
Oh, why don't you put a pay lock on?
Well because er 
Mum and dad have threatened that regularly
Well I mean the trouble is that
Watch
I went round,wha wha wha what's all this front seat driving?
 

I would of seen it


by the time I'd got to the next one
Exactly , so what were you saying?
You do er, what?
I forgot what I say now, it's all this intense recording that's putting me off
You were saying about the phone, you were, you were thinking about doing whatever
I went to see a patient, a, a, a woman who's husband had died they're a pa a pain because you want to ring nine nine you've got to take the darn lock off, there's er trying to
Yeah  but would you need that?
Why not keep the phones such as the main one downstairs and the other one as open, I mean as closed and have your own personal one upstairs, in your room or whatever
well I, as I say I've got a, see I'm, you have this 
You've got to have a phone that, that's going to ring, ring through with the erm  the patient, need to be on the er  there, don't we?
Yes, that's, that's the, that's the way to do it 
The only reason we've got several phones is that we, because if you don't, you don't hear them
or why don't you have erm, get the girls to pay a percentage of the bill, get them to note down all the calls they make and work it out, that's a way of doing it
What with?
What do you mean what with?
What with to pay with?
Money
Oh money oh
you take it out their pocket money
They don't get any
Fine
you take it out their bank accounts, you, that's the only way you can do it, we don't give them pocket money, that's the only way you can do it,
That's the way that mum and dad  
With all these phone calls, we're out of pocket
See we've got four phones in our house and it does add up
Oh I believe 
we've got four phones in our house in operation 
Well the the system only takes four
so we've got that and so I, er, I'm gonna have to, how much does it cost to put your own line in?
Er, your own line in, I thought you weren't allowed to do that?
I mean there's this line
Oh I don't know
this is all things I've got to consider when I'm starting this thing
It'll cost a bit 
It's gonna cost me a fair bit to get lines to the house I want  so I've got, er I, the problem is with, as dad was saying this morning, the majority of people when they're starting their business they go to the wall because oh they're going in for the, oh it's gonna be a quick sale
Mm
and we're gonna get quick turnover and we're gonna start making loads of money easily 
Yes, that does 
but you don't
it all starts off very slowly
Exactly and if, if you can break even in the first 
 
two years you're very lucky
Yes
and that's what I'm gonna be aiming to do, if it, if I break even in two years I'd be happy  cos I've made money back and then I'll be making profit after that, and you won't make it back in the first year, no way
Don't forget you're only putting, you're only part time, you're pushing to do your work hard
Well mum will be doing, mum'll be the secretary and then I will have someone in to do it
Oh
I'm paying someone, I'll pay a Y T S guy to do it and that
Oh
so that's why I need this summer and part of er working during the week, week days to get money to pay for it
Oh
cos er, I, I'm selling the fish tank for a start, for a hundred 
What?
I'm selling the fish tank to get some money
Really?
for er, I'm selling that for a hundred and thirty
No
so, yeah I'm getting rid of that to get some
Mm
I'm selling my, erm remote control car to get money
You mean you're selling your fish tank, you can't sell a fish tank
Mm, yeah, I'm selling a fish tank
No
Yep, to get rid of that
Oh my god 
so that's going for a hundred and thirty pounds 
who's buying that then?
Dunno I, there's a friend of mine and I'm selling it in the pa have to advertise in the paper as well so that money's going to it, I've made, I'm having a word with the bank manager for business facilities and then opening an account with him at the bank to er basically get some extra, a business account going which I don't touch, er I need to get credit facilities done on the bank, accounts and stuff, dad's gonna look through it completely with me and work everything out, but for the next six, seven weeks I'll be too busy with the school work to really concentrate on it, cos exams start at seven weeks time now 
Yes 
so I'm going to be very busy doing the evenings, doing my work.
Absolutely.
Well I don't know
I'm gonna make this work, I'm not rushing into it, I'm, I rush into a lot of things
I noticed that
but I'm not rushing this time, cos I'm, if, I'm putting, I'm spending two and half thousand pounds on this, I'm not wasting my money
Yes
cos it's a lot of money  to be perfectly honest
Right, well we've recorded this for so long, can you use some bigger words now please?
Bigger words?
Yeah, you need bigger words if it's going into the dictionary
Some bigger words, what kind of thing, er  supercalologilistic 
Er yes it is really, it's a bit too long for me that one though
Erm, protocol, that's a good one
Only three syllable though
Mm, er what to think, oh I can't think of any words, oh we're going to go off for an interview now anyway.
Mm, looks very nice
Yeah?
Yeah, he's done a great job
Will won't he?
I like the bit where he's er wrapped the
little bits all the way round
Yeah, they're brilliant
Well they were there only, they were there before you see
Oh it looks very much mm snazzy now 
but er oh of course, I mean, er all and nice, clean and varnished, oh good 
Well he did varnish it, didn't he?
Of course he did, yes
So it's worth it for twenty quid innit?
Twenty five
Or twenty five
It's good, yes
So
well excellent
are you going to get all your
like that?
Well I don't need to
like that.
So he obviously thought it was worthwhile doing that
Not really  I just made him do it
Well I liked it
we gave him the bread and we did it
Exactly, so he's a  
What?
Sorry?
 
It needs to be in the dictionary, bread
Your definition of money of course, er, eh, well I suppose so, but well, there you go, so.
No I think it's 
You send these people twenty five tips full of science, which I normally speak


it's what I 
Oh well
what they say then?
I don't know, I suppose you've still got your voucher, I get the voucher next Friday, so
What about it?
They pay you to do it
What in a week?
Yes, a week
You mean a week
I've only got a week to do them
Cor
so I get paid twenty five 
not long is it?
pounds for doing it
Really?
Yeah, it's not bad for a go.
So where are these  coming?
Kent, I've dr erm I've written to them so he's gonna send back a erm
How do you get this then?
price list , well I'd of sent for them, they'll post them to me by Securicor
What by post?
Yes, it's only a, an hour
Oh
they post them straight or I'll go and collect them.
They won't go through a letter box
I'll be at home, idiot, or er, it's in Kent so I can get dad to pick them up for me
That's true
so I'll get, I'll get all the prices whatever, he's got like thirty six inch coin er
Mm
Japanese, it's a massive one, one er, it's a thirty thousand gallon erm pond and it's got, and it goes through a filter box and it's four and a half tons of erm  four and a half tons and that is a lot of 
I should think it is, what is ?
is the stuff that I've got in a little bag, got little bag full
Oh yes
and that's where the  that you've got in your pond
Oh
that's how much four and a half ton of  costs, just ever so slightly, it's more about
Yes
er, so it's a bit expensive
Absolutely
but erm, so I'll order them, I'll pay for them when I'm there you can pay back when  when I get them 
You won't get them anyway
Of course I'll get them
there are, they don't sell 
Well why do you think they've advertised them?
Yes, but they're going and then they've got them in the ponds, they've got them all in their ponds, so they're obviously okay, they're for ponds  so it, I think if we probably get ten, fifteen on the, cos I'm gonna be so used to seeing them, cos I'm gonna be ordering those, I'll order  all the carps and you've got  as well 
Oh nice
Yes  so I'll get hold of some
well, if you can get on with doing that thing, sit down and look through those magazines with me and I'll show you the prices that I can get them at retail  I mean at trade, all the prices  cos I've got that two and a half thousand gallon job and that is only seventy quid, so I'm just gonna have one of those, I'm gonna have that with a U V A filter and eight er eight watt U V A filter which is fifty quid, that then, which is for one of those tanks which is for three hundred and fifty, but that's not, I've that's 
Oh 
retail I haven't worked out trade yet.
So that's basically lost about five hundred quid a set
Oh
thing and that's without a pump, so to set up it'll cost me probably a thousand and a bit and I want and then I'll need to have the rest of the money left over to survive
Yes
do it that way, but I'm not rushing into this, I'm doing it very, very slowly  cos it ain't worth it with that much money
 

To be perfectly honest.
Seemed to be going down to south coast of the river
Yeah he is isn't he?
Wake up mate, get out the middle of the road.
I've got sore wrists again today
Well you shouldn't play tennis on, on er on squash 
probably it's probably been slapped
pathetic, it's ridiculous  I really do.
You see, well, you know, I think the trouble is what do I say now?
You tell them what you damn well think.
I think it's absolutely, I think it's perfectly, thing is I think it's blooming awful  I really do.
You don't have to be careful, you obviously have to 
Yes you do 
watch their fees, but they haven't watched yours for crying out loud  it's quite obviously, but I think it's, it's ridiculous, because you're looking at doing it that way, the other, it's ridiculous
Well I mean the erm, I had some bins and all stuff, buy some bins and stuff for the office, she's ordered all sorts of things  I, I had, I, I
Yeah, but it's not gonna go back and get her blamed
Well this is the trouble you see 
it's erm, it's, it's not fair.
If she's gone without asking anybody then, anybody fine, then maybe, maybe reasonable to
she's asked you  but then again I don't know the ins and outs of the practice or
but I just think it's unfair the way they're treating you.
I, if I was you, I'd be extremely pissed, but then again I've got the temperament where I won't sit down and take something if I don't like it.
Well I've made it not to if, if, if I, if I, if, if they'd ordered, been ordered on my say so, I have made an autonomous decision, well you, there's so many people in that place making autonomous bloody decisions, why shouldn't I do a few?
Exactly
Aha
it's, it's, it's ridiculous  I just think it's very unfair  that they regard you that way.
You go for these people and ask for a board and this sort of thing it's just, it just gets to be demeaning, the practice manager should have, should have
within a reasonable area to order the things that she feels she wants for herself
Mm
I'd better go and warn her now I suppose
Yes, it's only fair  yes I would  ah there you go, ah that's gonna ruin her weekend innit?
But it sounds as those, those two probably have the same feelings as you do, when it comes to the crunch they don't make a note
It's up to the wimps when it comes to the crunch 
Exactly, they know, exactly , so why the hell should you be quiet all the time?
It's not fair  if you said how, what you feel, then maybe they'll change it  but they're not going to do anything without them knowing you, because they don't know them until you've told them  do they?
How can they change it if they don't know what you're feeling?
But they probably do they're too bloody erm, insensitive to bother 
The problem here is, if, if, if, if, the, what's, what's happened is if, if that, if anything gets bought there in the practice, that then is taken out of our remunerations, so if we spend six hundred pounds on the stuff in the prac in, in, in the reception area
Yeah
that then means each partner is then a hundred pounds less for, less pay at the end of the month
Right
so then they're gonna quibble about it, do you understand that?
Yes, oh yes 
There isn't so much for the expenses and so on, so, they're gonna sort of start grumbling
Mm
er, all I've got to do is to get ev every single part ev every single partner
because they're a hundred pound less and then I then, I'm up a, up a creak aren't I then?
Mm
Curses, curses and heavens to
done nothing today again, as usual 
We're not doing bad
I've got all the bits and pieces I could
we've got those things there and we've got the erm  garden done.
There's a very huge amount we can do in winter
This is true, yes there is
No there isn't, right what'll we do tomorrow?
What do you want to get done tomorrow then?
I don't know
I'll come dressed looking dirty here tomorrow
Yes
or something like that 
we need to get something done
Well we'll just have to work very hard tomorrow, tis 
Yes 
quite simple
just so many bits and pieces to do, I need to come and get this  to come and give me some further comments
Oh well, wouldn't go to him to be honest
What?
I wouldn't go to him to be perfectly honest 
Why not?
Because he doesn't appear to do a very good job, he doesn't turn up when, at times, he doesn't ring you to tell why he's not turning up and that sort of person is not a good idea to go for
No, this is true 
unless you produce contracts, which is cheap, exactly, I'd rather pay for the quality
Mm, mm well that's of course 
you've got the money
Well, I think it's worth five hundred pounds then for the quality and the service 
isn't it?
Don't chew your nails
I'm not chewing them 


Oh dear  well
Take ah, erm, take it into the squash club I would think.
Take a recording of my abnormal breathing
Ah you could try that I suppose
Yeah, would you like to try that?
you could sort of wear it while you're playing
Yes, great idea
What you wanna do is leave it in the squash club, in the actual er court
Oh yeah, good idea 
take it down and put it in the bottom of the 
because then you can get, I can hear you two talking, and see what you're doing during sport, great idea, should try that.
Three thirty, the only thing about it, you know, I never know if I've got anybody who, who, who, who, who I'll be able to play with you see.
Well wouldn't they tell you?
No, you write it, you ring in and it all depends on who's about to play
Well you rang in
No
cos there must be someone there
no, they put your name down
Oh
at three thirty, if nobody else rings that wants to play three thirty then there'll be nobody there
Well I'll give you a little knock around
and usually they're a better, the better players come later on you see
I'll give you a knock around
Ya ha
if there's nobody else there
and then what they do is they normally, they normally erm 
Oh it's a bit, good God it's busy today 
change you over you see
Oh it's the Open this afternoon 
What's the Open?
It's, it's the Open here I mean it's 
The open what?
The erm, the championship
What?
this afternoon
Is it?
Yes it is
I hope not
I do believe so
No, it won't be because they don't do the, they don't do an open afternoon if it's a championship
I believe
No, there's nobody here much
What do you mean there's nobody here, it's packed
No, there's hardly anybody in
Oh well
they'll be in the pub that lot
Getting the ball back within a degree of percentage and be able to get yourself back into position  er you've got to be very careful with that.
Well I think you did very well  much better than last time as it goes 
A bit, a bit good that fella
Oh he's no better than you
Oh yes he was
No he wasn't
more accurate
No
nice, serves into the back, very difficult to get out again
No he wasn't as, as, strong-wise he was hitting as well as you, but he was  he wasn't as, much better than you at all.
Oh  you can't watch yourself play can you?
You are, you, you were very sort of standard-wise
Yeah
but I thought that you were very good today, much better than before
Aha
and that I
it gets a bit better as you get a bit, a bit further on it
Exactly you'll get
You loosen 
You loosen , exactly
Yeah I did do 
lot looser 
my back dropped off mine, ho, ho, ho, ho
You didn't do your back
No, you're right
no, you don't, go on change you beggars, change, yeah, you won't change, ah, ha, ah, ha
Blasted traffic lights 
ah, ha , ah, ha got a cough now 
Oh well my head
Oh I
I've got a headache
Oh dear
Pretty vicious actually
Oh, oh, oh
God knows where it's from or why I've got it, but I have
Mm, mhm, mhm  
I  canna stand
oh shine
What?
I've forgot my money, I've forgot my, I want some money out
I'm gonna get stir crazy not being able to play badminton I know, and I score, it's gonna drive me crazy
Eh  you drive me crazy, crazy 
three months
 
hell of a long time 
What?
not to be able to play
You stop, don't move 
I'm cold
Why?
Aha, I've been there twice
Right
been there two weeks ago, are you cold?
No, I'm hot 
We had to pay, I did my arm in and I had to damn well pay
Why?
to go in there
Why?
Well we parked in the car park  and he charged us in there 
Yeah place , nice place, oh  it's run by National Car Park, N C P, National Car Parks
It's sodding expensive 
Don't move 
Yeah don't go, at least we haven't got far to carry if she does
what down there


No I didn't mean that
Oh dear, he used to belong to the squash club
Who did?


Did he?
Mr 
Is he good?
Taffy , yeah he's alright
Will you give me a game, when er my arm's better?
Oh crikey, you won't be able to play squash, if you can't play badminton
Why?
I can play badminton thank you, even though you've beaten me.
Come on let's go  oh goodness  yeah have a game if you like
 
But it won't be for a while
Right we're off
What do you mean you'll never beat me?
Come on let's go,oh goodness
Yeah, have a game if you like
It won't, will it?
End of February, March, April,God it's nearly the end of May before I can start playing again 
Oh look


don't go into me you bugger will you?
Went down and had a fish at Hills Bay on Wednesday
Why?
What do you mean why?
Cos I wanted to
You fished in Hills Bay?
Yeah
What with?
Er ragworm
Oh yes
Not a damn thing, I froze my nuts off, it was freezing.
Were you the only person fishing in Hills Bay?
Yeah, me and my friend, were
Oh
the only two
Is he a good fisherman?
Very
Is he?
Oh he's got all proper equipment, he is  
and he, he, even he didn't catch anything?
He didn't catch any either.
Oh, you see you've got to get  
We gave up after two hours it was too cold
got to get me with the 
Yeah it was just 
I'm a 
just freezing.
When Ted took me out into the sea, we had fifty fish
Oh God yes in the middle of the sea, yeah, you get loads
Ah
but we were just down there
What?
fish were down there
Yeah
it was a bit cold
Well er
puncturing ragworms was disgusting
Oh it's good
you hold the mouths open
Oh yeah
and stick it down, oh yuck
Hope they don't bite you
Oh yeah, exactly
Is there any spare boxes in there?
You look and see if there's any spare boxes  
Yeah there is 
are there?
Yeah
Oh good, coming down here then boyos, there we go, whoops-a- daisy.
Have a look at some really  knives
Don't want to thanks
They're great prices, they got some lovely penknives
look at  knives
Have a look at these penknives
I want a  what else am I going for you?
Erm
I'm going for a tank stopping unit, look out, get that window down boy 
Oh meant you, erm a vinegar jar
Oh yes that's right, is that as fast down there?
Oh good
Yes there's loads
loads of spaces that's good
Well you're looking for a new penknife so look at the penknives
No I'm not, I'm not looking for a new penknife at all boy
Ah there we go, there's loads there
Where?
Why is it everyone goes for the most difficult car parking spot?
Why, I don't know
Ha I don't believe
Ah phew, you?
No it's not me
Sure?
It must be me then.
Blooming cheek.
What's that then?
Oh well it was going when I was, you were talking all the way back from the squash club
Was it?
Yes, it is now
What's it doing?
Mind that lady, it does help if you 
Mind baby 
Oh God, it's cold 
go, here it goes
What number?


That's it
I notice he charges
Eh, she's a rhinoceros isn't she?
What?
Is she a rhinoceros?
Oh right 
Oh God that's awful
rhinoceros
she's an Essex girl
Oh dear me  does this tape recorder understand Essex girls?
I don't know, I wonder if I should explain it
Do it 
cold


So where we off to now?
Mm, what?
Where we off to now?
No, no, surgery, B and Q
Right
three and Q, I don't know, I'm trying to find a tap hole stopper, I've got to find a tap hole stopper somewhere 
Well why don't you go over to Wimborne quickly and get it off of them?
I don't want
Was 
It'll be closed soon you  dent doolly a bump 
that to be in a dictionary
 dent doolly a bump 
yes, well, oh I'm cold
Look at this
Ah she's
Go that way, go the
Yeah, tape it as well 
Mm, mm?
Take it this way, this way in, yeah there's fishing down there, freezing  
Where?
Where?
Where?
Over there 
No
fish in line, fish in line with the wreck
er
and then fished in line with the end of that reed boat
Oh
didn't get a bite on any of them, not even a take, crabs  
 
oh the fish are about down there
Where?
can you see?
Seagulls are out there 
They're not gonna catch any big ones are they?
Nothing noticeable, it's normally a good sign though
put some speed on 
you are  oh speed is ninety around here
What?
Speed limit's ninety around here
Seventy
Yeah, but we always go eighty, they always allow you to go ten
what is she doing?
Pulling over to the right lane to turn right down the Royston Bypass
What a prat, she should of been further al further along
Why?
Because you don't pull out in front of a car going seventy miles an hour
How do you know it's a she?
Because it's an obnoxious move, it must be
Looks like a fella  to me
That is  no I can't see, wow
quick overtake her see if we can see
Sorry
stop in here, Do It All
No
let's go and see in Do It All
Do It All won't have one
Yes they'll have one, I've not been in there
go and have a look in Atlantis while you're here
What's Atlantis?
Atlantis has got, they're an electrical shop, they're on sales, see if you can find  
No, I don't, I want the tap all bloody stuff, I don't want a new whatsit
you can see 
 
yes exactly, dad can get erm fifteen percent off there and you can give 
That's his car
he didn't want one, I say you're gonna get one if, if, if, if Mr  going, you'd better go and get one, but oh no she wouldn't
Poo!
What stinks?
The plant 
The bloody plant?
Oh no


no wonder they're selling them


mm, they stink
Oh I love it
Do you wanna smell?
Oh toxic
Is it?
No,
What's  what stinks then?
Oh I didn't want to tell you this Phil, but  
What?
it's the  
you've gotta
No, this isn't gonna smell, I like the condom it's wearing 
It's just the things you poke your hairs up on a sharp stick


You can do a blue movie with this thing
What?


Do shut up, what's that doing in there?
Get it out
Oh dear 
Have a goody
Oh thank you, oh I love these, what you done to them?
Don't know, they're melting
What have you done?
I use that thing  which sort of congeals them together


That was a long word, congeal


Here's another word conjugal
   
 
I don't know why, good God what the hell's he doing over the road?
He's not in the middle of the road
He's not supposed to be in there, what the bike is doing, you're not allowed to go on this road
It's a woman
I rest my case
Yeah
Women  
 
Erm  close your window
Why?
otherwise you'll knock out the record
Oh, sorry about that


I thought  was cold
I apologise for any temporary loss  
 

I wonder where I'd get that vinegar  from?
I'd probably get it from Boots
Boots
Mm
Ah well, there we go
Mm
there we go
Do you rest your case?
Yes, this 
Mm?
Aha, you can try in Quick Save, they might have one
I doubt it
You can try  
 
Oh yeah 


and where here?
Mm
I shall go in
Here I go, here I go, here I go, we are off to the show to the show ho 
We didn't do bad here, it was quite quick actually
Always quite quick, always quite quick  
 
doesn't cost me anything, me personally it costs the practice
Ah, but who's gonna pay for it  oh hurry up, hurry up, hurry up
What?
I need the loo
And I need a sweety, have another sweety
Thank you, I love these, mm
What you love them for?
What?
What you love them for?
I just like them
What?
I just like them
You do you
Mm, yeah


Oh mind my fish  erm best get all the work done tomorrow
Why?
Cos we will  I'll come dressed for dirty work tomorrow
There's dirty work afoot eh?
That's right


Do you want Morse taken out?
If you can find him you can tape him
Why's he home?
No
How?
Anything you want taped?
No
He started he's back next weekend
Who?
Morse
No he's not
Brand new series, yes it is
Is he?
Yeah, brand new series
Oh good  oh right
It look's quite good actually
I erm, it's on tonight er old Regan's on tonight
Regan?
Mhm Regan
Oh
John Thaw in Regan
Oh right
pilot for the series I thought it was gonna stop
I doubt it 
I hope he is 
Do you want that taped?
No thank you
Alright then, oh Regan as in Sweeney?
Yeah
Oh
pilot tape for it you see
Oh right, yes  yes the Sweeney it's quite good it  ba, ba, ba  with Dennis Waterman,ba, ba, do, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba  quick mow that jogger over  got him, now we've got time turn this when we've done this, erm, put the plants in and everything till I gave it at table tennis  
you can't get any work done if you play table tennis
Well we'll get the motor work done first
Mm
then play table tennis
No
Yes, I've gotta have a chance to win again 
No chance


Where were they, five  five games on?
Er, no you won six five
Did I?
Yes
Oh
It was quite disastrous
Mm
so we'll go from er six five up to whatever
Oh look at those big beggars
Er are they swans or geese?
Don't know, geese I should think
Geese, get the guns 
Herons , herons
They're not herons, herons don't fly in threes
How many do they fly in then?
Ones  they're still  
they fly in one's what?
On their own  
singularly


That's a long word isn't it?
Singularly yeah that's not so bad
What's it mean?
Something to do with singling,si si singing
We  we can have a game of count down masters
Count down masters
cogitation  don't follow that one up 
Mm
Come on oh the loo, how much further is it?
I'm getting desperate
Ah desperate's a good word
Desperado, singular desperate
Mm
Latin for desperado
Oh dear   oh it's down about here when, did it the other day, and the woman just drove out straight in front of me from another lane
Lovely
I just, I mean, why bother having roundabouts I ask myself
Well it was a woman come on
Yes it was a woman
women don't comprehend roundabouts, driving cars
Oh 
you should know that by now, nothing is ever  
it is an excuse
What?
er don't put your ear piece to the micro to my blooming sweets


I'm not keen on  ear droppings in my sweets
They're not mine, don't worry
Mm, I know
I love it, I love it.
So why have you started taking up the bag?
Why have I started taking up?
The sweets 
They are marginally easier to eat that way
I don't mean, I mean why have you taken up the other, the plastic bag and put it in that?
Mm, why it's a horrible bag?
Oh, oh you can pop in and get your fishing magazines while you're down here
Why?
Well why not?
What fishing magazine?
Your fishing guides
It's shut is it?
It shouldn't be it's six o'clock
Not stopping now I haven't got no money anyway  sorry I haven't got any money for the tape  oh dear  
Oh fish and chips, I fancy fish and chips
No you don't
Well I fancy the woman serving 
My, it's a man
It's a woman, I wouldn't mind her on a bed of lettuce, ha, get out the way morons.
Have you ever tried Max's kebabs?
No
Mm, pretty good, hey there's Danny's dad, he'll go right up high, erm up er, up Roman Road, I bet you
Which one?
That one in front  see it's gone, ram him over
Oh  
not to  over there, dear oh dear
I want to be Danny's dad, I want to be Danny's dad  go that way look
Oh he's going the wrong way, moron, mm, where's he going?
Bonsoir, bonsoir
Wow  oh dear
What?
I now realize why it was reaching  love it, it's getting right  
erm,bom bom bom 
So if we're going to do er  I'd better unclip this hadn't I?
Yo
Yes
not one
not once
not one but two
Oh that's awful
Oh dear 
You'd thought that these houses could of least put a bit of paint on
Why?
Make it look more attractive
No 
They look grotty like that  
 
I still think that you should buy Jean a Range Rover
Why?
She likes them, nice cars
I'll buy her a dinky toy one 
they're beautiful
Mm, they might be beautiful but they're difficult to run
What do you mean difficult to run?
They're a damn sight more efficient than this I'll tell you that for a start
Rubbish
they take more petrol, but servicing-wise they don't require as much
Rubbish  they're probably a lot more expensive to run than this
Well just because this is a Jag H J six convertible, it's neither here nor there 
Oh, what the whole part of the problem running is, is the depreciation thing, the more, the more you spend on a car the more the more depreciation you're going to get
Oh I suppose so
I'm not saying I suppose it's better  
well this is a classic car as they go
It's a, it's a, it's a er  
 
Oh no
What?
 le pool de javelle horse dirt, mm
I don't know if we're supposed to be talking er French
We weren't
Ah at last home


So that's basically, I now got a B grade for and that gives
Mm
so that's English, and I've gotta get, er he reckons he'll get a B grade for the er lit, but I was so cheesed off with that erm  piece I got today, thirty five and thirty five, one mark off being er an A, he put at the bottom aargh, if only you'd seen the lousy ending, cos he said if I'd got the, an extra couple of sentences it er would of been forty eight, forty, so that's, so annoying, but I've now gotta write an informal letter, I don't know how that comes under informal letter
You write to an imaginary friend, you're inviting him down for the summer holidays and you say all that, all about the sort of things that you're planning to do with them, make it up
Can you put bad spellings in those as it's informal?
No you cannot, you'll write it like a normal, a formal letter, like you would write to Melanie
That's not formal
It's informal
it's that use of formal
No an informal letter
You said write like a formal letter
Well you do, but you don't put, don't put like heading for a business thing and
Oh
just the normal address and date and dear wh whatever it is
Er
and then you write, just write a set paragraph just as you would normally.
see if I can get a grade A for this one, that, if I can get a grade A for the er next two pieces that I'm doing, which I've got to hand in, that could take me to a B grade after that.
Did you erm, give in a formal letter?
No he said don't give them in yet, but do the informal first, so I'll do the informal, we've got to do an informal
Well don't talk about it, go and do it
Yeah I'll do it later
Well do it now you're not doing anything before dinner
Dinner's now 
No dinner's in at least twenty minutes at least if you rough
Twenty minutes
Probably, if you just rough out
Yes it's easy enough those  so, I hope they don't get bitchy because most of mine are on, on the computer  
well then write the song through, write the informal letter by hand
Yeah, I might do
your handwriting's quite nice and neat
Erm, oh I've got another piece back that I've  twenty nine, twenty nine  as it goes
That's a C innit?
Yeah, but that goes, that goes in the lit file, so I got rid of my er with the thirty five I managed to get rid of erm 
Who's got all these things?
They're at school in a box
Thank goodness for that
but er, so now I've got a thirty six, thirty five, thirty four, thirty four, thirty four, thirty two and thirty, so that's a B count in B file, so there's no hassle with that, but if I can get on and get rid of the er, I've got twenty eight, twenty nine in there as well, er twenty eight in there as well, so I want to get rid of the twenty eight and twenty nine  but it is a guarantee that a B file, so there's 
Mm 
no real worry about it, but erm I want to do better
What about your economics?
Or don't you know that yet?
Yeah, he still keeps far faffing around with the erm  whatever detail, yeah, he still hasn't given it to us
Well how you supposed to do it?
Did you get, did you get that thing finished er geography whatever it was?
Something, something
Science 
well well whatever it was you 
No 
had to finish off?
No
Why not?
Because I didn't have time, but er they started geography course work today and I was out the lesson
Why were you out the lesson?
The drama thing, so I'm a se a section hand already on that and I've even got a, well we're supposed to listen to it tomorrow, we've got a tutor period instead, so it means that we miss another lesson
Can't you copy out what you, what you missed?
Yeah, I'm out tomorrow night, I'm out school, selling books again  so should be at home
When you gonna get all this work done Richard?
Yes I'm trying to get it done, but I am getting pressure from the year group as well, it was, and so I've got that, back out at Wednesday, so I'm gonna have to have my hair done last
Gonna Wednesday what?
Erm, got a rehearsal haven't I?
But you can't back out of the whole rehearsal
I mean I've backed out of going, having, I'm supposed to be working on that on the stalls as well but I backed out of that and said I've got a hair cut, erm, so I'll have to be done last.
It's not, it's not gonna go on very long is it?
Yes, er probably until about half four 
Well that's alright, she ain't she's not here till half three in any case
Yeah, you'll have to come home a bit er, a bit er
Yes I know
She's  so this'll probably be our last appointment here wouldn't it?
No I was saying to her  I'd probably have one more before I go anyway and er  I'm, I'm gonna ask her if she  with my, cos at that nana's there, I mean there'll be four of us there, it might be worth an hour and a quarter drive
What her?


She wouldn't wanna drive an hour and a quarter
Well she might not, she might do
She wouldn't drive an hour and a quarter, it's not worth it
Well we haven't much choice, we'll have to arrange something else that's all, mm I don't, I don't wanna give her up, she's a good hairdresser
Well you can hardly ask her to drive round and er an hour and a half
An hour and a quarter 
for twenty quid
It's not twenty quid, if Melanie and I have our hair permed, that's, that's two perms and two, two cuts
And granny have it done
Possibly
dad can have it done
Possibly
nice family outing
Er if she was to come over
Saturday
No, no, no 
she won't do that 
but she could, I dunno perhaps we can work something out, I dunno, er failing that we'd have to come out to her house 
Oh right, yeah, I'd rather go up the road, stupid
I know, but she's really good though, I be shall sorry to erm, have to give her up  
oh dear, see that tutor tomorrow morning for an hour, hey hey
What, get the job er copied up then
I can't do job, it's course work, don't you understand?
Well
How am I suppose to copy up course work, it's my own work
Do, do you study that at home then?
What?
A science or something
Mum it's a tutor period, it means work
Oh you'll have to work then 
don't sit around for an hour doing nothing 
I realise that Richard
but don't be stupid
Look, if you've got work to copy up, why can't you study and work in
Because he's a tutor
What do you do in it?
I have D R N L As to do
Mm, I used to let my  when it's tutor period, get on and do some revision work
Good grief.
and it's much nicer it, they know what they've got to look at.
I've got to go and see Wally in tomorrow for the forms, I ain't got any forms to fill in cos I'm officially not leaving, I'm only moving
That's right, that's right 
change of address 
I don't know it yet
it will be change, I can't say, is it, I mean I said it's a change of address, they know I'll probably be moved in four to six weeks 
Do get that out of your mouth please
Which is it gonna be?
I'm not signing or changing anything Richard until we have exchanged contracts
Oh yeah, that's easy muck around do what I do 
No Richard because the whole thing can fall through  when we have our survey done it might show a defect or something, we might pull out, when they have their survey done it might show a defect so they might pull out, you don't do anything Richard until the contracts have been exchanged, then you can start saying right I think that's, that's, every thing's definite
Alright  we were doing company law  and 
Mm, mm 
I was damn good I knew everything, first I had to watch the accounts and secondly I'm looking at all this stuff for when I start my business
Mm, mm
so I'm saying ah that's that and that, that, so I basically have  we were looking at erm, what's it?
Partnerships, did you know that if I start a partnership with Phil right, mum
Mm
I will be completely liable for erm   liability
Yes
but that's, wouldn't affect me because I'll be taking loans out  so there and I can have up to twenty er partners, nineteen in fact, because there's twenty partners altogether, basically, so there is definitely benefits for being in partnership
as if er, there's not, if you've got twenty partners or there's twenty of you altogether you're splitting profit twenty ways 
I'm not having twenty partners, I'm having Phil and that's it
What, we'll sort it out later
Erm
when you've got the capital right?
Erm, but sole, we're looking at sole proprietor as well, there's some good things in that, I E they're cheap to set up, stuff like that, so they're not bad as they go, but, I suppose well I'll have to sell when I've got more money, I didn't get any replies today  not a single blooming one, I'm a bit cheesed off, so erm, I think I might ring back that one of the ones that I did get a reply from and say thank you.
I would leave it for a while Richard
Well dad said I should say something
I would just leave it for a while
But er, it's all I've had for now I suppose,oh God  I've got maths tomorrow, hate maths
No you don't
I do 
Well that is, that is a really stupid attitude to go into isn't it?
Oh I hate it
No you
be one G C S E I'll fail
Don't be so silly, if he drops that glass I'm gonna kill him 
Dog went mad when I  
 
Eh?
Sorry?
Dog went mad
Mm, mm
dumping himself and running around and banging into doors and things, stupid mutt, so er, erm give him his Bonio, he gets, he now barks at me when I sit down, till I get up and give him his Bon Bonio mum
Mm, mm
well he is so cheeky, and you can tell when he's hungry cos he goes back for and stand by it again, sometimes he does and sometimes he doesn't
Well more fool you for letting him
Well he's obviously hungry if he wants say have a second Bonio  so I just give it to him  so what   oh excuse me will look good with my full colour and commendations and credits and
Which means we've done three times in a night and a half, Agnes?
Oh, she's useless!
So you're gonna write up the list?
Yeah, may as well.
But  today  when we finished up to the middle of th here.
But erm  so as what we have to do is to basically  arrange  start arranging things.
Like songs.
What do you reckon I should get?
Sort of trout  trout hors d'oeuvres and stuff?
Oh my God!
I can't stand fish!
No, do smoked salmon.
Or smoked salmon hors d'oeuvres.
You know, bits of smoked salmon on cheese sticks and things.
Ya.
Poke people's eyes  with a 
Cos you don't want wanna have a meal, sort of nicknacky that you can sort of nibble.
Like Donna!
Sausage rolls and stuff like that  sort of thing.
Yeah.
I don't suppose you fancy taking this tape machine home tonight do you, and recording some of your conversation with your brother or something?
The longest conversation we have is, get off the computer, it's my turn!
Er, I wonder if we should take this to school tomorrow?
Oh great laugh!
Yeah, I tell you what you could take this to school for me.
Why?
And you could tape it, er imagine it's yours
Yeah.
well, then you won't get the comments will you  that I get?
Yeah.
What do you think?
One of the lessons I've got are design, and not a lot happens in design.
What about German?
We er
German?
Oh yeah, it's all in German,yeah !
Art?
I don't think you wanna record those,you'll hear the conversations we have about you !
Oh!
What about me?
No we don't really.
Andrew!


Erm
What is in that stuff?
Are you quite finished ?
No, why?
Don't do it!
Turn this off.
Oh!
Erm
All you can do  is leave it,ge take the  out that one  you know, like a  and that, put that over the e end so it; s a nice warm bit like here, just enough to see.
Oh you'll have to buy a new light top.
Mm.
You could of course, have a big marquee in the back garden.
Oh yeah!
Richard.
What?
Er, we're not gonna be able to tape er  LA Law.
Yes you are!
I asked first!
Erm, no because we're recording Red Dwarf for dad.
I'm sorry, I asked first!
I don't care!
I do!
Because you can tape like  music, beginning music  and then he can tape it, he only wants a couple of minutes beginning.
If you only want the bloody music,whe I, what's the point of taping in the first place!
I want the music, cos I wanna co introduce them to music, so tape it, I asked first!
You got a tape recorder there!
I asked first!
Well it's, I don't care!
So you tape the music, I asked first!
Use that!
No!
I asked first!
Use that!
Alistare!
No!
It's my damn tape !
Right!
Okay then!
Yo fine, I'll just wipe the thing!
It won't survive, I'll wipe it!
Flipping scum!
Punch his face in!
Not like brotherly love!
I hate him!
Ah tho yo re , ah you don't really!
So, we can have 
 
a marquee  out in the back garden.
Wo!
What's this?
Be a bit cold wouldn't it?
Valentine, to Richard, from Richard.
I know!
Ro Roses are red, violets are blue, I'll get straight to the point, I want to bonk you !


Roses are red, violets are blue, most poems rhyme  this one doesn't !
No, read it properly!
 
Read it
Right!
properly!
Roses are red  the day is blue, my only wish now is that I spend it with you.
Roses are red, violets are blue, I'm writing to tell you I'm in love with you.
You never see me   who wrote you that then?
Er, er er er, Mel  .
I bet you, I bet you can't guess who .
Thank you!
No.
Told you!
You didn't believe me did you?
And I had a Valentines Card, ha ha ha !
Ho, ho, ho!
A tough, tough !
You know what he's waiting for ?
Yeah..
See you've made a mess on the board as well.
Mm!
I mean it  why grey inside?
I wonder which poem book she got that out of?
No, she wrote it herself.
How do you know?
Because, I do!
Roses are red, violets are blue, I'll get straight to the point
I want you!
I want your body!
Mm mm!
Noticed the poems rhyme without detection there.
It's because,I have a rather large 
A finger of fudge is just enough  to give 
to give myself up!
No.
To win the by-election.
A finger of fudge is just enough 
A finger of fudge is just enough to give me  myself  a dee dee dee  dee!
Stiffy!
If, I'll fill my  with goodness, nothing now can save her
a finger of fudge is just enough so go and vote for labour!
But don't!
Please, now this is a conservative household!
Oh alright!
Maggie Thatcher rules  good on her!
Down with the poor!
Up with the rich!
I agree!
Erm
Oh he's gonna be busy on that night isn't he?
Ah!
I can, am bringing Claire a present tomorrow.
About who?
Graham.
Why?
I dunno.
She wants to see who's interested in po in  helicopters.
I think it's which er  sixty ki six
 Komenchi 
Ah!
That's a nice helicopter!
Where's the list gone?
What?
There was a list.
List of what?
Oh it's underneath there.
Er  it was  there it is!
Mm mm.
Ah !
Kate, Donna, Helen, Jenny, Georgina, Sarah,Ji i er,Sa is that right?
Read them out again, start from the beginning.
Is that Chloe?
Slowly.
Oh is that Claire and Jim?
Clare and Graham.
Start from the beginning, slowly.
It's, looks like Chloe actually.
Sarah 
No, start from the beginning.
Kate.
No!
I'm not gonna  well, no.
Not Kate?
Not Kate.
Donna?
Definitely.
Helen?
Definitely.
Jenny?
Definitely.
Georgina?
Definitely.
Claire?
Definitely.
Claire, another one?
Definitely 
Sarah?
Definitely.
Rebecca?
Maybe.
Jessica?
Maybe.
Sarah  wacko-jacko!
Sarah wacko?
Oh definitely!


Oh 
A 
yes!
four inch?
Tony.


No !
Paul .
No !
Andy?
No.
Me?
No!
Paul ?
No.
?
No.
No.
No!
Can't read that one!
Danny.
?
No.
She must be joking!
Paul  and Bryant ?
Erm, Bryant maybe.
No.
I didn't put Paul !


Couldn't have been him.
So I'm gonna show dad that list this weekend  see if he says  oh oh oh!
What that?
Yes.
He's not gonna know any of them is he?
Well he will trust me not to invite rebels!
And you can hardly say 
Yeah.
that those are rebels can you?
Helen
Has he told yo , has he tol , if he doesn't know them he's not gonna know is he?
Helen's quiet, Jenny's quiet  ooh I tell you what, I'm beginning to fall for Jenny actually I have to admit.
I'm not.
She kept looking at me today in
God!
now, at lunch.
Giving me all sad looks  cos she feels sorry for me.
My little Helen!
Helen!
My little Richard!
A failure of natural selection!
Ooh!
You wanna  perhaps.


So if we can, yeah, well I suppose so.
So I've recorded half an hour of tape already up here.
I got  
Can't you spell  !
What?
Can't you spell  !
?
Yeah.
.
It's starts with J actually, in case you were wondering!
I thought  was a G?
That video was quite fun this morning wasn't it?
Ah .
Well talk about getting to the climax!
Yeah !
But imagine that!
I,th there's no need to show in schools or anything like that!
There wasn't.
I think that just slowed down, I think it was all done in about thirty seconds, they just slowed it down.
No, it was that's 
Oh the music was building up, you know
Yeah !
It had something for 
Yeah, that's it.
everyone didn't it?
Had music for me


people bonking for you!


And lots of computer graphics for James.
It was quite funny wasn't it?
Yeah I .
It was quite funny, I have to admit.
She was very good looking!
I thought she looked like Sarah .
You reck any, anyone who's blonde looks like her isn't it?
Well, she yo , she was er  do you think I should invite Sarah?
If she'll come.
But i , does she know any of those people?
No, not really.
That's the problem.
She, she'll get on with them.
No she's probably teetotal!
And I'm not having Melanie !
Ah, you're joking!
She's going out with a nineteen year old!
She's gonna even lived with him!
Who is?
Sarah!
What ?
Yeah!
Tell 
He's 
me more?
he's he's er, she's goes for the rich guys you see.
I'm not surprised!
Mm!
No.
She's got everything!
She's very intelligent, she's very rich, and she's very attractive!
Mm, I don't know about very attractive, not bad, ha!
She's damn good!
I wouldn't kick her out of bed on a cold night!
I must admit.
But 
I'd sooner have the duvet to be honest about it!
 
German in three months, ha!
Yeah.
It's not good!
Oh what!
Done really good!
Well you  still do it for three years  and  !
German in three years, like that.
Well  oh yeah!
 Acht  bitter 
So, well that's what we'll have to do then.
I'll have to have a  have to have a word with good old dad  and see what he suggests.
Basically, say, ah ya!
 Das is good  Das fater That's, my father in German.
No!
Erm  yes.
Didn't I just say it.
Er er   God I'm 
Then you say   swina 
Mine a   Ah !
Re er er er er  Re , er er er er 
Open that cupboard .
What?
Cupboard.
Who's in there then?
And the other wo , and the other.
Mm.
Is there a green lined shirt in there?
What colour?
No!
Green lined, it's white with green 
Oh!
lines.
That one?
Yep.
That's the one!
Get it out.
What one.
The shirt.
Why, what's it got in there?
Just get the shirt out!
What's wrong with it?
Ge get it out on the hanger  that's it!
Don't knock it off!
Bring it over.
St. Michaels, oh yeah!
We 
Good!
Put it up on the door handle!
we go to Marks and Spencers do we?
Put it on the door handle.
Of course, I'm getting twenty five quid from there.
Put it on the door handle.
Why?
Cos I'm gonna use it tomorrow.
Good!
Put it on the door handle!
That one?
Yes!
So just leave it on that, that's it.
Good!
Now go into the cupboard
Right.
and you should find a pair of trousers
Oh!
Why am I doing all this?
Cos I can't be bothered to get up!
Ah!
In between the 
I can't be bothered to do it!
red and the green shirts, there's a pair of trousers.
Turn them in.
Them ones?
That's it!
Can you get them out then?
They're kind of  a disgusting colour aren't they?
You're not turning up to school in this are you?
That's the one!
It's all hanging out, it's all  it's all hanging out.
Put that on the door.
Good!
Have you ever thought about getting out of here, you know, if it's all on the door?
Er  denim jacket on top of that I think.
I don't think so!
Don't think, denim jacket?
Well, where you going anyway?
Just to  Rush School.
I'm just wearing the denim jackets as casual jackets to take off when we get there.
Why what's happening tomorrow?
We're going to perform our stupid play!


About the sodding  Rush and I'm gonna die!
I thought they weren't
I know all my lines, my lines is, my name's Robert and I like playing cowboys and indians.
I then in front of Sam and she's the headmistress and I say, I've been sent to see you by Miss Huddy, Miss Trudgenell, because I got caught 
Miss Trudgenell!
cleani ,co cos I got caught pulling a little girl's pigtails.
She said erm  tt  don't you know it's ma only my privilege to do that?
And I say, no Miss Trudgenell, she says  er, why did you do it?
I said, because I wanted to , see miss  and she says, right!
Bend over my table!
She gets the cane out  and just as she's about to whip me, er  Jane walks in.
And she bu , joins in does she?
Yeah.
And then er, basically, that's it!
That's my lines.
Danny has to go down on the floor, put his hands on hips and go, evening all!
Bends his knees, cos he's a policeman !
Has to come in like this?
Yeah.
Evening all!
That's it!
That's right.
Sting
And he says 
police , impression of Sting, you know!
Oh.
Oh God!
It's, he is such an awful actor!
Even I can't 
I can imagine Daniel sort of coming in  you know
Exactly!
Evening all!
He is, he does!
He goes,evening all!
Evening all, prowlers !
He either under acts or over acts doesn't he?
Not
He does!
Evening all!
I'm a policeman !who's innocent?
That's right !
He's he's just terrible!
He's crap!
What, do you reckon I should wear 
I reckon he'd better off with the music to be honest, I mean
What me?
No  him
Oh oh!
No, he's no good!
Shall I wear that one?
Shall I wear that lemon one?
What?
Which one?
That er, one in between, next to the red one.
That one?
Yeah.
Oh my God, Richard!
Looks like Ca Carly's curtains!


She hangs them round her waist!
She 
Or do you reckon I should wear  a white casual
Well,ha , you're supposed to be a five year old 
Yeah.
dressed in that?
Yeah.
Bloody hell!
Exactly!
That's what I said!
Have you got the little cap as well?
With shorts on?
I thought  I se , I'll be a boy, er Donna's.
What a cap?
Yeah I know!
 
I didn't know  she was due !
What's the matter with grey trousers?
Grey trousers maybe?
Black shoes, grey trousers and that?
I don't care!
It's your 
What about black trousers?
play!
Put it somewhere.
Oh!
A cloak.


Or do you reckon that shirt?
Oh that's looks alright, leave it.
What that one?
You know the ones you have it tied, sort of half round your neck, you know.
Like that.
Do you think that, that one maybe?
I dunno.
If you like.
Do you reckon she'll prefer it in that colour?
No, I'm taking  not bothering.
I mean, nobody's gonna bother to check the colour of your shirt with about twenty other people on stage ?
There's my  Global Hypercolour.
What a !
Ooh there again, what do you reckon to these?
I've never worn these?
Neither have I.
I've only got one pair of  I've only got one pair of 
Get into these actually.
Yeah, I've got one pair presenting clothes .
Bloody hell!
This was half price!
Aargh!
Jesus!
How much is it?
Twenty five quid.
Half price?
Yeah.
What do 
 
you reckon?
Urgh!
Those?
Oh!
Yeah if you like.
That's a possibility.
Do you prefer them to those ones?
Not particularly.
Right.
Those are more casual actually.
And I can wear a white shirt  straight laced white.
Ha er er !
What's Do , by the way, what's Donna wearing?
Oh!
Wow!
You should see it man!
Wo ooh, ooh, ooh!
Tell you what, I do, but I can't wait that 
You want to.
Wow!
Erm, a very, very, very, very, very slinky erm  black skirt  and tights, and a very low top!
I'm talking seriously slinky!
Oh I see!
A er
phew!
We're talking seriously tasty!
So  
Not me, I sprayed my balls with that stuff.
Oh lend you a jacket, moron!
Er 
It's over there.
So
It's good stuff this!
Thank you very much.
You seen it?
What sort of  take it every morning ?
That's right!
Yep!
It's good stuff for bad breath actually!
Talk about,
Just go 


See it kills all the throat hairs!
The throat tissue .
I suppose we should get our German actually shouldn't we?
What German?
German, German.
All that?
Yeah.
To put our thing onto tape.
How the hell am I gonna do that?
Why?
Mean, how the hell you gonna  do that ?
Yeah, what do have to say anyway?
That thing we did in class.
Oh that!
Yeah.
Ow!
Ow!
Ow!
Right, so just a minute, so let's  let's plug up this te te ,ta ta ta ta ta tape.
Ivor !
How you gonna do that?
No, use that while I'm doing the entertainment.
That, oh 
So 
what?!
Oh well I wouldn't mind being entertained by her!
To be perfectly  honest.
Ooh that's nice!
Ooh!
Very nice indeed!
Cor!
That's a bit okay!
Yes!
This bloke means it!
You got a flinch or something?
What?
You got a flinch or 
What?
keep on doing that!
This one?
I'll  in the eye, don't want this  waste my expensive  deodorant!
This stuff costs a fortune now!
This Lynx is expensive as well!
This is one ninety nine a can!
And it doesn't last very long, there's only about two week's worth there!
Cos I absolutely spray myself to death!
Erm  booze, booze!
We gotta limit that.
So you don't want food?
You don't want, you just want sort of crisps and nicknacky things
Sausages.
and sausages and hors d'oeuvres 
Sausages.
Hors d'oeuvres.
Salmon and  you want salmon on rolls 
Salmon 
on biscuits?
sam salmon the bed!
Ha!
Salmon on the rolls , and
Salmon on !
salmon on toast and  sort of stuff like that?
Toasted salmon.
Basically
Do you know what?
What?
I feel like humping Donna again!
Again?
You're not supposed to say that!
You're supposed to say, I didn't know you have?
You haven't.
No, but I felt like it before!
Er
I don't mind !
Ha ha ha ha !
You just messed that joke right up for me!


Shall I, shall I tell you a joke about my car?
No.
My car's got a bidet in it.
Yes!
You told me that one!
 
Yes, well that's er, er really not Andy!
What about,I I thought that was quite good !
I've got a joke for you.
What do you call a Scouse  in a five-bedroomed house?
Burglar.
What do you call a Liverpudlian in a suit?
Defendant.
Yes!
Oh you heard it?
I was waiting for .
You sod!
Erm  why do Essex girls  wear knickers?
Keep their nipples warm.
Why don't , oh it was brilliant !
Why do erm  what's the difference between a Skoda and an Essex girl?
You can drive an Essex girl more than a hundred yards!
Er
Oh it's !
The side of shoes are all peeling, look, they're all cracking up.
Oh well, I'm not surprised.
You do, sort of, put them under  wear and tear.
I walk with them!
Oh dear!
I sprayed my hair!


I hold my hair  spray !
Designer wear hair!
Cor!
But did she tell you how she's gonna wear it?
On her head!
No!
Good possibility!
No, you've gotta try.
There is rumours  decisive rumours  that she's gonna wear on it her head!
She looked very nice today in Science!
I was watching that film and thinking of her.
I have to tell you.
But when doesn't she look very nice?
Oh true!
She
Can you imagine, Stuart asked her out!
Can you imagine that!
He's walked up to her and asked her out!
So?
He was a prat!
So  he can be a prat !
I spent six months  too  priming my time  then
It still didn't work !
it still didn't damn well work, too right!
And then asked her out it  orgasmo, or what, too!
Yes!
She's, well  looking at her in P S E D and she looked so cute and adorable!
Who?
Helen.
Oh, Jenny's not to bad either!
And Georgina's not bad either!
But Sarah Jane's, wow!
Well!
She's just darn right good looking!
Yes!
It's huge!
What?
Her bum.
Who?
Sarah  's.
I don't think I've ever looked.
It's a whopping great thing!


just trying to lift it!
Yeah.
It's not that big !
You get  it is,her bum as well!
Oh dear!
So I've basically gotta take one of those suit holders in tomorrow to  school  for my costume.
Cos I'm not gonna go in and get it ruined.
As,Lloyd Grossman would say  it's quite novelty .
Tony.
I can't do that !
That's right.
I can't say that.
No you can't say that one without a .
Erm  damn!
I've forgotten what I was gonna say!
Ah, phone!
Phone!
Oh Miss  might be communicating to us all.
It's a
Phone!
sign!
It's a sign!
Aha!
Mum's got it.
It'll be for Alistare.
Fifty P bet it'll be for him!
Fifty P bet!
Here we go!
She's come upstairs.
Has she?
Yep!
Fifty P bet?
Fifty P bet!
Oh Christ, it's for me!
Who is it?
How the fuck is, I do!who it is?
Girl or boy?
Oh what are talking about!
Hello?
Hi!
What do you want?
Alright, I'll have to.
I've got little Andy  sitting here!
Who is it?
It's .
Go away!
Yes, you were saying?
Let me listen.
We haven't got any.
No, we didn't!
I rang Danny  and already checked  so there isn't  basically!
That's crap!
Is Jim there with you?
Or is he at home?
No!
No!
No, no, no!
No, that's crap!
We haven't got any.
No!
None at all.
And Andy's still in the bedroom 
we 
getting me undressed!
Forget about it Nick!
Did you hear that ?
Did you hear what he said?
Oh well, basically  well 
Mm!
oh it's nothing of interest.
Er
Shut up!
 
What ?
Do what?
Do what?
Oh well, nothing of interest.
Erm, no  yo I've, er I've asked him at the parents' evening what he expected us to do for economics, right?
And yo you're never gonna guess what he wants us to do for our final bit of course work?
We have got to go and stand outside Marks and Spencers  and ask questionnaires  and we've gotta do the same in Wimbourne.
Ridiculous or what!
I think it's crap!
I think it's pathetic!
Er here!
Er here !
I think it's ridiculous!
We're never gonna get that done are we?
Are you gonna go and stand outside Marks and Spencers and get arrested?
For asking surveys?
Oh God!
I think it might be worthwhile actually so the school can come and bail us out!
Urgh!
God it's ridiculous!
I mean  will be arrested for kerb crawling!
I mean, you can't do that sort of thing, surely!
Oh well, I think it's ridiculous!
As you can tell, I said, Andy's been drinking  I think.
I wouldn't know.
Er, blackcurrant  yeah, blackcurrant mate, I'm afraid.
So I I was a bit stupid letting him on that sort of thing.
We were this, just discussing the party here  that we're having  and we've now got twenty five guests  you see.
Guests?
Twenty five!
It should be a great doss up!
Donna, Georgina, Sarah ,er er er
Pa oh ah, I'm definitely meant to record that!
Georgina, er, Helen, Jenny, Claire , Claire , Sarah   Madeline, that lot.
It should be a great doss up!
Tell him there's about twenty 
So 
million girls, and  two boys !
Pardon?
Yeah, and you, Phil, that lot.
Phil's gonna basically, when we've all had  as you would know with all the other girls, then erm  he basically has to come and sin  erm, we repent to him, basically!
Yes.
Exactly!
That's basically what we , er what's happening.
Right!
Anything else I can help you with?
Oh, rightio!
Yes.
Please be on ta the professionals 
What?
on are on now.
When's what?
Oh I don't know exactly.
As soon as I can arrange a free couple of weeks  away, yep.
Cos I gotta get booze and food and all that stuff in.
So, Andy's gonna hire a video camera  to, to film er  Stuart and Phil, and that stuff.
So it should be a good laugh like a good old er, jolly jaunt!
But we'll have to have a look.
Right!
I will let you go then.
And I lost the bet by the way, cos I said to da , Andy, I bet you fifty P it was for my brother, and it wasn't.
So 
Oh I'm rich!
I'm going to kill you tomorrow!
 
Right!
Okay?
Oh thank you!
Oh don't go!
So, I'll basically see you tomorrow.
Okay.
See you!
Bye!
Oh it was !
It was for me!!
Well what do you want to talk about?
Well there's not a great deal to talk about.
As 
No.
it goes.
But you have to have, er  it'll be good if you could find something for her.
Well, we'll see  er  hardly think  that I know any  active 
Well you 
Admirals at the moment.
Well not active, but you do go down to Portsmouth quite regularly don't you?
Well yeah, I mean I might  I can probably get more advice on the R A F or Army  than, than the Navy.
Can you find out for the Army for me?
Mm mm mm.
And  
Mm.
Put it forward.
Yes, probably.
See what they can recommend.
That is a serious option actually.
Oh well, course it is!
I know that.
Recruit , there's a 
Mhm.
erm  there's two guys want to go in the Marines in mine anyway  and so they're paying erm, A levels of fifteen hundred quid  for one of them.
Well
He's getting paid fifteen hundred 
Yeah.
quid A levels.
Yeah, that's a good idea.
And so, if I do that  for the army  and then get them to do my degree as well.
Yes.
So, you get fifteen hundred for going the Ar , er, doing A levels, which isn't bad is it?
Nope.
Have a  with that.
So, that's not too bad.
That's right.
And you have 
Erm 
are you going to look around the  house again tomorrow?
No.
Are you going for a buy then?
Well, probably will do.
Can we go again?
Er, if I go then you can go.
Yeah.
Don't see any reason why not.
We could pop up this Saturday.
No, I'm not going while   is driving.
Oh er  Sammy.
So, when they gonna sell he his, this week?
Hang on!
Oh I dunno.
I do I haven't heard anything, I was supposed  to ring them and find out.
Oh God!
Don't really understand why I haven't.
They're playing around!
No.
Or they would have got back wouldn't they?
By now.
Well  possibly.
Have you filled in all th , did you hear  telephoned back?
The one you were supposed 
Sorry?
did you call that number back?
Oh, that wasn't anything.
Who was it?
It was just er
Estate Agent, probably.
Just an Estate Agent, yeah.
Oh my God!
I thought it was important!
Nope.
Shouldn't have bothered!
Sorry?
Said, I shouldn't have bothered.
Anyway, I dropped, I rang his office and then  erm Alistare rang me on the mo I think, I think if Alistare rang me they could tell me that er  if I did, or I, no I got the message 
No you 
in yo , I got another message in the office, that's right.
No, you got one from mum  in the evening.
No, a different, the next day.
Oh!
And I thought he came back again.
Oh well, it's another part of the office then.
Oh my God!
Oh!
But er, yes  won't be long but er  it's ridiculous!
Well then, nothing's stopping you putting the damn thing on.
It's not plugged in, there's not enough plug sockets.
But you don't need the, you don't the plug in for the erm
Heater.
heater at the moment.
Oh!
True.
Put it in that one.
Is it a big, oh you quite often get messages on there.
Yes.
That's right.
Oh yeah.
Could be important.
Madeline's offering 
Oh dear!
mum advice about moving.
Oh well that's well founded!
She's never moved in in, what is it, thirty years?
No, exactly!
It's our fifth in ten years .
I should imagine that went down well!
Yeah!
You could say that.
She rang erm  a le , did she tell so , did, mum tell you about the time she had erm  some calls  about two in the morning?
Yeah.
Imagine  calling Maggie at six in the morning!
I mean, Glenys at six in the morning.
Exactly!
I think they'd got another hour.
Sh she's weird!
Didn't i oh that cedar table needs re layering.
One general  well  well I wouldn't worry about it yet, I don't think.
You can't read  Belgian though can you?
Yeah.
Oh, didn't know you could.
Oh it's better than buying a new one isn't it?
I would hope so.
Oh, you're going through those!
Do you have to ti , do you tick them off against your  cheque  book stubs?
No , that's not what I'm doing, I just wanna see which erm  which  building society  sorry, which erm  not building society, which  erm
Bank?
er  what do they call them?
Stadium?
life assurance, erm 
Yes.
loans  erm  is directed.
Haven't you er, you got Alistare insured, and you haven't got me insured?
Not true.
It is true.
It's not true.
I'm not insured!
Nor is Alistare.
He is!
Mum says he's insured.
Not any more.
Oh!
Brilliant!
So if I pop my clogs  nobody get any.
Dee doo doo doo .
But erm  oh damn!
Stay there.
Try not to talk too much.
I don't know want you to have too much.
Why can't I  get rid of this thing for you?
What thing?
Save the accountants doing it.
What things?
Your cheques on the  statements.
Mm?
Because it's dead easy!
I know it is.
So why don't I do it for you?
Say cos the accountants, that's sort of fifty quid you've saved.
He's not doing it.
Well he does it doesn't he?
I know.
Do you do them?
.
He goes through and puts circles round everything and ticks off.
Not at the moment, no.
But we , cos I'll have to do it for you so , something interesting for me to do.
When we get ourselves sorted again.
I love doing that!
Great fun!
I used to be able quite regular.
With the  P C and B.
Oh dear !
My friends are already applying for their summer jobs.
Yeah?
Yeah.
James has applied to Macro.
He'll probably get in as well, little, bloody sod!
But, I'll have to see, yeah I'll have to g pop along to  Liphook Actually, if we do that  if you re do go back, well I can pop round the village can't I?
Sort of if I go smartly dressed  I can see if they've got anything.
Well it's an idea.
Gotta ring Phil actually,wha is it  too late now?
Dad?
What?
Is it too late to ring Phil?
It's about my C, will I get my references.
Oh don't do it now!
Cos it's, I've gotta get th , ask if I can  if they need a, explain er 
Well don't do it now!
Oh well I'll, have to ring him tomorrow, it's very important!
Can't forget that.
Cos then we sort of, turn out, get a finger out and get a move on!
And so, it doesn't look good if I don't bring the information in  so I'd better hurry up  with that.
I've also gotta put my  German onto tape tomorrow.
Oh!
I haven't got a microphone, what a shame, I can't!
Mm.
Ah dear!
No, I can't do that.
So erm  that's German homework I can't do.
Dear oh dear!
Oh!
Oh, oh!
I'm 
Well  that's probably doing too much work.
Oh very funny!
You're being sarcastic I take it?
Oh, me ?
Me?
What, sarcastic?
No I am aching actually, I don't know why.
Ah!
Well I don't know when these three, oh yes it is!
Not good enough!
Who cares!
Don't do that!
habit.
Erm  there's no reason why I can't go out with you on Friday  is there?
Where?
To  Liphook 
No.
If you're going up that house on Friday afternoon.
Pop up to London  we could already
Why am I going Friday afternoon?
Just saying, just in case you do !
I can leave at  the new 
Well I'm not going to am I?
new house.
Oh I've got my  biology tomorrow.
Aargh!
Dum dum da!
Should be doing about 
That is stupid!
Ah ah!
Aha!
Found it?
Erm
Found it?
I'm not really sure.
Well it must say, la la la la
Ah, two thousand eight, got it right!
And that says, twenty seven from
You're not gonna stop insuring yourself are you?
No, no, no, no, no!
Oh no!
God!
Increase the premiums.
Twenty seven from the nine  two thousand one eight.
I still think it'd be good if my bike went walk about .
Be a good way of doing it.
Get it practically sawed up and that.
Got plenty of friends who would be willing to saw it up.
Nineteen, I don't think that's a very good idea at all!
I do!
Saying it's broken.
I'll stretch you for it.
Oh good!
Why?
Well, only really because of erm  as mature, as policies mature  before the er 
What do you mean they mature?
You can collect them?
Yeah.
Before 
Are they pensions?
No, no, no, no!
They're, they're er  and er life insurance against the mortgage.
What?
You borrow money
Yeah.
and then you use life insurance to pay it off.
Oh fabulous!
What?
You mean, in other words, you won't have life insurance left.
So money you've put into life insurance, goes?
Well that's what the life insurance is for, to pay the house off.
Oh!
Put that against the value of the house.
Oh, great!
So 
So 
in other words the money from your life insurance will pay the mortgage?
Yes.
So we've not got that much hassle then?
No, not yet.
So  well then, what you worrying about?
I wasn't worried!
Good!
Glad to hear it!
Now where was I?
What happened to the grand throw out this year?
I wasn't worried at all.
Listen though if, we can't keep everything again!
If we go through and chuck out all the grotty stuff.
Like what?
Well, wardrobes and stuff like that.
Cos, we can get rid of these can't we?
Sell these?
No!
That, this and that.
No!
But keep th , keep the 
Absolutely not!
Don't see why not.
Some of it's useful, I mean
What and that thing?
What?
That can be chucked.
Well, we need it, the amount of stuff at the moment, and get rid of it  when we  know what we're doing with that thing.
Well we're gonna need two removal vans.
Well if we have two removal vans, we have two removal vans!
We didn't fit in the last one.
We only just fitted.
The company pays for it, I don't care!
And that was squeezing it.
But if the company pays for it I don't give a damn!
Hadn't you better contact Pickfords.
Well they'll do it, I'm sure one
Cos er they might sort of book them up ahead or something.
They'll do it in time.
They're not moving much at the moment.
Aren't they?
Well obviously not.
Oh yeah, true !
The housing market is hardly buoyant is it?
So, in other words, you can  push them down a bit.
Did you get the er  bit they saved on the  stamp duty  to buy the kitchen?
It's possible.
Does that mean yes?
Oh good!
Mum was so embarrassed!
She didn't know how you got the chee , the nerve to do it!
Disgraceful!
If you don't ask, you don't get anything.
Don't ask, you don't get!
Exactly!
But do you think they'll load the thing on the joints?
Or
We'll probably have to split it  I would think.
Oh excuse me !
But it shouldn't be too much should it?
No.
We eve , we can dig them up and fix them, really, there's real problem getting anybody in.
So why have the three trees gotta come down?
What three trees are they?
Well those that are right next to the  the ones growing up  between the two bedrooms.
Ah!
Oh that, that one 
The big one.
the big one?
The big one on the back.
Yeah.
Oh tha , we need that anyway.
Tha that one's actually  another .
Oh brilliant!
Then we got one round the corner in the patio area.
Oh no!
Not that big one?
Yeah.
Oh!
But it's right up against the house, it's gotta come down.
tt.
I bet next door are gonna get bitchy aren't they?
Well  possibly.
Then we'll erm
Why's it gotta come down?
Does it have to?
Oh th the erm  the surveyor reckoned that that house next door
Yeah.
was built afterwards as a servant's house.
Lovely!
Too bad it doesn't come with the property.
Yes.
Why is it smaller, it's much smaller is it?
Oh yeah it's smaller, but it's a nice er 
Is this the biggest one in the section?
Er, well it's bi , I don't know.
It must be pretty near it.
Don't know.
Don't really care!
It's got the biggest garden in the area.
I don't know, I don't really care!
Not really.
You can see that about five garden size.
Well it's not really relevant.
Well it's a property!
He said it was a big one didn't they?
Mm.
Cos it's probably double the size of this one.
Er it's,
It's gotta be  well it's ri , what do you reckon, four thousand square feet?
No, no!
Oh I can't work it out.
I really can't afford
It must be pretty close.
So you don't need all this, surely?
What do you need Alistare's report for?
I'll keep the  no, I just keep the stuff, that's er  got sentimental value.
Oh Christ!
I'm gonna burn all of mine!
No you're not!
, I keep them it's such a waste!
No you're not!
Aha!
Aha!
So when are nan and granddad gonna come then?
Oh it's Alistare's trust fund.
Hang on a minute.
Well I'm sure what's going in there.
Are they gonna come and stay with us, sort of in  December
I dunno when they'll 
onwards?
come.
God you can tell that hadn't been open for a while!
Oh 
Ss 
right!
Struth!
This  never changes .
It's just a copy anyway.
Mm, course.
What's the passport for?
Is that an old one?
My to , very first one.
Oh God!
Who's that?
Peace 
An ugly looking  son of a bitch!
police, peace like man!
It says .
But this stuff needs brushing out  once it's that  supposed 
Mhm.
to be quite simple to remove.
I'll have to try something different.
I thought it'd be nice if you get, the teachers I get on really well with a bottle of wine or something.
We'll see!
Cos there's only a few that I get on really well with.
Well we'll see!
It's,now.
Probably more than that actually, and  er  well they are 
And the  policy you are.
,no it's about four  five probably.
Oh what the heck!
Oh well, I can't shift  
You almost got those  doctors.


What time is it, by the way  please?
You got a watch on?
It is  nine fifty two.
Oh God!
I better check my .
Be a bit late.
I would think so.
Yeah.
Pretty fancy though.
Well I suppose we could use them.
Mm mm!
So
Must still be in there somewhere.
Well then mother knows more about these things than we do.


What annoys me is that I know I saw the damn thing not too long ago!
It must be in there then.
God, I'm thirsty again!
I've been thirsty all evening!
Yeah, so said it was that  spaghetti Bolognese that did it.
Makes you thirsty.
Mm.
Well, it's probably
Mm.
it's probably that.
Maybe it is a flu going around then.
Well these all need to be  well I mean quite often this stuff we can
Throw?
no, no, half of this stuff we can actually  keep bi , or or leave, leave for them because it's actually  relevant information.
What leave them bills and everything?
No I mean it's
And guarantees?
Well it's no damn good to us once we've moved, is it?
Ooh God, they've had the house at a cheap rate anyway!
They can damn well pay for these stuff if it breaks down!
That's not the point!
Just stop it!
Are we taking the cooker with us or not?
Not the cooker, no.
So they get i ,we will work pay for all our appliances and stuff?
Eh?
Will work pay for all our appliances?
Not all of them, no.
Well a lot of , yeah?
And water softener as well?
All those big salt pebble things I have to fill up every week in the ?
Well I guess we may get a  we may get ourselves a  waste disposable unit.
Good!
Get one of those we got  in, particularly in favour of those.
Does she like them?
Stick some raw eggs and things down there.
Get it chopped up.
It's a great laugh!
Mm.
But we want one of those halogen jobs.
What are they called?
Hobs.
They are nice!
Mhm.
Not a bad price either.
What the halogen hobs?
Mm.
Oh you're joking!
About five hundred.
Not bad!
You can't burn stuff on them either, can you?
On the halogen ones, no.
It's a
Exactly!
So that's a definite bonus!
Well it wasn't, although they'd actually be going around burning ourselves anyway!
I do, you know those frying pans that you bought, the frying pans and saucepans?
An , you know the metal bit that's by the handle  that's a really poor safety device!
Poor?
On the saucepans there's a metal rim  sort of piece at the end of the handle
Is there?
that that touches the actual saucepan
Yes.
when you pick that up you put your thumb on it!
I  
And I burnt myself so many times on that!
Don't pick it up so close to the handle then!
Yeah but it's 
Well that's the answer 
it's 
isn't it?
Why am I 
difficult.
missing  missing some subtle point here.
Are we leaving the washing machine, by the way?
No!
Well that absolutely, we've gotta get a new washing machine!
Don't be stupid!
We have, look, this one!
It's only because it's not so not erm  stable.
Just adjust the feet  slightly.
If I had it on a solid floor, but it's gotta go, don't forget it's on a  a wooden floor.
Oh I suppose so.
What you want is a so so , is a solid floor.
Is it?
Mhm.
Oh right.
Well that makes a difference, solid floor.
Oh oh!
Will you stand it, sort of the garage in your er  best job of the afternoon?
Won't be too bad.
Well this, well I think it's a Hotpoint.
Well no.
Everything you buy is a Hotpoint!
No it's not!
There's nothing wrong with buying that.
Well L E C are pretty good  that's why we buy them!
So, oh!
The tapes nearly run out!
Thank God!
Only a bit more to go.
Ooh it works!
I bet I will get nice and fluffed out so that it 


I will keeping talking to this stupid machine!
Oh God!
But still  oh er
Why?
They'll probably contact and they'll check every single  doctor.
Why is that?
Then I'll  I think it's disgraceful!
We'll have to get the guy out from Sticks and Stones to do our fireplaces.
Is it a real fire there, by the way?
Well it's  and in the bedroom.
There's on in the bedrooms?
Well, one of the bedrooms has got  a fire.
Now, let me guess, you're having that one?
I dunno.
They,na , nan and granddad may have that as a sitting room to start with.
Oh!
So we we have proper logs?
Over there?
It's possible.
Brilliant!
Roasting chestnuts!
My God!
Cooking crumpets!
Yeah, yeah 
Marshmallows!
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah!
Cor, it's ages since we've done that!
Used to do it down there and we used to get stones that blew up  and poinged everywhere!
Aha.
Ah, I love that!
Yeah!
Brilliant!
So we'll have to have that cleaned as soon as we get there.
Get a chimney sweep in.
I think we'll have lots of things to do Richard.
I suppose I could clean it really.
I don't think so.
Don't see why not.
Cos it's a
Might be a big fire.
Is it a big fire?
Is it?
You've seen it.
I can't remember.
Which room is it in?
Well there's a fire in the  main room.
Oh, and that's the ballroom, I think it's called dad, the ballroom.
I don't think so!
It's called the ballroom!
Oh well that's what, yeah, they call it, I think it's hardly that.
Well it's big!
I know that, yeah.
Big house!
Well the house  gotta .
It's gotta be there somewhere so just let's and find it.
Right!
I'll look in my ro so that sort of thing she can  look at in the morning.
Oh God, I'm starving !
Oh!
I thank God that  .
Oh I'll take Twiglets into school tomorrow.
Mhm.
Make a change.
Get .
Twiglets and er  and the   pasty.
You have to get the  done as well.
Yes.
Put, put that on the shelf though.
Exactly!
Mm.
I don't think you'll ever get tha that to be done now.
Yes I will.
Not with the rigging, the rigging's had it!
Well then, do, redo the rigging, that's not a problem.
No, it's  a bit difficult.
Just a matter of
It's a shame, it's a beautiful ship!
Just a matter of finding the time!
Did you buy it from ?
Oh yeah.
How much did it cost?
Oh , can't remember now.
Probably about sixty three isn't it?
Oh easily!
Easily!
Shame!
Lovely  
A shame , yup!
Cos it's the solid ones .
Yep!
Yes.
You'd have to repaint and stuff as well.
Yeah, I know 
Find the 
I've got 
on some 
so much to do!
on some .
So much to do and so little time!
We went to Parkside Reproductions  your desk  the maho , mahogany one.
Oh God!
Just can't be bothered about that yet Richard!
No you said for the new office.
Yes, I know .
Oh dear!
Let's go and watch the news.
Alright.
Ah!
I saw what's his name today by the way.
. And  clobbered me again!
Wanted to know if you'd said anything.
Mum?
I said anything?
I mean, if I said anything to you.
About what?
Me me me mention yo , something in the newsletter.
Wa wondered if you  were gonna do anything.
So, I said no, I'd mentioned it to you and talked about it.
I think he must think we're complete idiots or something!
I've got a temperature, by the way.
Mum?
Are you going to sit there and read the paper, or do nothing?
I'm reading the paper!
I wanted my cup of tea and I'm tired!
Well you gonna, oh I've gotta bring a cup of tea in for you, have I now?
Yeah.
Oh right!
I'll get up and get the damn thing shall I?
Do you want me to do anything else while I'm up  up and about?
There we go!
Anything else you'd like while I'm up?
Scratch your back, or get the paper, or the get the post in, or  take the dog for a walk or then, shall I?
Richard, on the odd occasion you something for me Richard  I ought to be a lot  for you!
Altogether  
I said , I can do tea.
Well I'm not doing tea, Alistare can do it, he's been home all day!
Alistare does something  
He's been home all day.
No!
He did
Yes, he's been home all day I'm not doing it tonight!
I've got things to do.
Fabulous!
He'll 
Yeah.
I'll do it!
Yeah!
Don't see why you can't do it.
Don't ask me to take that in again tomorrow, cos I can't!
If I'm supposed to be doing it.
Can you take it in tomorrow mum?
I better take it back tomorrow  hadn't I?
Mum?
I would have, you said she's calling here to pick it up er, isn't she?
Yes.
Four thirty.
And you won't be home before four thirty will you?
If you can take it in tomorrow I'll be much obliged!
Nope!
Sorry!
Why can't you just leave it on?
Did you ring the coach back?
Yes, I did.
We're here at Blackpool presumably?
Gonna give Mel a ring tonight?
Mum?
Mum?
Mum!
Oi!
Can I give Mel a ring tonight?
Mum!
Why not?
Cos .
.
Oh flipping heck!
You shut up as well dog!
You miserable mutt!
It's hardly difficult is it?
Is it?
Oi!
Oh, they've won.
How many of them did they get out, done?
Mm?
How many did they get them to, done?
Three.
Three?
Yes .
Pathetic!
Hello!
Have you done ?
I got two other evenings to do at school now.
What are they gonna do about  surely you haven't forgotten?
Mum.
Got, parents' evening on the fifth and tenth to do.
Helping out I guess.
I think it's wo , it's worth for the school .
I think I should get some work done, don't you?
I must say it's  that er
Time's running short!
Yes, I do know that!
So tired .
Dinner's almost ready now.
He was upstairs when I came in tonight.
Chee you cheeky boy?
You cheeky boy?
Gotta give Phil a ring tonight.
You have been good!
You're a cheeky boy!
Ain't he stupid!
Oh, ha ha!
Wo!
Almost fell off 
You 
dog!
Ha !
What is he doing?
What's this?
He's gotta get along of the band, without touching them.
Oh, one of those jobs!
Why is wasting so much time?
Why hasn't he put his fingers in between it?
I thought that was a mistake then he made.
Why the hell doesn't he  do you get locked in with three?
That is cruel!
I'd say sod the crystal and just sort of take him out.
He's not is he?
Bit disastrous!
What about baked beans?
Or ?
Oh we don't want baked beans!
We always have baked beans.
We don't always have baked beans Richard!
Go on then!
There's a  tank in the paper beside you.
God that's so stupid !
Yes you can.
Too bright, I couldn't .
Don't see why not.
Oh!
Oh!
This is Debbie , oh this is, might be quite good I think I might go and watch this actually.
Mum!
What did you say?
Might go and watch this film  .
Not bad.
Look, so  I've gotta remember my drama stuff tomorrow.
Mum?
Well you'll soon have it for yourself, I won't do it!
I've gotta go and pa , to the shoes, polish the shoes, polish both pairs of shoes, in fact.
Two pairs to do now.
Get  the thing out of the  my trousers, the shirt
Don't tell me about it, would you just do it!
and I wear my denim jacket on top.
You had better remember Richard not to er  leave them th behind.
But if I don't pick it up, cos if I don't take it in I'll  in the morning.
I know you want to take it in.
Yes I know.
And you'll, please make sure you bring every single thing back Richard!
Stupid keys!
There's a tank in the paper for sixty quid today.
I heard you.
Then why didn't I go, er I might ring up and see what it's like.
No you won't!
I don't want it thank you!
Christ!
I hate this advert!
Oh it's  can't stand it!
He's pathetic as well!
I'm not up Phil's this weekend.
He's got a course until Sunday afternoon and I'll probably Sunday afternoon, I might even do that.
It would be nice to do that, have a really good work session wouldn't it?
Yeah, and I've got the weekend off aft , er that got ma 
Apparently  doing anything else.
Oh well it, I must admit .
This German you ought to be doing, and you've got economics to do.
Yeah.
Great!
I can't, haven't got the information.
He didn't even give us the instructions, he wants it in in two weeks time!
I've not been given any instructions!
Well go and see him!
He, got it tomorrow, but he won't tell us anything.
It's ridiculous!
This is a stupid advert as well!
So we're missing lessons  three, four, tomorrow.
Mum?
Right.
Unfortunately, it's drama I've got .
Oh I love that!
Is that the Radio Times you've read?
Anything interesting?
Dad reckons we can get a second contract done within two weeks.
Then you've gotta .
I mean, he ca reckons we can have draft copies done.
That's what he says I can erm  tell my friends.
Richard, wait till we've got a date fixed.
No he said, take two weeks.
No, to all, wait till we get a date fixed!
I don't know.
Oh I better go and check the sausages.
Two gammon  salads.
Sodding well running after you!
It's not fair!
Perfectly fair .
Ah shut up Richard!
Oh!
I'm still here!
Oi!
It's here mum!


Oh look at that!
Not bad is it?
Not a bad little machine at all!
Yeah, except the record battery light's flashing.
It's supposed to.
Is it?
Oh!
I'd imagine.
Erm
That light just stays on, look.
So  we basically have to now  plan the .
Another bloody packet of Polos!
I'm addicted to them, you know!
You are!
You, just a bit!
What do you do, sort of buy them in fifty packs at Sainsburys?
Yeah.
Every month.
Why aren't you gonna get them from Macros, it's only one pound ninety for forty eight?
No Macro.
I got Macro  got a Macro card.
You've got one?
Mm.
Oh I'll go there the other day and see what's
Do you want me to get  no, I'll get you a packet of Polos, a box of Polos.
Never guess where I got the shirt from will you ?
Is this Macro's?
Yeah.
Have you got Macro cards?
My dad ha , or did have.
Mm.
Ah!
Cos I'll get you one.
Oh, put it in the cupboard!
Lock it in!
Give me the key!
What are you on about?
Right!
So basically have to plan  who we're going to invite to this party.
I think Donna should be the only one.
Oh, Donna's coming.
Donna and me, that's it.
Donna's definite.
I thought you could find some Copydex couldn't you?
Sarah , Claire   what do you reckon to her?
Why her?
I just don't
If she comes, she doesn't get on well with Donna.
Hey?
She doesn't get on well with Donna.
Well who does?
Er 
 
Sarah ?
She's a definite.
She's gotta come.
Yeah.
Helen, definite.
Jenny definitely.
Claire definitely.
Claire who?
.
Oh.
Erm, Lisa  wanna come, Donna want Lisa to come.
Erm
Who's Lisa?
Oh it's one of Donna's friends.
Erm
Which one?
Tony  Paul .
Is she that  black haired one?
Oh!
No.
No, no, not her.
No 
Oh!
she's got blonde hair.
Erm  who else?
Dunno.
Paul , you 
Aha.
me, er er er  Tony
Josh Ja , Stuart?
Wo oh oh oh!
It's !
That will be , that'll be very choosy.
 
Pardon?
Je , you gotta put James 
Not that  oh not, James is alright.


He's alright.
Andy , er James ?
James ?
Yeah.
Why him?
Cos he gets on well with other people.
Claire ?
Yeah but not with me!
Claire ?
Yeah.
Er Sarah ?
Why have a fe , oh why not give the whole school a knees up!
We wanna get about twenty  twenty five.
Andy  ?
Oh , yeah!
No , don't have him!
I don't like him!
Don't you?
No.
No, he's alright is Andy.
He's not!
He can be.
To be perfectly honest, he is quite an embarrassment!
Quite right.
Yeah, I agree actually.
Yeah, can be a pain in the arse!
To be quite honest.
Erm, yeah  maybe not him.
Madeleine ?
Get on well with her.
Erm
Do you think she'll come?
Yeah.
You think she will?
She's already said, how many bottles do you want me to bring?
Oh right!
So this will be  the party  of all parties!
I've basically gotta pay someone to  be be the bouncer  for the day  or for the evening.
I'm not having these  silly old sods turning up!
This is gonna be  a strictly invitation only.
Will you have cocktails and that?
No!
Just have a load of booze.
Load of booze!
Load of girls!
Then
Oh ah, ah, we need a little room where


I don't mean the toilet !
Anyway, you're a  no that's the pavilion  that's the pavilion so
It's gonna be freezing!


Gonna freeze out there!
Sure you'll find some way to warm yourself up!
Mm, yeah, I'm sure.
So, basically, what you wanna do is get Donna drunk.
As soon as she has 
Oh yeah!
Yeah, right you got like me, Stuart 
I would 
James , I mean who else is gonna try and sedu 
Me !
I'm gonna be seducing her!
Er  Helen  Jenny 
What , what we're doing, taking goes or something like that!
Yeah.
Time-share !
Good idea!
Is that mum calling?
Just a minute, I'll just go  find my clo Mum!
Mum, where's my bed clothes ?
What on the bed!
No, if we do that, that's a good idea!
That's basically what we have to do.
I'm not sure about James  though, I mean
No?
No James ?
Right!
I'm not sure about him.
Okay.
We'll keep him out then.
Cos we've basically gotta find people that  people'll be happy with  or that they know.
So I know most of them, I get reasonably well with most of them.
I'm not inviting anybody I don't like!


Erm  so
Why are you inviting Martin and James?
James who?
.
That's no , what the hell!
Why, don't you like him?
I really like him.
But, you want
You're not!
I  but I won't then.
I'll just have one.
James .
Yes.
Yeah, why him?
I just thought, what the hell!
I don't anybody absolutely rowdy and out of it  if somebody's  to be perfectly honest.
I have to kept on a strict leash do I  fucking 
Yes you do.


So, you definitely, Murphy definitely, Tony definitely  cos Tony and Paul get on well with all of them.
Can Donna be easily offended?
No.
Good!
Er  Donna definitely, Helen definitely, Jenny definitely
Are they da , easily offended?
What Jenny and Helen?
Mm.
Mm mm mm mm, depends.
Erm
Well you know something that I could say
Oh you won't!
that 
Sarah  definitely!
Is she sensitive then?
Oh  I dunno !
No, I don't mean like that.
Willing to find out !
I'm willing to find out!
Ooh yes!
But er, definitely, she has to come.
Got a nice arse!
Are you a buttock king?
Oh yes!
Very tasty, yes!
Though, yeah, but she may think, oh well!
But erm  so she's got to, you're gonna make a list of people 
Is she she easily offended?
No.
She's quite friendly to talk to actually.
Er, Eleanor  Rebecca   she's actually quite a party animal when she gets going!
What do you want her for?
She's quite a good laugh!
She gets on well everyone.
You want people who feel confident in a group.
Aha!
You want some  you want some ringleaders who get on well, so you sort of bully them into things, which Donna is!
Definitely!
Oh she's ah, I can imagine her a bit bossy actually.
She is bossy leader basically!
Yes, I can imagine that.
So we're just going to practise what we saw yesterday.
I can imagine her with a whip, you know, ka!
And getting to like it!
Oh really!


She's even better from a big
Well she's a twenty pounder definitely.
Certain definite.
But you don't want to have people sort of splitting up into groups  like you say, sort of standing around  which will be a bit embarrassing.
You want  to get them in, see the drink, have a drink  and basically  get drinking.
Ow!
What was that?
Look!
Er, can you just sort of promise me something?
What?
That Donna isn't, won't come, arrive
Yes.
but I'm, after I'm there?
Right.
Well therefore, no other lads can have their way before me!
 
Richard just, ooh ah!
Well I don't believe you're gonna just  do away with her!
Unless she's completely drunk, blind drunk  and I haven't already given her a good seeing to!
I'm sure she will.
So, to be perfectly honest I think er  you're out of luck mate!
Cos, I will be first in line!
But what, I protest!
I will be first!
No!
It's er, well
This is it!
I'm ju 
It's highly surprising!
Just a minute.
Never touch the
And  dad thinks it should be alright, no hassle!
Mum's iffy, but she says with   er 
Er , are they going to be there as well?
No,
Oh well!
Oh come on!
Going to Hoover!
Bloody cramping our stu , they'll be a bit cramping our style wouldn't they?
Come on!
But,a , not your style Ri , yours perhaps, not mine!
Oh well!
I just carry on as normal!
But, no definitely not.
No,th I'm sending them up 
So when is this thing gonna be?
Well  if it, dad says two weeks now, so it could be next, not this Saturday coming, the Saturday after.
Or it could be the Saturday 
Not the Saturday  two days time?
But the one 
No.
next one after that?
Yeah.
Or it could be the Saturday after that one.
I want you to do it as soon as possible!
Yes, I should really.
But 
 
erm


it does become a problem.
What about Sam?
No!
She's too 
Oh oh!
much of a trout!
She's too much of a what?
Trout.
Trout?
Yeah.
She's an old fish!
Look at that, that's all my German!
Mm mm, yeah.
Bloody hell!
What are they?
That's all the German cards I put down all my vocabulary.
Ah, but do you, do you actually learn them?
Not yet.
I haven't had time.
Er, not yet!
Haven't had time.
You've had time to write that lot haven't you?
So  so basically, in a minute, have to sit down and write a list of who is going to come and who is not  and what order.
Now if you went out for a ferry, you'd have one of us  guarding the stereo   one person on that .
Take all the !
If you take all these off you get a fre , two free pizzas  but I'm not gonna 
That's what I've always wanted!
but I'm not gonna get to use these you see.
I'll take them then.
It's ridiculous!
Because you can't  er, I can't really take it out.
See, I get three small pizzas if I took all these off.
Well go on then, I'll start taking them off for you.
But I can't!
You see  she's collecting it at four thirty.
Oh God!
Oh!
Oh, what are you gonna say me, relationship?
He just exists!
Friends.
Someone I met!
Yeah.
I better fill in these actually.
Er  I need a thing.
Oh Christ!
Is it  have you got a pen on you?
No, no, no, oh God you're useless!
In my  coat pocket.
Er, you got one in your coat pocket?
Mm.
Get it out then!
I haven't got one.
What about my pen in the coat pocket?




So Sarah  's got to come!
Why, you got 
Serious!
the stimulator on her at the moment.
Serious!
Yes, yes!
Wow!
I just turn, I think I better tidy the room up that night.
I think she's
You don't  her as well do you?
Well  it's 
Erm!
er, well   yes, definitely!
You have to admit, she's better than a kick in the wot-nots!
Right, so er  tape, what day did I do this?
Tape, tape two.
So it leaves me Sarah, Helen, Jenny, and Donna are all gonna be being chased after by you?
Yep!
Lucky them!
Ha!
Ha!
Lucky me!
It's my party cos I'm gonna stand at the door and everybody has to give me a big french kiss when they come in  the door!
Apart from you!
I don't mean you and the boys!
Oh thank you very much!
I mean the girls!
I mean the girls!
Good!.
So erm  basically jus 
They wouldn't  have found out about me !
What time did I start doing this, er, tape?
That one?
Ah crumbs!
Er  about eleven A M.
Er, in which town, Broadstone 
Er er er er er er er ma ma 
This is worth twenty five quid.
Erm
I've got  I've got  
What were you doing during the conversations?
Now that was


wha , during the conversation  sitting  in a car
On the back seat.
Legs 
then 
through the window!
in  classroom .
See, it's not bad, it's in a classroom.
Right!
Er, in the space provided please write your names and details, no there isn't any.
Right!
First name  crumbs!
Who was on that tape?
That was the doc, so it was me, Phil 
Oh!
I think  was  Michael 
No.
?
No.
Then it was mum.
No!
Get stuffed!
They're not coming!
Well, aren't they the life of  the party ?
Yeah, but if you don't invite them,tha , I'll talk to you about it in a minute.
It's ridiculous!
My mum sa , and then it was  dad  me.
Occupation?
Student.
Occupation?
Doctor  teacher  er, what's dad's?
Mm mm.
Director.
Er, me, student.
Age?
Oh Christ!
What is my age?
Sixteen.
Don't even know your age?
Forty two
Do you know your own, own name as well?
forty two.
What did I put dad down as being, age wise?
Forty two as, I suppose.
Ooh!
Come on!
He is actually.
That is the truth.
Forty two, sixteen.
Sex?
Male, male
Yes please !
female


male, male.
Regional accent?
Haven't a clue!
Right!
Dorset !
Friend.
Who's that?
Doctor.
Mother
Enemy!
Father.
Do you want a drink?
It's alright.
You sure?
Yeah, I've got some.
Well give us a  yell if you want er  if you want a drink or anything.
Erm  side two, have I just this side two?
Yes I have.
What's the date today?
Thirteen, fifteen,sixt , twenty seventh.
Twenty seventh of the second  ninety two.
What time did we start recording this?
Now, this was about five P M   Broadstone Oh er, what were doing during the conversation?
What was I doing?
Talking yo , talking to  you.
Am I in that?
Yes, you're on it, moron!
What have you written about me?
Talking to pervert!
To friend.
Erm  jus right!
Me, Andy
You Jane !
Yeah !
 
Occupation?
Student.
Are you writing about me?
Yep!
Student.
Age?
What's your age?
Sixteen and sixteen, that's right.
You're only two mo , two days older than me, or one day older.
Sex?
Er, not sure!
Ba zed!
Relationship?
Friend, I think!
Right.
And that's, that what one's er basically doing pretty well know we're getting the near the end of that tape.
This one, it's got one with Donna on that side.
That's that stupid tape done!
Oh God!
What's this leaflet for?
Oh no!
Oh that's tapes fifteen to twenty, I mean ten to twenty.
But, I haven't 
You 
got that far.
How many tapes you gonna record?
Three.
Supposed to get twenty done but I'm not gonna get that many  bu , cos I've been away you see and doing school.
Ah!
Right!
Now, we've got a list to do.
Just take it into school.
No.
No way!
Why not?
Cos I'm not daring!
Now, basically we have to decide 
You mean, you mean the vocabulary will be too intense?
Exactly!
We basically 
 
have to decide
Ooh!
Sh!
Do you have to do this for 
Sh!
me!
We basically have to decide who is gonna come, and who isn't.
Do you think we should invite Stuart?
I don't know.
I'm not sure about him.
What do you reckon?
Oh he can be real quiet and  actually one little thing 
I think he will be quiet.
could make him go won't it?
And 
I think he will be quiet cos he'll be embarrassed and all the girls will be there.
I'll be embarrassed if I told  Stuart to come !
Becau , well what do you reckon?
I don't think he, I think he wo I dunno.
Daniel will stare like a gormless goit!
He does , I know!
He  with a door post!
Would you go round a circulate and talk to girls?
Oh, I expect I  I'd be persuaded to do so.
Well, do you think you would?
Well, yeah, I suppose so.
Depends who it was.
Donna?
Mm mm!
No, you wouldn't!
Helen?
Helen?
Helen, who?
.
Yeah, possibly.
You blooming better not do!
Alright!
What are you asking 
She 
me for then!
she's my property!
Alright I'll  le leave her alone then!
Yeah, you damn well will!
You can talk to erm
Stuart!
Thank you very much!
Yeah.
Well Georgina  will be coming.
Will she?
Wanna make a mess?
Ow!
I'll kill you!
Ah, get off!
Erm  so basically, well that's what we'll do.
I do so Stuart , I don't think Stuart should.
I don't think Danny should, will.
Oh him as well!
He's in half as well now, Helen.
Is it?
Oh I don't know.
I reckon it is.
Right!
So 
Well name a person who doesn't fancy her.
Difficult!
!
!
And he's not coming, no way!
Whisht!
No way!
No way!
So, let's make a rough guide.
Donna, Helen, Jenny  who else?
What?
Georgina , Claire , Claire , Sarah  
Enough of her to go round!
She's, damn right!
She's 
Er 
only got !
I've lost the flipping names again!
No need to .
I will write it down !
Right!
Oh !
Let's have a look.
Right, erm  who is it?
What's her name?
I've got Claire, no right!
Donna,
Er, er er er!
Helen
Mm, mm mm!
You flipping get that off your mind for start!
 
Jenny  er, Georgina  oh yes!
Georgina, er, who else is there?
Erm  oh, don't know what's the name of her!
Wacko-Jacko.
Donna, Helen, Jenny, Georgina  oh!
Claire 
How many Claires are you having?
How many times have you put Claire?
 
What, she count as two people or something does she?
Claire , Claire 
Oh her as well?
Oh God!
Sarah   Sarah   erm  which other girls were we gonna er  invite?
Er, who else is there normally in her group?
Not gonna invite Abby.
Well I don't think she's  time actually.
Rebecca.
Isn't, oh she is, now.
Is she?
Yeah.
Rebecca   erm
Os what do you want her for?
Because she's not gonna know anyone who's there is she?
Yes!
Cos she gets on well with a lot of those.
Jessica   she gets on well with Donna
Oh my God!
It's, why don't you invite the whole school, what the heck!
Erm Costas we better invite cos he's a boy.
Could you  any more.
I think it'll just you and me here!
Yep!
I like those odds!
Right!
What you should do is tag them when they come in.
Yes!


Where?
Sarah  
No you can give them little stickers and say, hello, hi, my name's Donna!
Stick it on her forehead,you know !
Sarah .
Right!
So you got Donna, Helen, Jenny, Georgina, Claire , Claire , Sarah , Rebecca , Jessica   and Sarah .
Why Jessica ?
Cos she's a, good friends with Rebecca.
Who else is there?
We're actually flexible.
Tony.
I know it .
I don't fancy him much, I got 
Yes, Yes , yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, maybe, yes, definitely!
Right!
Tony  
Ooh Tony!
Wow!
He's  he's such a party  isn't he?
He gets on well with that lot.
Paul 
Like who?
You and 
Name one?
Andy, Sarah .
Who Tony?
Yeah.


Tony, Paul , Andy 
Do you want me go hire a video camera while I'm at it?
Yeah, be a good laugh!
I think it would be, yeah.
I think it might be worthwhile actually.
It's a good idea!
How much is it to hire a video camera for us all?
Can't be more than fifteen quid  for a night.
You have to pay for the tape don't you?
Oh God!
I'll pay for the tape.
It's not a bad idea at all.
Yeah, Rich!a video camera.
Da da da da da, da, da get Donna  rat-arsed!
Yes!
That 
No you're not allowed to use the camera when I'm busy!
Now that's a word I want on the tape, rat-arsed!
Good word!
Erm 
It's brilliant!
So Paul , Andy, who else is the boys, we've only got three boys, me
That's enough!
That's enough!
four boys, erm
Paul .
, yep!
?
Yep.
James, the party animal !
No!
Not James, that's right.
!
Oh, get lost!
No way!


So Ste , er, not Steve  
Karen will certainly liven it up I think, she's a drunkard!
Well we got six boys now, and two, four, six, eight
Don't you think?
ten.
Two, just a minute, four  eight, ten girls, and six boys.
Er  who else is there?
That's four left over.
If we can get  we nee , can probably get another ten people yet.
You don't want loads of people though.
You want a reasonable size, so people get on well with each other.
Who else is there?
We well they're gonna know everyone aren't they?
What about Kate ?
What about her?
Invite her?
Well sh , does she know any of these people?
Course she does!
Tell yo , well I dunno do I?
I mean
Put her down as a poss.
Erm  you pu 
Enough.
oh I suppose you pu , better put Stuart down.
Oh no!
And Danny down.
It is gonna be so embarrassing!
And  down.
Do you think you could keep away from me by the way?
Yes I know.
He is a not a  
Paul 
away from me.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty.
Five more.
No!
Another five more.
No we don't!
Yeah you wa , we wi who ar , who other girls are there?
Where are you gonna put all these people, like in the
Downstairs in the main two rooms, and the kitchen.
If we have alcoholic  non alcoholic, fruit juices, mulled wine
Love juices !


soup and salad !
What food can we get?
What?
Oh sorry, I thought
You've been drinking again tonight haven't you?
I have 
Well actually I've had a half a bottle of  I don't know if you've  but
At a push.
he thought he's drunk it all, but yeah !
Er  who else is there?
What are the girls, other, that we've always wanted to invite to a party and we haven't bothered before?
Donna!
Got Donna.
Donna.
Got Donna.
She's the only one in the whole 
What about Sarah ?
No, I bet she'd come actually.
Very good friends.
Yeah, she's more friendly with the rest of them int she?
The other bou bunch.
Mm.
Yeah.
What about Helen, as in the other Helen?
Helen who?
?
Oh yeah, she's alright.
Do you reckon I should her down?
Yeah.
Yeah, she gets on alright with those.
Helen  is not coming!
No way!
Er
What about Sadie?
Oh get stuffed!
Sam?
No!
I think she'd liven it up.
I don't care!
She's not coming and that's final!
I I'll see her when she's sober cos she's ever so drunk!
Er, who else is there?
Does she bounce a lot?
Ah, I don't, I know, she's a good  yes well!
She's alright.
She's 
She's 
herself!
so common!
She's not all reserved then is she?
I mean
You only reserved 
she's gonna 
people!
I'm not having people 
But 
wrecking the house, and that's final!
Erm
Not actually .
Oh yeah.
Er, who else is there?
Erm
I shall try and split my bodily structure.
Who else is there?
There must be some other girls.
Who's in our science group?
Go through the list of science group people.
Costas , Sarah , Andrew  
Got her.
Claire .
Got her.
Donna .
Got her.
Got her.
Eleanor.
Got her.
Eleanor?
Yeah.
Oh alright then.
Erm, who else is there?
Judith, Cathy 
No.
No.
Mel.
No.
Sarah.
No.
There's one more, that's the once innit?
Oh, I know , erm .
No.
No !
Definite that.
No, definite.
No, there's none there.
Erm  Claire, Kate, Rebecca, Helen  Jenny, on that table
Your planning where they're gonna be are you?
No, I was thinking of history, what th , where they are in history.
Erm  so you've now got two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen, eighteen, twenty, twenty one  so far.
Four more.
That's pushing it!
Dad'll let twenty five I think.
And everybody's gotta bring a present, so that's twenty five presents I get!
Twenty four presents, that's not bad!
And what sort of presents do you want?
Yes!
You know, like sort of  translucent and
About four foot, five foot tall, yeah.
Erm
Oh well, well don't worry!
Who else is there?
There's loads of oth , Georgina, have I got Georgina?
I've got Georgina.
Erm  erm, erm
Why was she dressed up today?
Cos she was going to the panto thingy.
I normally invite Sarah  whatsaname,gro ,Sa Claire , er Claire 
Wha , aha.
cos she's gonna want to bring Gary  with her.
Oh God!
And I ain't having him round!
Erm   I've got, what other boys are there?
Who else hangs in our, oh Phil, I'm not gonna invite Phil!
He'll just say prayers in the corner,you know !
Do you reckon I should get Phil?
He'll have the sinner box and everyone's gone upstairs and have their bit of nooky, they can all come down and confess to him!
Yeah !
Do you reckon Phil?
Dunno, invite who you like!
Oh sod it!
Put him down.
Er  ha  
It's like er, nobody dislikes ?
Nobody dislikes him, but nobody knows him!
Oh there you,you're safe then aren't you ?
Right!
Let's go through the list.
Kate, she knows Donna doesn't she?
Doesn't she?
Ah?
Kate, she knows Donna doesn't she?
Well on fa front of Gavin  's file there are the words  Donna loves Kate.
Ah!
Ka 
I thi I think they were  !
Kate knows Helen, Kate knows Jenny, Kate knows Georgina Cla , knows Claire, Kate knows Claire too.
Kate knows Sarah, Kate knows Rebecca, Kate knows Jessica, Kate knows Sarah, Jessica 
 
Kate knows Tony, Paul, you, me,,, yeah she knows everybody  apart from Phil, probably.
Nobody knows Phil !
Two Helens?
Why have I got two Helens?
Helens who?
Helen 
and .
and , right!
Helen .
Erm
Th , we should make it fancy dress.
Yeah!
None at all!


Great idea!
At least you can turn up with a sheet.
wilder or something.
Er, ah ah!
Let's just say, ah ca be ah bip bam boo!
Erm
Eh?
Play strip bam boo.
Oh!
Er


What else?
Who else is there?
I dunno.
We need about three more.
Who else hangs round in the corner.
What, our corner?
Yeah.
Er er er er er er
Glen!
Oh not Glen!
No!
He's a good laugh!
Nah, not Glen!
He's a good laugh!
Nah!
Not Glen, not Simon 
Oh yeah!
Not  there's only about, there's only, so what, who else comes to our parties, er normally, our little ones?
It's normally, you, me


I've got, Tony I've got,And , er 
And me!
Stuart I've got.
Stuart's gonna so embarrassing!
Ma Carl I've got.
Who else is 
I mean Stuart is gonna be quiet or he's gonna be  really loud !
He'll be quiet.
In front of this lot he'll  would 
If he's not drunk anyhow which  
he'll have no choice.
We're gonna need loads of booze!
And loads of food!
I should say, if I, see if everybody put a pound towards it  that's another twenty five quid.
Aha.
But you can't ask to put a pound really  can you?
Really?
Where do you get, hire video cameras from?
 Holmans 
Ah, will they do, how will they ?
Just borrow, hire one from   Holmans 
I don't wanna go down to Wimbourne do I?
Er   Harris 
But 
 and Nash 
I thought they do it at  
down the road.
So that's twenty si 
I mean I'm skint at the moment I've I've I've hardly got any money money at the moment.
Oh, it's not for a while anyway so you needn't worry.
So that's that.
Get all the details shall I?
Or
Yes.
Because people act weird in front of video cameras.
I hope so.
I hope Donna acts weird in front of video cameras.
I think acts really weird most of the time.
Oh well!
Hear her squeaking away on that 
She was very nice on the er, phone, I have to admit that's what I er  she's 
On the phone, or on the bed, on the floor!
On the floor, exactly !
Yes!
Exactly!
Erm
On the table.
So that's the people.
Who answered the phone?
She did.
How did she answer it?
Er er er  hello!
Oh well .
She said it in her nice little voice, and I said hello, is Donna there please?
And she said,speaking !
Ee ee ee !
That's right.
Speaking !
At the studios you have a thing called pitching, there's a little pitcher 
Oh yeah!
and you sound like Mickey Mouse, ha!
Oh well there's
Really embarrassing .
well there's not much difference.
I wonder what she sounds like when she's humping you?
Er, I think she's .
I think she's like .
But who el , there's always other people!
Who else?
What other girls, dream girls would you like to invite?
Really beautiful bombshells!
Cos we're talking, this is gonna be  one wild party!
And I can't think of anybody.
Or do you think that's enough?
That's enough.
Right!
Well we'll do that, unless they suggest somebody else.
Er, what to do.
And if every , everybody brings a friend  then you're looking at fifty people, and I'm not looking at fifty people, I'm looking at  this lot.
I'm not  saying
If they're all friends with each other they'll all bring each other won't they?
Exactly!
So that's basically twenty fiv ,pe , that's enough.
Shall we do a little list on the computer, write it up?
Oh yes!
So I can sho 
Put them on the word processor, yes!
So I can show Donna  and see what she thinks of the list?
She might find my titles good.
Yes, we can wri , I'll put it in a minute when this tape's finished.
It's only got about another 
As I said, Sam wo Sa Sam would be a good laugh.
Tell you what, I'm gonna turn it off.
Yeah, but  she
Should have seen her P S E, she was  a laugh!
Yeah, I know.
She's was blooming yawning!
Stuart was  
Yes.
so he tried not to look but he's, you know
And he's a  well, I don't know.
See I'm gonna use this as a exercise to prove what a charmer I am  basically!
Or what an idiot you are !
Well dad'll put  afford a fair amount, and I'll have to put, afford a load of money.
Do you think I should bring a video camera?
If you can afford to get one, yeah.
I don't think it'll get used.
I'll sacrifice something to video.
Not until we're drunk anyway.
But, I've gotta get mum and dad out the house somehow.
I shall try and arrange with Jean to get them that der , night.
To go up her place for a dinner party or something.
But, I was trying to think who knows ?
If we can sort of get them out for  a night  or even if they get back at twelve.
Yeah, what time do you reckon this party should go on till?
At least eleven o'clock I should think.
I was gonna say past eleven, Christ Andy!
Well that's what I said er past eleven o'clock.
I was gonna say twelve, what do you reckon?
Twelve, half twelve?
That'll be alright, yeah.
Cos by the time, that's about long enough isn't it?
What?
You watch, eleven o'clock we'll all start to get really friendly with them
And nearly time to go home!
And it's time to go home, exactly!
It's so damn sickening!
And then they'll, they'll completely return to their normal way  on Monday morning.
Oh, it's a pain in the arse!
So, if, if I put twenty five forward, or fifty forward and dad puts fifty forward  that's a hundred, we can get a fair bit of food for a hundred quid couldn't we?
Hundred quid!
You could buy the shop for that much!
Well for a hundred we can get a reasonable amount.
A load!
Well say you spent fifty quid on booze
Yeah.
you're looking at probably, you wanna get  two twenty four packs, at least!
I can't imanan ,a imagine Donna sort of putting away a six pack!
Christ, she does!
She drinks  like a horse!
I'm talking severe boozer!
She's been out, I've seen her off her face!
She's been off her face quite a lot actually.
She likes being at parties and getting off her face!
So er  if we do that, we'll get two twenty four pack, they've got a load.
I tell you what  I will buy the minimum amount of drink, i.e. a twenty four pack  and some wine, and do the mulled wine  and everybody else can bring a bottle or some food.
Do it that way.
Say, it's basically, bring a bottle, or bring some grub.
Right?
Splendid!
Do it that way.
You know when you walk home, do you walk anywhere past  Harris and Nash anywhere near it?
No, but I can pop down there on Saturday.
Well if you could, I mean, probably it's a further way out from where I live.
I'll pop down Saturday.
And how much for a  basic video camera.
Have a word is  just a basic jobby.
It's a, it's a little memento isn't it?
We can do copies of.
And sound.
And I'm not gonna be any, in any of them!
You will be !
Paul  's got one!
What a video camera?
Or his dad has.
He's got a, a video.
Oh!
Nah!
He won't let us borrow that!
Why does  wanna come ?
And he ain't! is not gonna, I tell you that for a start!
No way!
You can just imagine at nine o'clock we've all gotta walk him home!
I'd die!
Have we got to walk any of the girls by any chance.
Well it depends if they want to stay the night.
I mean, some of them, if it's twelve o'clock they'll no , they'll say sod it and sleep the night!
, just get 
Oh!
Could you imagine, a pyjama party !
Yes!
Knowing Stuart she's probably got a little hole down there and he can just  flop it out !


Tights are on backwards to make sure !
Shall we do that?
What?
Ye , shall we have a pyjama party?
Oh yeah, that'll be nice won't it?
That'll be brilliant!
Oh good!with nighties!
Cor!
Wow!
No, but I can imagine that!
Yeah !
Oh!
Ooh!
Probably share the same  actually.
Ooh I co , ooh I'm liking the idea of this more and more!
Yes!
Oh no!
Ooh!
Oh definitely!
Mm!
So
Oh I shall look forward to this now!
Yeah, it'll be a great laugh!
So, that's what we'll have to do then.
I'll have a word with Donna tomorrow see we , if she thinks it's a good idea
The High Priestess!
and make sure.
Make her se , listen to her crystal ball and read the tea leaves.
Exactly!
See what she thinks.
If she thinks it's a good idea, we will then have erm  a word with  I'll make sure it's okay with dad and mum first  basically.
We've  you've planned all this well they better let 
And check to make sure cos they're gonna have an  argument about it, I can see it!
Dad will say yes and mum will say no!
So 
Well , if they have pity on me, you know.
Exactly!
It's gotta, you've gotta have booze though.
Mm.
You cannot have an evening with no booze!
But they don't like that do they?
What?
The booze.
Who?
Your dad and mum I meant.
Oh dad won't, mum will.
Dad will have no problem, but he'll say you can get lager and stuff  no problem.
He, there won't be any spirits, they'll say no spirits.
They'll say, right you can have lager and you can have wine.
But mu mum will say no to everything!
So, basically they'll be an argument between he , him and mum.
Who's gonna win.
Er  hopefully dad.
So
Yeah but who is going to win?
Dad.
I hope!
 
And so, basically we'll open the main double doors downstairs so you can have people in  the living room and in the sitting room.
And you should have a list upstairs and we can quickly
Nobody would dare go upstairs would they ?
I will if Bridget will come.
I will, if Donna's there!
I'm wanna Donna and Sarah  absolutely drunk and so erm, Helen as well.
Why, that way.
Taking all three upstairs and let them .
Bloody hell!
Before it's  I'm gonna save the hot water  for the next three weeks!
Looks like we'll be having showers !
Should be a laugh!
I think I'll get a clean getaway!
True!
Yes!
Oh wow!
Cos I'm clean on this one!
I mean slightly, ah no this is gonna be a great laugh!
Wo!
Such a thing to do!
So, if I have a word with, like I say, with Donna and see what she thinks, if it's a good idea.
I will basically do that .
So, that's what I'll do.
Great!
It's gonna be a great laugh!
I think if we get everybody by ooh, ten thirty we can have sort of  a game of strip Trivial Pursuit.
And the only person we strip is Donna!
That's right !
And Sarah  !
Cor!
Yeah!
Mm.
To look
Yes!
She is very tasty!
Like !
Wow!
Yes.
Right, that's what we'll do!
So, I'll get the booze from Macro  cos they do reasonable value  like, sort of the, twenty four pack for a tenner, so the er 
The other one down by
Yeah.
Tha tha that's 
Down towards Poole?
Yeah.
Yeah I know it.
That big one.
I've been in there.
Yeah!
There.
Just do Ninti , oh they do Mas , Sega Master Systems for thirty two quid.
Do they?
Yeah.
It's 
Oh!
half price.
Not, they don't include V A T in their prices.
No, exactly.
That is, that adds it up.
And for .
Yeah, it does actually, it makes it forty 
I'm sure if you look round you can get a lot of electrical goodies cheap, or just as cheap in other places.
Yeah.
Cos people still
If you want a really place, there's a place in  Bristol, Richersan they're de dirt cheap.
Bristol?
Bristol.
Oh, my dad's getting ne , new cooker and stuff from.
I wonder if they, they used to do Hi-fi
Oh!
and this sort of thing.
They don't do that.
Oh right.
You can get a  like, a similar one to this, perhaps not as good as this one but  buy it for twenty quid nearly.
Not bad!
It's about that.
Yeah, that's a nice one isn't it?
No with twin cassette decks.
Oh!
Well that  is just a crap jobby anyway!
Dirty job, I don't like  I, well it's alright.
Nothing to argue about.
God!
How much further has this tape got to go?
How much in that in your opinion.
Made in Japan.
Mine was made in Korea.
How much is that your opinion  to go?
Well I dunno!
I'll measure it.
It looks, there's about  sort of  quarter of a millimetre to go.
I think it's about five minutes isn't that right?
Mhm.
Oh what the hell!
Keep talking and we'll go and print this stuff onto the computer, our little  list of names.
We're talking just for the sake of it aren't we?
What?
No not really!
Oh that's left on!
Oh!
What's that, that's  that's Foreigner isn't it?
No.
It's Brian Adams.
Only wanted to play a while, wo!
And he taught me to fly like a bird, wo oh oh!
Baby!
Thought I'd died and gone to heaven!
You ain't gonna hide in there!
But tonight I never  had before, yeah ah yeah!
Thought I'd died and gone to heaven !
I hope this is number one again.
This is probably number one.
This is brilliant!
About five in the charts now.
Number five?
I think it's something like, five or six  .
Oh!
That's quite right.
It's a brilliant album!
This is a brilliant song!
make up the name.
Yeah.
You got the album?
You did my brother's copy.
My brother wanted a copy.
What?
My brother wanted a copy.
Oh did we do a copy for him?
Yeah.
Oh that's alright then!
I had it for about two weeks before I told him I'd got it!
He had one.
And why not?
Oh, I'll take one box , there you are oh jolly good
Use of none for epi epitaxial  
so it's tape one and tape two finished?
Oh we're not doing badly
Yeah, according to this it says
Oh wow
so we've finished the tape side B,on this page please write a detailed tape side A three  er  er  oh three A three that's it there 
No, that is so  
specific  now what's the date today?
Dunno
Twenty seventh?
Yep
Of the second ninety two,what time did you start recording this tape ?
It was about seven o'clock   in which town ?
Broadstone, God I hate filling in these stupid forms.
what are you doing ?
Talking to a friend
Then I talked to Andy ha, ha
Mm  talking to a friend
I got these so 
Yeah
Has it got a lot  talking to Donna on the phone
Donna?
Yeah
She's very nice on the phone  very nice indeed  student, age sixteen, they're sixteen, male and male, relationship
This has got a microphone on it, but
Yes I know, leave it off it makes a hell of a racket
So does mine
So if that's that, that's not bad, so  yeah, so, so side three B now, so if we can get two and a half of three tapes done, cos then I can change the batteries and I get to keep, get a free pizza  which isn't a bad thing 
Urgh can't stand pizzas have Italian to start with
Oh I used to find that Stuart, and then I distinctly went off them, absolutely free pizza  
Stuart started off with pizza jokes 
this and one other Kodak battery   good God you've got to take two of them, oh sod that  ooh very nice, these cost quite a bit actually, it's three packets, ooh
How much do you think a video camera actually cost then?
Fifteen quid, no more, no less
How would 
you 
you know?
wanna borrow it for a night don't you?
Er just the one day I put
If you borrow the Friday night, if you put on the Friday night
Yeah  can take it back Saturday  
 
Why what's wrong with it?
closed on the
you close it
Why?
Just close it
No you close it I don't want it closed
Oh do close And


There might be a fire
Ha, well there's a window out there
Oh yeah, it's two storeys up 
It's three storey drop , three storey actually
How can it be three storey up?
Because there's another storey down the bottom floor, because if you noticed there's a huge great patio there, unfortunately, so er, so it's eight thirty seven, say you're being picked up nine thirty
Yeah, go on
so we get another hour done, that's another hour of taping, so that's er one and a quarter tapes, sure you won't take it home?
Take what home?
Tape recorder
No, why?
three
on this, do you want to take it to school tomorrow?
I've already got a tape recorder haven't I?
Do you want to take it to school tomorrow?
Not if you're bringing it
I mean I can give it to you to take it in tomorrow morning
Why should I wanna bring it in?
Cos you can sort of talk to people on the way up and record you in the car 
I'm not carrying that tape recorder around with you all day Richard
Well you strap it to your side of you
I mean, when I talk to someone I'm turning it off, right?
Yeah fucking say 
There's no record of what I say to her
you're turning sourpuss as well, ho, ho, ho, no I suppose not, she's coming to pick it up at four thirty, that's when I get my money  which is very nice.
I'm music room madness, that'll be interesting to record
Mm
hee, hee, hee
and bit
well I want some really good words in, like erm, spontaneous
How you spell it?
abruptly
Spunky
 brouster yes
of those words
paddle, er I like the word paddle, you swim for it
Yes, I'm sure you do
ooh
I bet you'd like some bacon with this wouldn't you?
Yes I think, like some bacon with your ham?
Erm
Then there's a
you should do our Julian Carey like we did before
Oh great
do his
go to this party of Julian Carey
Do your Grace Jones thingy
I don't do Grace Jones  I don't do anyone really 
your Roger Moore , do your Roger Moore
Oh, oh this Bond man's tedious 
oh this is hard
Not as hard as the maths exam paper  
Oh that's dead easy
Oh yeah
Oh, yawn, what do you reckon you'll get for maths?
A
Dunno
A
if I do well in the exam as I did last time round, yeah
You jammy sod
I know, good innit?
that's fucking awful, I'm gonna get a C, er Stuart's not set to get anything is he?
Big nought is not set to get passes in anything, do you know that?
So he will go to school, unqualified, that is really sad cos he's done all the exams and everything
English, how'd he do in English?
Er D's and E's
Er geography
D below
C, I don't think so
No not C D, he'd not put it to C D that's complete rubbish  no way
does that, no I don't
Dunno what about science
C D actually I think
say it, even if he gets C Ds, he's not be getting into college is he?
He's a computer genius, but he's crap at everything else, geography he's useless at, economics he's useless at  I'm aiming basically for, I'd be happy with four As, five As maybe
is gonna get nine of them
Well so are you 
Oh yeah
I'd be very surprised if you don't get, if you get less than eight As
No way am I going to get an A for English literature
Oh no, nor am I, you'll get an A for design
Maybe
A for art
That probably not
Have you started your final art piece?
Yeah
What are you drawing?
Er dunno at the moment really
A bowl of fruit you're drawing
Yeah, naked women actually
Oh yeah, do you get, do you get to do that later on
I know, ha, ha
you can do that later on
Ah, ah, I wonder if we'll be able to choose who the model is?


Miss 
Oh god don't, er E E C butter mountain, oh that's sick, no thank you,oh god I'm tired , but, oh well, you'll get A for science as well 
A for German
Not a chance
You're very close last time for getting an A, in fact you did get an A didn't you?
No
In marks, what you get?
A B
Oh B, oh dear, oh god that's devastating, that was with no work
Mm, mm
I wish you wouldn't blooming try and kill the dog
Sorry
leave the poor sod alone 
it's fighting back 
Oh, this is boring  what do we normally do?
We're normally drinking aren't we, we're out somewhere, boogying the night 
So you've given up on the town park idea?
Yeah, it's gonna cost me too much  this is gonna cost me a hundred quid, a hundred quid and a party is a bloody lot of money if you look at it, to be perfectly honest, we need a D J
D J?
just to log the records on and watch them and sort of 
Put the C D in the C D player and press shut
Yeah, that's what I do
and play it and it'll just go on forever, and like my one just past the second song and it's stuck
Have you checked it for hairs or anything?
Yeah there's nothing wrong
what C D are you using?
New ones
You've only got one C D haven't you?
Got several
What have you got, anything?
anything good I mean?
Not particularly 
Why?
What are they?
Why they're only like Aha
you've got Aha on C D?
Yeah
When did you go and buy C Ds then?
Eh?
When did you go and buy those?
You never spend your money
I know
and you got Aha on C D?
Anything else?
Oh usual sort of compilation job Wings of Love I've got
Wings of Love, oh I like that
Yes it's, it's sort of 
oh, oh, I'll borrow Wings of Love 
just the, just, just the first song on that is the one I recorded with Sam
Oh god
and the result was best play
hear that song again, it really irritates me
I'll borrow Wings of Love, bring it in tomorrow
Oh
I'll borrow that
oh
so, I think we're
now, call it eighty five plus tapes, got loads   over the wings of love 
Get out of me you poofter
I'm trying to
I'm tired  I'm very tired, in fact I think I'll go to sleep, I've had enough 
Look 
I've had enough work today I've worked my nuts 
I bet you have 
that ho have you read that how's it done?
How's it done, on where?
It's very good, that big blue book
Oh yeah
that's a brilliant book
Ooh, ooh alive book is it?
Have you, not it's not, have you read Blop by the way as well?
Yes I think Blop
Yeah you've had Blop
How's it done?
There's some very good stuff on erm music in there, C D systems and stuff, and laser discs
Where?
If you look in the back, in the index, look up C D systems, laser discs and stuff  and records, there's stuff  on records in there, oh
Records are really crude
Yeah I know  almost as crude as you
and I think you'll find some are even cruder
Yeah
if she gets together, he
Oh er
she is Stuart's kind of person really I think
I don't
you see he's sort, he's so disgusting at times
I know
so that was the phone going twice now, it's disgusting
oh, I've gotta get er  what's it name, next week, next month, I can't remember what it's called, it's got Erica Hasslehoff, I mean Erica, tut
in it
anything of interest in it?
oh, oh, oh there we go, oh yes  oh, oh, er , hee, hee, hee, hee,
make electronic and music
Really?
and that is quite a thing, ha
What is?
synthesizers and how they work
Have you got a synthesizer?
Mm
So what is your Technic thing then?
A graphic equalizer
So basically
posh one though
does it do anything?
What do you mean, it don't play demo tunes or anything
Does it do anything?
Yeah it's a graphic equalizer and it's got echo and things and  rebo and things like that on it
Mm  you basically saving up for a complete system?
More like
oh the odd and soddy pieces, like a hundred and fifty
why?
Well it sounds pretty naff really
So, you're gonna change the money from that into buying one ano a separate
I don't know?
a Technic separate
Erm, but then you need an amplifier
Yeah
then the C D player and all
Mm 
I won't make the best
no, no way
What anyway?
No way
What, they're industry standard they are
No way, don't want one
You've got everything else, but
Yes, I agree
the C D clip, the er, cassette player is amazing
No, I like Sony, Sony are very good
what are the
What you digging around for you got some worm or some valium or something
What does that machine do?
Just load it, it's like, it's like, you use it like a normal tape recorder, you just use it like a tape recorder
And that's it?
Yeah, you can record on it and it does a C D sound, that sort of thing
So you pay five hundred quid for a sort of normal
Yeah but the sound quality thing is a lot better
Oh
you can't get better than C D sound
can you?
Oh, that's twice I don't know, don't make so much difference  but I'm only a, sort of uneducated slob, but there you go  oh god, it's boring 
A mate of vibration  
Yeah , we should go down to er the chippy
Hold on
get some chips, no I can't be sodded actu I don't like going down there, you get loads of dickheads
F M synthesis
What's that when it's at home?
F M synthesis, synthesis is erm using
sign language
Really, oh god, no, oh slap my thigh
Oh dear they've got their facts wrong here
Why?
F M synthesis is the basis of diastral synthesis of the nineteen ninety  of the eighties actually
Hmm
Ha, ha, ha
well it was a book that was produced a little while ago  you can buy that tape deck off me if you like
What?
That one
Why, what are you selling that one for?
Eighty quid
Eighty quid
That's a forty quid profit on how much I paid for it  I think I bought that for forty five quid or forty seven
it does the job, it's not a bad little thing, mm, mm
My one doesn't do the job
Exactly  you've got a
why don't you save up for the Sony compact jobs?
Down have you been down Parrots and Nash recently?
Speakers are too small 
They've got a lot of money, a lot of savings on at the moment
They all have these days but no one 's still buying them
on a lot of systems, really now is the time for you to try and go and buy a new system, because you can knock them down immensely  really good bargains  the basic
get off me
you basically can say look here you sods, give me some money off, because they're desperate for people to buy oh what time is it?
What time is it?
What time is it?oh
I dunno do I?
what has happened to your watch?
I haven't got it on have I?
We've gotta go in in twelve minutes time to watch L A Law
Oh no
just for the music, surely for the music, can we get this thing up to L A Law?
what the Sony?
Yeah
You get the wires to do it, well er
I mean can you plug this, the speaker
Well not really, no
What do we do
have you got a headphone socket on the erm
T V, yeah
Yeah a headphone socket
Yeah
you might be able to do it off that, you won't be able to listen to it at the same time
Oh that's no problem
and you have to be careful with the master volume, not to set it too high, oh let's have a look  well you can't really do it on this one
Well we can do it downstairs from the main system or something 
What bring the cassette deck up to the telly you mean?
No do it downstairs  
Take the telly down
what you mean take it out of the
Use the main T V 
Yeah
you've got wires across
Oh yeah, you'll probably do it from the video actually
Yeah and then 
is it stereo video?
Yeah
Yeah, do it onto the back into the back, certainly
Do you wanna get, shall we go and have a look and see what we can do?
We'll take the Walkman this downstairs with the video tape recorder, come on let's go
You've gotta put the microphone in front of, by the speaker, although it doesn't come out very well
Let's go
well we can
a little try,dom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom  Shandy speak into the Walkman, you say hello  go on growl at it  that's it you say hello, go on  that's it, good boy 
Richard 
What?
did you use my postcard up?
No, I never touched your postcards, am I supposed to of done?
I had a little postcard and I can't find it
Right, I'm just going to destroy this, now Andy what do we need to do?
What do you mean going to destroy it?
To record it?
Yes 
What do you mean it, they're not Richard, there, there, that's
no cos we're doing my, taping my, we're doing it onto a tape, music from L A Law, so what do we need to do?
What are you talking about?
We're taping the music from L A Law onto a tape
Why?
Because I want the music from L A Law
we're not going to, we're
Is the video recording at the same time?
Well, it'll start probably, yes, nine o'clock,
start, does Red Dwarf start at nine o'clock?
You got headphones on it?
Erm is there headphones on it?
Er, ah
Are you sure you've not had my card Richard?
I can't find it anywhere here.
Positive alright Red Dwarf let's look at the T V guide, starts what, what do we need, need to do it?
You're the expert, Red Dwarf starts at nine o'clock yeah, so
You need a long very long pair of wires
Of what type?
These type 
Er  we should have some of those
Can't, can't you video L L A Law or
No because that's, we've got a video going in now at nine o'clock, er, a very long pair of wires  erm  so what do I need here?
What do you need?
Mm, oh sod it, I'll do it next week, next week's one
It's easier just to video the thing
Yeah, so I'll video it next week, I'll do it that way, oh there's
I've got a terrific headache tomorrow, have I got a temperature?
No
I have actually
ah, just a sec   we will go away for the day if my  
   

pull up er a bean bag up with the record
That brings back memories
there's no knob on that
Right, talk in the microphone while I'll go to the loo
Why don't you take it in with you?
Oh yeah, right  oh if you get that on the tape I'll kill you
Get what on that?
You know damn well
I can't, I can't get through the door, what's that?
You have to go and
ain't you?
Oh it's a flush
talk in that machine
Why?
Oh, you've got to
I haven't
Yes you have
I haven't got to do anything 
anyone got a Polo if one's on offer
One isn't on offer
Why not?
Aargh, it won't close
How'd you know?
Cos it won't  so are you going to offer me a Polo?
No 
Why not?
You've already had some
I only had one  give me a Polo you
Casualty thing's on tonight
Nine thirty, oh I feel ill 
L A Law's on in a minute
I don't want to watch that
only watching the, the title  I love the title music
Oh it's American stuff that, I'm gonna play with the balls I think in the pocket
On the shoe table, I love Polos
Please clean that without
I love Polos  mm, I'll get you a box of forty eight when I'm next down at Macro's
Forty eight?
They're only one pound, ninety  for forty eight packets, that the equivalent of ten, you only get fifteen packets for that price, or would you like me to get you a box of er Extra Strong Mints?
Would you like the extra strong?
What are they?
Are they
The white ones, the big white ones 
Alright
cos they're only er two pounds or something or other for forty eight, Wrigley Spearmint Gum about one pound fifty  oh, what's happened to his voice?
Been there, been there
Where is it?
New York
I've been there and all
gross, New York is a gross city  er well  been to, oh dad uses one of those at work
Sounds like Frank Bruno doesn't it?
he loves his nose, he's stripped all the information, he's a stripper
Oh there's a ball in the pocket
so erm, yeah  so I'll get you a
you want to play snooker upstairs do it?
Hope so
yeah
What time did you start it?
Seven o'clock, seven thirty
Well that means to me it's about eight o'clock I'll get there 
Ah juicy
yeah basically
see it's all confidential information, dad
 

He said
he is a very clever man  what?
What about gatecrashers?
We're not gonna get any
How'd you know?
Because we'll have er  people at the door
Rugby Club, pay them both a tenner
Put Stuart at the door, that'll keep him quiet, put a guard
That's the way to do it actually, ring the Rugby Club 
Aha
it's not Mr Branson it's Mr Branson, oh shit, shoot 
What's the matter with these things?
he's very good
do what?
He went round Gatwick airport giving
to people
Who did?
Richard Branson
Why?
I dunno do I?
Did you get one?
Oh I wasn't there at the time was I?
Oh
 

But you'll do your own 
Well Richard Branson's very, very, very stupid
I beg your pardon  it's good innit?
Who?
Me 
He's, he, he offers fantastic prices
Who does?
Branson
dad flies with him regularly 
Hey
Shh  it does actually happen  that's a seven four seven  er he's a good guy, did you see my dad on T V?
No
Yeah he was on B B C Two.
What was it?
A defence thing  but er, yeah dad was on T V
 

You shouldn't do this, this is unfair reporting  why can't you realize to leave him alone mate.
All, all companies are con companies
Get out of my filofax, I put you did last time
Got Donna's number in


You can't even spell her name, I think she's going to be deeply insulted with that, to spell her name wrong 
 

I don't see why not 
Alright, I'll bring, I'll have to bring my Wings of Love one you know
Yeah
play it when you're in a good mood, cos songs like that you
yes  tonight is bad
I think Daniel should come
I've invited Danny
You have?
Yes of course 
Well in that case I don't think you should
So you don't want  to come then?
No way
Close that one
Which one is it?
It's, er, ah Maiden thingy
What is?
Maiden Voyager
Flown er?
I've been on that plane, I have been on that plane
what?
You've got about five
yeah
you see the desert is a bit, the way, the planes in the desert in America, there's over three in the, sort of billion dollars' worth of planes all brand new , that companies can't afford to buy any more and they're all mane in a sitting desert  oh there we go, aha, aha, there we go
Ah it's too easy
Oh dad flies Virgin quite often, he likes Virgin
First time was it?
What?
It was his first time was it?
Ah ha ha bom bom bom bom bom bom bom bom bom bom bom
And there if I can keep that  keep the memento of that wall going, it'll eventually get
eventually yes
but I can't, so it won't go 
Yes
suitcases
bom bom bom bom bom  face it, I hate flying
I don't mind flying, it's the crashing I don't like, haven't done it often
Aargh
learning to be ladies, ooh  oh jolly good show   I like the music to this  ah, bom bom bom bom bom bom bom
They put fluorescent material on that stuff you know, so when you wash it the
material sticks to the clothes
Yeah, right
and in the sunlight it'll glue
Yeah
get it whiter than white
yeah alright 
it's true 
Yeah I agree, ah look at that doggy  that's three four, forty, forty oh it's turning  oh there we go
who me?
Why?
Me?
What do you mean?
That's why, that's why
the Hook, there again the Hook, that's where I'm moving to, Hook  aargh, well that's nice, nice and comfy now
oh yeah, right, thirty, thirty, forty
Oh yeah, go on
right you ready?
L A Law music coming up, hey look at this, this is weird, oh look, look, look at this  weird  shh, this is it, shh, do not play  oh dear 
 

Shh  yeah  she's guilty, she's a woman  right here we go, shh, gotta get the sound up, urgh 
it's beautiful   this is what I'm gonna do in ten years time
it's brilliant


You have to admit that is brilliant, Steve  has done some fabulous series in his time, but of course, but he's, he's pretty damn good, there's no doubt about it  so er, it's not bad at all , I like it.
yeah, we could
for Daniel,
Pass
No if I had a video camera do you think anyone would dare to do that?
No, no
my God if I have my way, no one will have theirs
don't you dare
What's that kid that
a big geezer last time 
Like, like who?
Dunno
Who with?
ow, you're fingering my balls
Gorbachov, not him the other one
him
No  no
a gospel singer
Three for one
ooh, that was close,too close for comfort  
Oh that perfect position, my snooker's not that bad as well 
Oh good shot  yes
Ah?
What?
What you shut them for?
Cos you can't do that
Cor, why?
Now think of something to do
Think of something
What would you like to do?
Apart from the obvious, not with you of course, but 
Ah, afraid there's no answer to that, er 
bom bom bom bom
there's no answer to that is there?
Repeatedly, always quite remarkable  oh well this is so boring  atone, ah, you can take that down with drugs
Who?
you boil the skin of cane toads and smoke it, it, it's the equivalent of cannabis
Heard about that, who actually goes and boils toads?
No, from  exactly  yep  what about the
this is basically what I'm gonna be doing
What?
I'm gonna be a top London lawyer
No,
them big poofy wigs don't they?
Earning a lot of money
Oh all those kids are sort of young
they are young
America's got
really artificial aren't they?
Oh God
  

go on get that one down, get the blue down
she's a dirty little slag  be easier
recently
Yeah
I knew you wouldn't use it very much
I said yeah
Oh, what's the matter?
My eyes are hurting
Why?
do you wanna open the window and get some fresh air
I know I'm breathing Richard it's
why they hurt?
What do you mean they're aching, are they aching or sharp pains or dull pains?
Are you gonna pass out or what?
Go to sleep I think
Yeah, same here actually 
aargh 
Go on see if you can get them
I dunno how you do this though, how'd you get the ball to jump?
You make the ball jump and I'll break your face
I think I'll break yours first
Oh good shot
I wasn't actually, I was going
oh try and get it between the
if it's worth trying to hit anything   I was on top of him
Good shot
it weren't the right one 
you don't watch this rubbish do you?
No, let's watch the news, see if John Cole's on
his glasses are awful aren't they?
I think they're the wrong size actually, I think they're a size too big
Yeah, I think they're about four sizes too big actually  
Ah
Yes
what's the news?
Everything is higher and about the worse in prediction, do you remember last time you got
 

That's not bad  good the Welsh get taxed the hardest, I hate the Welsh
they might not like you either
down with the Welsh, down with the Welsh, down
oh coming were the  
Oh I like your pack
What pack's that?
wonder
er, I've got Brian Cord, I can't stand him, I hate oh crap down
very handy, yes I have to admit I do feel like my
done that in biology
Is that?
Yeah I know  yes
cub like that with a stick, I know a job about that  a blind man coming, a blind man was walking down the pavement with a stick, so on the side of the pavement there's this dog turd
Oh we did this in R E, do you remember?
Yeah, and he, he's blind, he can't see and he walks round it, and he goes I bet he drinks Carling Black Label
gets up and walks off
Yeah
I bet the turd does as well 
We tried to do that in R E, do you remember?
Yeah
and it was useless


yeah
tangle with it
it was so crap
It was weren't it?
It was crap, oh
the Conservatives are a better breed of men
Yeah, Neil Kinnock I suppose had, got a lot done hadn't he?
Well yeah, they're a better breed of men  yeah, exactly
oh yo ee, bonnie Scot, bastard 


Urgh
leave it alone 
How much longer is there on that tape?
Andy
Sorry?
how much is left on that er tape?
Not much.
In your opinion, oh look at that beautiful shot 
Has the pause button fallen off here or something?
Why?
The pause button seems to be
there isn't a pause button
 

Oh 
Ministry of Defence
mm
Quite nice little machine that isn't it?
As they go, it's not bad at all 
Dirty recording
So we can't have much left can we there?
No there's not much at all.
So talk about this party
The party, well what about the party?
What would you like to talk about, about the party?
My God  Christ
Two weeks
blooming heck, British Airways and K L M
Why not?
No way
K L M is a pretty big
you know
Seven four seven hundred, seven four seven  mm 
He's a grumpy old git
He is, dad knows him, he's a grumpy old fart  he's very 
Margaret Thatcher's lover, that's why he's got that job, hmm


Well it is isn't it?
I mean
Now Andy, he gets a nice two hundred and fifty thousand a year, he does do a lot of work for it though
What a sick interview 
Now that is a seven four, seven four hundred
I've been on one of those
What a four hundred?
Yeah
Lucky sod, and that is a
seven four seven
Seven four seven
that's a seven
Five
five seven and that is
Seven three
Yeah, there's a jumbo in the background, two jumbos  oh  lovely
Who the driving instructor was shot was he?
Shit  lovely, he's a pain in the arm  good  don't like him  pain in the arse  oh dear 
as ever 
Oh yeah
Oh this'll go down well   dad's going back to Russia, Russia did that


what about the French farmers?
Ah
They not there?
burn our land  no they're not  land is the pit, he won't be
brought about  stupid  yeah, you jolly will as well, as Red Dwarf, see if you like it
What about it?
It's on
Sorry?
Do you wanna watch it?
Not particularly, if you wanna watch it, I don't mind 
I'm not bothered 
Alright
So about the party  right, what were we talking about?
Oh God
The party, what's gonna happen?
Have we got an agenda of events like
seven o'clock Donna arrives, seven thirty she's drunk, eight o'clock she's up here, eight fifteen she's
with me twice, eight seven 
You gonna play snooker are you?
eight forty five she cues you up
I don't trust you with that ball, hmm
or you
er, quarter to eleven Stuart has a go  yes, that sounds fun
Half past ten I come 
Yes
eleven o'clock we all go home
Good idea
 

So it's next Saturday then?
No, it's not  it won't be next Saturday, it'll be Saturday after next Saturday
So it's not Saturday, like in two days' time?
No
Not, the next one, but the next one after that
Next one after that
It's two weeks
Yeah
Oh
it's only two weeks Andy, but it goes quite quickly
It won't go quick enough, but
so
ah ah ah
I wish you'd stop that poor dog


he's gonna get very objectionable
 

How these people gonna get to this party?
Just turn up on their own, or get, come by car or something
I can imagine an early busload arriving 
Yeah
we've got a busload here sir, they'll probably turn up in a cab and ask you to pay for it 
Bloody well won't 
I'm sure they'll succeed  oh we've still got Friday tomorrow haven't we?
I let you start a bit early
I'd like it earlier, but I'm not going to  does it look a helicopter?
Yeah a
 

Oh  it's blown off, ah  yes, you beauty
You didn't know that?
No
aha  yeah  aha, beauty  oh it's Casualty next, ah   da, da, da, da, da  da, da, da   yeah  , they have to call it
is that what they started to call it?
yeah
Oh
Hmm
oh  hmm
cor dear  good evening
yeah  I'm glad to hear, oh John bloody Prescott, fat git  oh sod that, yuck, puke, oh wobbles
Oh it's all  mm
all wobbly  oh dear
Oh 
yeah
not bad  there is
your, suddenly it must be nine thirty  is the
back on?
Mm
Back on?
Let's go and have a look at the, in case anybody over the road's after it 
 

What
How long have you got that tape recorder for?
Until tomorrow night, why?
Oh it's tape, you have it, conceal in your pocket and have the microphone tucked in your shirt pocket innit?
Right
That's what
tape Stuart
Oh that's a possibility
yeah, try that, oh I've got a headache, I feel really sick actually  I have to admit, oh dear
Is that recording?
Yeah
Make a lot of noise
Yeah it is, it's a terribly loud recorder,you never close your eyes any more 
Wave out the window
when you kiss your lips, there's no tenderness in the way, with your finger tips 
Those buttons are funny aren't they?
Just wonder what the hell he's playing at
He's kerb crawling isn't he?
What's he playing at?
He's trying his brakes out, oh, actually sounds quite good in this corner, what is, it's quite intermittent in this corner
Oh alright
get the sound affects up here really quickly
Your jolly hard 
 
to show it  he's not
that would amuse every one wouldn't it?
No
I don't think so to be perfectly honest
I think he, he should be there
I don't know he'll be 
probably not invite him, I think he'll
Exactly
Truth is he'll bring all the booze the other time didn't he?
Oh he only brings a little bit, I brought loads last time, even though you didn't get a song played
Didn't I?
Oh shoot, oh damn
You've broken it
That's it, me go and break mum's crystal thing, no, er
The Crystal Maze
din, din, that was on tonight
I know
What time do you get back in tonight?
About six
Oh God I've been waiting, I was told to ring about seven, cos you wouldn't be in till then
 
ring Sandra or not  
Was she there tonight?
No, it's alright I can get her some time again
I didn't think she would be
She's been away for the last week or so
Keep away from you
I'm not surprised
she doesn't trust you, oh God, done it again
I think I'm more at risk than she is 
Oh what from?
Hmm speed at the window, yeah
You've got a sore throat haven't you?
Oh I feel ill, oh dear oh dear, I'm beginning, I'm just beginning, hello who is that?
Who's that going out there?
Who's that then?
Who's that then maths?
German teacher, have you got any German homework?
Who is it?
Who is it?
Who is it?
Who is it?
And who is it?
I don't know do I?
Something, done a robbery  at nine thirty two precisely, a lady did er actually walk out of next door's house
Your honour
your honour, carrying one large bag, looking very guilty and shady
Probably cos I couldn't see her
Ha, ha, ha, so
er she happened to wear a sort of a striped top or something isn't she?
A swag bag, swag bag  er, er, er, er, er, er
I bet Stuart turns up in his leather jacket
Yeah
He'll probably put like studs on it, you know
Yeah he will 
 
What, you wanna turn up looking smart
Smart?
than looking cas
What's wrong with that?
Nothing
That's alright, I'll turn up like this then
Smart and cas, cos you've got a small body for, haven't you?
You're only a two foot imp, cos er unlike me as a man being six foot


and looking like a man


and being like a man
I think being's not the word I use for that
so erm
a funny shape
you've commented on that every sodding time you've
No I haven't
You have
No I haven't, no I haven't, do you know this
voice has got very low lately
Low?
Yeah in the
it's of
You think it's actually breaking?
Just sounds more like, get out, get off, now your highness, get off


get off, reckon his voice'd break?
No 
I , I just reckon his vocal cords will slow down, competition of the high pitch vibrations, you know
hello punters
I know
I'm strangely drawn to Stuart
You are aren't you?
 
You are, we've noticed that and we're getting worried
Anyone who's drawn to Stuart they must be strange 
It is, yeah I have to admit we're a bit worried about you Andy
Yeah
you open yourself to comments from  now, you've got yourself a name, er


from 


's sodding fault
Oh yeah 
he reckons he held it around, he's a real pain in the arse at times
You seen the way he does it, he just sits there
Yeah
yeah, right, I mean you should let him come I mean
he'll sit in the corner, you, you know, he'll take the Mick out of you, you can guarantee it, I mean he's
Yeah, he does
Well it's my job usually
Exactly, I don't, I don't know whether I'll invite 
Don't, don't have  then
No I don't think I will  because he will sit there sort of, might, when he rang up once, right, my mum said I think there's a poofter on the phone 
So how would you know?
God knows
Said, I think he's just farted, why do you know that?
I can smell semen
Oh, please, can we erase that joke?
 
 
Well you should have it on record should you?
You prat


Please ignore that joke it was a very rude joke 
Oh it's quite good actually
Oh God Andy, you moron


prat
I must try that one tomorrow
I'll have to go and wipe that now
Ooh er
I'll have to go and wipe it exactly, you prat, you are a chief moron, how do you do that?
to make it 
So what do you think Donna will wear?
Nothing if I had my way 
What, you want something to sort of take off don't you?
A negligee 
Me and Ron here don't like negligence


no we don't like fe any form of underwear


we don't like scandals either, no we don't like casual
that's quite good
oh when you going?
I need my shower, tut, and my hair's gonna 
I  
stick
I beg your pardon?
When I wake up tomorrow morning my hair will be in a mess, I'll have to wash it again, in the morning
Why not just do it in the morning?
Because, I suppose I could do that, no
I think of that, you wouldn't catch me doing that in the morning
Exactly
washing I mean, washing my hair that is
Yes
I have trouble to get out of bed, let alone anything like that
yeah, imagine what, hey do you, do you reckon I should ask her if she wants to stay at Steven 
I'm sure, I, I, I, I've a fatal inkling that she might decline, but there's no harm in trying, but she might get the wrong idea about it, you know
Oh no
she might think that, you know, she's the only one who's gonna turn up and
Well anyway Sarah  and that lot can sleep downstairs, we'll all come down during the night 
Wake and we'll wake up find that we've got no respect
Never had anything else  love it
Eh, oh, ow
Could walk to the door frame, well done  oh God, it will be a good laugh, it will be 


Oh maybe I'll pick you up at ten o'clock


they might be picking you up, at ten o'clock 
My Rolf Harris impression   
Yeah   come where the jocks are strapping, come where the feet are clapping me  come where the hands are clapping, come where the feet are strapping, come where 
 
the jocks are strapping  oh yeah I think I'll ask 
So this party is definitely gonna go ahead?
Yeah, I hope so, I get permission from dad
I have to write it in my important portfolio
Oh yeah you're absolutely booked up, I have to, I'm sorry I forgot you have such a taxing social life with Stuart  yeah definitely, er  people listening to this could get the wrong idea I think  but this is, this is normal conversation 
No, no this is a normal conversation
It is normal totally normal 
a pervert and me 
Yeah, oh thank you
That's alright, that's what I'm here for
This, this is totally normal conversation, I've never got this done if Wendy had turned up, I'm glad, cos we've now got, a tape and a bit done tonight
Oh wow
which is brilliant  din, din, din, we should give it to Phil for his dad
Praise, and praise a lot, I bet, I bet his erm, his erm Sunday seminar thing, yeah they're not, erm
Seminar 
What you call them?
Service 
Congregation , congregation, it's not sort of all sort of these people sat there a disco or something don't they?
Yeah
Hey, yeah, groovy,the purple lights are flashing
Get to the beat, yeah
Get to the beat of the bible  
Aha, here comes a car, there goes a car, vroom, Renault   da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da  have you said to your dad get Sky yet?
Oh I
about that, mm  the thing is they're gonna put, they're gonna put, from the Sky to the televisions they're gonna put a satellite dish on the roof
Yeah
how embarrassing 
So
how embarrassing
True  get loads of new programmes
Oh yeah, like what?
Rolf Harris
Oh great  Rolf Harris 
Worth the extra
worth the extra sort of four hundred pounds isn't it?
Out the
Oh Rolf Harris for two days, the kiddies' channel
Oh you, I'm tired 
May as well have the morning chat show with Frank Bough
Oh yes, because he got chucked off er B B C T V, some morning he used to do it with Selina Scott
And he has the, the er Frank Bough health joke presented with Frank cough


oh yes
Er the er, the insult show, presented by Frank off


reach the climax very well did it?
Where is your phones?
I suppose it's getting more than one tape done now 
There's one, there's one , there's one
Do they argue?
Leave it on when you're in bed and see what noises you make 
Sneeze and snore probably
Probably going hmm hmm 
I do a lot of sleeptalking actually
Eh?
Yeah, I sleeptalk a lot  a lot, a lot
Who do you talk to?
I just talk to myself and I talk out, in aloud and what every
Sort of go, the economy, the economy
Yeah that's right
and nightmares about the economy actually getting better
Ha ha ha, you are a socialist scum
I know 
You scum of the earth   de, de, de, de, de, de, de, de  you should only have that attitude if you come from a deprived childhood
I am deprived
and you, if you have parents who
I'm deprived of
Yeah I can guess, Stuart
oh God Andy
What?
I think there's a name for you
Eh?
I think there's a name for you
What?
Freddy Mercury
I want to break me 
Yes, right, you, you sound like erm Michael Jackson   you even smell like Michael Jackson
Put me in the fire, you know
Melt yeah
Melt, even near a radiator
He sort of catches fire, yeah, self combustion, I think you must of said ten o'clock  did you say ten o'clock?
Oh I got a C D with erm Love and Kisses on it
Love and kisses 
just thought you know, Stuart might be on the T V
 
if we'd done it , for the rest of us we've got people like Donna to watch and so, be like serving Donna up and if you look like Danii Minogue on the television for Stuart
Yeah
you can do that
I'd be chatting to 
have you got 
Helen and Jenny all night 
have you got any Danii Minogue posters?
No
Oh
To think they have to be talking to me because I'm the host of the party, so I've got to go around and talk to everybody
Oh yeah, yes, you get, what, lots to happen, everyone goes in and it's like a ring around the room,you know  hmm
Yeah
there's sort of get backs against the wall you know, here comes Stuart 
and I basically go round the bottles filling up
Filling the bottles up I presume
Yeah and I get, I get 
Oh God as long I, as long that's all
that's right, yep, oh I think that'll be very good for, aha
bah, bah, bah, bah, bam 
No, that's not you
them Norwegians
who?
Aha
They're not actually 
Where they from then?
Scotland Upon Thyme 
Scotland nee 
No, they are, how you doing with your geography coursework?
I've done the second lesson of it
Oh, I've done
I've done the second question
The second question?
Mm
Christ you're taking your time
Yes
I've done the first 
 
diagram, graphic enhancement
Oh mine are graphic enhanced as well 
which is equal main, you know, well for me they are


these bar graphs are like three D you know
Oh it's good if you can do the three D, it looks
It's a waste of time and effort innit?
No, it's nice cos it's a lot for presentation as well 
I know, but the thing is you can tart it up afterwards
Yeah
if you've got time
Exactly, that's what I'm doing, I'm doing it that way, I'm doing the basics, which will get the marks and I'm doing, going back and adding extra little sods when I've finished it   oh God
People are walking out here, I don't know why
No neither do I, just trying to wear holes in the carpet or something are we?
Er, keeping my legs in practice
Oh right, two weekends' time, so I'll talk
I can't wait
so I'll be sitting talking to Donna, cos Donna, Helen and Jenny be sitting in one group with Sarah , they'll be chatting away and I'll be sitting in the middle, sitting on
that is what's gonna happen, that little lot, posy little girlies are gonna  together little girly chat aren't they?
Sitting on, on 
Yeah they've got something in common if they sort of, they say, what they say?
Oh drat  yeah 
no
Quick snigger and look at somebody and look away and go
Exactly, yeah you've got it right


yeah that'll probably, that's, that will happen, I wouldn't be surprised 
Aren't you gonna be, with two people there, you could have a ring round the room though could you?
Yeah we're gonna have about twenty five people there I think, twenty five's enough  what we gonna do about sitting down what
cos there's not enough seats 
sit on each other, I'm sure we could find space
Move the dining room table out and stuff
That'll be popular, that, I mean she's gonna be so popular ain't it?
Yeah, too damn right
Hey who does  like?
Er Sarah 
Does he?
Yeah
Hmm
not half, I think everybody likes Sarah  actually  she's predicted all As do you know that?
Who?
Sarah 
So
She's very intelligent, very good
How do you know?
I think it must be all Sarahs or what else or something, all Sarahs are registered as very intelligent
Oh she ain't actually got all As then?
because she's got all predicted As
How do you know?
Because I saw her predicted grade card
Did you saw mine, but
Yeah, predicted grade card I'm talking about  oh  where is, did you say ten o'clock?
Don't know what it is, well the thing is she's gone
Well
my mum has gone to photography or something
Photography?
Yeah
Was
no, not like that
Oh don't , oh shut up, I mean 
No 
why, what she gone to er photography lessons or something?
Mm
Ah
He thinks
What camera she using?
I dunno, some poshy thing
Is it hers or?
Yeah
Oh, do you go and buy it or something or what?
Yeah, she didn't
Oh very nice 
Gone , got all little things that stick up the end you know
Very nice
telephoto job you know
Very nice, yeah we've got that on dad's, aha there's a car  is your dad home tonight?
Er, yeah
Ah, oh, oh there's a change,you're lucky, he used to be home talking to Sue  oh excuse me   you wanna break free 
black and a little pink cardigan
Oh shut up, don't, please
What's wrong with that?
I need to go  I've gotta see her
Well  if I keep you away from going into the shower, it'd be like extended foreplay won't it?
Very funny Andy, very funny, yeah 
Mm
yeah I, not so, yeah well I suppose so, it'll be nice though, it should be a good laugh  being how people in the back garden talking and the lights in the back garden
She's gonna be February possibly March
Probably March
and if 
get them my key up
getting my key up with heaters, getting my key up with heaters
we can have it at your place if your parents go
Oh yeah, right, oh yeah where we gonna put like three hundred people?
Squeeze them in  sure we'll find somewhere for them to go, vacate, so long as I get a kiss from everybody apart from the boys and
kiss from all the other
oh, er, I'm ecstatic really
Kiss from Stuart
No that'll be
no it's better than alcoholic innit?
Oh right
but, well I'll have to have a word with Donna tomorrow and see what she thinks, hard luck 
You mean you've arranged all this?
Yeah I think it at my place actually
Yeah I might do eventually, I'm not going to bother to do it tonight, I'll pop off early 
I could wordprocess it for you
Well go on then you get the stand
Eh?
you take the stand tomorrow, tonight
Take the stand, I'll wordprocess it for you
good idea
Now what comics can I bring round?
Don't bring any comics, I'll show Donna that one piece of
What one?
don't put the comics, put the surname as well go and get it from my room, take the information out of the little envelope  you must of said ten o'clock to your parents, cos there ain't no sign of them, is there?
Have you got it?
Did you take the information out of it?
Where's the lights?
There
Er, no
oh Christ, dazzle me  sometimes I forget
That's a bright light innit?
It is innit, turn it off again
Aren't you gonna read it?
You've got it all 
Right 
There you go 
now what can I say about, is Kate going?
What?
Is Kate going?
Katie, yes
Oh my gawld, I can't, I can't read it
You know all the people there
I can write, you know you've given them middle names, you know, that suitable middle names
Donna very attractive 
I've
the whole page up
Yes
Helen
Yeah, oh,
Toni, we'll put like lots of dots and say no comment 
Yes
poor , maybe worth one, one day
Mm
kind of weird isn't he?
Stuart
Urgh  that's a comment and a half 
I think another page for him there
Yes 
What's that say?
There comes so motor bikers 
Daniel , what's that say?
Don, Dan
Dan 
Alright okay 
erm
oh Miss  calls him Danny now
Danny
Dan, Dan
Oh
Danny the bighead in the world
Danny stop us now, Danny
the fondler,
Yes  yes I was thinking about your fritters this morning
Fridged ferret


Helen  is she coming?
Yeah, oh hold on 
I get on alright with her
What?
Do they get on alright with her?
Yeah they get on alright with her
I think, everyone gets on alright with her actually
I don't
Phillip, oh well yes, Phillip   yeah 
Put that down, I see, I show dad the list and see what he thinks
Yeah, but if you just know any of the people, I mean
Yeah, exactly, it's just number-wise he's worrying about
Mm
Twenty, twenty five isn't er
We can't read half of these, I mean, why is it Donna's at the top of the list?
She's not, Kate is
Oh I mean, I think you put her on first actually
Yeah I did, oh I'll put Kerry on later
She's alright
because Donna is high in admir admiration in fact I
Admiration?
I admire 
I think it's called infatuation
 
infatuation 
oh I can't think of it, I can't think of a
without being disgusting or any
Something tasteful, because she's gonna be reading that tomorrow
Is she?
So will Helen and so will Jenny  I do snazzy formal
er up, one who's been invited to one's birthday party
Mo, one who's been invited to one's
I keep imagining she turns up with her mum and  she's holding her hand it says, now make sure she doesn't rip her tights  
No we will
We won't, no I thought we'd relieve her of them
Yeah we'll take them off just, take them off now dearie, you won't get them ripped them, yeah too damn right, you must of said ten o'clock, Geoff 
I can't think of enough comments about enough people, I mean what do I say about Phillip?
Saint Phillip  
Yeah saint Phillip, yeah, put him there
Why do you want this now?
No you take it home
That's alright
No, never
you still Jessica  and Re Re , Rebecca 
Yeah write them down
Mm, I'm not sure about them  you'll have the headmaster turning up say I recognize everyone here


I'm joining in the party
Yeah
he probably would as well wouldn't he ?
Ho ho ho, ah God can you imagine that, Christ, aha here comes a car, there goes a car  we are now in a country lane, looking out on the odd passing car   bom, bom, bom, bom, bom  I don't know about Jessica and Rebecca actually
I don't think so
Right then, cross them out
Okay
Taken two out  we're always gonna get people who are additionally at school tomorrow who you'll remember suddenly
Like who?
Oh you'll fi we'll think of somebody
Christopher jock strap and Jane
Oh get stuffed, no way, no, no way
Les the lesbian  
No, get lost 
Can you image him turning up, he'd follow me round everywhere wouldn't he ?
Yes, he would do 
Did you hear about my sixteen bit distal 
unless his 
signified computer 
unless he's now following you everywhere
Yeah I know, I think it's the glasses he can actually see me now or something 
You think it's a bit worrying?


And he's following you
Yeah I know
I wouldn't be seen dead with him
Tony, toe nail, Tony the toe nail 
yeah  go on call it a
got a date for everyone, so I wacko, Jacko, Jackson, hmm
Oh yeah, wacko
I think that's insulting knowing it, he's, anyone who knows Donald I think I should insult them
So
 

The fairy godmother, Donna the fairy godmother
Er you want to annoy Donna just go like that to her
Why?
Cos she does it and whenever she talks in drama she goes like that and so I go up and goes cooee, hello Donna, who, who
A bit like this?
Yeah, that's right
Billy Connolly, excellent
she stands there going who, who, exactly, got it in one, we've nearly done a second tape tonight now, did you know that?
Nearly a second tape 
Somebody's gonna get a surprise when they hear that
Probably
especially if we take it into German tomorrow
Yeah play it in German on a, on a loud speaker
Oh great
Yeah so everybody hears,
Who else we got on here?
Cricket 
No,
I'll check with dad before I start telling everybody  to make sure it can go ahead 
 

Right you got that?
Okay  Donna knows about it don't she?
Yeah Donna does, but nobody else does, so don't go yelling it tomorrow at school, keep quiet
Do you think we really should have Stuart?
Yes, he's a mate anyway, so, he'll behave himself in front of all the girls anyway
He'll be, he'll be quiet for the first few hours, he won't sort, say anything, then he
he will, you know what he's like
Yeah, but everybody else will be happy then, by then, hopefully
He'll probably go after Helen, hello, you know
If he goes after Helen he'll be out
So 
he is on the streets if he makes a pass on Helen
Oh well, I think well Phillip did, Phillip you know, you can, you can harm on him, harm, harm on him could you?
I could, can you imagine Phillip making a pass at someone, ah embarrassing
Hello, would you like me to buy sweets?
Yeah  so he'll say 
Like a suck of one of my sweets
No I don't take sweets from strangers, oh God
a vicar


he'll come and give everybody prayer books


and a sort of a sing-song
The Gideons bible
That's right, he'll go on the Gideons club, we ought to have a bible meeting


all sixteen of us 
I dunno you , like there's twenty of us all completely drunk you know 
Yeah 
Arthur turns up 
the school goes, they go hey, peace man, they all go and they 
They can give us a prayer man 
Yeah


they say right
Oh no, that's what's gonna do it
What?
Stuart's gonna be quiet all afternoon and all evening until his dad turns up
Yeah
give us a prayer man


Desmond
Oh God, oh yes, it would be a bit of a disaster  
Quite definitely
but it would be a good, aha here comes a car, ah 
Andy 
I think this is your mum  if it's trundling along at max nought point nought, aha it could be, it could be, it is, it will be, it is 
It is, it is 
No 
Yes 
No it's not, oh
Oh
Oh  that's no good  well that's no damn good 
Hmm, thought that was them
Obviously not, quite remarkable
Quite remarkable that, oh, are you on there by any chance?
Of course I'm on there
Oh
my sodding party
I don't, you actually there, you know 
Yeah it'll be nice because I'll be centre of attention cos everybody'll be wanting to talk to me
Why?
Cos I'll be, it's my party, so you have to be nice to me, cos it's my party basically, cos I consider it
Do I have to cover the video camera?
No, don't
I think I should I mean 
No 
that would definitely make it more interesting, if it, a talking point for everyone won't it?
I don't think it'll work 
Cos people play up to them and do things if perhaps they might not, wouldn't, you know, but would want to do it, but 
Yeah and then Helen and Jenny will be shy as hell, aha




That song's written nineteen eighty four and released in November nineteen eighty five.
There we go.