

THE father of IRA murder victim Tim Parry yesterday said a moving, poignant farewell to the smiling 12-year-old with the ‘twinkling eyes’.
And amid calls from all sides for the terrorist violence to end at last he said that if his son became a symbol for peace and hope, that would be ‘Tim's unique achievement’.
Colin Parry's voice frequently choked with emotion as he addressed more than 400 mourners packed into St Mary's Church, Great Sankey, near Warrington, Cheshire, for football-mad Tim's funeral service.
They included many of his friends from Great Sankey High School, and his soccer star idol Peter Beardsley, alongside Everton team-mate Dave Watson and club manager Howard Kendall.
Some of those attending the final farewell wept as personnel manager Mr Parry, 46, stood beside his son's coffin and courageously poured out the family's feelings.
He told of Tim's ‘captivating smile, flashing teeth and twinkling eyes’.
Turning to a school photograph next to the oak coffin, he added: ‘We look into his eyes on that wonderful photograph but his eyes are still.
‘They don't blink.
They don't change.
They don't move.
We no longer hear his voice.
His school books are closed.
His football boots hang limp and his Sea Scout hat hangs down.’
On occasions Mr Parry was seen to wring his hands as he struggled with his emotions when he spoke of the impact of recent events, since the double IRA bomb blast cut down Tim and three-year-old Johnathan Ball in Warrington town centre on Saturday March 20.
Tim, who suffered appalling brain injuries, was placed on a life support machine.
It was switched off five days later.
‘Before this tragedy, our immediate family probably amounted to about 15 to 20 people…
Now we have, it seems to me, a family of hundreds of thousands — millions of people,’ said Mr Parry.
They had received kindness, thoughts and good wishes from total strangers throughout England, Wales, Scotland — and particularly Ireland, he added.
‘They said Tim had not died in vain.
They said good must come of this.
They have said Tim will never be forgotten.’
Struggling to hold back tears, Mr Parry added: ‘If my son becomes a symbol for peace and gives everyone a new sense of hope after so much tragedy, then that will be Tim's unique achievement.’
In his address, the Bishop of Warrington, the Rt Rev Michael Henshall, described Tim's death as ‘innocence slaughtered by barbarians’.
He angrily condemned the killers of Tim and Johnathan for their ‘white feathered cowardice’ and declared: ‘This was a bomb too far’.
‘Cynics say — cynics have already said — when your preaching is done, when your lofty words have gone with the wind, when the media has departed to tell another tale, the world will forget.
It will be back to more bombings, more killings,’ said the bishop.
‘It need not be so.
Let Warrington be the watershed of violence.
It should be a catalyst, a moment in time, a turning of the tide.
The time has come.’
Comparing Tim's murderers to those who had killed Christ, he spoke of the ‘impish and delightful schoolboy, dead before his prime, his potential cruelly destroyed’.
After the service, Tim was buried on a windswept hillside just 25 yards from the resting place of Johnathan, who was killed outright by the blast 12 days ago.
Mr Parry and his wife Wendy, 35, seemed composed as they stood with their other children Dominic, 14, and Abigail, 11.
It was grief-stricken Abigail who made the final parting gesture.
She dropped a cuddly brown toy wearing the colours of Everton into the grave.
Disturbing fall
Decrease in air traffic growth
THE world's airlines suffered a ‘disturbing’ dip in passenger growth in February, it was announced yesterday.
Although actual passenger numbers on international scheduled services rose 4 per cent during the month, this was well down on the 11 pc increase for January.
The 4 pc compared with the 7 pc increase in the number of seats supplied, said the International Air Transport Association.
IATA director general Pierre Jeanniot said: ‘The drop in traffic growth for the month, compared with capacity, is disturbing.’
Meanwhile, Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic is likely to announce next week that it will be acquiring four of the European Airbus A340 aircraft, whose wings are built by British Aerospace.
The deal is expected to be worth about £300 million, with the aircraft probably being used on Virgin's Tokyo service and other long-haul routes.
Witnesses of armed robbery sought
DETECTIVES hunting a bank robber who stole £3,000 in cash after threatening staff with a gun are appealing for witnesses.
The robbery happened at Barclays Bank in Lodge Road, Writtle, near Chelmsford, on Wednesday afternoon.
Police are want particularly to contact someone who was driving a black K-registration car near the green at Writtle at about 3 pm on Wednesday.
They also want to speak to an elderly man who was wearing a brown jacket and was refused entry to the bank because he arrived just as the robber had left.
No shots were fired by the robber who was white, 6ft tall and wore a blue duffle coat with the hood up and a balaclava, gloves, light-blue trousers and white trainers.
He also wore steel-rimmed spectacles, possibly without glass.
Anyone with information is asked to contact Chelmsford CID on (0245) 491212 or Crimestoppers on (0245) 252252.
Michael shoots to senior glory
ARCHERY: THE Essex County Archery Association held its 15th indoor county championships at Brentwood.
Michael Heart, a junior from the Deben Archery Club, asked to be able to enter the senior section.
Sixteen-year-old Michael, from Stowmarket, has been shooting for just over two years, and his dedication and practice paid off as he came a magnificent third place in the senior compound section.
His score of 568 points out of 600 was only seven points down on first position, which was taken by R Jones of Racketts Archery Club, with T Preston of Braintree Archery club second.
In the senior recurve section S Culverhouse of Deben took second place and J Lamb also of Deben took fourth place.
The ladies recurve section saw S Romain of Racketts first with E Lamb of Deben second.
Chelmsford seek cup success
Volleyball: Chelmsford Partners women's volleyball side are banking on a wealth of experience to give them the edge this Sunday in their first English Volleyball Association Cup Final.The team has an average age of nearly 34, but they still fancy their chances of defeating a younger Sheffield Wednesday at Riverside (start 1.30 pm).
The EVA Cup is for sides below the top two divisions.
Wednesday are sponsored by the Premier League football club and the girls are all travelling to Wembley for tomorrow's FA Cup semi-final.
Chelmsford squad: Carrol Powell, Veronica Craik, Ruth Bolton, Henia Dane, Julia Iwrachia, Barbara Murie, Jenny Rolfe, Jennifer Wall.
Halstead looking for fourth win
Soccer: Halstead Town host a Jewson League Premier Division fixture with Fakenham Town tomorrow.
Halstead will look to make it four wins in four games.
Halstead (from): Loach, Goodwin, Leversuch, Rayson, Skeggs, Jewitt, Keeble, Elliot, Deveraux, Sinclair, Proctor, Streetley, Bailey.
Manager wanted
Soccer: Border League Wormingford FC are looking for a first team manager for next season.
The club is based seven miles west of Colchester and has good social facilities.Anyone interested in applying for the post should contact secretary Kevin Roberts on 0206 570983 after 6 pm.
SOLDIERS returning from a training exercise were injured when their Army truck was in collision with an articulated lorry yesterday.
One soldier was trapped for 20 minutes because the impact of the crash forced the lorry door on to his body.
Firemen cut him free from the vehicle in a lay-by on the eastbound carriageway of the A45 at Risby, near Bury St Edmunds.
Assistant divisional officer Peter Thorpe said they were called to release the front seat passenger at 1.09pm.
They used hydraulic equipment and freed him by 1.30pm.
A second soldier, from the 1st Battalion of the Royal Anglian Regiment based in Colchester, who was in the back of the lorry, was also hurt.
ADO Thorpe said: ‘It was an open lorry and he got thrown about in the back.
There were one or two other minor injuries.’
Four soldiers were taken to West Suffolk Hospital, Bury.
Two fire crews from Bury attended the crash which happened in a torrential downpour.
A police spokeswoman said a section of the eastbound carriageway of the A45 was cordoned off into one lane for more than two hours.
The soldiers were released from hospital after treatment.
The Army truck involved in the collision with a lorry on the A45 yesterday
IRA suspects on trial for bombing
Hanover: THREE suspected IRA terrorists went on trial yesterday charged with attempted murder for bombing a British army barracks in Germany in 1989.
A criminal court spokesman in the northern town of Celle said the three were also charged with espionage and intended sabotage for spying on British military installations in Germany in the spring and summer of 1989.
The three, all Irish nationals, were named as Pauline Drumm, 26, Patrick Murray, 49, and Donogh Mary O'Kane, 32.
A fourth suspect, Donna Maguire, 26, is on trial on separate charges in Dusseldorf and no date has been set yet for proceedings in the barracks bombing case.
Federal prosecutors say the three were involved in planting five bombs with a total of 150 kg (330 lb) of explosives outside a single-storey building at the Quebec Barracks in Osnabrueck, near the Dutch border, in July 1989.
Two attackers entered the British base and had set detonators on the bombs before they were discovered by a 64-year-old German maintenance worker.
They attacked him with a gun barrel before escaping.
Police to tackle the boy racers
BOY racers who plague the centre of an Essex seaside town are to be tackled by a new police campaign.
Clacton Police will start the initiative on Monday aimed at clamping down on the young drivers who regularly roar along the town's one-way system, screeching tyres and playing loud music on their car stereos.
Past attempts to stop the tearaways have failed because in many cases they have not actually been breaking speed limits.
Now, however, Acting Chief Inspector Dave Halsey believes he can stop the problem through noise pollution legislation.
Under the Control of Pollution Act 1974 the noise from stereos in the street between 9pm and 8am is forbidden.
Offenders, he claims, could be open to massive fines.
‘I believe this is a way forward for us,’ said Ch Insp Halsey.
‘We've got, I think, a way here to deal with this problem and improve the quality of life for people in the town.’
Officers will be issuing fixed penalty tickets and fining drivers for creating excessive noise and disturbing the peace.
Howard caps Essex councils
TWO out of only three councils in England to have their spending capped by the Government are in Essex.
Labour-controlled Harlow and Tory-run Castle Point have 28 days to challenge the decision, announced by Environment Secretary Michael Howard yesterday.
Along with Gloucestershire County Council, on which no party holds overall control, they are the first authorities hit by capping under the new Council Tax system.
The spending cuts would reduce the bill for an average Band D home in Castle Point by £18 to £625 and in Harlow by £288 to £987.
Mr Howard said: ‘All but a tiny minority of authorities have set affordable budgets and council taxes.
Only three of 419 English authorities have in my opinion set budgets which are excessive or represent an excessive year on year increase.’
His proposals would limit Harlow's spending to £11.20 million instead of £17.953 million budgeted by the council, and that of Castle Point to £7.97 million instead of £8.47 million.
Colin Parry breaks down while making a speech during his son Timothy's funeral yesterday.
Struggling to hold back tears Mr Parry said: ‘If my son becomes a symbol for peace…then that will be Tim's unique achievement.
Among the floral tributes was one from Everton football club.
From Page One
Green expert warns of risk to coastline from oil spill
By Andrea Smith
AN Essex environmentalist hopes to investigate the chances of a Braer -style disaster on the Essex coast.
Every year there are 26,000 ship movements in the Thames estuary, many involving cargoes of oil or its products.
Graham Game, a full-time green activist, hopes to win a commission to look at the dangers of a spill along the coast of Essex, the county's prime natural asset.
He said the particular nature of the Essex coast would mean a spill had ‘horrendous’ consequences.
The mass of estuaries and inlets that make up the coastline mean an oil spill would cover a lot bigger area.
‘It would also become trapped.
It's a nightmare scenario,’ he said.
The Essex coast is home to numerous species of birds, such as the Brent Goose, Shelduck, Black-tailed Godwit and Sanderling.
Many of these birds feed on the millions of worms, snails and cockles that inhabit the mudflats or on the eel grass, a green seaweed, that grows on top.
It is this habitat that Mr Game fears may suffer in a spill.
While clean-up campaigners in the past have steam-cleaned rocky shores smothered with oil, Mr Game asks: ‘How do you clean mud?’
It is the death of these mud-dwelling creatures that Mr Game fears has broken the food chain in the Shetland Islands.
He said divers surveying the aftermath of the Braer tanker disaster found large numbers of razor shells contaminated with oil.
Mr Game, who was commissioned to write a report on the incident for Greenpeace, said two milestones in the life-cycle of the Shetland wildlife must be crossed before the full extent of the damage will be known.
In September and November, sand-eels, the only things eaten by puffins, lay their eggs.
If that happens as normal, then the puffins have a better chance of survival.
In May and June, the common or harbour seals pup.
The Braer disaster produced a knee-jerk reaction among many hoping to improve safety standards at sea, but the suggestions from Government agencies and green groups stung the oil giant Shell into action.
It produced a 13-point action plan to reduce the risk of marine pollution.
The company, which runs Shell Haven oil terminal on the Thames estuary, said its own inspections have revealed that although nearly all tankers carry valid certificates, about a fifth are sub-standard.
Shell has argued that suggestions to impose a statutory limit on the size and age of tankers, and to ensure that all new ones have double hulls may back-fire.
Limits on tanker size, Shell says, will lead to an increase in the number of tankers and hence the chance of an accident.
The group adds: ‘Traditionally tankers have averaged a physical life of 20 years, and a well-maintained 20-year-old tanker is safer than a poorly-maintained five-year-old tanker.’
It has been argued that double-hulled vessels can be more hazardous in high-speed collisions than single-hulled vessels.
Shell argues that rather than introducing new requirements of dubious value, governments should enforce existing regulations to force sub-standard ships out of business.
The Braer disaster — could it happen off Essex?
Council chief to tell nation of area's bid for assistance
A BID launched by Harwich and Clacton for assisted area status will receive national prominence tonight.
Chief executive of Tendring District Council, David Mitchell-Gears, is scheduled to appear on Channel 4 News at 7pm to talk about the application.
A film crew interviewed him at Parkeston Quay and also met a number of prominent industrialists in the area.
Mr Mitchell-Gears said he was very pleased to have the opportunity to promote the council's case for assisted area status.
‘It is very important to Tendring that our application is successful and clearly we will continue to do everything we can to achieve this,’ he said.
No date for a decision has yet been made but the council hopes to hear in the near future.
Earlier this week Clacton, unemployment blackspot of the South East, was tipped to win grant aid following research carried out by the General Municipal Boilermakers' Union.
Should both the Clacton and Harwich travel-to-work areas receive assisted area status firms can be given grants to set up shop in the area.
It will also pave the way for further aid from Europe.
Children help chimps show £400,000 home
THE NEW £400,000 complex for Colchester Zoo's colony of chimpanzees was officially unveiled yesterday, with the help of local children.
Pupils from Lexden Primary School spent the day at the zoo, learning about the work involved in looking after the chimps and other animals.
They then joined BBC Essex radio presenter Liz Mullen to perform the opening ceremony at the Chimp World and Africana complex.
The indoor section of Chimp World has been open to visitors for some time, but the full complex also includes new outdoor accommodation.
The outside section will also be used by Mississippi alligators, the rare L'hoest and Diana monkeys, cheetah and leopards.
Other guests at yesterday's opening, which was broadcast live by the radio station, included North-East Essex Euro-MP Anne McIntosh and Mayor of Colchester Mary Frank.
Miss McIntosh said her visit complemented work currently underway in the European Parliament for a directive seeking to raise the standards of animal care in EC zoos.
‘Many zoos, particularly in the southern member-states, are not up to adequate standards,’ she said.
‘I hope that the UK and the excellent example set by Colchester Zoo will lead the community to implementing much higher levels of animal welfare.’
Last month, the owners of Colchester Zoo angrily rejected criticism by the campaign group Zoo Watch that some of its bears exhibit abnormal behaviour due to the stress of captivity.
Council clerk to retire
A PARISH council clerk is to retire in three months time after five years service.
Cedric Humphreys, 65, wants to retire as clerk to St Osyth Parish Council to devote more time to his interests in amateur dramatics and music.
Yesterday, chairman of the council, Phyll Hendy, said: ‘He has been unswerving in the service he has given to the parish and has been kind and co-operative to everyone.
We all wish him well in the future.’
The council is now seeking a replacement.
Clinic for young is hailed a success
A YOUNG people's family planning clinic has been hailed a success — just five months after opening.
The clinic, the first of its kind in Clacton and which meets every Wednesday afternoon at the town's hospital, now has 40 under 21s on its books and newcomers are still booking in.
When it opened Tendring and Colchester were recognised blackspots for teenage pregnancies and the clinic was set up expressly to reduce the number of gymslip mums.
Secure
The special group aims to make youngsters, who might worry about bumping into older friends of the family at the usual clinic, feel more secure.
Youngest on the books is 14, but Dr Caroline Marfleet, senior medical officer for family planning in North Essex, stresses it is not her job to promote early sex.
‘We do not automatically dispense the pill,’ she said.
‘We always try to persuade the girls to discuss their relationship with their parents if at all possible.
‘Ninety-eight per cent of couples who come to us have already started a sexual relationship,’ she said.
She explained one of the more important sides of her work was briefing youth leaders, who in turn could educate youngsters in schools, colleges and other organisations.
Two new faces at coastal station
TWO new coastguards have taken up their posts at the Thames District Coastguard station at Walton on the Naze.
Their new appointments will reunite Mark Baker and Bruce Lack, who first met several years ago on a training ship.
Before becoming a coastguard officer, Mr Baker spent six years seeing much of the world as a radio operator in the Merchant Navy.
Mr Lack is a former boat builder, skipper/examiner of the Ocean Youth Training ships.
He has trained handicapped youngsters at sea and is a lifeboat crew member.
The pair will spend about a month at the Thames Coastguard station and take a further training course at Highcliffe, in Dorset, before taking up their duties at Walton on the Naze.
Hockey
Colchesterjust fail in Essex Cup
Danny Wheeler
Old Loughtonians 2
Colchester 0
A COMMITTED Colchester side could not prevent National League Division One side Old Loughtonians from claiming the Essex Cup for the seventh time in ten years down in Chigwell.
Under-strength and under pressure, John Helliwell's men held out to finish a season in which they came fourth in the Norwich Union East Premier on a high note.
Old Loughtonians, who beat Colchester 6–1 in last year's final, had most of the possession but could not be sure of the win until ten minutes from time.
The north Essex side did extremely well to beat Redbridge and Ilford by the handsome score of 4–1 in the semi-final, but the rugged nature of that game paid its price.
Jinxy Jon Dye was ruled out with a hamstring pull and Ian Heggie had a broken hand which created a big hole up front and Kevin Wesson was also unfit, leaving the defence weakened.
Michael Thorogood and Tom Le Her were unavailable through holiday, leaving young midfielders to contend with the might of England's Julian Halls, who is off to Germany this weekend.
In the circumstances, Martin Dye, Phil Penton, Mark Potter and Earl Peacock had marvellous games and Graham Crossman in goal was also outstanding.
Gameplan
It was never a classic encounter, but Colchester's greater motivation kept them running hard and reaching half-time just one goal behind was a huge bonus.
They won short corners without being able to penetrate the Old Loughtonians defence and often the final pass went astray, so when the second goal came, the large crowd knew it was all over.
Nonetheless Helliwell said: ‘I was very, very pleased with our performance.
They had the edge territorially, but we allowed for that in our gameplan and I think the moral victory was ours.’
Council's complaints system
A COMPLAINTS system is being set up by a local authority to make it easier for residents to complain about the service that the council offers.
Tendring District Council wants to be responsive to the needs of residents and to work in partnership with them.
The system is being introduced in response to the Government's Citizens' Charter which laid down that every resident with a problem about a particular public service should have access to a well publicised complaints procedure.
A simplified leaflet to be made available to the public will concentrate on procedures for making a complaint and the follow-up action which can be taken if the initial response is thought to be unsatisfactory.
Provision has also been included in the draft scheme for compensation to be paid to complainants in exceptional circumstances after loss or suffering.
A nominal ‘time and trouble’ payment has also been included.
Chief executive David Mitchell-Gears stressed the number of complaints received was relatively small compared with the overall volume of work undertaken by the authority.
‘I believe the draft complaints system will offer our customers a straightforward system for resolving problems should they occur,’ he said.
Cracks risk will not hit nuclear schedule
GREENPEACE is accusing Nuclear Electric of risking safety by refusing to delay commissioning of the Sizewell B power station — despite a risk of cracks developing in the head of the vessel which forms the ‘heart’ of the reactor.
The company says it has no intention of replacing the suspect part before operation but it will take remedial action if cracks subsequently develop.
Concern surrounds tubes which pass through the head of the vessel.
Report
Cracks have been found in tubes in similar power stations elsewhere in Europe.
According to a report commissioned by Greenpeace, a serious accident could occur.
Nuclear Electric says there is no safety risk although it would want to prevent leaks within the reactor containment.
According to the experience of other European plants, leaks are unlikely to start to develop until at least four years after the start of operation.
Company chairman John Collier says in a letter to Greenpeace that special measures are being introduced to monitor the state of the tubes but there is no intention to replace the reactor head.
‘If there is any sign of cracking during operation we are ready.
We will activate any remedial measures necessary up to and including replacing the vessel head,’ he says.
‘Catastrophe'
Replacement could cost about £5 million.
Greenpeace anti-nuclear campaigner Bridget Woodman said: ‘Nuclear Electric wants to operate Sizewell B in the full knowledge that it has sub-standard components and an increased potential for a disastrous accident.’
She added, ‘The station should be cancelled now, before it turns into a radioactive as well as an economic catastrophe.’
Waco: CULT leader David Koresh may be drawing out the 34-day stand-off with federal agents so it ends on a religious holiday and fulfils his prophecies, the FBI said.
But Koresh's lawyer said the leader's gunshot wounds are taking their toll, complicating efforts to persuade him to surrender.
‘He's suffering from his wounds and he's a little tired.
He needs a doctor,’ said Dick DeGuerin.
FBI negotiators, who have not spoken with Koresh since Monday, said they were unaware of a request to provide a doctor and would probably refuse.
FBI spokesman Bob Ricks said: ‘I believed from the very beginning they had a certain time agenda.
I think somewhere along this agenda Passover (April 6–7) is entering into the equation.’
Three of Koresh's followers who left the isolated compound since the stand-off began yesterday denied conspiracy to kill federal officers.
Coroner prompts action
A CORONER'S comments have goaded health bosses into issuing new guidelines after a mentally handicapped woman died after fracturing her skull.
Summing up at the Colchester inquest of Joan Miller on Wednesday, Essex Coroner Malcolm Weir said there had not been enough communication between staff from Colchester General and Turner Village Hospitals.
Miss Miller, who was 65 at the time of her death but had a mental age of two, died on November 7 last year from head injuries.
After falling and hitting her head in Turner Village, where she had lived since 1945, she was taken to the accident and emergency department at the general hospital.
Doctors failed to diagnose her fractured skull and sent her back to Turner Village with a note saying she should be kept under observation and a message to return if her condition changed.
Confusion and communication problems arose at Turner Village as Miss Miller developed neurological problems and died in the early hours of the morning.
Yesterday chief executive of Essex Rivers Healthcare Dr Alan Davison said: ‘We have issued some guidelines to our own medical and nursing staff to assist in the diagnosis and management of head injury patients who also have a mental handicap.
‘We have sent those guidelines to the other two trusts and are setting up a work party involving all three trusts to improve the way we deal with those cases and improve communications.’
The three health trusts involved are Essex Rivers Health Care, which manages Colchester General Hospital, the New Possibilities Trust, which manages Turner Village, and the Mental Health Trust.
An inquiry into the incident is due to take place soon.
Knight to contest seat against party
DEFIANT Ralph Knight last night revealed his intention to stand against Labour in the county council elections after being repeatedly snubbed by the party.
Immediately after the announcement, the party warned Mr Knight he faced immediate expulsion if he went ahead with his stand.
The move follows the party's constant refusal to let him stand for re-election as a Labour county councillor for Harwich, a decision which led to Mr Knight's resignation from public life.
Mr Knight said in a statement he would now be standing for re-election to Essex County Council as a Community Representative.
Description
The decision was made ‘after giving serious thought to the rejection of myself by a few Labour Party activists,’ said Mr Knight.
‘My description will be Community Representative which I hope will result in an organisation with ideals to put the community and its needs first and will defend the high moral ground in politics together with support for the have-nots.’
Mr Knight, who angered colleagues when he lashed out at homosexuals by saying ‘Stop sodomy’ during the General Election campaign last year, said the gay issue had played a part in his decision.
‘I have been alarmed at the easy way the Labour Party has in recent years allowed certain factions in society to dictate to them the philosophical approach they should be following.
‘One example is gay and lesbian organisations and, though I would not persecute these people, I cannot support their way of life as one to be promoted and developed.’
Mr Knight said he was particularly worried that Labour would, at county level, support the fostering of children by homosexual couples.
He promised to adopt the same approach to councillorship ‘which has seen me through as a councillor for 20 years with 11 of these as county councillor.’
Mr Knight, 58, said he was confident of winning the seat ahead of his Labour rival Brian Theodom, a builder from Kirby.
Expulsion
However, Tom Cook, treasurer of Harwich Constituency Labour Party, said he doubted Mr Knight would win.
And he warned: ‘If he does go ahead, he is out of Labour.
Standing against a Labour candidate results in automatic expulsion.’
Mr Cook added: ‘It is not a nice situation to be in but I am afraid these things happen.’
Pondering his future — Ralph Knight is to stand against Labour in the county council elections
Gloom squeezes life out of film
Good cast and photography overcast by plot
Andrew Clarke
GERARD Depardieu's latest film,Tous Les Matins Du Monde , tries very hard to be a very worthy movie but unfortunately I am unable to recommend it as an entertaining evening at the cinema.
The film is well-cast, the acting's good, the photography is very classy but this means nothing when Tous Les Matins Du Monde turns out to be an incredibly depressing experience.
It limps forward at an agonisingly slow pace and then proceeds to heap an unrelenting catalogue of death and disaster upon the audience and the leading characters.
It's a very austere movie, filmed largely in semi-darkness and featuring a morose baroque soundtrack.
At times I felt like cutting my throat as the depression conjured up by the story spilled over into the auditorium.
The two leads Jean-Pierre Marielle and Gerard Depardieu play a pair of unsympathetic musicians.
Marin Marais (Depardieu) is cruel and self-obsessed while Sainte Colombe (Marielle) is so wrapped up in his own private world of misery, he shuts out his family and the world.
To Sainte Colombe, music is all about sadness and loss; he added a seventh string to his viol to make it sound more melancholy.
Not even the love scenes between Guillaume Depardieu and Anne Brochet can lift the deeply entrenched gloom.
Tous Les Matins Du Monde needs more light and shade.
It would not be unkind to say this movie revels in despair.
According to director Alain Corneau, each minute of joy has to be paid for by a lifetime of misery.
The acting in the film is good.
Billed as a Gerard Depardieu movie, he is on screen for no more than 20 minutes.
He narrates most of the film and his real-life son Guillaume plays his character as a young man.
Guillaume makes an impressive debut and with more interesting material, his scenes with Anne Brochet would have set the screen alight.
However, it is Jean-Pierre Marielle's film.
He brings a believable austerity to his portrayal of the tortured Colombe.
His wife dies in the opening few minutes of the movie and he spends the rest of his life mourning her.
He shuts himself off from his two young daughters and composes laments to his dead wife.
This forms the basis of the film.
He is persuaded to teach the talented Marin Marais but when he detects the young musician has little sympathy for his belief music is only an expression for sorrow, he returns to his hermit's existence.
Marais' charismatic playing wins him a place at court while Colombe has to cope with the death of a daughter.
A film to avoid unless you enjoy wallowing in misery.
Tous Les Matins Du Monde , certificate 12, is showing at the Ipswich Film Theatre from April 6–18.
Jean-Pierre Marielle as Sainte Colombe and Gerard Depardieu as Marin Marais
New business is beating recession
Sharon Asplin
A SMALL village business, which is to shortly celebrate its first birthday, has been so successful it could soon be looking for bigger premises.
IE Displays Ltd, of Rectory Road, Great Bromley, was set up last May and designs and supplies illuminated acrylic advertisement display cases.
Already director Ian Evans, 46, and his daughter Susan, 18, who run the business between them, have supplied their original designs to household names like McDonalds, the Abbey National and John Menzies.
They have also just won an order to supply the scout shops.
This week they will be advertising for one or two extra staff and anticipate moving to bigger premises by the end of the summer, if business continues to boom at the same rate, possibly in the Manningtree area.
Turnover in the coming year is expected to be in the region of £330,000.
Mr Evans had been employed in the marketing and sales field in Bristol but was left jobless when the firm's holding company went into receivership.
‘It was then I decided to find a product which I thought was marketable and start marketing it,’ he said.
He has been so busy in the last two or three months that he has been forced to temporarily stop promoting his products.
It took the Evans family about four months to finalise designs and begin trading, but now the father and daughter work regularly from early in the morning until late at night, seven days a week.
‘I am very pleased I took the plunge,’ he said.
‘And I'm quite proud we are making our mark in the depths of recession — you name an outlet, we've done work for it.’
Operation Dodgem aims to cut car crime
Police campaign targets main trouble spots
OPERATION Dodgem was launched by Essex police yesterday in a crackdown on car crime.
The initiative is to run for two months, and will include high profile policing in a bid to reduce thefts of and from cars.
It comes after growing concern about the amount of thefts of cars, and break-ins, especially at all day car parks, such as those at railway stations.
Inspector Howard Norman, of Stanway Traffic Division said they intended to target specific areas badly hit by the crime.
He added: ‘We hope it will also increase the detection rate.’
The exercise will include random stop checks by police, and involve special constables and traffic wardens.
Insp.
Norman said: ‘There will also be lots of local initiatives, concentrating on specific areas and specific problems.’
He added: ‘Thefts of and from motor vehicles is an ongoing problem.’
Thieves tended to target certain types of car he said, such as high performance Fords, or stole from cars parked in vulnerable places such as all-day car parks.
Insp.
Norman advises drivers to fit visible security devices to cars, such as steering and gear lever locks, and to have the car alarmed.
However, in Braintree a high performance Escort Turbo, which was alarmed has been stolen.
Inspector Brian Jaggs, of Braintree police, said yesterday that according to the alarm company the only way the £8,000 car could have been taken was to be physically removed by trailer, and it was likely it was stolen to order.
Another vehicle stolen in Braintree overnight was a £12,000 K registered Suzuki Vitara four wheel drive, taken from the Riverside Centre car park.
At Great Dunmow Inspector Martin Reed said often people did not take enough care when leaving their cars, which could remain unlocked, or with keys in the ignition.
The initiative, set up after a meeting between sub divisional commanders, will end with results being compared with the same two months last year.
Indoor bowls
Clark's nerve holds to deny Suffolk
PAUL Clark was the hero of the hour as he guided Norfolk to a second successive title as the tightest of finishes resolved the Eastern Counties under-25 tournament at Ely.
He scored a three count on the last end of the final match against Essex for victory as Suffolk's young bowlers held their breath for an improbable win.
With two matches remaining, any of East Anglia's three leading counties could have taken the trophy, but Clark's nerve held out as he stepped up to the mat with his last wood.
Immaculate
Paul Maynard, skipping an all Essex County rink of Andrew Blake, Steve Cooper and Andrew Skilbeck, had fought back from 7–1 and 18–10 down to be two shots ahead.
Suffolk, who eventually beat Hertfordshire 18–15 to take runners-up spot, would have taken top honours had Clark not pulled off such an immaculate saver.
Essex might even have taken the title after the morning's matches produced two good wins.
Maynard's quartet beat Hertfordshire's Ryan O'Ferguson heavily and Nathan Birkett, Steve Tucker, Jamie Holmes and Paul Clapp conquered Cambridgeshire.
Clapp subsequently lost heavily to Suffolk's Colin Gathercole in the afternoon, however, to leave Essex needing the last two matches to go the right way.
They didn't.
Results
Morning: Suffolk I 33, Cambridgeshire II 15; Suffolk B 13, Norfolk B 26; Cambridgeshire A 16, Essex B 28; Norfolk A 20, Hertfordshire A 17; Essex A 37, Hertfordshire B 8.
Afternoon: Suffolk B 34, Essex B 10; Cambrdidgeshire B 21, Norfolk B 23; Cambridgeshire A 14, Hertfordshire A 27; Norfolk A 23, Essex A 22; Suffolk A 18, Hertfordshire B 15.
Final standings: 1, Norfolk won 4, plus 19, points 8; 2, Suffolk won 3, plus 32, points 6; 3, Essex won 2, plus 16, points 4; 4, Hertfordshire won 1, minus 22, points 2; 5, Cambridgeshire lost 4, minus 45, no points.
Junior title won by Braintree
BRAINTREE, represented by Paul Davison, Paul Owen, Jeff Gaydon and Sarah Davison, have won the Junior Championship of the Essex Inter-League Table Tennis competition.
They defeated Chelmsford A 9–0 in their final match.
Finishing order: Braintree A 30 pts; Brentwood B 18; Chelmsford A 16; Southend A 15; Brentwood A 10.
Southend B beat Burnham 6–3 to clinch the Junior Division Two title.
Their winning squad was Andrew Murray, Sean Ram, Mike Hurry and Emma Washington.
Finishing order: Southend B 25 pts; Burnham 20; Chelmsford B 19; Harlow 15; Colchester A 11.
Clacton (Jim Dove, Matthew Lincoln, Gary Ridgeon, Daniel Burrell, Emma Cartwright) are Junior Division Three winners.
They beat Braintree B 6–3 in their final match.
Second-placed Ilford, unbeaten in the four matches played, must regret having conceded their match with Clacton.
Finishing order: Clacton 40 pts; Ilford 32; Braintree B 24; Romford 14; Basildon 13; Colchester B 10.
Cricket
Essex League to have two divisions
WITH effect from the 1994 season, the Colour Assembly Essex League will consist of two divisions linked by two-up and two-down promotion and relegation.
The league, which is the premier club cricket competition in the county, has operated with one division since its inception in 1972 and is organised into 1st XI, 2nd XI and 3rd XI competitions.
The announced change is an exciting development which is anticipated to underpin the strength and depth of club cricket in Essex.
The 18 clubs joining the existing 20 clubs were invited as a result of an ‘in principle’ decision by an EGM of the league in 1991, and following a lengthy discussion process conducted by the league committee (initially with nearly 50 of the leading clubs in the county).
All the clubs invited meet strict criteria relating to facilities, number of teams run, colts infrastructure and overall organisation.
The whole process has been carried out with the full knowledge and support of the Essex Cricket Association and Essex County Cricket Club.
League chairman Mike Boyers said: ‘I believe that the opportunities encapsulated in the expansion of the Colour Assembly League will have a marked effect on the standard of cricket at club level in Essex.’
Essex League set-up for 1994
Division One: Brentwood, Buckhurst Hill, Chelmsford, Chingford, Colchester and East Essex, Fives & Heronians, Gidea Park & Romford, Hadleigh & Thundersley, Hutton, Ilford, Leigh-on-Sea, Loughton, Old Brentwoods, Orsett & Thurrock, Southend-On-Sea, South Woodford, Walthamstow, Wanstead, Westcliff On Sea, Woodford Wells.
Division Two: Ardleigh Green, Basildon, Benfleet, Billericay, Brookweald, Clayhall, Epping, Harlow, Harold Wood, Horndon on the Hill, Hornchurch, Old Parkonians, Old Southendians, Shenfield, Stanford le Hope, Theydon Bois, West Essex and Wickford.
Two divisions for Essex League
Cricket: The Colour Assembly Essex League, the premier cricket competition in the county, will have two divisions and automatic promotion and relegation in 1994.
A total of 18 teams have been invited to form the Second Division, but none are existing members of the Anglo Two Counties Championship.
Last Supper
MR Alan Whelan, headteacher of St Benedict's School, Colchester, yesterday washed the feet of two pupils from each of the five year groups as well as those of two staff as part of an early celebration of Maundy Thursday Mass.
Maundy Thursday, the day before Good Friday, is the day when the Last Supper is celebrated.
During that occasion Jesus washed the feet of his disciples, Mr Whelan explained.
The ceremony took place a week early during the end-of-term Mass because the pupils will be on their Easter holidays on Maundy Thursday.
Mr Whelan said: ‘Although the idea has caught the imagination, pupils are most reluctant to have their feet washed.’
Pupil Tanya Hammond has her feet washed.
Ministers attacked over cost of flights
Explain or pay back taxpayers, say Labour MPs
John Gummer — urgent charter
Peter Lilley — holiday cottage
LABOUR backbenchers yesterday called for two Cabinet ministers to explain how they allegedly spent £6,000 of taxpayers' money on three urgent flights home from France, or repay the money.
Bryan Davies (Oldham Central and Royton) and Dennis Skinner (Bolsover) claimed in the Commons that Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley and Agriculture Minister John Gummer chartered special flights to fly back from holiday in Normandy.
Mr Davies told the Press Association later that regular flights back from Normandy cost less than £200, yet Mr Lilley spent £2,000 on each of two urgent chartered flights home to Northolt.
‘He should either explain why it was necessary, or pay up.’
During questions on parliamentary business, Mr Davies had demanded: ‘How can Mr Lilley justify ten times the cost from his holiday home in France in order to return to ministerial meetings at Westminster?’
Commons Leader Tony Newton replied: ‘I've no doubt Mr Lilley will take note of your point.’
Mr Skinner said Mr Lilley should come to the House to answer questions over ‘the £4,000 bill the taxpayer is having to foot for him flying from his holiday cottage in France to come back to Britain’.
He said Mr Gummer had been ‘out to Mr Lilley's holiday cottage, and it cost the taxpayer £2,000 for him to fly back when they could fly back for less than £200 apiece’.
He said the flights amounted to £6,000 of taxpayers' money: ‘It's time they paid the money back.’
Mr Newton replied: ‘There are well-established rules governing what is reasonable and appropriate in such matters.
‘It does seem to me there must necessarily be some provision of this kind unless it is to be supposed that ministers are never to be allowed to leave the country at all.’
UK willing to help enforce UN no-fly zone
BRITISH fighter pilots could be patrolling the skies over Bosnia within days after the Government yesterday made it clear it was willing to help enforce the United Nations no-fly zone.
Sir Michael Graydon, chief of the air staff, said jets could be in position ‘in a very short time’.
‘The Government is clearly going to consult with its allies.
But the beauty of air power is it can get wherever you want it and go there very quickly indeed, because aircraft can be there in a very short time,’ he said at the 75th anniversary celebrations at RAF Marham, Norfolk.
And last night top U.S. military commander General Colin Powell said he expected Western jets to be enforcing the zone within two weeks.
The UN security council on Wednesday passed a resolution allowing the use of force against aircraft violating the zone.
Defence procurement minister Jonathan Aitken told MPs yesterday the Government hoped the threat of action would deter violations.
But he added: ‘Should further violations of the no-fly zone occur, the resolution requires all necessary measures to be taken to secure compliance.
‘It is expected that the UN Secretary General will invite NATO to take on this responsibility.
The UK is in principle willing to contribute aircraft for the enforcement task.’
Mr Aitken said British jets would take ‘evasive or retaliatory action’ if attacked or threatened.
Military experts think more than 50 fighter jets would be needed to enforce the zone.
Government officials said the UK's exact contribution to the task force had yet to be worked out.
But the RAF is most likely to send about two squadrons of Tornado F3 fighters, which can intercept and destroy with deadly speed.
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic warned that enforcing the no-fly zone — which is violated largely by Serbs — could have ‘negative consequences’ for the peace process.
But the UN Protection Force in Bosnia said it welcomed the UN move, despite the possibility it may increase military tension on the ground.
Later Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind blamed the Bosnian Serbs' introduction of combat aircraft for the need to send Western fighter jets to the region.
A meeting of the 16 NATO nations in Brussels is expected to give final approval to the no-fly mission today.
RAF anniversary — Page 55
Fooling around with James Bond fans
HUNDREDS of James Bond fans had the wool well and truly pulled over their eyes yesterday.
Bulletins were broadcast throughout the morning by Frinton-based Radio Mellow claiming heart throb Timothy Dalton was being filmed in the latest Bond movie on the town's seafront.
Hordes of listeners rushed to the beach to catch a glimpse of the star and the cameras, and inundated the radio station with inquiries about the exact location.
News editor Andre Kimshe was at the seafront that morning, reporting back to the Walton Road station, to add authenticity to the wind-up.
Listeners were finally put out of their misery just before midday when broadcasters finally admitted to the April Fool.
A spokeswoman for the company said the numbers of people actually taken in were ‘amazing’.
‘Literally hundreds of people were down there on the beach,’ she said.
‘One listener even told us he had never been taken in by anything until this.’
NO WAY TO WIN FRIENDS
THE RAIL unions are calling a one-day strike, which they seem to think is the way to win the support of their passengers.
Why they should think this, it is difficult for anybody else to understand, but it is a traditional belief among union leaders.
Arthur Scargill had much the same idea, arguing that pits could only be saved by strike action and taking the battle to the streets.
Support for the miners promptly and inevitably began to shrink, especially upon the Conservative back-benches, but he still believes that he is right.
If they were to behave sensibly, the railwaymen could count upon public sympathy, for there is widespread unease about the Government's attitude to the railways.
Ministers have for many years seemed to regard them as a somewhat unnecessary alternative to the roads.
Lady Thatcher left nobody in doubt that she disliked public transport in all its forms.
Only when she retired, and was deprived of her police escort, did she appreciate why other people find driving in London so difficult nowadays.
Her house in Dulwich was suddenly much further from Westminster than she had realised, and had to be sold.
It had been supposed that, with her retirement, a more reasonable approach might prevail in Government circles, but it has not been so.
Mr Major's transport ministers have desperately tried to discover some way in which they could carry out their former leader's instruction that the railways must be privatised.
In other public utilities, there was a reasonable chance of some benefit from privatisation.
Services were often inadequate and expensive, because the Treasury had refused to provide money for investment; managers were full of ideas of what could be done with new and cost-cutting technology.
British Rail management has said that it is time to start thinking about the passengers —‘customer-orientation’— but does not seem to have any other ideas for improvement.
It is not surprising, therefore, that most people assume that under private ownership services would be fewer, and charges would be higher.
The assumption may not be justified, but it will be held until somebody comes forward to show that there are other ways of making investment in railways profitable.
The Government could therefore be put under some pressure to give the passengers a guarantee that they will not be exploited.
The rail unions should be putting their own demands in such a way as to reinforce this campaign; but they have not done so.
Instead, they are asking for no compulsory redundancies, and are arguing with BR management about whether this can fairly be interpreted as asking for jobs for a lifetime.
Passengers might well support a campaign against redundancies, while their trains are late, dirty and overcrowded; but a campaign for no compulsory redundancies at any time, is a different matter.
This is not, in the BR jargon, a customer-orientated dispute.
Nor, of course, does a one-day strike serve the interests of the customer.
It is a nuisance and an invitation for him to look again at other forms of travel.
It might even suggest that perhaps Lady Thatcher did, after all, have a point when she despaired of public transport.
If the rail unions want to keep a service going and their members in work, they should urgently consider employing a good public relations firm.
They will neither win friends nor influence people if they continue on their present course.
New trust runs out of puff
FRANTIC balloon-blowing and a cancelled fly-past by an RAF formation marked the launch of a new hospital trust yesterday.
The staff at the West Suffolk Hospital, Bury St Edmunds, planned to release more than 1,000 balloons to celebrate the start of the new West Suffolk Hospitals Group NHS Trust.
At the same time, in an unconnected event, 148 aircraft were due to be flying towards RAF Marham to mark the 75th anniversary of the RAF.
Many of the planes would have passed over the hospital and to avoid the risk of an accident, the hospital was asked to cut the number of balloons.
A spokesman said staff only inflated a few hundred but then hurriedly blew up some more when bad weather forced the cancellation of the fly-past.
The balloons were printed with the new trust slogan of The Trust is Yours, The Caring Ours, thought up by health care support worker Margaret Grant.
The 400 or so balloons were eventually released by St Edmundsbury mayor Ted May, hospital chief executive Bob Jones and trust chairman Raymond Grierson.
Mr Jones said: ‘The balloons are a bit of fun, but the serious message is that the West Suffolk Hospital, which has served the community since 1882, has entered an exciting new era in terms of health care for the area.’
Staff at Walnuttree Hospital, Sudbury, are using the balloons grounded by the RAF to decorate wards, give to young families attending the local clinic and at the hospital's summer fete.
Site services manager Jilly Cailes thanked those who turned up expecting to fill 1,000 balloons with helium, including students from Sudbury Upper School and representatives from the town's Volunteer Centre.
She said Highpoint prisoners Paul Carter and Aslam Mirza had inflated some of the balloons.
Anti-gipsy moves branch out
MOVES are being made to plant trees on a grass verge in an effort to stop gipsies setting up camp.
Great Bromley parish council has written to Essex County Council asking for mature trees with stakes to be planted on a verge in Mary Lane North.
Parish council clerk Herbert Booty said gipsies had knocked down 200 saplings on the county council-owned land by driving through them to get onto the land.
The gipsies had tampered with the water supply causing flooding to a nearby farm and generally been a nuisance, he added.
He said the parish council either wanted the county council to plant mature trees, considered to be an effective deterrent, or allow the parish council to plant the trees.
Just after Christmas gipsies were evicted from a triangle of land opposite the verge in question between the A120 and Mary Lane North.
The county council has since planted trees on that piece of land which has stopped gipsies from camping there but led to them using the verge instead.
Effective
A spokesperson from Essex County Council said the council was looking into planting trees on the verge but it considered they were likely to be less effective there.
Colchester North MP Bernard Jenkin has written to the county council supporting the parish council's plan.
This week he met environment minister Tony Baldry to discuss Government proposals to give local authorities greater powers to curb illegal camping.
Motorcycling
Opening cracker
THE flag goes up on the 1993 Eastern Centre Motorcycle Grass Track racing season on Sunday at Brazils Farm, Woodham Ferrers, near Chelmsford.
Organised by the Eastern Sporting Sidecar Association, the first of 12 scheduled meetings this year has attracted a top class entry.
Regulars expected to be in the thick of things are 500cc Champion Robbie Fuller, Shaun Nichols, Neil Scopes and Adrian Mower, all from Woodbridge MCC.
In the 250cc class, former Junior Champion Stephen Green from Sudbury will be making his senior debut.
Heading the line-up in the 350cc class is Steve Carter, of Bury St Edmunds, one of the fastest and most consistent riders in the country.
Practice starts at noon and the heats at 1 pm.
Admission costs £2.50.
THERE were fond farewells and plenty of tears yesterday when Russian exchange students left Harwich for home.
With armfuls of gifts and souvenirs, the 25 youngsters and seven teachers were waved off from Parkeston Quay by their hosts — children, parents and teachers from Harwich School.
Since their arrival on March 20, the visitors have enjoyed an action-packed programme of events including trips to London, Cambridge and Colchester.
But they also tried out a few Western favourites such as a meal at McDonalds, a fish and chip supper, and a performance of Cats .
Svetlana Fetisova, head of English at School 14, Grodno, in the newly-independent state of Beloros, described the visit as ‘unforgettable.
‘We got to know a lot of interesting things about your way of life and your education system — and we found many similar things.’
Pc hurt in attack while on 999 call
A POLICEMAN responding to a 999 call was attacked as he tried to make an arrest.
Pc Peter Harris went to a house in Springfield Park Road just after midnight yesterday after an emergency call about an alleged assault on a young woman and criminal damage.
When he tried to make an arrest he was attacked and suffered cuts to an eyebrow and hand, and some bruising.
More police arrived to assist him and the arrested person was taken to Chelmsford police station.
Pc Harris went to Broomfield Hospital for treatment.
A 27-year-old man is helping police with their inquiries.
Euro-reforms spark paperwork problems
Roving experts help farmers claim cash
Peter Hopper, Agriculture Editor
A ‘FLYING squad’ of experts takes to the road this month and early May to help East Anglian farmers tackle probably their most important office job for years.
Staff based at the regional office of the National Farmers' Union at Ely have arranged a series of ‘surgeries’ at which members can get help and advice with the paperwork resulting from EC agricultural policy reforms.
To claim crop and livestock payments, farmers have to complete special forms giving highly detailed information and, in some cases, extremely accurate maps to support claims.
Minor mistakes or missing the May 15 deadline could end in the loss of payments.
The Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS) forms are now being issued in the region by the Ministry of Agriculture.
‘This means the forms will be dropping through farmers’ letter boxes at one of the busiest times of the year,’said NFU regional director John Biles.
‘The timetable is very tight but farmers will have to meet it if they are to avoid risking loss of their payments.’
The day-time surgeries in Suffolk and Essex are at: Thursday, April 15, Cedars Hotel, Stowmarket; Tuesday, April 27, Severals Hotel, Newmarket; Thursday, April 29, Butterfly Hotel, Colchester; Friday, April 30, South Lodge Hotel, Chelmsford; Monday, May 10, Severals Hotel, Newmarket.
All the sessions will be by appointment and ministry staff will be present to receive and acknowledge completed forms.
East Anglian surveyors Bidwells have taken up the cudgels on behalf of farmers not only at the timescale for completion of claim forms for area and set-aside payments and ewe and beef premiums, but also at the fines which could result from late or incorrect returns.
The company's rural partner, Peter Day, has sent a letter of protest to Agriculture Minister John Gummer.
He says on a 500-acre farm the cost of an innocent error in completing the complicated forms might be a loss of more than £100,000 over a two-year period and assured bankruptcy for the farmer concerned.
Year's losses £3.25bn
IBM job cuts to hit British plant
IBM EUROPE will cut nearly 10,000 jobs and has told four plants in Britain, France, Spain and Sweden to prove profitable in the next 12 months, a spokesman in Paris said yesterday.
The plants, which employ 4,800 people altogether, are located in Havant, Hampshire, Montpellier, France, Valencia, Spain, and Jarfalla, Sweden.
Among the 11 plants across Europe, some 2,600 jobs are to be eliminated this year, said spokesman Joerg Winkelmann.
He said 7,000 other positions in marketing and service are also to be eventually cut from the workforce, which totalled 90,000 at the end of 1992.
US-based International Business Machines Corporation reported a £3.25 billion loss in its operations worldwide last year.
The four European factories must show their efficiency over the next year, especially by selling their products to clients outside of IBM, Winkelmann said.
It was too soon to know exactly what would happen to the factories if their efficiency remained in doubt after the 12 months are up, he said.
Enduring hell of incest memories
Charity has huge call for counselling
ONE WOULD not normally think a national awareness day for something which could affect as many as one in three of the population would be necessary.
But when the subject in question is incest, it is easy to see why a little coaxing to even recognise the scale of the problem is needed.
Today is in fact the second National Incest Awareness Day called by the fledgling charity Independent Care after Incestuous Relationship and Rape (ICAIRR).
Started in 1991 by Christine Latham of Chesterford in Essex, it now has 12 branches throughout the country, but aims to grow even bigger each year.
Christine, 52, decided to tell the world of her own experiences about two years ago, as much for therapeutic reasons as through a desire to reach those with similar horror stories to tell.
‘Initially it was for the sheer hell of it,’ she said.
‘There comes a point when you've just got to face up to the private hell you go through every day.’
The idea was to start a volunteer counselling service for adult victims of incest and abuse, but the response to Christine's appeal was so great that ICAIRR is now struggling to cope with the demands on its services.
Hence the awareness days and the campaign to recruit new members to act as counsellors.
‘It is vitally important we get people who have themselves been through that experience,’ said Christine.
‘It doesn't matter how well-trained someone is.
If they haven't been there they will just not be able to relate to it.’
Christine believes the problem is much bigger than anyone believes and cited a recent study which claimed as many as one in three children suffer some kind of sexual abuse.
Silence
‘All those people are out there struggling to cope, and in many cases have themselves become abusers — they know no better,’ she said.
‘Society in its silence is condoning what is going on.’
For further information on ICAIRR contact the 24-hour helpline on (0799) 30520.
Schools match
Ipswich boys set for debut in Belfast
TWO Ipswich schoolboys will tonight play for England under-15 Schools against Northern Ireland in Belfast.
Midfield player Leon Bell of the Stoke High school gets his second cap in midfield after making his international debut in the win over Wales ten days ago.
Making his first appearance in goal will be Richard Wright of the Thurleston High School.
Both boys are schools associates with Ipswich Town and club Youth Development officer Tony Dable is flying to Belfast to watch the game.
Star wins top award
THE EDITOR of the EADT 's sister paper the Evening Star has won a top newspaper industry award.
Malcolm Pheby has been chosen Regional Newspaper Editor of the Year.
He was named as winner at the annual Newspaper Industry Awards held in London on Tuesday night.
The award was presented by TV newsreader John Humphrys at a ceremony held at the Grosvenor House Hotel in Park Lane.
Afterwards, Mr Pheby said: ‘It's a great tribute to the support and enthusiasm of all our readers who have backed us in all our campaigns.
Their involvement has been invaluable.’
Stuntman plans to leap Wall of China
MOTORCYCLE stunt rider Eddie Kidd is planning to jump the Great Wall of China next month.
The 32-year-old daredevil has spent two years negotiating with the Chinese authorities to make the jump.
His manager Dean Gordon said yesterday: ‘The Chinese liked the idea.
Although there was a lot of paperwork, they have been really wonderful.’
Londoner Eddie, who cleared a record eight double-decker buses with no hands on his machine at Knutsford, Cheshire, last year, will attempt the jump on a Honda CR 500 on May 11 at Simatai, about three hours drive from Peking.
He will need to jump about 120 feet to clear the 20ft high wall, and will also perform stunts in an 85,000-seat stadium watched on TV by an estimated one billion people.
Jungle romp returns
THIS WEEK sees the long-awaited re-release of my favourite Disney film,The Jungle Book .
Considered by many until last year's Beauty and the Beast as Disney's last true classic,The Jungle Book boasts some terrific songs and first-class animation.
The film, the last to be supervised by Walt Disney, is a colourful romp through Rudyard Kipling's Mowgli stories.
The secret of the film's success has to be the vibrant characterisation of Mowgli's jungle friends — creatures like Baloo the Bear, Bagheera the Panther, King Louie of the Apes, Kaa the Snake, Shere Khan the Tiger and Colonel Hathi and his elephant patrol.
Much of their charm comes from the careful way that the characters were conceived.
Veteran Disney animators Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston said of The Jungle Book : ‘Character relationships must be built up slowly through actions, expressions and emotions.
This was particularly evident in the characters of Baloo and Mowgli.
‘Walt Disney came up with the off-beat idea of having popular film and radio star Phil Harris provide the voice for Mowgli's mellow mentor, Baloo.
‘His breezy, free-spirited delivery inspired a new approach to the character and from there all the pieces started to fall into place.’
This new ‘hip’ Baloo also helped animators create identities for the other characters.
‘Soon we started seeing how Baloo could help us with Bagheera.
What could work better with a free spirit than a stuffy, disapproving straight man?
The looser the bear got, the more entertaining the panther became.’
Walt Disney also suggested that Shere Khan, the villain of the piece, was aristocratic and regal rather than the slavering, growling heavy that he had been in development.
‘The voice of George Sanders gave the character the right blend of conceit, disdain and intelligence that we were looking for.’
The Jungle Book , certificate U, is showing at the Ipswich and Colchester Odeons, The Hollywood Cinema, Lowestoft and The Cannon Cinema, Bury St Edmunds.
Baloo the bear takes a shine to his mancub friend Mowgli in The Jungle Book.
Tests may explain shooting tragedy on ‘jinxed’ film set
A POST-MORTEM examination may help explain the shooting tragedy that killed the son of late Kung Fu star Bruce Lee on a U.S. movie set which has suffered a spate of accidents.
Brandon Lee, 28, died on Wednesday 12 hours after he was hit in the stomach by a projectile fired from a blank pistol during filming of The Crow .
Showbusiness trade paper Entertainment Weekly said the filming at the huge movie complex in North Carolina had suffered so many disasters that some crew members feared a jinx.
These included a carpenter suffering serious burns, a publicist being involved in a car accident, a disgruntled sculptor going berserk, a construction worker accidentally driving a screwdriver through his hand and a storm wrecking film sets.
The film is about a murdered rock musician who returns from the dead and, quoting lines from Edgar Allan Poe, seeks revenge.
Police said the martial arts actor's death was an ‘accidental shooting’ but the cause would not be known until after the autopsy.
Brandon Lee was born in Oakland, California, but spent much of his youth in Hong Kong.
He was only eight when Bruce Lee, whose 1973 film Enter the Dragon made him an international star, died mysteriously aged 32.
Fencing
Leon's sabre success
LEON Butterfield, of Colchester and District Fencing Club, took first place at Maidenhead in the Leon Paul Junior Sabre Series Tournament, where there was a large field.
Clubmate Stewart Raven finished second in the competition for Under-17s and in the Under-15 contest, Robin Knight came third and Ipswich School sabreur Alisdair Cullen won the plate.
In the under-13s, Oliver Coultrop was fourth.
Northgate Sports Centre, Ipswich, hosted the Amateur Fencing Association's Eastern Section Ladies Epee competition took place with a field of quality entrants from all across the region.
The event was won by Cathy Davies, of Norfolk FC, with Ipswich's Jos Hofmans Clark second, CADs' Sandra Dawson in third and Sylvia Stratford, from Watford, in fourth.
At the same venue, the Ipswich mixed epee match was won by Hofmans Clark, Dave Benford was second and Robert Lait, from the host club, was third.
Threats to kill alleged
A MAN appeared before Braintree magistrates yesterday accused of making threats to kill and possessing a shotgun without a licence.
David Lewin, 40, of High Street, Earls Colne, is charged with possessing a single-barrelled shotgun without a licence on February 25 this year.
He is also accused of making of threats to kill on three occasions dating from 1990.
The case was adjourned for six weeks to allow committal proceedings.
FA Premier League
Dozzell set for 400th
Dave Allard
JASON Dozzell prepares for his 400th Ipswich Town game at Manchester City tomorrow saying: ‘We all need to step it up ten per cent.’
The 25-year-old former England Under 21 international midfield man hopes that his major appearance landmark can co-incide with a victory to wipe out Premier League relegation fears.
‘That would be the best possible way to mark the day as far as I am concerned.
We have got ourselves into a rut
and have got to get out of it,’ says the Ipswich born and bred schemer.
There can be few players in history who have clocked up 400 league games at the age of 25.
‘I was given such a very early start in the game and looking back now I think of it as an even more remarkable achievement than I did at the time,’ says Dozzell.
February 4, 1984 was the date when then Town boss Bobby Ferguson sent Dozzell on as a substitute for the injured Eric Gates in a home First Division game with Coventry City at Portman Road.
Then a Chantry High School pupil aged 16 years and 56 days, he became the youngest player ever to play in a league match for the club.
Youngest
On top of that, scoring the third in the 3–1 win over the Sky Blues made him the youngest scorer of a First Division goal.
It is a record that still stands, is even in he Guinness Book of Records and is unlikely to be broken.
‘It didn't really sink in what I had done until I returned to school on the Monday morning and saw all the television cameras waiting for me at the gates,’ says Dozzell.
‘Apart from a fractured leg I've been very lucky with injuries and have got on well with the managers who have come to the club.
After establishing myself in the team I have only been dropped once, that was by John Duncan and I deserved it.’
He added: ‘I have many happy memories during the ten years, the best being when we won the Second Division Championship last season of course.’
Dozzell becomes only the eighth player to go over the 400 mark for the club.
The others have been Mick Mills, John Wark, Paul Cooper, George Burley, John Elsworthy, Billy Baxter and Tommy Parker.
He joins that elite group of Town stalwarts at a time when his future is uncertain.
Repeated talks with manager John Lyall still leave a new long term contract unsigned.
Dozzell says: ‘Ipswich is a great club, but I am not rushing into anything.
This contract is the one I consider to be the biggest one of my career as it will take me into my peak.
It could be that I will wait until the summer and weigh things up.’
Ipswich visit Maine Road tomorrow to face a home team eighth in the table but only two points head of 16th placed Town.
400 coming up.
Jason Dozzell points to his landmark on the Portman Road home dressing room blackboard.
Picture: JOHN KERR.
Point-to-point
Bigsun will have come on for High Easter run
Carolyn Tanner
THE EAST Essex point-to-point at Marks Tey tomorrow has attracted 136 entries, and the Maiden race has been divided.
Racing starts at 2.10, and there will be almost one hour's interval between the third and fourth races to allow for the Grand National broadcast.
The last race will therefore be at 6 o'clock.
The Men's Open is a qualifier for the Land Rover final which will be held at Towcester on May 11.
The small but select entry includes Carl's Choice, several times a winner on this track, and Sneakapenny, whose last fence blunder at Garthorpe last weekend may have cost him the Men's Open there.
Shimshek's chance
Quick Reaction finished well clear of Bigsun at High Easter, but the latter will have come on for the race, while Shimshek bypassed Ascot on Wednesday and must have every chance here.
Mountain Crash has been off the course since his Cottenham run, but may reappear in the Ladies' Open, in which recent winners Easy Over, Royal Sting, Shedid and Takeover Bid are among a good entry.
Perhaps the most interesting name, though, is that of the useful hurdler Mr. Gossip, previously trained by Nicky Henderson and now owned by David Wales.
The recent rainfall will be in his favour, as his best form has been on ground with a cut in it.
Bloom leading
Nigel Bloom, who hopes to be fit to resume tomorrow, remains the clear leader in the County Linen Service area men's championship.
He is 35 points clear of Perry Harding-Jones, who has Simon Andrews and Simon Cowell just behind him.
Zoe Turner has an 18 point lead over Lisa Rowe in the ladies' title race, while Neil King and Lucy Hollis head the novice tables.
Easy Over's victory at Garthorpe puts him at the head of the area Young Horse title, and Shedid has increased her lead in the mares' championship.
Both awards are sponsored by ‘Horse and Hound’ and the Point-to-Point Owners' Association.
Mountain Crash, off the course since his run at Cottenham, looks set for a return in the Ladies' Open at Marks Tey tomorrow.
Mother hurt in road crash
A WOMAN and a child had a narrow escape yesterday when their car left the road.
The accident happened at about 9.25am at Marks Tey, near Colchester, in Coggeshall Road — the main A120.
No other vehicle was involved.
A police spokeswoman said the driver, Fiona Bocking, 33, of Donsey Bank, Marks Tey, was treated for minor injuries at Colchester General Hospital but not detained.
The child with her in the car was not hurt.
Money figures fuel hopes slump at end
PROSPECTS the recession is over continued to improve yesterday with new figures pointing to another surge in consumer spending last month.
Economists said the growth of money in the economy, known as M0, grew sharply in March and remains well above the monitoring range set by the Government.
According to unofficial estimates M0 grew about 1 per cent in March, pushing the annual rate to about 5pc.
Chancellor Norman Lamont has set a monitoring range of 0–4pc for M0, which measures notes and coins in circulation plus bank balances at the Bank of England.
Harwich in Trophy final
IN THE final of this year's Essex Senior Trophy, to be staged at Chelmsford City, Harwich & Parkeston hope to repeat the 1990 triumph over Tiptree, against Southend Manor.
In the past, the Shrimpers have also won the Senior Cup, in 1937 when they beat Ilford in a replay, and 1899 when they beat Leytonstone.
Martin Head has guided them to wins over Walthamstow Pennant, Basildon United and Canvey Island.
For their part, Southend Manor dumped out holders Ford United in the semi-finals.
Briggs Sports, body part suppliers to Ford, took full advantage of the arrival of the Professional Cup to win three Essex Senior Cup titles between 1950 and 1952.
To boost their works team, the management headhunted a host of England Amateur internationals, giving them factory floor jobs, before Briggs were taken over by the American car giants and their football ground was developed.
The most conclusive win for any side in the history of the Senior Cup was registered by Ilford in 1929, when they beat Barking 8–0.
At the time, Ilford's small population voted to return Members of Parliament for the constituency of…
Barking.
Besides Colchester, the inaugural winners of the Senior Cup, other sides to have only won the competition once include Woodville, Upton Park, Custom House and Wanstead.
Day for fooling with the bard
Shakespeare's Motley Crew, English Shakespeare Company at Wolsey Studio Theatre, Ipswich, last night.
IF YOU fancy Feste, dig Dogberry or are crazy about the clowning crew who leaven Shakespeare's plays, you should look to catch this delight.
From the moment John Labanowski opens his mouth and starts his one-man show you know you are in the presence of a great comedy spirit.
Labanowski is a born raconteur.
He jokes, jests, clowns and capers and involves victims, er, sorry, volunteers from the audience with immense goodwill.
He packs a tremendous amount of theatre knowledge into the 90-minute parade of anecdotes and excerpts.
He brings the three great Elizabethan clowns to the stage, with a wonderful fund of factual background and a colourful range of styles.
Labanowski is on an eight-week tour, and regrettably last night was the only Ipswich performance — coincidentally, All Fools Day, which was exactly the right spirit.
It was a fun evening that ricocheted between giggle, belly laugh and roar.
But illuminating too, and anyone seeing their next Shakespearian clown in action will have a deeper appreciation.C.C.
Colleges hold breakaway celebrations
Expected strike by lecturers is averted
COLLEGES in Essex yesterday celebrated their new independence from county council control.
And the party was all the better for not being spoiled by a strike by lecturers which had been threatened earlier in the week.
At Chelmsford College of Further Education an exhibition entitled From the Past to the Present was the highlight of events staged throughout the day for 120 invited guests.
Principal speaker at the launch ceremony was Prof Alan Smithers from Manchester University, one of the country's leading workforce experts.
Colchester Institute, the largest college of further education in the county, staged a ceremonial planting of an oak tree and held a buffet reception.
Similar ceremonies throughout the county went off without a hitch because a strike threatened by the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education was called off.
Nationally NATFHE had voted by two to one in favour of a strike to protest at new contracts being introduced without consultation.
The contracts, according to NATFHE, would introduce unlimited teaching hours, a massive cut in holidays and required weekend working among other measures.
The national College Employer's Forum issued the contracts without recommending consultation with unions.
However, it appears that in Essex at least, individual college principals have agreed to negotiate their introduction and avert strikes.
Lecturer at the Colchester Institute David Hubbins said: ‘That is only common sense.
We are all happy a strike was not necessary on this our first day of independence.’
Bid to improve care
BETTER value for money health care and a shift from hospitals to care in the community are among the objectives outlined by the new health authority for north Essex on its first day.
Yesterday saw the first meeting of North Essex Health Authority, which replaces the consortium made up of the old north east, mid and west Essex district health authorities.
In addition to the national objectives such as Health of the Nation, Patient's Charter and Caring for People, NEHA has identified specific targets of its own for the coming year.
Having just completed long negotiations with the various provider units in the area, the authority is now keen to ensure contracts are honoured and it gets the best value healthcare available.
Efficiency and the cutting back of unnecessary and lengthy hospital procedures are therefore going to be targeted.
McDonough decides to sit out friendly
Carl Marston
COLCHESTER player-manager Roy McDonough will watch from the sidelines as his team take on Norwegian tourists Nessegutten at Layer Road this evening in a friendly fixture (kick-off 7.45 pm).
McDonough has just been handed his third suspension of the season following his sending off offence at Rochdale last weekend, and he is prepared to take a back seat for much of the rest of this season — if not all of it.
The U's leader has been suspended for four matches, with effect from the Scarborough trip on April 13, while left-back Martin Grainger has also been suspended for a couple of matches following his latest booking at Spotland.
Grainger will miss the Scarborough and Gillingham clashes, while McDonough will be unavailable for these and the games at Crewe and at home to Scunthorpe.
‘It's probably just as well for all concerned at the club that I should hang my boots up for a while.
It is very difficult being a player-manager in the firing line up front, especially in a physical game,’ explained McDonough last night.
The U's boss was not happy with the physical tactics employed by Rochdale in last Saturday's 5–2 defeat at Spotland.
He felt that he was being earmarked for special attention from the Dale's big central defenders in a rough and tumble encounter that saw McDonough being given his marching orders in the 66th minute for an alleged use of the elbow.
The linesman saw the incident and McDonough has been sent off twice and suspended three times this season.
In fact, Colchester will want to forget about this season from a disciplinary point of view.
More than 50 bookings were clocked up before Christmas and, in addition to Grainger and McDonough, defenders Tony English and Peter Cawley have also been suspended.
Champions
Youth team players Nathan Munson, Paul Flowers and Andy Partner are included in the squad to face Nessegutten, last year's Norwegian Division Three champions.
Munson will definitely start with McDonough keen to watch the young keeper's progress.
First team custodian Fred Barber is only on loan from Peterborough for a month, so there is a good chance that Munson will make his Division Three debut before the end of this campaign.
Central defenders Flowers and Partner could also see some action this evening.
Flowers has already made two full first team appearances for the U's — against Cardiff and at Carlisle — while Partner also made his debut in the Football League as a late substitute against Cardiff.
Colchester: Munson, Grainger, Roberts, Kinsella, Cawley, Betts, English, Cook, Abrahams, McGavin, Smith, Ball, Bennett, Hopkins, Flowers, Partner.
Newmarket report
Brittain for Kempton double
NEEDLE Gun and Boloardo have the credentials and have been working well enough this Spring to land a Kempton double today for the Clive Brittain-Michael Roberts combination (writes our Newmarket correspondent ).
Brittain is always up with the lark and it was a nice piece of work that Needle Gun did under Roberts on the Side Hill woodchip gallops early on Tuesday that makes me select him for the Laburnum Stakes.
The three-year-old showed promise as a juvenile with his best effort probably being his length and a half second to Petardia in the Group Three Champagne Stakes at Doncaster.
On his final outing there was also a lot to like about his fourth to desert Secret and Geisway in the Royal Lodge Stakes at Ascot.
Satisfaction
That effort marked him as a classic possible and his work on the gallops leaves no doubt in my mind that he has trained on and can dispose of Azhar on his way to better things.
Stable companion Boloardo faces a tougher task in the Listed Magnolia Stakes but he has also come through the winter to the complete satisfaction of his trainer.
After a Goodwood win last May Brittain considered it worth letting him take his chance in the Budweiser Irish Derby in which he finished eighth to St Jovite and Dr Devious.
He was not right after the race and did not appear again all season but I like the way he has been stretching out and he could win here before making his mark in middle distance Group company.
Robert Williams has made a bright start to the season and can continue the good work by winning the Jonnie Mullings Memorial Handicap for his new main owner Lord Matthews.
His runner is Secret Society, whose final effort last season was a highly creditable fourth in the £70,000 added Krug Trophy at the Ascot British Festival of racing meeting.
In a large field he did not have the clearest of runs as he challenged as a result of which he finished fast but too late having to settle for fourth place to the Ebor winner Quick Ransom.
That form bears the closest inspection and as the six-year-old has settled into his new surroundings at the Marriott Stables I give him the edge over Newton Point, whose cause will not have been helped by the rain.
On Y Va has been a model of consistency and ridden by the ebullient Newmarket based light-weight Jimmy Quinn can complete a Williams double off a favourable mark in the Syringa Handicap.
Watch for Mizyan
At Liverpool it should pay to give Jack Banks' Mizyan another chance in the Oddbins handicap Hurdle as he was probably an unlucky loser last time out.
That was at Newcastle, where he faded to be fourth to Mazmoor but it turned out that he had hit a hurdle or two and cut his legs badly.
Fortunately he is now fully recovered and will take all the beating as he is better than form figures indicate.
If Di Haine's Smooth Escort makes the cut for the Grand National at Aintree tomorrow he could be worth a sporting each-way bet as his trainer has always maintained he was made for the marathon.
Certainly he showed plenty of stamina and jumped well to win the National Hunt Handicap Chase at Cheltenham a couple of seasons back.
Some of that sparkle was shown in his win early this year and as he comes to the race fresh.
Even though he is a long way out of the handicap he has the ability to spring a shock.
At Lingfield blinkers fitted for the first time could enable Bob Jones' Lookingforarainbow to win the Daily Star Challenge Final.
Forget his last form figures because the shades have woken him up and he could be a long-priced winner despite the claims of Gold Blade and Ballyranter.
Pat Eddery can partner Ron Boss' speedy youngster Don Pope in the Peter Adamson Maiden Stakes at Beverley tomorrow, where the same combination should strike with Daring Past in the Dave Taviner Handicap.
‘I need a fresh look to make a new start’
Spring is here and our make-over feature is back, offering readers the chance to try out a glamorous new look.
Put yourself in the hands of our experts, who will transform your hair and make-up and let you try on the latest fashions.
If you feel you deserve a bit of pampering or if you know someone who does please write to: Make-Over Features, EADT, 30 Lower Brook Street, Ipswich IP4 1AN, enclosing a recent photo and your clothes size.
Norma Jones wrote to us from her home in Braintree.
‘Last year I had an accident and broke my neck.
Thank God I'm fully recovered, but I feel I need a fresh look to make a new start.’
Norma, 55, was unable to lie down for three months while her neck healed after a fall downstairs at a friend's house.
‘I got so depressed,’ she says.
‘I couldn't have my hair done, and it got so thin and straggly at the back.’
Hair stylist Michael Trower, of Michael Richards salons, first treated Norma's fine, limp hair with a protein conditioner to add body.
He then cut her longish locks into a classic, chin-length bob.
‘Norma was afraid of having anything too drastic done to her hair,’ he said.
‘She didn't want it coloured or layered, but I felt her original style was too long and dragged her down.’
Michael swept Norma's hair back off her face, to emphasise her striking eyes and fine bone structure.
The final stage was to roll her hair with Tech Ni Pli velcro rollers to give it extra fullness and shape.
Tanya Frost, of Lily's Beauty Parlour, decided Norma's fine, clear skin did not need a heavy foundation.
She used Polished Performance Ivory Beige as a base and Sunny Orange blusher, both by Estee Lauder, to emphasise Norma's high cheekbones.
To make the most of Norma's dark brown eyes, she applied shades from Estee Lauder's Warm Effects shadow collection, creating a subtle blend of browns and golds.
Dark brown Rimmel eyeliner pencil and black mascara added extra emphasis.
Warm Geranium lipstick by Kanebo and a loose matt powder completed the look.
As for clothes, fashion consultant Barbara Thomas decided Norma had the poise and presence to carry off a sophisticated designer label.
At Ipswich's Clouds boutique she chose a soft, elegant three-piece outfit in shades of apricot by Italian designer Crimson.
The floaty, translucent, viscose jacket costs £195; the gathered skirt, with its lycra waistband which can be rolled up to form a strapless dress, is £169, and the long overtop costs £105.
We thought Norma looked stunning.
‘I've had a wonderful day,’ she said.
‘I feel dressed to sail off on a luxury cruise.’
With her sophisticated new image, she would certainly cut a dash on board the QE2 .
Hair: Michael Richards Salons, Penshurst Road,(Ipswich 723814) and St Nicholas Street,(Ips 257927).
Make-up: Lily's Beauty Parlour (Ips 274284).
Clothes: Chosen by Barbara Thomas of Karisma Modelling Agency (Ips 289115), from Clouds, Tacket Street,(0473 215309).
Pat Small
Pictures by Paul Nixon
Norma Jones, left, wanted a change of image to cheer her up after recovering from a nasty injury.
Our experts emphasised Norma's dark eyes with make-up and a new hairstyle, above, completing the look with an elegant outfit, below left
Bomb hoaxer was mentally ill
A CONVICTED bomb hoaxer suffering from paranoid schizophrenia sent suspicious-looking parcels to a leading historian and solicitor.
Lady Antonia Fraser and solicitor D L Morgan of the Law Society were sent packages which Post Office staff thought could have been bombs.
The items were intercepted in Haverhill by a sorting office worker.
John Pryse-Jones, of Fore Street, Ipswich, had previously been convicted of sending a fake letter bomb to the Queen at Sandringham in Norfolk.
One of the latest packages carried the message: ‘Light the blue touchpaper and retire immediately,’ Ipswich Crown Court heard.
However, an Army bomb disposal expert discovered both packages were harmless.
They contained tape cassettes and scribbled notes, and a polling card in the name of Pryse-Jones, said Tim Brown, prosecuting.
The package sent to Lady Fraser gave an address at Sandringham in West Norfolk, while the other item was to be sent to a Chelmsford address, said Mr Brown.
Detectives investigating the case went to the Pryse-Jones' former home in Haverhill.
As soon as they spoke he said: ‘They weren't bombs.’
He admitted sending both packages.
‘It is absolutely crystal clear that he is the man who did these things,’ said Mr Brown.
The court heard that Pryse-Jones, 61, has previous convictions for bomb hoaxing.
On one occasion he placed a briefcase in the foyer of Kings Lynn Crown Court.
The case contained a message about a guard dog.
A jury decided Pryse-Jones was unfit to stand trial at court because of his mental illness.
Consultant psychiatrists, in three reports, said the man was incapable of understanding court procedure and should not be tried.
A separate jury yesterday convicted the man of ‘sending an article’.
The original charge was of sending a fake bomb with intent, but the charge was amended because of the man's mental state.
Pryse-Jones did not call evidence.
A number of psychiatric reports have been carried out but Judge John Turner adjourned the court until April 30 for further details before deciding what action to take.
Parents vote for school to go it alone
Second ballot shows a U-turn
A COMPREHENSIVE school in Essex is poised to opt out of local authority control after parents overturned their own decision.
The result of a ballot announced yesterday showed 78 per cent of parents who voted were in favour of Helena Romanes school in Great Dunmow opting out.
In all, 68pc of the school's parents took part in the ballot, with 22pc voting against grant maintained status.
However, in an earlier ballot, held in December 1991, 54pc of parents who took part voted against the school opting out, with 46pc in favour.
The first ballot was dogged by controversy, when parents opposed to the school opting out claimed a propaganda war had been waged to promote the move.
Last night, however, school deputy head John Ayre said: ‘We are delighted with the result.
Clearly with this second vote a lot of people have changed their minds.
As far as we believe it is the best thing for the school.’
He said the school, which has 1,150 pupils drawn from a large rural catchment area, would benefit from more resources and have total control of its budget.
Mr Ayre said a national report earlier in the week showed grant maintained schools were faring better than their counterparts which had not yet opted out.
‘This means we will have total control over our site,’ he said.
Opponents to the opt-out now have a chance to lodge objections to the Education Secretary.
However, Mr Ayre said it was ‘more than likely’ the school's application for grant maintained status would be approved.
He said it was probable the school would be given grant maintained status by January next year.
Pupils' paper art show is large as life
AN EXHIBITION of paper art work is being staged by pupils from four north Essex primary schools.
Local artist Hazel Albarn has been working with ten and 11-year-olds and their teachers, helping them design and create large sculptures relating to their other work topics.
Work on display includes life-sized Elizabethan figures, a mural and an exhibit featuring the projection of slides on to specially made screens.
Involved in the project are pupils from Fordham, Chappel, Wormingford and Great Tey.
The two-day exhibition, being held at Great Tey Primary School, opened yesterday and continues today from 10am to 3pm.
Parents, children, friends and the public are all welcome.
Pupils at the exhibition at Great Tey Primary School
Sense of duty led policeman to his death, says friend
A POLICEMAN beaten and stabbed to death when he was called to a disturbance died at the hands of a brutal generation with no concept of right or wrong, a close friend said at his funeral yesterday.
Deputy head teacher and policeman's son Keith Cotgrave told 700 people mourning the murder of Sergeant Bill Forth that he died from a ‘deep sense of duty’.
Speaking at the service in St Nicholas's Church, Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, he said Sgt Forth, 34, was killed on a night when he could have been enjoying the festivities at a friend's wedding.
But, said Mr Cotgrave, he refused all suggestions that he should remain ‘knowing very well that his shift was short-staffed.
Had he been less conscientious then he might be still alive today’.
He said the father of two ‘died from a deep sense of duty, regardless of a generation, some of whom do not recognise or accept authority’.
Mr Cotgrave spoke of the increased demands placed on police officers.
They faced ‘a fundamentally more brutal, wicked, perverse and godless generation who appear to have no concept of right or wrong in the traditional sense’.
Sgt Forth died of his injuries after being called to a disturbance at a house in Gateshead, 12 days ago.
Police colleagues formed a guard of honour as six other officers carried the coffin, topped by a large wreath of white carnations, into the crowded church.
Behind, walked Sgt Forth's widow Gill, and their son Christopher, ten.
Daughter Rebecca, seven, was a few paces behind with a relative.
A man of 25 and a 15-year-old boy have been remanded in custody, charged with murdering Sgt Forth.
Gill Forth, top right, widow of stabbed policeman Sgt Bill Forth, follows her husband's coffin out of St. Nicholas's Church
SOAP opera star Julie Peasgood took time off filming yesterday to launch a sponsored pottery day at a centre for disabled adults on the Essex/Suffolk border.
Some 20 members of Ferriers Barn, Bures, took part in the event, which is part of a major drive to raise £1,000 towards the centre's annual running costs.
Julie, who will be familiar to viewers of Brookside ,September Song ,Luv ,Taggart and A Word in Your Era , moved a couple of miles outside Bures last summer after living in Monks Eleigh for five years.
Actress Julie Peasgood at Ferriers Barn, Bures
Speedway
Guentchev signing hits Witches
Elvin King
THE Ipswich Witches speedway team are currently tracking under strength sides — and they have been told it is Ipswich Town FC who are partly to blame.
The Foxhall Stadium-based club have been hit by injuries to Shane Parker and Mitch Shirra, and the refusal of the Department of Employment to issue a work permit for foreigners from outside the European Community.
Consequently they have been short of riders for their opening British League Division One matches, and for last night's rained off home meeting with Wolverhampton they were due to use David Norris, who has been sold to Eastbourne for £15,000, and use the rider replacement facility for Shirra.
Feeling the effects
Top riders Tony Rickardsson and Chris Louis are already feeling the effects of riding six or seven races every match — and Ipswich cannot see an answer in sight.
Witches chairman Dave Pavitt said last night: ‘The Speedway Control Board, who liaise with the Speedway Riders’ Association over work permits, were happy for us to have a permit for Polish rider Miroslaw Kowalik.
‘They recommended it to the Department of Employment but were told that things had been tightened up because of a Bulgarian footballer who was signed by Ipswich Town and then found to have less international caps than at first thought.
‘It is a shame that we are being penalised for something which has been done by the football club, but there does not seem to be anything we can do about it.
We have been told that it would be a waste of time applying for a permit for any other foreign rider.
‘We would have been interested in signing Czech rider Gaspar Forgac who impressed us on Press Day.’
Ipswich Town signed Bulgarian striker Bontcho Guentchev from Portuguese club Sporting Lisbon and it was first believed that he had several full caps.
It later transpired that all but one of these were for the Bulgarian A team.
Poole were hoping to sign Rene Aas, the Latvian who finished runner up to Chris Louis in the 1990 World Under-21 final and Edinburgh were keen to sign Finn Vesa Ylinen, but both applications have been also refused.
The Witches management are also unhappy with the SRA who are not backing requests for riders new to the British League.
‘They say that they have members out of work,’ says Pavitt.
‘But we have scoured the country and can't find one.
They have all been signed up.’
Ipswich hope to have Shirra make his debut in the double header with King's Lynn on Good Friday but by then Norris will have moved, and he is due to make his first appearance for the Eagles tomorrow at King's Lynn.
Rider replacement
Ipswich have applied to the management committee of the British Speedway Promoters' Association to use the rider replacement facility for Parker until the Australian is fit — or until a signing is made.
‘We are still looking for riders,’ adds Pavitt who called last night's match off at 6pm following heavy rain.
‘The track was in good shape until 5.50pm after much hard work by George Osborne and his crew.
But it stood no chance with the heavy rain that continued to gone 7pm.’
Ipswich's next meeting is on Good Friday and Zdenek Tesar has taken the opportunity of the break to return to Czechoslovakia to see his wife and daughter and do some cross country skiing near his mountain home.
Keith Rodwell, Ipswich Witches' commercial manager, shuts up shop after last night's match with Wolverhampton was rained off.
Picture: JOHN KERR.
Pirate radio fans expected to flood 29th birthday party
HUNDREDS of supporters of the Free Radio Association are holding a party to celebrate the 29th birthday of the pop pirate ship Radio Caroline .
The pirate radio station was anchored off Walton on the Naze for several years until it was prevented from broadcasting by the Government.
The party is to be held in Dover between 12 noon and 11 pm on Saturday April 10 where the Ross Revenge — which houses the pirate radio station — is berthed.
Free Radio supporters will be able to look over the vessel and meet DJs.
Already free radio enthusiasts from all over East Anglia are planning a grand reunion.
The station has broadcast a couple of times legally over the past year.
During the 1960s when three pop pirate ships were moored off Walton on the Naze hardly a week went by without the town's lifeboat being called out to youngsters attempting to reach their idols in makeshift rafts, and rowing boats.
Pleasure craft also operated sea trips from Clacton and Walton to give a close-up view.
For further details of the Radio Caroline birthday party write to the Chief Organiser, Albert Hood, 5, Larkins Road, Croydon, Nr Royston, Herts, SG8 OED, or telephone 0223 208191.
Last year representatives of the Radio Caroline organisation visited the Walton lifeboathouse and presented the crew with a plaque in appreciation of services rendered.
The lifeboat crew were presented with bravery awards for launching in violent seas when the ship went aground at Frinton in the 1960s.
The original pirate radio ship Mi Amigo eventually drifted helplessly on to the Long Sand Head where she sank.
Crew and DJs were rescued.
Scargill seeks support for pits stoppage
THOUSANDS of miners will be on strike today as part of their continuing campaign against pit closures.
Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of Mineworkers, has called on other trade unionists to take action today to defend the coal industry, which is being run down despite the Government's rescue package reprieving 12 of the original 31 pits earmarked for closure.
Collieries in Nottinghamshire manned by members of the moderate Union of Democratic Mineworkers will work normally, but face closure later this month.
The breakaway union is balloting its members for a one-day token strike in protest over the amended pit closure plans.
The union's national executive is calling for a ‘yes’ vote and is likely to ask Nottinghamshire businesses to close for the day when a strike is called.
Officials of the union say the proposed stoppage is to mark the mood of ‘total disbelief and dejection’ over what is happening to the coal industry.
NUM members are expected to stage demonstrations and rallies in coalfields throughout the country, urging the public to keep supporting their campaign.
Mr Scargill met British Coal officials in London yesterday over the disputed consultation procedures for closing the ten pits where production has already stopped.
He said that he could not accept the procedures and it is possible the dispute will be referred to a court.
Hotel crisis
Queens Moat group holds talks on £1.2bn debt
HOTELS group Queens Moat Houses was yesterday locked in crisis meetings following Wednesday's decision to freeze dealing in its shares.
The debt-laden group, Britain's third biggest hotel chain, said the situation was being discussed at a series of internal meetings.
The group has estimated debts of £1.2 billion.
It asked the Stock Exchange to freeze dealings in its shares at 47.5p, valuing the company which is based at Romford, Essex, at £439 million, after it failed to pay a preference share dividend.
It said it had requested the move ‘pending clarification of the company's financial position’.
‘The company is, for the time being, deferring payment of the dividend payable today on the company's 7.5 per cent convertible cumulative redeemable preference shares,’ it added.
Queens Moat Houses, chaired by former estate agent John Bairstow, expanded rapidly in the UK and on the continent, funded by seven calls on shareholders for extra cash in less than ten years.
The group was to report full-year results next week.
City observers suspect some of the group's banks, who are led by National Westminster and Barclays, may have refused to sign cheques to allow the payment of the dividend which is believed to cost about £7 million.
The banks are believed to be pressing for yet another rights issue of new shares at the company.
Institutional investors who include Schroders, Prudential and Phillips & Drew Fund Management are believed to be opposed to a rights issue.
Germany disappoints
Quiet day on stock market
THERE was little news to entice investors into the market.
On a quiet day, with few shares changing hands, the German central bank's anticipated change in interest rates was expected to make an impression on the FTSE.
But the bank announced rates will remain unchanged and the 100-index hardly moved.
Burmah Castrol, the lubricants group, was one impressive performer as dealers cheered its healthy profits rise.
Costain, the building and construction group, dipped 6p after revealing massive losses last year.
Fashion retailer Next was on everybody's buy list as it boosted taxable profits threefold.
The re-listing of Thames TV shares, suspended on Tuesday due to possible takeover talks, proved to be unhappy.
A statement that full-year results due on April 21 will show a hefty provision for property write-downs sent the shares into a spin.
A strong profits leap by LWT Holdings and a forecast that 1993 will be another good year sent the stock 23p ahead.
Hanson, the industrial holding company, announced it had sold almost half its stake in packaging-to-adhesives group Wassall.
Hanson firmed 2p.
Two large hotel groups continued to be unsettled from yesterday's suspension of Queens Moat Houses.
Forte lost 8p while Ladbroke was 5p off.
Weather spoils RAF party
David Weisbloom
EAST Anglians hoping to catch a glimpse of the biggest fly-past for 40 years were left disappointed yesterday as rain and cloud conspired stopped the 149-aircraft spectacular from getting off the ground.
People who had travelled to find a vantage point near RAF Marham, where the air force was enjoying its 75th anniversary celebrations, were forced to make their way home again.
The 10,000 guests inside the base, including the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Queen Mother, had suspected the worst for several hours as the gloomy weather showed little sign of lifting.
Aircraft embracing decades of RAF endeavour had been expected to take to the skies — from Spitfires and Hurricanes to Tornados and Jaguars.
‘It was an easy decision to say it wasn't safe,’ said fly-past organiser, Wing Commander, Dave Roome, explaining the change of plan.
It was sad, nevertheless, that six months of planning had not been shown off to better effect.
The weather did nothing, however, to mar the RAF's pride in its own history.
Its guest-list read like a who's who of the great and the good.
The Royal visitors, who also included Princess Margaret and the Duke of Gloucester, were flanked by Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, Lord Trenchard, Marshal of the Royal Air Force, Sir Peter Harding, and Air Chief Marshal, Sir Michael Graydon.
Before the event, there were complaints that Second World War flying aces, such as‘Johnnie’ Johnson, a former Air V-M, and John Cruickshank, a former Flight Lieutenant, had not been invited.
There was consternation that they could have been overlooked on a day commemorating such a vital part of British history.
Despite the confusion, there were opportunities for the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh to meet founder members of the RAF and veterans.
This followed a parade, at which the Queen presented a new colour and addressed RAF personnel and their families.
Dressed in a purple coat and hat, the Queen told her audience the RAF had adapted well to changing circumstances.
She praised the gallantry, determination and sense of duty of the servicemen and women who had given their lives for their country.
Left, the Queen inspects the parade before the presentation of the new colour at RAF Marham.
Below left, an embarrassing moment when the new colour fell from the piled drums during the ceremony.
Pictures by KEITH MINDHAM
Washing time after volcano adventure
CLEARING up after a volcano may sound like a nightmare, but for one man it was a dream come true.
Dom Turner, aged 21, has just returned from an 11-week assignment in southern Chile with adventure charity Operation Raleigh.
He arrived back at his parents' home in Bures St Mary near Sudbury, Suffolk, yesterday where his first task was to wash off the grime of Patagonia, much of it volcanic dust.
Large areas of Patagonia were devastated by the eruption of Volcano Hudson in 1990, and Dom's work included reconstruction projects to help rehabilitate isolated communities.
A layer of pumice up to four metres deep covered the countryside.
Another task was to build a jetty and his brief also included archaeological work aiding a Cambridge University expert in locating and dating ancient Indian settlements.
This also meant searching for remains on offshore islands, reached by kayak through seas teeming with porpoises, albatrosses, sea lions and jackass penguins.
Dom, who was sponsored by his employers, W. H. Smith, but also had to raise £3,000 himself, said: ‘The locals are amazing and so hospitable.
Wherever you go, you're their friend.
It's an attitude we don't get too often in England.’
Dom Turner
Dublin reaffirms claim
IRISH Prime Minister Albert Reynolds came under Unionist fire last night after he spoke of the importance of the Republic's constitution to nationalists north of the border.
He effectively closed the door on immediate hopes of Government ministers in London and Belfast for an end to Dublin's territorial claim over Northern Ireland.
Although he did not specifically mention Articles Two and Three — which contain the claim — he said the constitution meant a great deal to nationalists in Northern Ireland, and it could not change in advance of an overall settlement.
After the remarks, Official Unionist Party leader James Molyneaux claimed the Irish government had the same ultimate objectives as the IRA, while Peter Robinson, deputy leader of the Rev Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party, said Mr Reynolds's speech was a justification for the ‘absurd and illegal’ territorial claim.
Speaking during the special one-day debate on Northern Ireland in the Dail in Dublin, Mr Reynolds strongly denied that terrorists found safe haven in the Irish Republic.
‘The Irish government have always condemned paramilitary violence and employed all means at their disposal to combat the evils of terrorism,’ he said.
Mr Reynolds also detailed the measures taken by the Irish government against terrorism, including per capita expenditure on security three times that of Britain.
He went on: ‘Our long-term policy is to make possible the eventual achievement of a united Ireland by agreement and consent…‘
However, in a reference to the territorial claim in the Irish Constitution to Northern Ireland, Mr Reynolds said: ‘The present Irish constitutional position means a great deal to the nationalist community in Northern Ireland.
‘They see it as affirmation that they belong to the Irish nation.
They also see it as giving the Irish government a status to negotiate with the British government on their behalf.
‘Any attempt in a political vacuum to walk away from constitutional republicanism would be a very dangerous exercise, and would most certainly provide a new recruiting platform for terrorism.’
Reacting, Mr Molyneaux said: ‘The Irish government has the same ultimate objectives as the IRA, a united, republican Ireland.
It is simply that the Irish government want to achieve it by peaceful means, and the IRA otherwise.’
Shadow Northern Ireland Secretary Kevin McNamara said he understood Unionist MPs' remarks in the context of the forthcoming local government elections, but he praised the Irish premier for making a ‘sensible’ speech.
‘Mr Reynolds’ speech explained the Republic's position towards nationalists in the north, but he (Mr Reynolds) also recognised the position of Unionists and their legitimate concerns and traditions,’Mr McNamara said.
Crucial talks today
Strike vote looms in Rolls jobs row
ROLLS-Royce unions are threatening a ballot on industrial action unless the aerospace giant gives a guarantee of no compulsory redundancies at crucial talks today.
The warning came after a meeting in London yesterday of senior conveners.
Rolls-Royce announced last month 5,000 job losses over the next two years, split between white-collar and production workers.
John Weakley, of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, said workers at a ‘number of sites’ had warned they will take industrial action ballots if the compulsory redundancies threat was not removed.
Officials from the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions, which represents seven Rolls-Royce unions, will urge the company at today's meeting in London that the job losses should be voluntary.
Unions yesterday accused Rolls-Royce of ‘blackmailing’ workers into leaving by threatening they could lose enhanced redundancy payments worth thousands of pounds.
Alex Ferry, confederation general secretary, said workers were saying managers were telling them compulsory redundancies were essential and warning of a ‘last in, first out’ selection procedure.
He added: ‘Managers are saying if trade unions at local level are not prepared to sign agreements, management will not pay the Rolls-Royce additional severance payments and would fall back on state money.’
White collar workers at Bristol, Rolls-Royce's second biggest plant, have already held a ballot and rejected industrial action.
The threat of compulsory redundancies at car giant Ford has been averted, it was announced yesterday.
The company had insisted the last 88 job cuts in a 2,200 redundancy programme had to be found before yesterday's deadline.
Management-union talks deadlocked over the possibility of compulsory redundancies, leading to a protest strike by white collar workers on the day the Mondeo model was launched last week.
A joint company and union statement said all the necessary redundancies had been achieved by voluntary means but further minor reductions among the 8,500 Ford staff would be needed before December.
Cyclists will be in region
WOMEN cyclists from countries including Russia, will be in the region over Easter for a four-day stage race on the Suffolk-Essex border.
The 200-mile event is the largest so far organised by UK Women's Cycle Racing Association.
Based at Stoke College, Stoke-by-Clare, the racing ends on Easter Monday with prizes presented by the Mayor of St Edmundsbury.
Windsurfing
Pearce wins Alton Water series
THE Alton Water Windsurfing Race Series finals were sponsored by Anglian Water PLC and Colchester retailers Ski-Surf 2000.
The excellent race series organised by Peggy Mexome was nailbiting to the end.
The long beat and fast reaching course was probably the best set by race officer Roy Withell.
The south-east 15 knots wind opened up the fleet, but the gusty beat was a great leveller and provided some close finishes in the final four races.
Clyde Waite won the day's racing, but after 39 races the new overall series champion is the Bic-sponsored Clacton racer, Simon Pearce.
Results
1 S Pearce (Bic/Titman Tip Tools); 2 A Mexome (F2/Soveriegn Hols); 3 C Waite (Fanatic/Dolphin); 4 S Lindsell (Mistral); 5 S Miller (Fanatic); 6 M Smalling (Fanatic/Hummingbird Express); 7 P Goodchild (Mistral/Ski-Surf 2000); 8 B Fogg (F2); 9 N Ainsworth (F2); 10 L Booth (Fanatic).
Ladies: 1 D Bush; 2 D Kennedy; 3 H Kennedy.
Youths: 1 C Waite; 2 S Lindsell; 3 J Lucas.
The fleet lines up for the start of one of the races at Alton Water.
Sightscreen adverts
CRICKET traditionalists face another shock to the system this season with the introduction of sightscreen advertising at three famous Test grounds.
Old Trafford, Headingley and The Oval have been chosen for a pilot study by the Test and County Cricket Board.
Traditonal sightscreens — which help batsmen pick up the flight of the ball — will be replaced by ‘Tri-vision’ boards with revolving displays.
The blank face will serve the same purpose as old style screens.
But between overs and when the bowling is at the other end adverts can be shown.
Trust acquires its most sinister building
David Green
Only the crumbling shells of the buildings can now be seen.
The triggers for Britain's nuclear bombs were tested within their thick concrete walls and they housed the first experiments into radar.The buildings, on a remote spit of land on the Suffolk coast, may not be the oldest but they are certainly among the most historic and sinister in the ownership of the National Trust.They are on Orford Ness, a desolate wildlife haven, which has become the Trust's latest acquisition at a cost of £3.5 million.Yesterday, in pouring rain and silence broken only by the eerie shriek of gulls, the buildings were shown to journalists for what is thought to be the first time since they were erected.Strands of barbed wire and a Ministry of Defence ‘keep out’ notice are now the only remaining evidence of the tight security, overseen by armed guards, which surrounded one of Britain's most secret research establishments.
Orford Ness, where a staff of 2,000 once worked, has been involved in national defence research and development since the First World War when aircraft fitted with armaments were first tested.Research into bomb ballistics was carried out from 1929 and among the researchers was Barnes Wallis who became famous for inventing the bouncing bombs used against the Mohne and Eder dams during the Second World War.
A tower where Robert Watson-Watt carried out the early experiments with radar can still be seen, as can the crumbling remains of the curious Pergola-style buildings which were used to test nuclear triggers following the Second World War.
The biggest building is a rectangular, windowless hulk erected for a short-lived Anglo-American attempt to develop an over-the-horizon radar system called Cobra Mist.
The building, a powerful monument to the Cold War between East and West, is now owned by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and used as a BBC World Service relay station, staffed by just four employees.It is not within the 1,560 acre property purchased by the National Trust.Merlin Waterson, the Trust's regional director, who accompanied yesterday's visit by ferry from Orford Quay, said a study was under way into which of the buildings should be preserved.
‘We will keep the ones which are really historic but some of the rest are in such poor condition they will have to be demolished.’
Making buildings safe and clearing debris will have to be completed before general access is granted to the public, possibly by 1995.
Warden, Chris Martin, has already been appointed for summer duty when the ‘island’ is visited by organised parties of bird watchers and other naturalists.Orford Ness has been purchased with the help of £2.3 million from the Countryside Commission and contributions from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, and Suffolk County and Suffolk Coastal councils.
WHEN Fattorini & Sons, of Birmingham, were commissioned to fashion a trophy for a new competition to be run by the Essex Football Association in 1882 they really went to town.
The fantastic end product, the Senior Cup, stands three feet high, weighs a ton and is insured for something like £17,000.
It is a prize to adorn any trophy cabinet.
After Tuesday's final at Braintree it will be in the hands of either Wivenhoe Town or Chelmsford City.
Varied winners in a century of competition
Danny Wheeler
THE first Essex Senior Cup final, in 1884, saw Colchester beat Braintree 3–1 but the garrison town has never set eyes on Signor Fattorini's masterpiece since.
Many believe the U's modern day attitude, copied by the county's other Football League clubs, devalues the competition.
The rules stipulate clubs must field the strongest team available, but the FA turns a blind eye as the top teams clearly do not do so.
It was fitting, in an ironic sort of way, that the 100th final, in 1991, was contested by two League sides for the first time but neither Southend nor Leyton Orient fielded their best team.
However, if they did, each year, the future of the competition would not be nearly so bright and varied as the past.
Old Foresters, a team of former Public Schoolboys, won three years running from 1885 to 87 and Ilford repeated the act between 1988 and 1990 when the manager had no more than a large village to select his players from.
Army sides featured heavily in the early 1900s.
King's Royal Rifles won in 1909 while the Somerset Light Infantry and Lancaster Regiment also reached finals.
A scorecard is the only record of the 1910 Leytonstone versus South Weald showpiece.
In those days, when simplicity was bliss, Jas T Clark, the county secretary, also acted as referee.
In 1949, with the advent of wages, the ‘gentlemen’ of the FA drew up a new competition, the Professional Cup, for competition between the ‘players’of Southend, Leyton Orient, Colchester United, Chelmsford City and occasionally West Ham United, Romford and Clacton Town entered.
It lasted 26 years before John Bays, who is still competition secretary, allowed the professionals back into the Senior Cup, and the bowl which they had competed for became the prize for a new competition, the Essex Senior Trophy.
Nowadays, only clubs in the Football League, the Vauxhall Conference and the Beazer Homes and Diadora Leagues can enter the Senior Cup.
Presently, 23 such sides are eligible.
No team has really dominated since 1976 but now-defunct clubs Leytonstone & Ilford, Walthamstow Avenue and Dagenham all managed to get their names on the trophy before losing their identity.
The by-product of the takeovers and mergers that upset thousands of supporters in the eighties was Redbridge Forest, last year's winners.
Now they too have gone, but the Essex Senior Cup remains as a fitting reward for success well into its second century of competition.
AT Cressing Road last year, Chelmsford City lost 3–0 to a Redbridge Forest side coached by their current manager Joe O'Sullivan.
They last won the trophy in 1989 at Dagenham, when they held on for 13 memorable minutes to beat Grays 3–2 and in 1986 the Clarets beat Billericay 3–0 in a two-legged final.
Wivenhoe Town have never won the competition and are looking for a first success to complete a meteoric rise to the summit of the Essex non-league football hierarchy.
A 2–1 1988 Senior Trophy win over Rainham gave Broad Lane its only piece of county silverware to date.
Four key figures who will have varied feelings during Tuesday night's Essex Senior Cup final.
Above are Steve Restarick (left) and Wayne Hannigan, both ex-Wivenhoe who should be in action for Chelmsford while Christian McClean (below, left) has moved in the opposite direction.
When the Clarets lost last year's final Joe O'Sullivan (below, right) was the victorious manager.
He will be hoping for another success, this time as Chelmsford boss.
Man's finger cut to bone
Knife attack victim bent blade in two
A KNIFE attack victim fought off his assailant and bent the 10in blade in two with his bare hands, a court was told yesterday.
David Steventon-Rogers, 25, left Royston Smith, 43, covered in blood after repeatedly slashing him and slicing through his ear, Bury St Edmunds Crown Court heard.
One of Mr Smith's fingers was cut to the bone in the attack, which was prompted by a row over a noisy motorcycle, it was heard.
A jury took 90 minutes to find Steventon-Rogers, of Calkewood Lane, Rickinghall, guilty of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
He had denied the offence.
Assistant recorder Paul Downes remanded him in custody for two weeks for a report to be prepared.
He said: ‘People who attack people with knives…usually go to prison.
It is highly likely this will happen to you.’
Steventon-Rogers had admitted two separate offences of handling stolen goods and one of shop-lifting.
He also admitted breaching two suspended jail sentences.
Jonathan Seeley, prosecuting, said the incident happened on July 28 last year when Steventon-Rogers and Mr Smith were neighbours in Linnet Road, Bury.
Mr Seeley said Mr Smith had called the police after a friend of Steventon-Rogers had revved a motorcycle outside his home.
Later Steventon-Rogers confronted Mr Smith in his garage, he said.
Mr Smith told the jury: ‘He was holding a meat knife.
It was 9in to 10in long and it had a jagged edge like a saw blade.’
Steventon-Rogers then held the knife to Mr Smith's throat before slashing him.
Mr Smith said: ‘There were cuts on my chest, then he caught my ear and sliced right through it.’
Mr Smith managed to push his attacker out of the shed.
He said: ‘I grabbed the knife and bent it double so it couldn't do any more damage.’
In the witness box, Steventon-Rogers claimed he had gone to the shed unarmed and grabbed the knife from a work bench when Mr Smith became angry and attacked him.
He claimed Mr Smith was cut accidentally during the struggle.
Fry joins Southend
BARRY Fry left Barnet last night to become boss of First Division Southend after the sudden and mutual departure earlier yesterday of Colin Murphy, who had been in the job for less than a year.
Small firms offered space at exhibition
SMALL companies are being given the chance to share space at an exhibition to sell goods and services.
Tendring District Council's economic development unit will be manning a stand at the Colchester Enterprise Show in July and are keen for small businesses, which would not normally exhibit on their own, to join them.
Anyone interested in the manufacturing or service sectors should contact the unit on (0255) 256155.
New clue in hunt for killer
DETECTIVES hunting the killer of businesswoman Jean Bradley were last night sifting through new information after a reconstruction of her final minutes.
A member of the public bearing an ‘uncanny’ resemblance to the victim volunteered to play her role, retracing her movements from an office in London's West End to Acton Town Underground station in west London last Thursday.
Miss Bradley's boyfriend of 21 years was history teacher Nick Osborne, 42, from Felsted School, near Great Dunmow, Essex.
The 47-year-old businesswoman, of Crowthorne, Berkshire, a former air hostess who flew with the Queen, was stabbed repeatedly with an eight-inch carving or butcher's knife while loading shopping into her car near the station.
Roads nightmare as commuters hit by rail strike
Duncan Brodie
COMMUTERS from Essex to London have been urged to keep their cool as they as face up to today's nightmare journey to work caused by the national one-day rail strike.
Police and motoring organisations warned that drivers heading for the capital are certain to face lengthy delays as thousands of extra people take to the roads.
An AA Roadwatch spokesman warned of ‘bedlam’ on all main routes into London and advised travellers to help themselves by allowing extra time for journeys and sharing cars if possible.
Scotland Yard urged people not to drive into London at all unless their journey is necessary, and warned those who do arrive that normal parking restrictions will be strictly enforced.
Motorists were urged to remain calm.
‘A little courtesy, tolerance and patience will help to ease the strife,’ a spokesman said.
In Essex, a spokesman for the Eastern National bus company said its normal services between major towns were expected to be adequate to meet any additional demand due to the strike.
The company's two daily commuter coach services from Braintree and Chelmsford are expected to be busy, but managers will wait to see what demand there is before deciding whether to run additional vehicles.
At Stansted Airport, Network SouthEast's Stansted Express service to Liverpool Street will be replaced by a coach service operated by Speedlink Airport Services.
Coaches will run every half hour to and from Walthamstow Central on the London Underground's Victoria line from 6am until 11pm, leaving Stansted Airport's coach station from stand 28.
Airport passengers who would normally use north-bound trains between Stansted and Cambridge, operated by BR's Regional Railways division, are advised to use the alternative coach service run by National Express.
Commuters with BR season tickets will be entitled to a refund for today's journeys, and parents of school pupils who normally travel by rail are being urged to claim as well.
An Essex County Council spokesman said the authority was unable to provide alternative travel for pupils affected by the strike, and parents should make their own arrangements if possible.
Although the council pays for pupils' season tickets, parents are entitled to the refund to help cover the costs of alternative transport.
Even if their child stays away from school parents are still urged to seek a refund as the council believes children should have the same rights as other rail users.
The strike is likely to have knock-on effects causing some delays for travellers tomorrow, with rolling stock likely to be left out of position as a result of today's stoppage.
A spokesman for Network SouthEast said last night that every effort was being made before the strike began to get as many trains as possible in position for a Saturday morning start.
Table tennis
Hapless Hayden arrives late
THE onset of spring sprung a surprise for the number one seed at the J Reading and Sons Braintree Table Tennis League individual championship preliminaries.
Top seed Peter Hayden forget to put his clock forward and turned up too late for his first round match, in an unhappy day for the seeds.
Only Simon Woods of the league's five top players has qualified for the semi-finals at Witham tomorrow (7.15).
Andrew Wadling was forced to pull out, and Terry Dowsett and Steve Kerns replaced him in the number three seed position, but neither survived the first round.
Former champion Dowsett went out to Steve Edmonds, while Kerns found his doubles partner Pip French too good.
Neither of the conquerors however survived beyond the next round, Edmonds lost to Paul Davison and French to Dean Andrews.
But they too were to go no further, with Chris Jacob and John Andrews reaching their first Braintree League semi-finals.
Jacob will play Woods who shone throughout the day with wins over Peter Hunt, Peter Beatham and fellow fifth seed Nick Mills.
In events decided at the weekend, Kerns was a totally different player in the handicap singles.
He turned on a star performance to come past Peter Morgan, Andy Skues, Richard Whiteside and in the final James Gronland.
Kerns also won the consolation singles, for those knocked out in the first round of the men's singles, with a final win over Neil Butcher.
Paul and Sarah Davison retained the junior doubles title they have won for the last two years.
In a three-pair round robin tournament they finished ahead of Simon Jacob and Anthony Chapman.
Paul Davison, winner of the second division singles last season and the third division in 1990, added the first division title with a win in the final over Fred Button.
Peter Woodgate won the third division singles by beating Robin Swan, while Simon Woods and Chris Jacob warmed up for their men's singles meeting by reaching the final of the hard bat singles, Woods emerging the victor.
Stream of celebrities for jailed Tyson
AFTER a year in prison, former heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson is studying the Moslem faith, skipping prison food in favour of canned tuna, and receiving visitors ranging from Whitney Houston to Spike Lee.
He has three times had problems with his guards, putting back his release at least 45 days to May 1995, after being sentenced to six years in 1991 for raping 19-year-old beauty pageant contestant Desiree Washington.
While avoiding the other imprisoned rapists, murderers, robbers and drug dealers housed in the Indiana Youth Centre, Tyson, 26, has met a stream of celebrity visitors.
Cycling
Honours headed by Racing Team
RACING Team East dominated the Essex and Suffolk Combine's first 25 mile time trial of the season on a cold morning at Witham.
Their riders, spearheaded by new signing Richard Van Looy, formerly with Leo CC, littered the top ten and last year's prolific winners Eddie Page and Barry MacDonald reduced to the minor placings.
They did have the consolation of a team medal, however, and only Sudbury's Steve Jones prevented RTE taking a first five clean sweep.
Veteran ninth
His team-mate Mark Jay finished seventh, Leo Cole, of the Chelmer was eighth, with East Anglian Vet Vic Stark in ninth and Tim Bright, of Braintree, completing the ten.
Chelmer's comeback rider Bill Bradfield was pleased with a time of 1.4.24, while pedalling policeman Mark Kliskey crossed the line 25 seconds behind him.
Colleague Graham Partner was second in the Handicap stakes.
On Sunday, the start time for Chelmer's Colin Davies Memorial 25 on the Rodings course is 10am.
Afterwards, members will be joining the throng at Blackmore for the Essex Classic veteran cycle run.
Doors open at 11 am and the ride is at 2 pm.
Results
1 R Van Looy (Racing Team East) 57.40; 2 A Lawrence (RTE) 58.39; 3 E Page (RTE) 58.42; 4 B McDonald (RTE) 58.55; 5 S Jones (Sudbury CC) 59.18; 6 R Wood (RTE) 59.33; 7 M Jay (Sudbury CC) 1.00.38; 8 L Cole (Chelmer CC) 1.02.24; 9 V Stark (East Anglian Veterans) 1.02.35; 10 T Bright (VC Braintree) 1.03.08.
Safety dispute
MP backs garage in survival fight
JOHN GUMMER, MP, has promised to support the owner of a garage whose future is threatened by new safety guidelines.
Donald Wilson's business, Ward and Son, of High Street, Aldeburgh, faces closure because trading standards officials say that his petrol pumps, which swing out over the pavement, are a hazard.
However, after a meeting at the House of Commons, Mr Wilson said: ‘Mr Gummer was extremely supportive.
He said he was going to fight this because it was in direct conflict to Government policy.
‘The Government is trying to promote small businesses and to cut out some of the bureaucracy and red tape which is strangling us.’
Mr Wilson was accompanied by the director of the Petrol Retailers Association, Bruce Petter.
‘This is a test case for thousands of other garages which are facing a whole range of new checks.
The question is where does this all stop?’ said Mr Petter.
‘I feel that the trading standards officers have exceeded their authority by requiring Mr Wilson to conform with standards laid down for new stations and not established premises.’
When the garage's annual petrol licence expired at the end of January, officials refused to renew it.
Mr Wilson appealed and can continue to trade until the case is heard by a Government inspector.
The hearing will take place in Ipswich on April 6, but a final decision is not expected until at least a month later.
More than 1,000 residents of Aldeburgh have expressed support for Mr Wilson.
Officials claim there is an accident risk at the site because the pumps swing out over the pavement and delivery tankers stick out into the road.
However, Mr Wilson said there had been no accidents at the garage since it opened in 1925.
He has hired consultants to help him conduct his appeal.
John Gummer — expressed support.
General situation: An Atlantic depression is approaching western parts of the United Kingdom.
Any overnight mist or fog will clear quickly to leave most of the country with sunny intervals and scattered showers.
The showers will become heavier and more frequent, especially in the north and east, before dying out in the afternoon.
Thicker cloud will spread across western areas, bringing rain into Cornwall and western parts of Northern Ireland by late afternoon.
This rain will spread across Wales, south-west Scotland and the rest of Northern Ireland and south-west England by midnight.
East Anglia: Sunny intervals and showers, possibly heavy at times, dry later.
Wind west to southwest moderate.
Max 10c (50f).
Outlook for tomorrow and Sunday: A wet weekend for much of England and Wales.
Brighter more showery weather for Northern Ireland and Scotland on Sunday.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind mainly west moderate.
Showers.
Visibility good.
Sea moderate.
Cowboy builders' work killed pair
AN elderly couple suffered a ‘sad and lingering’ death after cowboy builders capped their chimney, preventing fumes from their coal-fired oven escaping, an inquest heard yesterday.
William and Gladys Wilkins had paid £23,000 for the work — which experts said should only have cost £2,700.
Police found the couple on the kitchen floor of their home in Swanmore, near Fareham, Hants, three days after they lit their oven.
Retired postman Mr Wilkins, 73, was already dead and his 83-year-old wife died in hospital two weeks later.
Detective Sergeant Josiah Betteridge told the inquest at Winchester: ‘The smell was over-powering.
The kitchen was in chaos.
Chairs were upturned.
‘The kitchen drawer had been pulled out and the coal bucket had been overturned.
They were lying on the kitchen floor.
Mr Wilkins was dead and his wife was barely alive.’
Detective Inspector Rex Carpenter told the inquest that the builders had knocked on Mr and Mrs Wilkins' door and persuaded them to have work done on their home.
After the couple's death police discovered bank statements which showed they paid the builders £23,000 for it.
Mr Carpenter said: ‘An independent chartered surveyor examined the house and concluded the value of the work was just £2,700.’
He added: ‘It was evident that repair work to the chimney had been carried out.
Someone capped the chimney which served the flue from their Aga oven.
‘The Aga had no ventilation.
There is no evidence to suggest that the chimney was capped deliberately to cause carbon monoxide poisoning.
It was probably poor workmanship or sheer ignorance.’
The inquest heard a team of builders, thought to be travellers, had been preying on elderly people throughout Hampshire.
Mr Carpenter said: ‘All the victims were elderly and infirm.
A lot of them were in no fit state to know if work needed to be done on their homes or how much it would cost them.’
He said 19 people have been committed to stand trial for various offences.
Returning open verdicts on the couple, who died last March, mid-Hants coroner Grahame Short said: ‘Mr and Mrs Wilkins suffered a sad and lingering death.’
He said he could not return a verdict of unlawful killing because there was no evidence that the builders intended to kill the couple.
He added: ‘I suspect that there was a single workman who, by his negligence, caused the death of this couple.
‘No one should employ unqualified people to carry out work on their homes.
The old in particular are vulnerable to pressure from casual labourers.
‘Many people have lost lots of money in this way but Mr and Mrs Wilkins paid for their decision with their lives.’
Policeman claims attack by clerk after road row
ESSEX police dog handler Pc Colin Elsegood was punched in the face during a confrontation with another motorist, a jury heard yesterday.
Clerk Gerard Wing, 20, of Toppesfield Road, Wickford, denies causing actual bodily to Pc Elsegood.
Miss Stephanie Farrimond, prosecuting at Chelmsford Crown Court, said on September 19 last year Pc Elsegood was travelling along the A130 between Rettendon and Chelmsford.
He was off-duty at the time and was on his way to Sandon to collect his police dog.
He had his two-year-old son strapped in the back seat of his car.
Pc Elsegood overtook some cars on a stretch of dual carriageway and became aware of a white VW car following very close behind him.
The VW, driven by Wing, overtook and he saw the defendant's brother, a passenger in the car, gesticulating at him.
He thought they wanted to talk to him so he stopped and got out.
The defendant's brother started shouting at Pc.
Elsegood and he tried to calm him down.
It was alleged Wing then punched Pc Elsegood, causing a swollen lip and broken tooth.
Pc Elsegood told Wing he was an off-duty policeman and he was arresting him for assault.
A struggle ensued and both fell to the ground.
The incident ended when other police officers arrived on the scene.
Wing later told police he acted in self-defence after Pc Elsegood struck out at him.
The case continues.
Footballer is fined £600 for speeding
IPSWICH Town footballer Eddie Youds, who was caught driving at almost 100 miles an hour, claimed he was in a rush to see his pregnant girlfriend, a court heard yesterday.
Youds, 22, of Lavenham Road, Ipswich, admitted speeding on the A45 at Kentford, near Newmarket, on November 8 last year.
Newmarket Magistrates told Youds he came close to being disqualified for a speeding offence which warranted a six unit fine.
Youds was ordered to pay £100 per unit and £30 costs and asked for eight weeks to pay the £630 sum.
He was also given six penalty points and had his licence endorsed.
Two further charges of driving without a valid licence and without insurance were withdrawn after the court was told Youds had produced the relevant documents.
John Fenn, prosecuting, said Youds was spotted by police as he drove his G-registration Vauxhall Cavalier along the westbound carriageway of the A45.
‘Using a pilot device, police recorded his speed as 99.04 miles per hour and when he was stopped he replied: ‘I'm in a hurry, my girlfriend is pregnant’,’ said Mr Fenn.
Jonathan Ripman, mitigating, said Youds, who had no previous motoring convictions, had been rushing home to see his family in Liverpool.
‘He is many hundreds of miles away from his family and likes to go home and see his mother and father, who are elderly,’ said Mr Ripman.
Youds signed for Ipswich for £250,000 in November 1991 from Everton, where he started his career as a 14-year-old.