

Dock empty for much of case
IN THE words of defence counsel James Hunt QC, the trial of Allitt at Nottingham Crown Court has been ‘unprecedented and without equal’, not least due to the defendant's absence for much of the three-month hearing.
When arrested, Allitt weighed 13 stone, but in the following months she became anorexic, refusing to eat, and her weight plunged to around seven stone.
Three weeks after her trial began on February 15 this year, she collapsed, and from then the dock remained empty.
The jury only heard her voice once when the prosecution played a tape-recorded interview with police, in which she protested her innocence.
The trial continued without her after the judge, Mr Justice Latham, was satisfied that was her wish and she was capable of instructing her lawyers.
Doctors at Rampton top security hospital said moving her could have a detrimental effect on her health.
But after Mr Hunt assured them Allitt did not want to give evidence, the trial continued.
Mr Hunt went to Rampton each week to brief his client and receive further instructions.
Because Allitt opted not to go into the witness box, the defence case lasted just two-and-a-half days against the prosecution case of two-and-a-half months, at a likely cost of about £1.5 million.
Cricket
Smash-hit Boden halts Braintree run
MALDON and Sudbury are the last two undefeated sides in Division One of the Anglo Two Counties Championship only a month into the season.
Maldon won twice at the weekend to make it five wins out of five, while Sudbury have won four out of four so far.
Maldon's David Boden smashed 78 in 36 balls and then took four wickets as Braintree's unbeaten start came to a shuddering halt on Saturday.
Keith Merrell made 65 against his former teammates and Chris Punchard weighed in with four wickets as Maldon won by 86 runs.
Australian all-rounder Paul Pratt added 72 to his earlier four wicket haul as Maldon saw off Colchester and East Essex by six wickets on Sunday.
Mick Brown, the Maldon captain, said: ‘Our out cricket is really good; we are bowling and fielding very well, which is where we are winning games at the moment.’
Sudbury, who entertain Maldon this Saturday, disposed of Witham, with –Indian Rajeev Seth again taking centre stage.
Seth scored 60 not out and then returned figures of 17–5–42–5 as Witham were reduced to 97 for six, setting up Sudbury for a 60-run success.
Won twice
Halstead won twice at home against Suffolk sides — whipping Stowmarket by 173 runs and Old Ipswichians by 56 runs.
John Clinch (83) and Paul Harris (82) put on 170 for the first wicket against Stowmarket, who were skittled out for only 85 thanks to a burst of 4–1–7–5 by Richard Pybus.
Clinch and Harris shared an opening stand of 69 the following day against the Old Boys, before John Steward (15.3–4–21–5) and Jon Zagni (16–5–31–5) shot their hosts out for 127.
Pybus (9.3–4–9–3) and Andy Sapey (9–1–26–3) then turned the tables as the OIs were skittled for 71.
Broken cheekbone
Stowmarket recovered from their thrashing to record a 64-run win at home to Witham.
Michael Peck made 87 but then had his cheekbone broken in two places after being struck while fielding at silly point.
Damian Miller, who is just 17, dismissed five of Witham's top six batsmen on his way to matchwinning figures of 11–0–55–5.
Clacton won at Coggeshall by five wickets, but the champions then tumbled to a nine wicket reverse at home to Braintree the following day — their fourth loss of the season and one more than the whole of last summer!
After containing the champions to 169 for eight, Alvin Greenidge scoring his second half century of the weekend, David Denny (68 not out) and Paul Bushnell (71 not out) steered the visitors home with an unbroken second wicket stand worth 126.
Slow left armer Richard Edgeley's 16–3–49–6 saw Bury St. Edmunds to an 81-run triumph at home to Wivenhoe.
Hedley Wright (85) and Ian Graham (44) had earlier helped Bury to reach 201 for six.
St. Margaret's said goodbye to their 100 per cent record in Division Two, losing by 67 runs at Harwich and Dovercourt, despite opener Ian Booth carrying his bat.
The previous day the Saints had sent Copdock packing by eight wickets after Steve Leggett's spell of 12–5–17–5.
Dave Rusby starred with bat and ball for Felixstowe, but ended on the losing side both days.
Rusby returned 15.1–4–39–5 as Felixstowe lost to Mistley by one wicket with five balls unused.
He then made 93 at Hadleigh, for whom Ian Piddington (90 not out) and Olly Magnus (64 not out) added 137 for the second wicket without being separated.
In Division Three, Trevor Moye scored 114 for Brantham as they beat Worlington by 21 runs.
Both Braintree and Clacton lost their unbeaten records in Division A of the Second XI competition and Copdock's John Garnham cracked a career best 119 (four sixes and 13 fours) against St. Margaret's in Division B. 
Take that!
Hedley Wright slams another boundary off the Wivenhoe attack on his way to 85 out of a Bury St Edmunds total of 201 for six.
Bury won by 81 runs.
The wicket-keeper is Adrian Brown.
Picture by KEITH MINDHAM
Athletics
Clarke equals UK junior pole record
SIXTEEN-YEAR-OLD Ipswich pole vaulter Rhian Clarke was one of the stars of the Suffolk County AA track and field championships at Ipswich's Northgate Stadium on Sunday.
Clarke equalled the United Kingdom junior women's record of 2.95 metres, and must now wait anxiously to see if she is selected for the junior international match against Hungary later this month.
International javelin thrower Nigel Bevan had to withdraw from the championships at the last moment with a foot injury sustained in training at the end of last week.
It was a disappointment for his many fans not to see him in action.
Only four new records were set up, but they were quite spectacular when they came.
Mason's best
Long jumper Anthony Mason, of Ipswich Harriers, cleared seven metres for the first time in his career to smash the junior men's record by 34 centimetres, and 16-year-old Keith Davis shaved a tenth of a second off the under-17 400 metres record with a time of 52.0 seconds.
Ipswich Harriers' young sprint star, Laura Seston, 14, had an amazing afternoon, clocking 12.4 seconds to win the under-15 100 metres, and then running a 25.8 seconds 200 metres.
Seston's 100 metres time knocked six-tenths of a second off the previous record, while her 200 metres time was 1.2 seconds faster than the old mark.
There was some impressive middle distance running, with West Suffolk's Daniel Madams gaining a narrow victory over club mate John Cross in the senior men's 1500 metres, and Gyamfi Kyereme (Lowestoft) gaining an exciting win in the under-17 800 metres.
Winning double
It was the third year in succession that Jamie McLoughlin (Ipswich Harriers and St. Joseph's College) had recorded a winning double in the 400 metres and 800 metres, his win in the latter being a close one over club-mate Chris Bailey.
Andy Mason, of Newcastle A.C., who is ranked in the UK decathlon list, looked in good form as he won the senior men's 400 metres and 110 metres hurdles, and Tim Conners (Ipswich Harriers) was another runner to shine when he won the junior men's 1500 metres.
Entries for some events, particularly in the senior age-groups, were rather disappointing, but the weather stayed fine, and many of the younger athletes turned in memorable performances.
Easy winner: Malcolm Fenton, who lives at Sproughton, won the senior men's hammer event at Northgate Stadium representing Essex Beagles.
Picture by OWEN HINES
Personal best: Anthony Mason of Ipswich Harriers cleared seven metres in the high jump for the first time in his career
THE new governor of the Bank of England will take a five-year pay freeze as a ‘personal statement’ of his commitment to controlling inflation, it was announced yesterday.
Eddie George, known in the City as ‘Steady Eddie’, who succeeds Robin Leigh-Pemberton in July, will receive more than £200,000 a year.
The exact figure remains undisclosed, but will be the same as Mr Leigh-Pemberton's pay over the past year.
The bank pointed out that it was ‘somewhat less’ than the £230,000 reported in yesterday's The Independent newspaper.
Full details of Mr George's salary are expected to be included in the bank's annual report published on May 26.
The last published pay figure for a governor of the Bank of England was £198,546 to Mr Leigh-Pemberton for the year ending February 28, 1992.
The current governor ran into a storm when it was revealed he had received a 17% pay increase in 1991.
It later emerged that he had waived about £34,000 of his £198,000 salary in response to the row.
The governor's pay is set by the bank's remuneration committee of external directors.
A salary of between £200,000 and £230,000 would put Mr George at the top of the Civil Service pay tree and on a par with senior City bankers.
Mr George has a reputation as a hawk on inflation and his move yesterday will reinforce his credentials.
Sitting pretty: Eddie George, who is to take a five-year pay freeze as new governor of the Bank of England
Golf
Curry the one to beat in first East Region merit tournament
THE East Region's top professional golfers will gather at Braintree golf club for the first Order of Merit event of the year this week.
The players will be keen to get their season on the East Region circuit off to a good start in the 36 hole Senate Charity Open which starts tomorrow, and the man they will all be out to beat is European Tour regular Paul Curry.
Curry, who is based at Quietwaters, has decided to by-pass the Italian Open to lend his support to the Senate Open which is sponsored by The Electrical Industries.
A big asset for Curry will be home advantage — he played his golf as a junior at the Braintree course.
Joint victory
The player in top form approaching the event is Richard Wheeler from Gosfield Lake.
He recently won the qualifier for the Glenmuir PGA National Club Professionals Championship with a three under par 66 at Mid Herts Golf Club.
He followed up with joint victory in the Panshanger Classic qualifier.
A four under par round left him equal with John Blackmore from Felixstowe Golf Centre.
Last year's East Region Order of Merit winner Murray White tees-up with Robert Joyce and Craig Laurence at 10.36.
Laurence, who plays Challenge Tour golf, aims to qualify for the European Tour at the end of this season.
Another Challenge Tour player with potential of making the big time is Kevin Golding.
The Stowmarket player partners Charlie Cox (West Essex) and Curry at 10.00.
Other players include East Anglian Open Champion Lee Fickling from Enfield and ex-Walker Cup player Peter McEvoy.
The top 40 professionals will play in a pro-am on Friday.
Tee-off times
7.45 Paul White (Orsett); Andrew Boulter (Braintree & District GC); David Stevenson (Hampstead).
7.54 Michael Oliver (Pipps Hill); Robert Taylor (Gosfield Lake); Gary Fitzjohn (Aldenham).
8.03 Richard Wheeler (Gosfield Lake); Clive Tucker (Warren); Mark Wall (Crews Hill).
8.12 Brian White (Thorndon Park); Robert Green (Whitehill Golf Centre); Jimmy Burns (Mardike Valley).
8.21 Stuart Robertson (Unattached); Patrick Winston (West Herts) Richard Layton (Woodford).
8.30 Mark Allen (Thetford); Colin Jenkins (Cretingham); Stuart Mills (Wyboston Lakes).
8.39 Darren Glasby (Gog Magog); Gary Harvey (Thorpe Hall); Andrew Duffin (Clacton).
8.48 David Beal (Old Fold Manor); Richard Willis (Berkhamsted); Nigel Lawrence (SNB Golf).
8.57 Mark Carey (Stevenage); Graham Burroughs (Boyce Hill); Peter Cherry (Cheshunt Park).
9.06 Matthew Deal (Bush Hill Park); Gary McCarthy (Thorpe Hall); Jason Groat (Brentwood Park).
9.15 Lee Barrington (Theydon Bois); Mike Lovegrove (Aldenham); Mark Proto (South Herts).
9.24 Paul Wilby (Fynn Valley), Ross Robertson (Aylesbury Vale), Gordon Goldie (Chingford).
9.33 Eddie Rawlings (Chadwell Springs); Mitch Kierstenson (Elstree); Glenn Crane (Fynn Valley).
9.42 Steve Cipa (Stockbrook Manor); Kevin Lunt (Great Hadham); Alan Walker (Warren Park).
9.51 Ian Dudman (Boyce Hill); Julian Holmes (Knebworth); Peter Lockley (Uxbridge Municipal).
10.00 Kevin Golding (Stowmarket); Paul Curry (Quietwaters); Charlie Cox (West Essex).
10.09 Lee Jones (Manor of Groves); Bobby Mitchell (Knebworth); John Reynolds (Crews Hill).
10.18 Iain Roberts (Muswell Hill); Phil Smith (Uxbridge Municipal); Mark Stokes (Brentwood).
10.27 Philip Davis (Saffron Walden); Lee Cox (SNB Golf); Jonathan Grant (Abbotsley).
10.36 Murray White (Aldenham); Craig Laurence (Warren Golf Club); Robert Joyce (Theydon Bois).
10.45 Sean Carter (Golf Club Rapair Centre); James Wright (West Herts); Alan Hall (Hartsbourne).
10.54 Harry Flatman (Romford); Paul Barham (Warley Park); Peter Lane (Watford).
11.03 Tony Sheaff (Bush Hill Park); Richard May (Welwyn Garden City); Michael Few (Wensum Valley).
11.12 Robert Curtis (Barnham Broom); Carl Williams (Unattached); David Young (Rookery Park).
11.21 David Armor (Kingsway Golf Centre); Sean Whiffin (Enfield); Nick Brown (Mid Herts).
11.30 Ken Wickham (Airlinks); Paul Foster (Old Fold Manor); Paul Magennis (Bushey Hall).
11.39 Sean Clark (Fornham Park); Richard Herbert (Abridge); Bill Mylward (Airlinks).
11.48 Peter McEvoy (Bushey Hall); Carl Green (Bawburgh); Michael Herbert (Abridge).
11.57 Paul Simpson (Harpenden Common; Colin Williams (West Essex); Paul Sullivan (Wanstead).
12.06 Frank Kiddie (Orton Meadows); David March (Braintree); Lee Fickling (Enfield).
12.15 Paul Coppola (Enfield); Peter Garlick (Enfield); Steve Standing (Hanbury Manor).
12.24 Andy Cotton (Bury Golf Range); Andrew Collison (Kings Lynn); Neil Wichelow (Harefield Place).
12.33 Gary Bothwell (Moor Park); Martin Brewer (South Beds); Anthony Dobson (Waldringfield Heath).
12.42 David Holmes (Wyke Green); Stephen Thomas (Ipswich); Nick Webb (Tilsworth).
12.51 Richard Whyte (Bungay & Waveney); Paul Ashwell (Wyboston Lakes); Michael Corlass (Panshanger).
ROBIN Mann jets off to Italy today to prepare for the Lancia Martini Italian Open near Bologna which begins on Thursday.
The Fynn Valley professional has enjoyed little success so far this year — he has made the cut in just one tournament — and his latest downfall was in the Spanish Open where rounds of 76 and 73 kept him out of the prize money.
Results round-up
Help for food industry
Service aims to solve problems
AN IPSWICH insurance firm has launched a new problem-solving service written especially for the food and drink industry.
Willis Corroon in Friars Street, Ipswich, has launched the new service for the UK's top 100 food and drink companies.
The risk management service will cover particular problems such as legislation, contamination, production disruption, quality standards and health and safety.
Jeff Hammond, of Willis Corroon, said the service would provide the means of dealing with these potential threats to businesses enabling them to get on with their main task — providing quality products to an ever more aware consumer market.
Problems will be dealt with either individually or as part of an overall package with wording which can be adapted or expanded to suit a policyholder's special needs.
Clerk let down as firm goes into receivership
Bakery cash crisis hits bride's big day
Wedding cake hopes crumble
A BRIDE-to-be has been left without a wedding cake because the bakery she ordered it from went into receivership.
Michele Dodd, of Orwell Heights, Edgeworth Road, Ipswich, paid out £84.75 in advance so the cake the would be ready for her wedding in July.
When she went to check on the order she found the shop, A Baker, The Walk, Ipswich, had closed down.
‘I went to Chantry's Bakery in Tower Ramparts because I knew the two were connected.
The shop assistant there told me they would be able to take on the order for nothing.
‘But when I went back the next day, I was told the two shops were no longer connected.
They said they could do the same cake but at a cost of £103,’ she said.
On calling the receiver, Michele, a clerical assistant and word processor operator, was told she was unlikely to see any of her money, because large creditors were already in line.
‘I was unemployed for two years and I have just got a nice job.
I am upset because the big man gets his money first.
He's not going to have his day spoilt.
I just don't want anyone else to get their fingers burnt over this,’ she said.
A spokeswoman at Chantry's Ipswich Ltd said the group was nothing to do with A Baker and was unconnected with Chantry's of Hadleigh.
Commenting on whether a cake had been promised to Miss Dodd, she said: ‘We were prepared to give it to her as a donation but she cancelled the order.’
Receivers Booth and White said Chantry's Ipswich Ltd was unconnected with the Chantry's chain, based in Great Cornard, which has gone into receivership.
No crumbs of comfort: Michele Dodd and fiance Antony Broadhurst in front of the closed shop
Doctors are wary of night-call guidelines
PATIENTS are to be told to stop calling doctors out unnecessarily at night under plans being prepared by the Department of Health.
Patients who persist in calling out doctors at night for minor problems could face penalties or risk being dropped from their doctor's list.
Suffolk BMA representative David Meldrum welcomed any leaflets explaining when night calls are appropriate but warned against written material or a penalty system that would discourage patients from calling their doctor.
‘There has been a continuing increase in the number of night calls.
GPs will often find themselves in a situation where they are working one day, they are on duty all night, and then have to work the next day as well.
This is putting a great strain on doctors,’ he said.
If the public wanted a system where general practitioners were on call all night then proper resources would have to be made available.
One system would be where the GP could contract out night duties to other agencies.
Colchester GP Nick Dixon said a continuing increase in daytime work was making the responsibility of being on duty at night more of a strain.
He described the Health Department's plan to put the onus on the patient as a red herring, and said alternative arrangements had to be found.
‘The workload of doctors by day has reached the level where they are pushed to the limits at night.
It is not conducive to good patient care,’ he said.
However, he said patients should also remember they are calling a private home and the doctor will often be asleep when the call is made.
He also welcomed the publication of a leaflet that would heighten patient awareness but warned that the Department of Health should not discourage callers with genuine need.
Fancied ride: Michael Hills rides Beneficial, Crusader's nap at Goodwood today
Still working: Reinstated Tottenham chief executive Terry Venables at his White Hart Lane desk yesterday
Players win places in the England team
WHITE, to play, surmounted his problems with ease in this position, Hurdle-Burke, US 1974.
Solution (moderate) below.
Six youngsters from Essex and Suffolk were among the 64 hopefuls vying for a place in the England Under-11 team in Christchurch at the weekend.
Two of the three Essex youngsters were successful: Simon Armour from Southend and Tim Hebbes, of Walthamstow.
All three Suffolk players come from the Stowmarket club and two were successful: Edmund Player, one of a small handful of team members who will still be young enough to play for the team again next year, and Josephine Badger, who also represents Norfolk.
Hard luck on Peter Kemp, Colchester, and Richard Watts, Stowmarket.
They both scored 3/6 in the trial; not bad.
In Peter's case he has put down a marker for next year, when he will still be young enough to try.
1 Q×h7+ and Black resigned in view of 1…
R×h7 2 R×h7+ K×h7 3 Rh1+ Qh4 4 R×h4 mate.
It is regretted that the wrong text was published with Saturday's chess.
Solution
Clothes shop that would fit the bill
Sir,— The new Mayor of Woodbridge, Mr Tony Hubbard, is encouraging local residents to promote Woodbridge as a commercial and retail centre in the face of the threat posed by new superstores and I would like to give him my support.
I am a regular shopper in Woodbridge and can easily find everything I need without having to drive miles to the nearest superstore.
But one thing I do find sadly lacking is a middle-of-the-range clothes shop.
I have two teenaged children and have to take them into Ipswich or Felixstowe to buy anything they require.
Might I suggest that one of the empty commercial properties in Woodbridge might be well suited to such a venture?
(MRS), Arden House, Shottisham.
The skyline is dominated by the two Sizewell nuclear power stations in this view over the reedbeds and pools of the Minsmere bird reserve
Picture by John Kerr
Journalist becomes first British woman to conquer peak
Climber rests after Everest triumph
TOP-of-the-world mountaineer Rebecca Stephens was last night recovering in a snow-swept tent, exhausted but safe, after becoming the first British woman to climb Everest.
After a five-hour descent down a treacherous ridge, she and her two sherpa guides reached the relative safety of the expedition's Camp Four at 26,000ft.
Danger
Peter Earl, joint leader of the DHL 40 expedition, said from base camp at 17,500ft: ‘She is now tucked up in her sleeping bag in a tent.
She is out of danger and she is in good shape.
There is a snowstorm expected, but she has already survived a hurricane in that tent.
We are relieved and proud of her.’
Ms Stephens took advantage of a break in the weather to race to the top of the 29,078 ft peak, often leaving the sherpas 30 minutes behind.
After planting a flag on the summit and taking photographs in bright sunshine, Ms Stephens — who only took up mountaineering four years ago — lost no time in getting off the peak as the weather closed in.
The sherpas climbing with her were so impressed by her stamina in temperatures around 30C below freezing they made her an honorary ‘sherpani’.
On reaching the summit at 12.41 local time, 7.41 BST, Ms Stephens shouted for joy over a radio link to Mr Earl and her boyfriend and climbing colleague John Barry at the Advanced Base Camp Two at 23,000 ft.
She told them: ‘I'm on top of the world.’
Despite misgivings from her sherpas and forecasts of gale-force winds, Ms Stephens, 31, set off without Mr Barry on Saturday for the summit.
He was suffering from exhaustion and cold after helping co-climber Harry Taylor, who had earlier become the first Briton to reach the summit from the Nepalese side without oxygen equipment.
Mr Barry, 47, an experienced Himalayan climber and former Royal Marine, stayed at Camp Four with Mr Taylor.
Exhausted but safe: Rebecca Stephens
Optimism over new shopping complex
Cloisters ‘will meet need’
MORE plans have been submitted for a new town centre shopping complex in Ipswich — just days after a major retailer announced it was pulling out of the town.
National Car Parks has applied for outline planning permission for a further development as part of the proposed Cloisters centre, scheduled for land between Carr Street and Tacket Street.
Plans for the complex were first revealed in September 1990 and it was estimated it would cost £100 million to build.
At the time, a number of shopkeepers in Upper Orwell Street expressed concern about the effect on their shops.
Plans for the centre include two department stores, an open-air market, a 1,100-space car park and other stores and facilities.
The earliest the centre is likely to be completed is Christmas 1996 — and it could be later, especially as nothing is likely to happen until there has been an archaeological dig.
A survey carried out in 1988 revealed people thought the town needed more shopping choice, more specialist shops and a permanent site for the open-air market.
John Field, the town centre manager, said the Cloisters development would fill the extra need identified in the survey for more shopping facilities.
‘It would also provide parking for 1,000 extra cars and house the open-air market on a permanent site,’ he said.
Bill Knowles, the general manager of the Ipswich Co-op — who has been involved in talks with the NCP — said he was confident the scheme would go ahead but the timing had to be right.
‘It very much depends on the national economy rather than the situation locally, but it will come.’
Earlier this month, Habitat announced it was pulling out of the Buttermarket because of poor trading history and the secondary location of the store.
No delay on compensation
HEALTH authorities are to pay immediate compensation to the families of Allitt's victims.
Professor Richard Alderslade, Trent Regional Health Authority's regional medical officer, said the authorities had received approval to make payments ‘without delay’.
In a statement he said that ‘regardless of legal liability’ the health authorities wanted to offer compensation without the families having to be involved in further legal action.
Exceptional case
He described the circumstances of the case as ‘exceptional’ and said the families had been ‘subjected to great anxiety and distress’.
Prof Alderslade added: ‘Terrible crimes have been committed at the hospital.
Any murder, anywhere, is unforgivable — but particularly so when it is committed against innocent children undergoing treatment.’
Summer arrivals in reservoir feast
AT Abberton Reservoir on May 9 to cover the final wildfowl count of the 1992/3 season, conditions were still distinctly wintry with a strong and chilling north-easterly wind and squally showers of rain.
Duck numbers were down to 503 in eight species with tufted duck heading the list at 313, twice the figure for last year's May count, but there were only 46 shelduck whereas last year we found 121.
A solitary goldeneye was lingering on, as per last year, and the ruddy duck has dropped to six from the record 52 we counted in March.
Mute swans showed a steady increase to total 79 with up to 12 nests, four of these bests being sited in almost strategic positions, with one in each corner just off the Layer-de-la-Haye causeway.
In the north-west corner, four different birds are nesting in close company — the mute swan regally aloft on its large and bulky nest, looking down upon a coot nesting nearby in lesser estate, with two nests of great crested grebes almost awash amongst the reeds close by.
Three pairs of oyster-catchers were sighted around the main region and a total of 13 common sandpipers and a flight of 18 turnstones, most colourful birds and on passage at this time when they occur regularly at Abberton.
Last May we found 44 turnstones.
Yellow wagtails were in pairs in fair numbers, but the most spectacular sight came around the main region, over the Wigborough Lagoon and down beyond.
The air was quite filled with hundreds and hundreds of swifts, wheeling and turning in the sky, with dozens of swallows and sand-martins and just a few house-martins lower down over the water.
Hundreds of black-headed gulls were also joining in the feast of freshly hatching insects, paddling over the waves to snatch them from the surface, whilst in the Island Bay we came upon three superb black terns, dipping and turning over the water.
Derbyshire opener Barnett carried his bat for the second time in his career with 108 in 227 minutes against Glamorgan at Derby — over half the final total in a 191-defeat.
Derbyshire, needing 406 to win, were all out for 214 with former Test bowler Steve Watkin inspiring Glamorgan to their second consecutive win.
Watkin, who won two Test caps against the West Indies in 1991 took five for 71.
Benson made 107 at Canterbury in Kent's second innings 231 as they lost by 110 runs to Warwickshire, who like Glamorgan gained their second championship victory to go second in the table behind Surrey.
The opener, who hit 12 fours in an innings almost five and a half hours long, was eighth out and one of off-spinner Neil Smith's six victims.
He finished with career best figures of six for 122 and after the match received his county cap from skipper Dermot Reeve.
All the other matches ended in draws but Nottinghamshire wasted an opportunity to go top of the table at Lord's.
Needing 76 off the last 20 overs and with five wickets in hand they were 35 short with six overs remaining when torrential rain called a halt.
BOTH Colchester & East Essex and Maldon are hit by injury and work commitments as they square up to each other in the second round of the NCA Abbot Ale Cup at Castle Park today.
The home side have lost Mike McEvoy with a shoulder injury he collected in the Essex Amateur XI's match against Hertfordshire on Sunday and is expected to be out of action for a fortnight.
Jim Cotterill and Lorrie Austin, who is obliged to play in a police match, are also out, but Andrew Kennedy, the Grammar schoolboy who has been piling on the runs, is available.
Maldon will be looking to repeat Saturday's comfortable Two Counties win over Colchester, but captain Mick Brown is without Essex seamer David Boden and Geoff Cooke.
Colchester & EE: Roy Flanagan (capt), Mick Hempstead, Tim Spelling, Nigel Hilliard, Glen Bolton, Andrew Kennedy, Chris Wheeler, Colin Perkins, Kevin Felton, Robin Fritz, David Butcher.
Maldon: Mick Brown (capt), Ian Elliott, Robert Barber, Keith Merrell, Chris Punchard, Andy Donner, Chris Elliott, Tony Barber, Martin Gozzett, Mark Hawkes, Brian Corduroy.
Anglo Two Counties Championship round-up — Page 28.
County table
Vote yes, urges Danish premier
THE people of Denmark were yesterday urged by their prime minister, Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, to stand with fellow Europeans and vote for the Maastricht treaty in today's referendum.
On the eve of the vote, opinion polls showed a big lead for the ‘yes’ camp.
‘No’ voters, who plunged the EC into crisis by rejecting the union treaty in a previous referendum last June, appeared to be losing hope.
Bludgeoned by a pro-European political establishment and press, the country's 3.9 million electors looked set to put the treaty — which legally requires endorsement by all 12 EC states — back on track.
But anti-Maastricht campaigner Niels Meyer accused the government of ‘trying to hide the fact that the goal of many EC countries is a federal Europe’.
Danes are in effect voting on a deal negotiated at last December's EC summit in Edinburgh, which gave them opt-outs on sensitive issues such as a common currency, joint security, police controls and citizenship rules.
The latest Gallup poll, in the daily Berlingske Tidende yesterday, showed 50 per cent of Danes planning to vote ‘yes’ and 32pc ‘no’.
Firm planning move to factory of its own
AN office furniture company without a fixed home of its own is planning to move into a new purpose-built factory.
Metal Office Equipment Limited, which has operated from rented premises for about ten years, is looking to develop land at Chiswick Avenue, Mildenhall.
Matthew Fullerton, chartered surveyor and a property consultant for MOE, said if the site was approved by planners it would double the company's operating space.
Mr Fullerton said MOE, which designs and manufactures steel desks and filing cabinets, hoped to have the new site ready for occupation by the end of November.
It would provide space for expansion if necessary, although no increase to the 45 staff was currently planned.
Timetable disk change for better
JOURNEY Planner, British Rail's timetable condensed in computer disk form, is proving a success.
Geoff Butterwick, public transport manager for Suffolk County Council, said: ‘We've only had it for a few weeks but it's already proving useful and I'm sure it will make life a lot easier.
It is very clever and shows journeys and interchanges you would not otherwise have thought of.’
Network SouthEast's marketing director, David Walker, said: ‘Anyone who has ever tried to use the 1,500-page British Rail timetable will know just how complicated it can be to plan a rail trip.’
The disk, designed to operate on IBM compatible computers, costs £19.99 plus £1.40 post and packing.
Details 0800 526306.
Cricket
Essex saved by rain at The Oval
DEFENDING Britannic Assurance County Champions Essex were saved by the rain from losing their second match in a row in the defence of their title at The Oval yesterday.
Unbeaten Surrey, setting the pace at the top of the table, were left with a target of 242 in 34 overs after bowling out Essex for 153 — and after some spectacular hitting required just 64 off 12½ overs when the skies opened up.
Darren Bicknell (33) and Alistair Brown smashed 56 off just over five overs — Bicknell hooking Mark Ilott for six in the paceman's opening over while Brown's 36 came off 21 balls and included two sixes and two fours.
David Ward then came in and thumped a spectacular half century in 40 balls and Surrey were on 178 for four at the premature close, with off-spinner Peter Such suffering the most — his six overs costing 66 runs.
Only Nasser Hussain (52) put up a fight in the Essex innings, with some dogged resistance from Derek Pringle and Mike Garnham.
In other matches skippers Kim Barnett and Mark Benson scored centuries but were badly let down by their team-mates.
Derbyshire opener Barnett carried his bat for the second time in his career with 108 in 227 minutes against Glamorgan at Derby — over half the final total in a 191-defeat.
Derbyshire, needing 406 to win, were all out for 214 with former Test bowler Steve Watkin inspiring Glamorgan to their second consecutive win.
Watkin, who won two Test caps against the West Indies in 1991 took five for 71.
Benson made 107 at Canterbury in Kent's second innings 231 as they lost by 110 runs to Warwickshire, who like Glamorgan gained their second championship victory to go second in the table behind Surrey.
The opener, who hit 12 fours in an innings almost five and a half hours long, was eighth out and one of off-spinner Neil Smith's six victims.
He finished with career best figures of six for 122 and after the match received his county cap from skipper Dermot Reeve.
All the other matches ended in draws but Nottinghamshire wasted an opportunity to go top of the table at Lord's.
Needing 76 off the last 20 overs and with five wickets in hand they were 35 short with six overs remaining when torrential rain called a halt.
BOTH Colchester & East Essex and Maldon are hit by injury and work commitments as they square up to each other in the second round of the NCA Abbot Ale Cup at Castle Park today.
The home side have lost Mike McEvoy with a shoulder injury he collected in the Essex Amateur XI's match against Hertfordshire on Sunday and is expected to be out of action for a fortnight.
Jim Cotterill and Lorrie Austin, who is obliged to play in a police match, are also out, but Andrew Kennedy, the Grammar schoolboy who has been piling on the runs, is available.
Maldon will be looking to repeat Saturday's comfortable Two Counties win over Colchester, but captain Mick Brown is without Essex seamer David Boden and Geoff Cooke.
Colchester & EE: Roy Flanagan (capt), Mick Hempstead, Tim Spelling, Nigel Hilliard, Glen Bolton, Andrew Kennedy, Chris Wheeler, Colin Perkins, Kevin Felton, Robin Fritz, David Butcher.
Maldon: Mick Brown (capt), Ian Elliott, Robert Barber, Keith Merrell, Chris Punchard, Andy Donner, Chris Elliott, Tony Barber, Martin Gozzett, Mark Hawkes, Brian Corduroy.
Anglo Two Counties Championship round-up — Page 28.
Traders count cost of computer fault
Prestige centre stays shut
TRADERS at the Buttermarket centre in Ipswich were yesterday counting the cost after losing their most valuable day's trading.
The centre was not able to open its doors until 3pm on Saturday because its computer failed.
Sales estimated at many thousands of pounds are believed to have been lost and insurance companies were being consulted to see if they would pay out for loss of business.
Engineers have still not located the fault and an alternative control board has been installed.
Peter Smith, manager of the shopping centre, said the shutdown was due to a technical and complex problem which has not yet been resolved.
The computer system operates alarms, doors and smoke detectors and the fault was discovered on Saturday morning.
Shops did not open for trading until 3pm — just as many shoppers were heading home to watch the FA Cup final on television.
Mr Smith said: ‘I had no alternative in the interests of public safety and in conforming with the conditions of the fire certificate.
My hands were tied.’
He regretted the resulting loss in trade but added that the risk to human life ‘overrides any commercial interests’.
Engineers would be working this week to locate the fault.
Paul Jukes, general manager of Owen Owen, said: ‘As with everybody else we did not open until 3pm and so we lost a lot of trade.’
Sanchia Holmes, manageress of the Framework clothes shop, said Saturday was usually their busiest day and they had missed out on a good deal of custom.
She said: ‘We had given up hope and by the time the precinct opened again we had all gone home.’
She added: ‘What further action our company will be prepared to take, I don't know.
But I imagine they will be looking at some sort of insurance claim.’
Green theme in peak expedition
EASTERN Electricity is sponsoring a team hoping to be the first Britons to conquer the world's second highest mountain and survive.
Five climbers will be tackling K2 in the Himalayas in June as part of the Karakoram 8000 project aimed at benefiting the mountain environment and the local people.
A spokesman for Eastern Electricity said the firm had got involved because it was a very green project which promoted the use of electricity as an environmentally sound power service.
The expedition will make use of renewable energy, such as solar power, and will remove all its rubbish.
It will be overseeing the installation of a small-scale hydro-electric generating scheme bringing heating and lighting to the village of Mango in the foothills of the Karakoram range.
This will reduce the village's dependence on firewood, which is in short supply, and help to alleviate some of the health problems associated with living in confined and smoky conditions.
Mr Horsley said he had every confidence that the expedition would be a success as the five climbers — Roger Payne, Julie-Ann Clyma, Alan Hinkes, Victor Saunders and Dr Caroline Williams — were all very experienced and some of the best in Britain.
K2, known as Pyramid of Storms, claimed the lives of the only two Britons to reach the summit, Alan Rouse and Julie Tullis, who were killed on their descent in 1986.
Shivers of heart op patient who fears for others
GLENN Taylor started the 1990s with a new heart after spending New Year's Eve 1989 on the operating table at Royal London Hospital.
Now heart transplant patient Glenn is a picture of health and just about to lead a walk in north Essex walks week.
But if Glenn had fallen ill now, rather than then, things might not have been so rosy because, he says, there are no more heart transplants at the Royal London Hospital.
When Glenn thinks about what would have happened if he had needed the transplant now rather than two-and-a-half years ago he says he gets cold shivers.
An ex-BR civil engineer Glenn, 53, of Windmill Fields, Coggeshall, had a heart attack in July 1989 while he was at work at Stratford.
Afterwards he became very ill and had difficulty breathing and could not walk at all.
He said he looked like the Michelin man because fluid was building up in his body.
The only comfortable position was standing up because then the fluid drained away and stopped pressing against his lungs.
Doctors tried out different medications to ease Glenn's condition but tests showed his heart muscle was damaged and he was put on the waiting list for a transplant.
He only had to wait 6–8 weeks.
Glenn, who has one daughter and two grand-daughters, said he was very impressed with the NHS but thinks his was a case of being in the right place at the right time.
Essex Rivers Healthcare health promotion unit have organised the north Essex walks week and Glenn will be leading the Coggeshall walk.
For details of that walk and walks in other parishes contact the unit on (0206) 834641.
Continued on Page Five
From Page One
Picture of health: Heart transplant patient Glenn Taylor
Picture by NICKY LEWIN
Brothers on pub violence charge
TWO brothers appeared in court yesterday following an eruption of violence at a pub.
Keith Mulgrave, 27, and his brother Ralph, 33, are together charged with using or threatening unlawful violence at the Bull pub, Haverhill, on Saturday night.
Both are accused of having offensive weapons in the pub.
Keith Mulgrave, of Blaxhall Court, Haverhill, is accused of possessing an axe and his brother is charged with having a knife.
Keith Mulgrave is also charged with criminal damage to two windows at the pub.
Ralph Mulgrave, of Manchester Road, Isle of Dogs, London, is further charged with assaulting pub customer Paula Howard, causing her actual bodily harm.
He is also accused of damaging two wooden tables at the pub and breaking a number of bottles and glasses.
Both men were remanded in custody to appear before Haverhill magistrates tomorrow.
Two other men involved in Saturday's violence have been released on police bail to appear at Haverhill police station on June 16 while further investigations are made.
A spokesman for the town's police said the two men, who are not being named, had both been charged with threatening behaviour and possessing offensive weapons.
Glue ear boy becoming withdrawn
Child suffers on for need of op
Private treatment ‘too costly’
BY JULIETTE MAXAM
A LITTLE boy is becoming withdrawn because he has so many ear infections he finds it difficult to hear, but his life could be revolutionised by one simple operation.
Stephen Banham, four, of Lucy Lane North, Colchester, suffers from glue ear.
He has two or three ear infections a month and sometimes pus pours from his ears for up to two days in a row.
He is always falling over because the condition affects his balance.
His mother, Debbie Banham, said: ‘He cannot hear properly, which affects his speech.
At parties he does not join in and he gets very upset when you try to do anything with him because he gets frustrated.’
Stephen needs a simple operation to remove his adenoids and insert grommets in his ears.
Mrs Banham said he was put on the operation waiting list in December last year, when the wait was about seven months, since then she has been told it could be 18 months.
Private
From last December, his operation date would be in June, 1994.
Stephen is due to start school in January, 1994.
Mrs Banham said: ‘Stephen is going to miss the best part of his first and most important year of school due to illness with ear infections.’
Mrs Banham and her husband Andy, a roof tiler, considered going private, but that would cost more than £1,250, and since their other son, one-year-old Ross, needs the same operation they really cannot afford it.
‘If the price was considerably reduced more parents could afford to go private,’ they said.
‘This would then reduce the waiting list for those parents that really cannot afford it.
‘If all of us parents pull together surely there must be something we can do to save our children suffering for so long.’
Anxious wait: Debbie Banham with her two sons 12-month-old Ross and Stephen, four
Two men charged after shooting at camp site
TWO MEN are due to appear before magistrates today after a shooting incident at an Essex travellers' camp.
Armed police staged a dawn raid on the Cranham Hall site in Little Waltham yesterday after a man was shot in the leg.
Six people were arrested at the site.
Last night police said two men had been charged with causing grievous bodily harm and one had also been charged with possessing a firearm with intent to endanger life.
The two accused men are due to appear before Chelmsford magistrates today.
Last night police were still questioning the other three men and one woman who were arrested at the site.
The arrests follow an incident on Sunday when a man hailed a passing ambulance on the A12 near Chelmsford.
Gary Cooper, in his late 20s from Cobham in Surrey, had a serious shotgun wound in his leg.
Mr Cooper had an operation late on Sunday at Broomfield Hospital.
After his condition stabilised he was transferred to St Andrew's Hospital, Billericay.
Police swoop: The travellers' site where armed police arrested six people
Aldeburgh final may occur in Hambro
THERE is a strong possibility of an all-Aldeburgh Hambro Cup final following both teams' home victories in the quarter-finals over the weekend.
The Artisans and the main Aldeburgh club find themselves in separate halves of the draw at the semi-final stage to be played on June 27 at neutral venues.
The Artisans may find it tough away from home.
They make the journey to Gorleston where they face Rookery Park in their semi-final.
The venue must favour Rookery Park.
The majority of their team has played the neighbouring Gorleston course on a number of occasions and should make their local knowledge count.
Aldeburgh's semi-final is against Diss at Woodbridge.
The draws
Hambro Cup: Diss v Aldeburgh at Woodbridge; Rookery Park v Aldeburgh Artisans at Gorleston.
Tolly Cobbold Cup: Waldringfield v Felixstowe at Rushmere; Bury St Edmunds v Stoke-by-Nayland at Felixstowe.
Exhibition by award-winner
AWARD-winning Colchester artist Ian Hay,left , holds a one-man exhibition in his home town on Saturday.
Ian, who won Anglia TV's Moving Art award in 1991, will be displaying townscapes of Colchester and East Anglian seascapes at Hayletts Gallery.
He studied at the Royal College of Art before teaching at St Martin's School of Art and is course tutor at Colchester Institute.
Child awaits operation
Tests begin in marrow transplant prelude
DOCTORS yesterday began tests on toddler Rhys Daniels who looks set soon to have a life-saving bone marrow transplant from an unrelated donor.
Rhys, aged two, of Epping, Essex, arrived in Bristol yesterday to settle in before three days of medical investigations at the Children's Hospital.
The tests will be carried out in the specialist bone marrow unit which is planning the world-first transplant on the boy.
But time is short for Rhys, who has Batten's Disease, a rare genetic disorder which can rapidly lead to dementia and blindness.
In children it is fatal before the age of seven.
No one was ever had a transplant for the inherited disorder.
Rhys's five-year-old sister Charly also has the condition and for her it is too late.
Parents Barry and Carmen Daniels have been involved in a legal battle to force Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley to reopen facilities at Westminster Children's Hospital where a transplant was to have taken place.
Mohamed Al Fayed, owner of Harrod's, offered to pay for Rhys's treatment anywhere in the world.
The youngster was referred earlier this year to the Bristol unit which has carried out 50 transplants involving unrelated donors — the highest number in Britain.
Dr Jackie Cornish, the hospital's transplant co-ordinator, has said there are at least two possible donors lined up following a search of the national bone marrow registers.
Due to patient confidentiality, the United Bristol Healthcare Trust has declined to discuss arrangements.
But if the youngster follows normal patterns he will return home after the tests to await the selection of the donor and final preparations for the NHS hospital procedure.
The transplant process takes six weeks overall during which Rhys will be under the care of the specialist bone marrow team, led by Dr Tony Oakhill.
Before the transplant itself Rhys will face an intensive course of chemotherapy and irradiation.
This will help rid him of disease, suppress immunity and create bone marrow space.
The donor marrow will be transferred in a process rather like a blood transfusion.
Rhys will spend almost the entire time in an isolation cubicle within the unit's small ward until the new bone marrow becomes effective.
His parents will be able to spend much of the time in the ward with him.
Hockey
Two years hard work pays off
FORMER England hockey captain Sandie Lister and teams of top county, national and international players were at a Suffolk school at the weekend to inaugurate its new £225,000 synthetic pitch.
Sandie, who captains the Ipswich Ladies' squad, headed an England Mixed team in a friendly match against international All-Stars at Great Cornard Upper School's sports centre.
And she was given the honour of cutting the tape to open the pitch officially, along with ex-Cornard pupil and Sudbury Hockey Club goalkeeper Wayne Athey.
Before the opening onlookers were treated to a free display of footballing skills in a seven-a-side contest between Cornard United and Sudbury Town, which Cornard won 5–2.
The new pitch is made of synthetic Baspograss, packed with sand and backed with a rubber cushion to minimise wear, and has been paid for by a variety of bodies both local and national.
Suffolk County Council and Babergh District Council have both contributed, as well as the Sports Council and the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, funded by the big three pools companies.
Floodlit pitch
Local support has come from the school's own governors, the Sudbury Common Lands Trust which gave £3,000 and Sudbury Hockey Club, which raised £7,000 towards the total.
Club president Jim Carnegie said the new floodlit pitch, which replaces a heavily-worn dry play area, represented the culmination of two years' planning and fund-raising.
‘There was a dry-play area here which was tired out,’ he said.
‘It wasn't ideal for hockey and I certainly wouldn't play football on it, but this is a multi-purpose surface.’
Tape cutting: Sudbury hockey club president James Carnegie, Cornard Upper School headmaster Doug Pickford, Wayne Athey and Sandie Lister inaugurate the synthetic pitch
Hypnotist ready to cast spell on unwary
Over-the-top comedy from Down Under
THE SEX Queen and Burger King are ‘appearing’ at a Clacton theatre this week.
Mild-mannered visitors to the West Cliff on Friday might find themselves behaving like Madonna or Elvis after Adam Night has cast his spell.
The controversial hypnotist also transports volunteers to the hot Mediterranean and cold Arctic and entices them into conversations with men from Mars.
And just when you thought it was safe to ignore Prisoner Cell Block H, Neighbours, Home And Away, Kylie, Jason, Dame Edna and Clive James — along comes another Australian export.
Triple X-rated comedian Kevin ‘Bloody’ Wilson, who started performing in football club smokos in his home town of Kalgoorlie five years ago, returns on Thursday.
Outrageous
Wilson's outrageous, over-the-top humour and couldn't-give-a-stuff attitude has earned his albums bans from both Australian and British radio.
He reached cult status with such dubious musical masterpieces as Hey Santa Claus and Living Next Door To Alan and his Lovable Larrikin video seems destined for success.
It will be time for something completely different on Saturday when Sid Kipper brings his simple country wisdom to the West Cliff.
One half of the now-defunct Kipper family, Norfolk lad Sid has invented a world of his own featuring the Women's Bright Hour and the anglo-saxophone. who is appearing at Clacton this week
X-rated comedy: Australian export Kevin ‘Bloody’ Wilson,
EXHIBITIONS
POLLY Pollock and Linda Miller at the Pam Schomberg Gallery, Colchester, until end of month; Jean-Charles Blais at Essex University until Friday; Jonathan Clarke and Ted Atkinson at Chappel Galleries until Sunday; Lisa Temple-Cox at Trinity Gallery, Colchester, until Saturday; A Leap In The Light at Braintree Leisure Centre until Saturday; Susan Monk at Colchester Central Library until May 29.
TODAY Hedda Gabler: Cramphorn Theatre, Chelmsford, 8 pm.
Chelmsford Cathedral Festival, until Saturday.
Ring (0245) 359890 for details.
You Never Can Tell: Colchester Mercury Theatre, until Saturday.
Piano recital by Michael Hattingh: Essex University, 7.45 pm.TOMORROW Betrayal: Essex University, 7.30pm, Pinter classic.
Big Bad Mouse: Institute, High Street, Kelvedon, 8 pm, Until Saturday.
Sonia Coode-Adams' evening.
Tour of art, discussion and slide show.
Contact Living Arts Society, Ardleigh Park, Ardleigh for details.
New Hall School concert: Central Square, Chelmsford, 1 pm.
Colchester Saxophone Quartet: Essex University.
1 pm.THURSDAY Kevin Bloody Wilson: West Cliff Theatre, Clacton.
CAMRA beer festival: Colchester Arts Centre.
Until Saturday.FRIDAY The Blues Band: Charter Hall, Colchester, 7 pm.
Jiving Lindy Hopper workshop: Chancellor Hall, Chelmsford.
Ian Hay exhibition: Hayletts Gallery, Colchester, 7 pm, until June 5.
Adam Night: West Cliff Theatre, Clacton, 8 pm.SATURDAY Gerry And The Pacemakers: Charter Hall, Colchester.
Martin Plackett guitar recital: New Hall school, Chelmsford.
Essex Police Band: Moot Hall, Colchester.
Sid Kipper: West Cliff Theatre, Clacton.
8 pm.SUNDAY Pele: Colchester Arts Centre.
8 pm.
Top pop band.
Tap roots workshop: Saffron Waldon Library/Arts Centre.
With Will Gaines and Lyn Colbeck.MONDAY Clive Gregson: Colchester Arts Centre, 7.45 pm, Folk night.
Instinct put police on trail
IT WAS plain old-fashioned instinct, the gut feeling that something was not right, that led Detective Superintendent Stuart Clifton though a medical maze to trap the nurse who killed four children.
Mr Clifton, 48, admitted the case was one which was ‘outside that of the normal expertise of the police.
‘It was one where the inquiry team had got to have an understanding of medical matters.’
The families of the victims were reluctant to co-operate with the police at first because they felt the staff at the hospital where Allitt was a student nurse — the Grantham and Kesteven — had done a wonderful job.
But then the truth about the massive doses of poison which Allitt administered to those babies in her care was uncovered.
Police decided they would concentrate their inquiries on one surviving child — five-month-old Paul Crampton, from Leadenham, near Grantham.
Tests revealed that he had abnormally high levels of insulin in his blood, which could only have been injected.
By this time, detectives had established that Allitt, along with perhaps one or two others, had the opportunity to administer the insulin.
As a result of the test findings the police began to look more closely at other cases.
‘What became quickly apparent then was that the common factor was Beverley.’
In June 1991 Mr Clifton called a conference of the best medical experts in the field and presented the 12 child cases before them.
These children had suffered 25 attacks between them over a 59-day period.
The medical experts found potassium levels were particularly high in some children.
This led detectives to conclude that three of the four dead children had suffered potassium poisoning.
They also discovered that the only place where potassium was available was on the hospital ward.
Their suspicions were fuelled when the ward allocation book, which denotes which nurse is allocated to which patient, disappeared.
When Allitt was arrested the book was found in her home.
Thieves strike after funeral of Ivy Benson
Home raided days after cremation
THIEVES have ransacked the home of celebrity musician Ivy Benson, just days after she was cremated.
Friend and neighbour Mary Ayers, who is looking after the Thoroughgood Road, Clacton, bungalow until it is handed over to executors today, discovered the break-in yesterday morning.
She had drawn the curtains at the house the previous evening and was carrying out a routine check at about 7.30 am when she saw the smashed back porch.
This is the third time Ivy's home has been broken into.
Thieves first raided the premises shortly after Ivy moved to Clacton, a few years ago.
Two years ago Mrs Ayers went next door to feed Ivy's cat while she was at the hairdressers when she disturbed burglars at work.
This time, she said, she was too frightened to venture in, in case the thieves were still there.
Mrs Ayers, who is still recovering from the shock, said at the moment she could not say for certain anything had been taken.
She added she had not seen a pewter mug with Ivy's name on it in its usual place, but could not confirm it had been stolen until the house was straightened out.
‘This really shook me this morning although I am getting over it a bit now,’ she said yesterday.
‘I really think it's terrible when anybody dies and people break-in — it's almost like grave robbing.
Mrs Ayers is convinced the raiders had seen all the publicity about the bandleader's death and had broken in, hoping to find money or jewellery.
Ivy's television set and pictures were left intact but all papers ready to take to Ivy's executors have been mislaid in the raid at the bungalow.
DS Tony Bull, of Clacton CID, said police officers were anxious to hear from anyone who had seen anything at the premises between about 7.45pm on Sunday and 7.30am on Monday.
He confirmed officers were still trying to ascertain what had been taken.
Ivy died on May 6 in Clacton Hospital after a heart attack, aged 79.
For 40 years she was famous with her all-girl band and pioneered against male prejudice in the musical and television and radio circles.
Hi-Di-Hi star Ruth Madoc, plus many of Ivy's ‘girls’, attended her cremation on Thursday.
She kept up her musical links until her death and for five years was resident musician at the Royal Hotel, Clacton.
Anyone with any information about the burglary should telephone Clacton police on (0255) 221312.
Break-in: Burglars target Ivy Benson's home days after her funeral
Frustration for school governor
Sir,— Nine years ago I volunteered my services as a school governor, believing that the expertise I could offer would be helpful to headteacher, staff and pupils.
Presently a governor of two Suffolk schools, the task is increasingly time consuming, responsible, unpaid and costly in terms of petrol consumed (no travel expenses paid), but still rewarding in terms of relationships within the schools carefully built up over the years.
Now, however, I am seriously considering resigning.
Why?
The Government — Mr John Patten — having learnt through the courts that teachers have the right to refuse to set the prescribed tests, now threatens to cut the headteacher's salary and to take legal action against the governors of schools where the tests are not set.
How do we do it if teachers are taking legitimate action?
Do we aid the overstretched budget — deny the children books and equipment in order to engage outsiders to do it and in so doing lose the rapport so carefully built with our staff?
What kind of results would such people obtain from children who would hold back from such unfamiliar faces?
The Government has spent £1 million on putting its case to the public through the Press.
Where do we find such funds to put the case of the moderate teachers in the classrooms who have to ‘occupy’ and not teach a large proportion of the class for hours on end whilst they test the few — or sometimes even the one child.
To test seven-year-old children in nine subjects is absolutely ludicrous.
I agree wholeheartedly that parents need to be informed of their children's progress.
Nowadays they are invited regularly to meet the teachers in the evenings (voluntary unpaid overtime for the teachers) to look at books and discuss progress.
This didn't happen in the ‘good old days’.
I agree wholeheartedly, too, with testing — but the tests have to be right — and not so overwhelming that hundreds of hours of teaching time are lost to those children waiting their turn to be tested.
Can't someone bring some sense into this ridiculous situation before the governors who took up the challenge after the Government's much-advertised campaign to persuade people to do the work, and those who served faithfully for many long years, resign en masse?
We, the volunteers, can do without this hassle.
MRS S JERRED, Tuscan, Rattlesden Road, Drinkstone.
Joe foils champion's bid for title four-timer
ONE of the happiest men in Basildon was Joe Mills, an Essex University student from Harlow, who claimed the 800 metres title by just four-hundredths of a second in the Championships' best race.
What made the victory all the more memorable for the 21-year-old was that he beat three-times champion and Chelmsford AC clubmate Dave Tullett, who was closing fast down the back straight.
Mills also finished second in the senior men's 1,500m.
The club had another double champion in Catriona Slater, who won the inter-ladies 100m in 12.7 and the long jump with a leap of 5.45.
Celia Brown, also 16, won the 300m hurdles in 47.1.
The under-17s are catching the senior men in terms of strength in depth, as was proved by Jenny Marie who was doubly unlucky to finish as runner-up twice, in the 800m and 1,500m, both times to Hayley Cole.
The men retained the 5,000m gold, although last year's winner Jeremy Freeman, was beaten into third spot by England international Dale Laughlin, former Anglo-European pupil now living in Romford, who showed a smart pair of heels.
Chelmsford's sixth gold medal was earned by Simon Bown, an unemployed 18-year-old who is widely tipped to get an international vest this Summer throwing the hammer.
He streaked the junior men's event with a distance of 57.18 metres and showed his worth by finishing third to Great Britain's Paul Head in the senior men's section, making 52.54 with the heavier hammer.
Former GB junior Paul Bushnell recorded a javelin throw of 60.84 to claim silver in his age group, but sister Debbie Calloway claimed the family plaudits with her golds in the discus and shot.
Formerly with Chelmsford, she is married, 28, and now competing for Aldershot and Farnham AC, but as an Essex-qualified athlete, she hit a championship best mark of 54.7 with the discus.
Jury discharged after failing to reach verdict
Man faces retrial on murder bid charge
THE jury trying the case of a man accused of robbing a supermarket and shooting two people who tried to stop him was discharged last night after failing to reach a verdict.
Mark Michael Kearney, formerly of Sycamore Road, Great Cornard, was appearing at Chelmsford Crown Court charged with robbery and two counts of attempted murder.
Kearney, 25, was accused of robbing security guard James Lewin of £15,000 at Gateway in Sudbury on September 3 and of shooting Mr Lewin and contract cleaner James Howard.
In his summing-up, Mr Justice Leonard said the case against Kearney hinged on his identification by Mr Lewin, who had picked him out at an identity parade.
Of more than 40 witnesses, only he had positively identified the defendant but the jury could still convict on his evidence alone if it was convinced by it.
‘Right from the beginning Mr Lewin realised that a robbery was taking place and he was the target,’ he said.
‘He was in the firing line.
‘Others did not realise.
One who saw the pistol thought it was a toy.
Another who heard the bangs thought it was a cracker.
Yet another thought they were caps going off.
‘Mr Lewin was not a mere passer-by.
He was a Securicor guard with some experience.
Once the demand for money and the threat were made and the pistol was produced, would that distract him or would it concentrate his mind on his assailant?’ said Mr Justice Leonard.
Both Mr Lewin and Mr Howard had displayed what could be called courage, Mr Lewin by throwing a punch at his assailant and Mr Howard by pursuing him even though he was being shot at.
Mr Lewin had been shot in the chest by a .32 calibre bullet which missed his heart by two inches, while Mr Howard had been shot in the stomach.
Both had required life-saving operations.
Neither the gun nor the money had ever been found, nor was there any forensic evidence linking Kearney to either a hat, a bag or a pair of shoes found at the scene.
The jury of six men and six women retired to consider its verdict at 12.45pm, returning at 4.15pm when Mr Justice Leonard gave permission to return a majority verdict.
However, at 4.50pm the foreman announced the jury was irrevocably split and the judge ordered Kearney to be returned to custody pending a retrial, on a date to be announced.
Bishop to hear couple's plea for teddy on child's grave
A GRIEVING family's plea to be allowed to have a teddy bear carved on their daughter's gravestone is to go to the Bishop of Chelmsford.
David and Linda Leeder, of Wayside, Shalford, near Braintree, wanted to have a small teddy bear carved on the headstone marking the grave of their daughter Sophie, who died when she was just seven weeks old.
However, church officials have refused saying a teddy bear has no religious significance.
They are, however, happy to allow a carving of a rabbit.
Last night, the Archdeacon of Colchester the Very Rev Ernest Stroud was due to visit the family, to put the church's point of view.
However, Mr Leeder said: ‘Quite honestly I don't hold out much hope, but this is the first time the church has agreed to visit us.
Hopefully they will listen to what we have to say.’
The family is planning to hand a petition to the Bishop of Chelmsford, the Rt Rev John Waine, in the diocesan office in Chelmsford next month calling for the church to change its mind.
They have already collected 1,000 signatures, said Mr Leeder, and had not come across one person who had objected to what they wanted.
The trauma began when Sophie was born last year, severely brain damaged.
She lived for only seven weeks during which time her two sisters, Clare, five, and Victoria, three, bought her a small teddy bear.
Only possession
It was her only possession and stayed with her night and day, even into the brain scan machine at St John's Hospital, Chelmsford.
The family has poignant pictures of Sophie with the toy, and six months after she died decided to include a teddy carved into a headstone.
‘This is the last thing we will ever be able to do for Sophie, and it's important to us to do it right,’ Mr Leeder said.
Man accused of burglary is cleared
A 26-YEAR-OLD Colchester man was cleared at Chelmsford Crown Court yesterday of a burglary charge when the prosecution offered no evidence against him.
David Jackson, unemployed, of Lilac Tree Court, Greenstead Estate, denied breaking into a house at Lime Avenue, Colchester, on January 16 and stealing a stereo system and a satellite decoder.
Judge Gordon Rice directed that a verdict of not guilty be entered.
A Braintree man was cleared of an affray charge yesterday when the prosecution offered no further evidence against him.
The court heard that Patrick Stracey, 33, of Warley Close, denied the charge, and after a three-day trial last month a jury failed to reach a verdict.
The charge arose from an alleged incident on October 11 last year in Witham.
Judge Rice directed that a verdict of not guilty be entered.
Survey finds concern over deteriorating standards
NURSES are worried that patients are suffering because qualified nursing posts remain unfilled, a national survey has revealed.
The joint Royal College of Nursing and Nursing Standard survey has come at a time when Essex Rivers Healthcare is trying to save £2.2 million to cope with an overspend of £1.3 million last year, waiting lists are at a record high and the closure date of a Colchester hospital has been set.
The trust has said savings can be made by ensuring nurses are not doing jobs for which they are overqualified.
Nationwide a picture has emerged of nurses worrying that patient care is being compromised by reductions in the number of qualified nursing staff in the NHS.
Correlation
More than half of the 2,000 nurses surveyed said changes to staffing levels where they worked had a detrimental impact on the quality of care.
Nearly two thirds reported staffing levels in their area of work were insufficient to provide adequate care and there was a strong correlation between reports of staffing reductions and negative effects on quality of care.
Two thirds of nurses who reported staffing levels had been changed believed the amount of qualified nurses employed had been reduced.
Meanwhile 57 per cent of nurses in the north east Thames region who participated in the RCN survey say there are empty posts in their workplace.
June 6 is the date set for the final closure of St Mary's hospital, Colchester, when the outpatient department will be transferred to Colchester District General and Severalls hospitals, two years after St Mary's in-patients were transferred to Severalls Hospital.
Dates have yet to be finalised for the closure of the nurses' home, said Mark Shackell, the trust's director of services.
The ambulance contract manager's office and the estates department on the St Mary's site will also be moved.
The town centre site will be sold off to free more money for patient care within the trust, added Mr Shackell.
Cutbacks on qualified staff hits patient care, say nurses
Mayor's record gifts to charity
St Anne's Community Association £1,250
Allitt ‘wanted to create drama and attention’
ALLITT was suffering from a rare personality disorder known as Munchausen's Syndrome by Proxy.
This is a type of extreme hypochondria which often translates into child abuse.
Parents, apparently desperate to seek attention, fool doctors into believing their youngsters are suffering from illnesses, either by faking symptoms or by making them sick.
Previous cases have included mothers repeatedly poisoning their children, giving them sedatives or tranquillisers, cutting off their breathing and causing seizures by applying pressure to the neck.
Director of psychological services at Broadmoor Hospital, Dr Derek Perkins, said last night: ‘Sometimes sufferers actually go through painful operations and in the case of Munchausen's by Proxy it would appear that Allitt's motives were to create drama and attention.’
Angel of death: Beverley Allitt
AN URGENT investigation was announced last night into the horrifying case of ‘Angel of Death’ Beverley Allitt, the nurse convicted of murdering four babies in her care and attempting to murder others.
Grieving parents want to know why Grantham Hospital officials failed to react sooner to the mysterious deaths and illnesses on Allitt's ward.
And they were shocked to hear at the end of the three-month trial that Allitt suffered from a dangerous personality disorder.
There were accusations last night that doctors at the hospital should have realised she had classic symptoms of the disorder.
The jury at Nottingham Crown Court returned its final verdicts yesterday.
Over more than six days they convicted Allitt of four murders, three attempted murders and six charges of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
Many of the youngsters who survived were left mentally and physically handicapped.
As the final verdicts were delivered, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley announced an inquiry, saying: ‘It is vital that the lessons of this dreadful case are learnt and acted upon without delay.’
Continued on Page Two 
More reports on Page Two
From Page One
QC leads child murder inquiry
It will be chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier, QC, a former health service commissioner, and would ensure any issues for the NHS arising from this ‘dreadful’ case were thoroughly examined.
Allitt, 24, of Corby Glen, near Grantham, Lincs, was, as usual, not in court yesterday.
She is receiving treatment for the weight-loss disorder anorexia nervosa at Rampton top security hospital.
Only once the verdicts were read out did the tormented families get a clue about why Allitt attacked defenceless babies, becoming Britain's worst woman serial killer this century.
Mr John Goldring, QC, prosecuting, said Allitt had been suffering from the attention-seeking illness Munchausen's Syndrome by Proxy.
Grantham Hospital chiefs were last night being asked why they did not notice symptoms of the syndrome in Allitt before she started on the children's ward.
From 1987 to 1991 Allitt went to the casualty department of Grantham Hospital 24 times, complaining of illnesses which staff suspected were self-inflicted.
She had 91 days off work in 1990 which led to her qualification as a nurse being delayed.
Mr Justice Latham adjourned sentence on Allitt until May 28, saying it was vital the public heard in court from the Regional Health Authority and the Department of Health ‘what consideration has been, is being and will be given to determine what these lessons should be and how they should be put into effect.’
Allitt had denied 26 charges, four of murder — Liam Taylor, eight weeks, Becky Phillips, nine weeks, Claire Peck, 15 months, and Timothy Hardwick, 11, at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital; 11 attempted murders, including Becky's twin sister Katie, and 11 alternative counts of grievous bodily harm with intent to injure.
Call to young musicmakers
MUSICIANS across Essex are being invited to come and join the band, with applications invited for places in three orchestras for the 1994 season.
The offer is from Essex County Council, which wants to hear from musicians aged from 14 to 20 who would like to play in either the Essex Youth Orchestra, the Essex Young People's Orchestra or the Essex Youth Jazz Orchestra.
Players of strings, woodwind, brass, percussion and harp are needed for all sections of the youth orchestra and the young people's orchestra.
Auditions are also to be held for the brass ensemble, the junior brass ensembles and the baroque orchestra courses.
Those that win through will get a chance to play in Europe.
In 1992 the Essex Youth Orchestra toured Venice and this year it will take part in the Edinburgh Festival.
An expert team of tutors helps to maintain and improve standards.
People who would like to apply for places should contact Karen Hills on Chelmsford (0245) 436335 by May 28.
Narrow rail ballot halts threat of more strikes
Less than half a per cent of union membership decide issue
EAST Anglian commuters will be able to reach work without fear of further strikes, it emerged last night.
Members of the Rail, Maritime and Transport Union voted by a margin of just 183 to accept British Rail's latest jobs offer, averting the possibility of a third strike.
During the union's last strike on April 16, Britain's 11,000 mile rail network was brought to a standstill and nearly 100,000 London-bound East Anglian passengers were forced to either stay at home or make alternative arrangements to reach the capital.
Of the 36,905 RMT members who voted, 18,544 were in favour of BR's offer and 18,361 against.
RMT general secretary Jimmy Knapp said the result showed ‘there is a deeply discontented and disaffected workforce out there’.
BR had made two important concessions, he said.
It had agreed there would not be any compulsory redundancies as a result of the use of outside contractors and had guaranteed a more secure future for thousands of workshop staff.
BR chairman, Sir Bob Reid, said: ‘I am delighted.
This is a victory for common sense.
It does show that people are interested in serving the railways and serving the customers.’
Saffron Walden Tory MP, Alan Haselhurst, a member of the Commons transport committee, said he was ‘relieved’ by the ballot result.
‘I think that is a sensible decision.
Striking was not really getting us anywhere.
The railways are strapped for cash in any case, so it was causing BR to lose money.’
The rail unions had behaved in an ‘old-fashioned manner’, said Mr Haselhurst.
New working practices would be introduced once passenger services were privatised which would be more flexible.
Peter Lawrence, vice-chairman of the East Anglian branch of the Railway Development Society, said: ‘From the commuter's point of view that is very welcome, but all the same we do understand the concerns within the union about the present situation.
‘We would agree they have got a reason to be concerned about their future.’
Railway engineers also agreed by 1,613 votes to 532 to accept BR's package.
Previous strikes have cost BR £20 million in lost revenue.
Men accused of violent attacks
A MAN has been remanded in custody charged with attempted murder following an incident in a house in Braintree.
Mark Piller, 22, of Bailey Bridge Road is accused of attempting to murder Colin Cornelius, a 36-year-old man from a different address in the same road.
Mr Cornelius was taken to Broomfield Hospital after the attack on Sunday.
An application for bail by Piller's lawyer was refused by Braintree magistrates.
Meanwhile Chelmsford magistrates have remanded two men in custody following the knife attack at the White Hart pub in Boreham on Saturday.
Dean Foster, 20, and Lee Rank, 20, both of Hopkins Mead, Chelmsford, are charged with attempted grievous bodily harm with intent to injure two men at the pub that night.
Rank is additionally charged with assault causing actual bodily harm on February 2 this year, driving while disqualified and failing to surrender bail on March 15.
They are due to appear again before magistrates on May 24.
Two London men have been granted conditional bail after appearing before Chelmsford magistrates facing charges in connection with an assault at a burger bar over the weekend.
Gary Howard, 20, and Lee Brigden, 21, both from Barking, are accused of committing grievous bodily harm, threatening unlawful violence and possessing an offensive weapon, namely a golf club.
A Chelmsford motorist was hit over the head during the incident at a burger bar on the A12.
He was taken to Broomfield Hospital with serious head wounds.
Bright outlook helps thin trade
A MORE optimistic forecast of where the FTSE will be trading in June lifted sentiment through the day.
The 100 index, which at one stage had been 6.5 points down, recovered strongly to be up 11.1 at 2858.1 in very thin trading.
On the company news front, brewing giant Whitbread commanded centre stage.
Its strong profits rise and increased dividend payout had been anticipated by the City and the shares gained just a penny.
Confirmation that United Biscuits chairman Sir Robert Clarke is to take over the chair at Thames Water following the death of Sir Roy Watts was insufficient to boost Thames shares.
They fell 2p to 495p while United gained 7p to 421p on continuing takeover speculation.
Good news is expected from Marks & Spencer today as it tries to compete with Sainsbury as the UK's most profitable retailer.
Although M&S may still come in second, the City believes it is set for strong future growth and the shares were marked up 6p to 355p.
The other two major companies reporting today are Allied-Lyons, the food and drink giant, and British Airways.
Allied dipped early on fears that it is planning a £200 million cash call and ended the day 2p down at 543p.
Rights issue worries were affecting British Airways after reports that it needs to fund expansion plans.
It fell 7p to 297p.
BT's plans to move into the home entertainment market by selling dishes to receive BSkyB broadcasts helped push the communications giant 3p ahead to 418p.
Pearson, which has a major stake in BSkyB, gained 4p to 451p while Granada, another substantial investor, put on a penny to 408p.
News International, with its 50 per cent stake in the business, was unchanged at 225p.
Amstrad, a major producer of satellite dishes, dipped 1p to 32p on competition fears.
Mr Sugar's other main company interest, Tottenham Hotspur, was in demand as it climbed 14p to 103p over speculation that chief executive Terry Venables might buy Mr Sugar's stake in the club.
Round-up of race news
Derby favourite Tenby was yesterday reported to be fully recovered from a minor sickness scare and remains firmly on target for the Epsom Classic.
The unbeaten colt caused concern after becoming ill on Sunday.
Trainer Henry Cecil said: ‘Tenby developed mild colic on Sunday night and as a precaution was treated for it.
He had a quiet, ridden exercise this morning and appears to be 100% again.’
Lyric Fantasy is poised to return to sprinting at the weekend and has an excellent opportunity to break her duck as a three-year-old.
Trainer Richard Hannon entered her yesterday for the Hambro Countrywide Fillies Stakes at Newmarket and the Daily Mail Leisure Stakes at Lingfield on Saturday.
Lester Piggott added another chapter to his legend at Bath yesterday.
Over 20 years since his last appearance, Piggott partnered the Queen's Desert Lore to victory in the Timeform Race Card Maiden.
Bashayer will miss tomorrow's Oaks trial, the Tripleprint Lupe Stakes, at Goodwood and go for the fillies' Classic without another race.
BEVERLEY Allitt attended a local school in Lincolnshire and was noticed only for her constant attempts to be at the centre of attention.
After she left at 16 she got a job in a pub but became interested in nursing as a career, being taken on as a trainee student nurse three years later.
She had two sisters, a brother and a boyfriend, local farmhand Stephen Briggs.
Her parents were a stable influence and Beverley continued to live in the family home in the village of Corby Glenn.
But colleagues at the Grantham and Kesteven Hospital recall unpleasant happenings at the nurses' home which they shared with Allitt.
On one occasion excreta was placed in the fridge and there was an unexplained minor fire.
But her colleagues and superiors could not fault her dedication to the job, speaking highly of her nursing ability.
Because of illness, Allitt's period of training was extended but she qualified as a State Enrolled Nurse in late 1990.
In February 1991 Allitt applied to be enrolled for training as a sick children's nurse at Boston Pilgrim hospital.
She was turned down on the grounds of lack of experience with sick children.
However, she was taken on for six months by the Grantham and Kesteven Hospital in the children's ward.
‘Region's firms set to suffer if stricken shipbuilder shuts’
Labour warns over Swan Hunter yard
FIFTEEN East Anglian firms will lose business if the Tyneside-based Swan Hunter shipyard closes, claims the Labour Party.
The party's trade and industry spokesman, Robin Cook, has drawn up a list of 341 companies in 184 Tory constituencies which supply the yard, now in receivership, with parts.
Fifteen are in Suffolk, and north and mid Essex.
Mr Cook said the list showed Government claims shipbuilding was an obsolete industry were ‘bogus’.
He added: ‘I wonder whether Government ministers and Conservative MPs will tell their constituents the products and services which they supply to Swan Hunter are a thing of the past.
‘The 341 companies from the 184 Conservative constituencies will not have to travel far to voice their anger the Government took no action six months ago to avoid the crisis they were warned would happen.
‘The shock waves will be felt a lot further than the streets of Tyneside.’
Stowmarket-based Sifbronze, in Michael Lord's Central Suffolk constituency, sells welding wires to Swan Hunter through distributors.
Spokesman John Rose said the distributors would lose business ‘and in turn we will lose a small amount’.
‘While any loss of business is not good for us, it would certainly not make a great deal of difference,’ he added.
Brackett Green, in Bernard Jenkin's Colchester North constituency, does not expect to be unduly affected if Swan Hunter closes.
GEC Marconi, which employs 3,500 people in Simon Burns' Chelmsford constituency, signs contracts with the Ministry of Defence rather than Swan Hunter.
Soldier fires after terrorists attack Sinn Fein offices
Gun raid Loyalist wounded
A LOYALIST gunman was shot and wounded by a soldier yesterday after an attack on an office run by the IRA's political wing Sinn Fein.
The outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters admitted being behind the attack on the Sinn Fein advice centre in Lepper Street in the republican New Lodge area of north Belfast, saying the aim had been to murder three members of the party.
A gunman fired more than 20 shots into the building, but as he made off in a stolen car, a soldier fired a single shot from an Army observation post on the top of a block of flats several hundred yards away.
The stolen car stopped at gates blocking its path into the neighbouring loyalist Tiger Bay area.
The injured man was supported by his colleague as they got out and fled through a security gate.
Soon afterwards police arrested a man with a gunshot wound to the chest found slumped nearby in an alley behind Copperfield Street.
He was admitted to hospital and his condition was said to be ‘critical’.
Police surrounded a house in Copperfield Street.
After a siege lasting more than three hours, members of the RUC Mobile Support Unit stormed the house, smashed in the door and fired tear-gas inside.
Shortly after a man was led away.
Police said a weapon was found.
The UFF, admitting responsibility, named the three targets as Belfast Sinn Fein councillor Gerry McGuigan, and Sinn Fein members Bobby Lavery and Mr O'Hagan.
Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams visited the scene and said the attack was an attempt to kill and intimidate party members in advance of tomorrow's local government elections.
The RUC said later that a third man had been arrested in North Belfast.
But a spokesman was uncertain where, or if at all, the man fitted into the series of events.
Six paratroopers accused of running amok in the mainly republican town of Coalisland, Co Tyrone, after an IRA bomb badly injured a colleague were yesterday cleared of all charges.
But magistrate Maurice McHugh bound over five of the soldiers to keep the peace for 18 months because he felt they were not entirely innocent.
Storm steals show from star trio
THE combined might of Hollywood's top tough guys Sylvester Stallone, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Bruce Willis last night found one enemy they had no chance against — the British climate.
When the muscular trio arrived to launch their Planet Hollywood burger bar — a glitzy showbiz restaurant in London's Piccadilly Circus — the heavens opened, to a lively accompaniment of thunder and lightning.
Police closed off streets all around the area, with more than 5,000 people expecting a glimpse of their heroes.
One fan said: ‘I haven't been this wet since Pavarotti in the Park and at least the burgers were cheaper there.’
Brushing up on dental hygiene
FREE toothbrushes are being given out to the first 400 visitors to an exhibition encouraging people to brush up on dental hygiene.
Health Promotion has arranged the exhibition as part of National Smile Week.
It will be held in the Healthy Colchester 2000 information office in Trinity Street in the town centre.
Research shows that smiling increases the levels of hormones which promote good health.
However, the aim of the week is not only to encourage cheesy grins, but also to ensure people have bright, healthy smiles.
A mini dental surgery will be set up in the office and toothbrushes and toothpaste will be on sale at a third of normal price until Friday.
Health Promotion will be looking for the best young smile of the week.
A professional photographer will be in the office today from 1.30 pm to 4 pm, tomorrow from 10.30 am to noon and on Thursday from 2 pm to 4pm.
The exhibition will be open daily from 10 am to 4.30 pm.
Soccer
Spurs remain in turmoil as Venables loses ally
TOTTENHAM remained a club in turmoil last night as chief executive Terry Venables lost one of his staunchest allies.
The White Hart Lane power battle took a new twist when Venables' associate Edward Ashby was sacked from his consultant post, a move which appears to weaken Venables position still further as he fights chairman Alan Sugar to retain his £200,000 a year job.
Both Venables and Sugar attended a 90-minute board meeting at the club which agreed to dismiss Ashby, an alleged undischarged bankrupt.
Dave Webb's disappointment at missing out on the Chelsea manager's job was eased yesterday when he was named the new boss of Brentford.
Speedway
Kowalik to miss Wolves Cup clash
NEW signing Miroslaw Kowalik proved his Polish pedigree with a paid nine point return for Ipswich Witches in the British League defeat at Bradford on Saturday.
But the 24-year-old, who made his debut last week, misses Thursday's Speedway Star Knock-Out Cup first round first leg with Wolverhampton at Foxhall Stadium.
He has travelled home to prepare for a World Championship heat in Austria.
Ipswich's other newcomer, German Andre Pollehn, will also be missing as he is committed to a long track meeting in his own country that day.
Kowalik said: ‘I reached the World Championship semi-finals last year and I must do the same again to prove that my career is on course.
It would also help me to get a work permit for the British League next year.
‘I had to score eight points at Bradford to make my trip financially successful.’
Nordic final
Kowalik looks a good prospect on the evidence of his first two Ipswich meetings and he does not expect to miss many British League meetings.
The Wolverhampton match will clash with the FA Cup final replay, but Ipswich have no intention of changing the date.
Tony Rickardsson cruised through to the Nordic Final stage of the World Championship when he finished third in the three-leg Swedish heats last week.
The Ipswich number one scored 12 points on the first day, 14 on the second and 11 on the third.
‘The Nordic Final is being held in Finland on a track where I hold the track record,’ said Rickardsson.
Royal July visit
Princess to keep a double appointment
A VISIT by the Princess of Wales to Suffolk's largest engineering works will mean a Royal chapter to complete its 50-year history.
The Princess will meet several hundred workers when she tours the Lucas Diesel Systems plant at Sudbury on July 27.
On the same day she will also officially open a £2 million sheltered home for the frail elderly, Babergh council's swan-song as a house-building authority.
The twin events in Sudbury follow earlier appointments in Bury St Edmunds where the Princess opens the St Nicholas Hospice and visits a St Matthew Society conference.
Yesterday Lucas factory manager Colin Hull said the firm was delighted to have been asked to host a visit from the princess as a result of her expressing a wish to include an industrial stop on her stay.
With the company preparing to celebrate half a century in the town next year it meant a Royal ending could be written into its story.
‘We see this visit as an opportunity for the Princess to meet as many working people as possible,’ said Mr Hull.
About 500 of the company's 904 workforce will be on site for the occasion which was coming nearly five years after a visit by the Duke of Gloucester.
In the last two years the Sudbury auto parts factory has allowed 300 workers to leave through voluntary redundancy or early retirement, said Mr Hull.
The present situation at the works is stable.
Immediately before the factory visit the Princess opens Babergh's William Wood House, a 28-person home for the frail elderly, the first unit of its type in south Suffolk.
Council housing services manager Chris Foti said the visit was in response to the council's invitation.
The first residents move in next week.
The Princess of Wales
Travel rights of BR pensioners protected in Bill
AN Essex MP has secured the future of British Rail pensioners in any privatisation deal.
MP for Harwich, Iain Sproat, feared under the Government's scheme to sell off the uneconomical service, the rights of BR's pensioners and current employees would be forfeit.
Currently they are entitled to free or subsidised travel on the United Kingdom railways — a deal worked into their wages structure.
Mr Sproat, a member of the parliamentary committee discussing the Bill, is now delighted the worried BR pensioners will continue to enjoy those rights for the future.
Transport secretary, John MacGregor, agreed with Mr Sproat's view that ‘all persons — pensioners, pensioners’ dependents, current employees or former employees of BR — who currently enjoy concessionary travel with BR should in the future enjoy the same rights of concessionary travel on all public railway services in the UK, whether they are run by residual BR or by any new private sector company’.
Because this had been stated in the debate, Mr Sproat explained, it had legal standing and could not be overturned at a later date.
‘Prior to this I was uneasy, and my constituents were uneasy, that some smart lawyer in the future could get round these rights for BR dependants,’ he said.
Colleague Sir Keith Speed, MP for Ashford, has also tabled other amendments to the Bill, including a guarantee that travelcards and pensioners' railcards would survive privatisation.
He claims he has the support of up to 30 Tory MPs — enough to defeat the Government, which has a much smaller majority.
Mr Sproat pointed out that currently BR was under no compulsion to make concessions but did so because it made obvious economic sense.
‘The Government says when the private sector run certain tracks inevitably they will offer special deals,’ he said, ‘but we cannot tell them what to do any more than we tell BR what to do,’he said.
Drivers cheated tacograph safety rules
Police operation praised as three men in court
THE drivers of three 30-tonne lorries were able to stay behind the wheel for longer than the legal limit because they managed to cheat the ‘spy in the cab’.
Chelmsford Magistrates' Court was told how the men had fitted special switches which de-activated the vehicles' tacographs — the machine which records how long the driver spends actually driving and how long at rest.
Tacograph readings are used to enforce European safety limits on the length of time a driver is behind the wheel without a break.
The biggest police operation of its kind in the county ended successfully yesterday when Leonard Featherstone, 56, of Tudwick Road, Tiptree, his son Brett, 24, from the same address and Kenneth Hammond, 36, of Banters Lane, Great Leighs admitted a total of 55 charges concerning false tacograph entries dating from last March.
Fines of £1,575, £1,050 and £1,500 were imposed on Leonard and Brett Featherstone and Hammond respectively and each was ordered to pay £150 towards costs.
Lynn Officer, prosecuting, told the court the three owned their vehicles and were working on exclusive contracts for aggregates company Redlands at the time of the offences.
Operating out of Rockswell and other quarries in the county, the three were able to carry up to five extra loads, worth between £40 and £50, per week.
This they achieved by switching off their tacographs as they were loading making it look as if they were at rest.
Robin Howard, mitigating, said his clients had not got fat through this scam — it was merely to stay solvent during the worst years of the recession.
However, magistrates took a serious view of the case in light of the safety aspects.
They also heaped praise on the police for the investigation which eventually caught the three.
Speaking after the hearing, investigating officer Pc Harry Sexton of Chelmsford Traffic Police revealed the men were caught after a three-month investigation which culminated in seven search warrants being executed simultaneously as 24 officers swooped on the three vehicles.
The three now face action from the Eastern Traffic Division which is expected to revoke their licences to operate.
Drivers cheated tachograph safety rules
Police operation praised as three men in court
THE drivers of three 30-tonne lorries were able to stay behind the wheel for longer than the legal limit because they managed to cheat the ‘spy in the cab’.
Chelmsford Magistrates' Court was told how the men had fitted special switches which de-activated the vehicles' tachographs — the machine which records how long the driver spends actually driving and how long at rest.
Tachograph readings are used to enforce European safety limits on the length of time a driver is behind the wheel without a break.
The biggest police operation of its kind in the county ended successfully yesterday when Leonard Featherstone, 56, of Tudwick Road, Tiptree, his son Brett, 24, from the same address and Kenneth Hammond, 36, of Banters Lane, Great Leighs admitted a total of 55 charges concerning false tachograph entries dating from last March.
Fines of £1,575, £1,050 and £1,500 were imposed on Leonard and Brett Featherstone and Hammond respectively and each was ordered to pay £150 towards costs.
Lynn Officer, prosecuting, told the court the three owned their vehicles and were working on exclusive contracts for aggregates company Redlands at the time of the offences.
Operating out of Rockswell and other quarries in the county, the three were able to carry up to five extra loads, worth between £40 and £50, per week.
This they achieved by switching off their tachographs as they were loading, making it look as if they were at rest.
Robin Howard, mitigating, said his clients had not got fat through this scam — it was merely to stay solvent during the worst years of the recession.
However, magistrates took a serious view of the case in light of the safety aspects.
They also heaped praise on the police for the investigation which eventually caught the three.
Speaking after the hearing, investigating officer Pc Harry Sexton of Chelmsford Traffic Police revealed the men were caught after a three-month investigation which culminated in seven search warrants being executed simultaneously as 24 officers swooped on the three vehicles.
The three now face action from the Eastern Traffic Division which is expected to revoke their licences to operate.
Bailiff tells court of threats from crowd
Poll tax debt led to scuffles in street
A CROWD of people fought with police officers as they tried to stop a council bailiff taking a car to pay for an outstanding poll tax bill, a court was told yesterday.
Bailiff Matthew Chambers went to Ashley Court in Dovercourt to enforce liability orders for £407 against Ivan Smith.
Mr Chambers told Harwich magistrates that when he arrived, two men, John Tipple and Richard Allday, acted as ring-leaders, whipping up opposition.
Tipple, 38, of Valley Road, Dovercourt, and Allday, 37, of Main Road, Dovercourt, deny charges of using threatening or insulting behaviour on September 8 last year.
Tipple also pleads not guilty to resisting arrest.
A third defendant, Keith Bunting, 23, of Ashley Road, Dovercourt, denies using threatening or insulting behaviour and resisting arrest while a fourth, Damon Wait, 17, of Victoria Road, Dovercourt, agreed to be bound over in the sum of £50 to keep the peace for 12 months.
He was accused of using threatening or insulting behaviour and of assaulting a police officer.
Mr Andrew Perry, prosecuting, said Tipple, Allday and Bunting had created a potentially violent situation when Mr Chambers arrived to collect the money on behalf of Tendring District Council.
Mr Chambers said Mr Smith claimed he did not have £407 and, when he said he would take his Astra instead, Mr Smith said it had been sold.
Mr Chambers said shortly afterwards a police officer arrived and a van pulled up with six men inside.
‘One barged past me and said I was not going to be taking the car away and became abusive.
More police arrived but so did more people, constantly.’
Mr Chambers said he and some of the officers went to the garage to get the car but Tipple told the crowd to link arms around it.
‘The crowd started fighting, punching and kicking the police.
Allday warned there would not be enough police to handle the situation,’ said Mr Chambers.
The case continues.
Horse racing
Follow the one that got away
By Crusader
BENEFICIAL gets another chance at Goodwood today to demonstrate just what a loss he is to the Derby.
Impressive victory in the AR Dennis Predominate Stakes, a traditional Epsom trial, would normally propel the winner up the ante-post market.
And with Tenby already a 2–5 shot, credible challengers would be welcomed like old friends.
Sadly, Beneficial is not even entered — an oversight made to look a touch embarrassing when he smashed the Chester course record earlier this month in the Dee Stakes.
Held up and brought wide on the final turn, Beneficial sprinted away from his rivals, including four Derby entries, to beat Blues Traveller four lengths.
He had earlier defeated True Hero on his reappearance — the runner-up franking the form by winning the Thresher Classic Trial — before finding a mile too short when going down narrowly to Colway Bold at Thirsk.
Although today's mile and a quarter looks his optimum trip, trainer Geoff Wragg believes he will stay further.
Unfortunately, he will not be proving that in the Derby.
In good order
Beneficial's half-brother Jeune, last year's Predominate winner, can make a winning return to the course in the Festival Stakes.
Jeune won with ease here, beating Hatta's Mill five lengths, and was again a most taking victor when beating Red Bishop and Seattle Rhyme in the September Stakes at Kempton.
His Newmarket reappearance confirmed him in good order, as he travelled comfortably until left behind by those smart animals Zinaad and Apple Tree in the final furlong, beaten a neck and two lengths.
Half Term looked a particularly promising sort in winning a 12-runner Yarmouth maiden last October.
Recovering quickly from a slow start, John Gosden's colt settled matters in the space of a few strides when sent ahead a furlong out.
He should confirm his potential in the Anne Frances Stevens Memorial Conditions Stakes.
Son of Sharp Shot won in the manner of a well handicapped horse when heavily backed at Bath last time.
Value for far more than the length and a half he beat Grand Applause there, he will relish the step up in trip for the Chichester Festival Theatre Stakes.
Crusader's choice
GOODWOOD: 2.10 Jaazim, 2.40 Son of Sharp Shot, 3.10 BENEFICIAL (nap), 3.40 Half Term (n.b.), 4.10 Jeune, 4.45 Sweet Whisper, 5.20 Dancing Sensation.
BEVERLEY: 2.30 Passion Sunday, 3.00 Sit Alkul, 3.30 No Submission, 4.00 Bay Queen, 4.30 Native Mission, 5.00 Abergele.
Traders campaign for shop parking
A PETITION calling for motorists to be given round-the-clock access to a town's main shopping street is being well supported by the public, say traders.
The petition is being organised by Stowmarket Traders' Association, which is concerned about the effect on traders' business of a pedestrian priority scheme introduced last August.
It also calls for a rigid speed limit to be imposed on motorists and for short-term parking bays to be made available.
Since the scheme was introduced, only motorists with special passes are allowed to use Ipswich Street during the working day.
However, traders want Suffolk County Council and Mid Suffolk District Council, which are responsible for the scheme, to allow shoppers to drive into the street and park for short periods.
Traders' association secretary David Head said the petition, which will be presented to the county and district councils next week, was being well supported by the public.
An exhibition is being jointly organised by the county and district council to give the public a chance to comment on the pedestrian priority scheme.
It will open in the Stowmarket's Meadow Centre shopping centre on Thursday and last until Saturday.
Logic that must prevail to save minke whales
ONCE UPON a time, the government of Norway promised that it would not only protect the wolf as an endangered species, but even maintain a breeding population of the beast.
And then, for the first time in many years, a wolf was actually seen on Norwegian soil.
In next to no time, the law had been amended to permit ‘pest control’, and a £100,000 expedition had been mounted to track the animal down.
When it was shot, the nearest town turned out en masse to welcome the man who had killed it and to pour champagne over the corpse.
Norway then returned to its previous habit of exhorting the rest of the world to conservation, until another conflict of interests arose.
This time, the government has to choose between the demands of its own whalers, and a ruling of the International Whaling Commission (IWC).
The IWC has said that there is no scope for slaughtering minke whales for fear that they might be driven into extinction.
The Norwegian whalers have votes which might sway the result of an election later this year.
It is the latter argument which impresses the Norwegian politicians.
Political reasons all too often prevail in questions of this kind, and Japan and Iceland are likely to imitate Norway.
They talk about the ‘sustainable development’ of natural resources, but their idea of what is sustainable is most unlikely to conform with the reality.
It is just 500 years since John Cabot sailed from Bristol to discover Newfoundland.
The cod, he reported, were so thick in the water that his sailors had only to lower their baskets over the side to fill them with fish.
And now the cod have almost gone.
The Canadian government intervened with measures to help the fishermen and other measures to help the fish; and though it acted with the best of intentions, it had the worst of results.
On this side of the Atlantic, much the same criticism can be made of the common fisheries policy of the European Community.
An article recently published in Science magazine on this theme claims that: ‘If you look at the history of fisheries, you see that one stock collapses after another’.
It goes on to argue that scientists do not know enough about natural fluctuations in fish populations in the wild to be able to advise on how many can safely be taken at any time.
Scientists advising the IWC have taken a similar view.
They have reported what they know about the number of minke whales in the sea, but have made no recommendation as to how many of them might safely be slaughtered — or ‘harvested’ in the unpleasant terminology of the whalers.
The conclusion reached by the Americans is that, if it is not necessary to kill, then it is necessary not to kill.
This is the only sensible decision to be made, and its logic must be pressed upon the minority of dissenters.
Pensioner tricked by bogus gardeners
POLICE are warning residents to be on their guard after two men tricked a pensioner out of several hundred pounds.
Last week two men called at the home of an elderly woman in Curlew Close, Clacton, posing as gardeners.
Detective Sergeant Mick Ornellus, of Clacton CID, said the two men either offered or already had carried out a number of jobs for her and tricked her into parting with the money.
He said the resident, who is in her late 70s, had been very confused about what had happened and had not reported the matter until a few days afterwards.
On Sunday two men, possibly the same two, called at a home in Tudor Green, Jaywick, offering to do some building work.
They gave the woman an extremely high quotation and she sent them away.
‘We would like to warn everybody to be on their guard against unsolicited ‘tradesmen’,’ he said.
General situation: Rain over western Scotland and Northern Ireland at first will quickly be replaced by brighter weather with blustery showers.
Elsewhere, it will be a day of sunny spells and scattered showers.
The showers, mostly confined to western areas, will be heavy with thunder, and will spread to some other parts later.
Extreme eastern parts of southern England will be more cloudy at times, whilst northeastern areas will be mostly dry and bright.
Windy in the north, with gales in northwestern areas.
East Anglia: Mostly dry with sunny spells.
Perhaps some scattered showers later.
Winds southerly light or moderate.
Max 17C (63F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Thursday: Continuing unsettled with rain or showers in most areas.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind south to southeast light or moderate.
Fair.
Visibility good.
Sea slight.
Allitt inquiry to sit in private 
NHS chief pledges no whitewash
A HEALTH chief pledged last night that there would be ‘no whitewash’ in the aftermath of the trial of nurse Beverley Allitt.
Trent regional medical officer Professor Richard Alderslade said the health authority was determined to get to the bottom of what went wrong and to learn the lessons from it.
Earlier yesterday, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley instructed the authority to set up an independent inquiry to look into the circumstances surrounding Allitt's killing spree on the children's ward of Grantham and Kesteven Hospital.
But the inquiry, to be chaired by former Health Service Commissioner Sir Cecil Clothier, QC, is expected to sit in private and not be able to compel witnesses to give evidence.
The victims' parents want a public inquiry with powers to force people to give evidence on oath, together with the disclosure of any relevant documents.
But Prof Alderslade said: ‘I believe that our independent inquiry is an adequate and appropriate response, backed by our determination to find out what happened, learn the lessons and then implement them.
There is no question whatsoever of a whitewash.’
Mrs Bottomley would not be drawn on whether it was a public inquiry, but told BBC Radio 4's PM programme that all who wished to give evidence to Sir Cecil would be able to do so.
And, after he completed his report in about three months' time, it would be published, she said.
But shadow health secretary David Blunkett said he was disappointed Mrs Bottomley had not announced a full independent public inquiry.
‘Everyone concerned with the future of the care of children within the NHS must be satisfied that every aspect of the case is available for full public scrutiny,’ he said.
Prof Alderslade said Trent Regional Health Authority had been appalled by Allitt's crimes, and pledged that the parents would be fully informed of the inquiry's findings.
David Crampton makes a statement on behalf of the parents of all Allitt's victims
Bosnian Serbs say peace plan is dead
Pale, Bosnia: BOSNIAN Serbs called for a new peace plan for Bosnia after declaring the current one dead yesterday but Muslim-led government leaders said this meant the West no longer had any excuse to avoid decisive action.
‘The plan is dead, long live the new plan,’ Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic said after his people finished voting in a referendum on whether to accept it or not.
Official results are not expected until Wednesday but Serb radio said ballots counted so far showed a massive turnout and a ‘no’ vote of between 95 per cent and 99pc.
‘This should be a signal to the world community to take decisive action for Bosnia.
Now there is no excuse,’ said Tatjana Ljuic-Mijatovic, a member of the government's seven-person presidency.
The Bosnian Serbs under Karadzic are against the plan drawn up by mediators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen because it demands they give up a third of the territory they control and proposes dividing Bosnia into ten ethnic cantons.
Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind has said the international community must consider the effects of an air strike in Bosnia before making the move.
‘There are 15,000 UN troops in Bosnia who have managed to save 400,000 civilians from starving to death.
If air strikes are launched, what will become of them?
We must ensure that any new action does not jeopardise what we have done or make us lose more than we have gained.’