

Colchester earn cup revenge
COLCHESTER & East Essex earned revenge over Maldon in yesterday's NCA Abbot Ale Cup second round tie.
After suffering a defeat by Maldon in the Anglo Two Counties League at the weekend, captain Roy Flanagan can overlook the hassle of having to organise days off work for his players.
Both sides were affected by unavailability at Castle Park, but Colchester showed the greater strength in depth to bag a satisfying 110-run win.
Maldon skipper Mick Brown admitted: ‘We were stuffed.’
His team certainly did not help themselves by bowling erratically (19 wides) against a home line-up weakened by the loss, among others, of Nadeem Shahid, Jim Cotterill and Lorrie Austin.
Openers Chris Wheeler and Roy Flanagan only hit nine boundaries, but scored 145 between them.
The target of 221 for 3 seemed beyond Maldon early on as Essex II bowler Glen Bolton and Nigel Hilliard pinned them down.
Opener Robert Barber fell to a great Kennedy catch at mid-on, Bolton — who missed the league match through county duties — had Elliott for a duck and Maldon were 2 for 2.
The first 15 overs yielded only 30 and the 100 did not come up until the 35th over.
Only Mark Hawes made more than 20.
C Wheeler run out 68
R Flanagan run out 77
A Kennedy b Punchard 25
C Perkins not out 11
M Hempstead not out 5
Extras 35
Total (for 3 in 45 overs) 221
Did not bat: N Hilliard, D Butcher, G Bolton, T Spelling, K Felton, R Fritz.
R Barber c Kennedy b Hilliard 2
I Elliott c Wheeler b Bolton 0
K Merrill c Kennedy b Butcher 17
M Brown c Bolton b Butcher 11
C Elliott b Spelling 10
A Barber c Hilliard b Spelling 8
M Hawes lbw Fritz 26
M Gozzett c Fritz b Felton 14
B Corderoy lbw Felton 6
C Punchard run out 1
A Donner not out 0
Extras 14
Total 111
Scoreboard
Colchester & East Essex
Bowling: C Punchard 9–43–1, B Corderoy 9–34–0, R Barber 9–35–0, I Elliott 1–7–0, A Donner 9–51–0, M Brown 8–40–0.
Fall: 1–145, 2–190, 3–213.
Maldon
Bowling: N Hilliard 6–19–1, G Bolton 9–12–1, D Butcher 7–12–2, T Spelling 6–12–2, R Fritz 6.5–28–1, N Felton 4–17–2.
Fall: 1–2, 2–2, 3–28, 4–37, 5–57, 6–74, 7–102, 8–104, 9–108.
Cup revenge: Colchester's Roy Flanagan fails to score from this ball in yesterday's cup clash with Maldon but went on to score 77 in his side's emphatic victory
Picture by NICKY LEWIN
SWIMMERS were turned away from Colchester Leisure World because a film crew under the direction of Alan Bleasdale had taken over the fitness pool.
The Liverpudlian writer is producing and directing an all-British film called Getaway due for cinema release next spring.
The film is about a getaway driver who decides to cast aside his criminal life, seeking refuge in the Suffolk countryside, where he falls in love, marries and starts a family, but his former associates do not want to lose him.
The hero was being filmed taking his 10-month-old baby to the pool when he gets the first indication he is going to be threatened.
Mr Bleasdale said the pool was chosen because it had ‘every facility known to man’ and added the staff had all been very helpful as had the mothers and toddlers from the Colchester area employed as extras.
In the swim: Alan Bleasdale and Katrina Levon at Colchester Leisure World
A CRUEL WAIT
Vital surgery delayed twice
A HOSPITAL patient with a life-threatening condition was twice turned away from an operating table because there were not enough intensive care beds.
Ken Connelly, 52, who suffers from an aorta aneurysm, a problem with his main artery, was about to be operated on when he was turned away at the last minute — on two occasions.
‘After the last occasion I was extremely upset.
It is not just the disruption to my life, but it is also the waste to the hospital.’
Mr Connelly, of Chantry Green, Ipswich, was told the operation could not go ahead because the five intensive care beds were already full.
‘Presumably they must have to pay for all the preparation leading up to an operation of this sort, and pay the staff who are waiting around.
It makes no sense at all,’ he said.
The operation at Ipswich Hospital is intended to strengthen the walls of the main artery.
Without it he is in danger of suffering a rupture which could result in death.
Mr Connelly's condition was first diagnosed in March, and a date for the operation was set on May 5.
He went into hospital the day before and was only told on the day of the operation it would not go ahead.
A second date was set for last Monday, when Mr Connelly was again told of the cancellation only at the last minute.
Ipswich Hospital general manager Brian Websdell said there had been a high intake of intensive care patients at the times of Mr Connelly's operation.
‘This is most sad.
We have every sympathy.
Intensive therapy is part of a national problem.
We are not sure why intensive beds are becoming more in demand.’
He said that from 1991–1992 there were only five times when intensive care patients had to be transferred to other hospitals in the region, but in April and May this year alone there had been five cases.
‘We could not predict that or anticipate that.’
He said each of the five intensive care beds in Ipswich Hospital cost between £150,000 and £200,000 a year, and he is hoping to get one more.
Nick Cooper, a GP at Mr Connelly's local clinic in Hawthorne Drive, Ipswich, said: ‘Ipswich Hospital seems to have a problem.
They need to get more intensive care beds.’
He said Mr Connelly was not in immediate danger, but the longer the operation was left, the greater the chance of a rupture that could prove fatal.
IF you have had problems with operations being cancelled or been waiting too long for an operation, please contact the EADT newsdesk on 0473 282387.
Patient patient: Ken Connelly reflects on his postponed operation.
Picture by Paul Nixon
Plea for symbol on baby's headstone
Tragic family fights on for bear on grave
A GRIEVING family's plea to have a symbolic teddy bear carved on their seven-week-old daughter's grave has fallen on deaf ears.
David and Linda Leeder, of Wayside, Shalford, near Braintree met the archdeacon of Colchester, the Very Reverend Ernest Stroud in a bid to get the church to change its mind over the refusal.
Instead Mr Stroud gave them a form to submit to the diocesan chancellor.
The trauma for the family began when Sophie was born, severely brain damaged last August.
She lived for just seven weeks, but during her short life her two sisters, Clare, five and Victoria three bought her a small teddy bear.
The little toy, her only possession, accompanied her everywhere, even into the brain scan machine at St John's Hospital, Chelmsford, and was put in her coffin.
The family wanted a three inch carving of the bear on the headstone, to symbolise the only thing that ever belonged to tragic Sophie, but the church has said no.
When Mr Stroud met the family, on Monday, he said the bear was not considered a Christian symbol.
Mr Leeder said yesterday: ‘The meeting was not very constructive.
He seemed to lay down rules and regulations.
He told us to fill in this form, saying we had not gone through the right channels.’
‘He said we had not made an official request.
I don't know then what we have been doing for the last four weeks, when we first asked.’
Mr Leeder said the church did not appear sympathetic.
The family has been told a rabbit would be allowed on the head stone of the infant in the parish church.
The Leeders are now drawing up a petition which will be presented to the Bishop of Chelmsford next month.
EC orchestra forced to call off concert
A CONCERT due to be given by the European Community Chamber Orchestra in Colchester on Sunday has been cancelled.
Announcing the sad news for concert-goers, Steve May, arts development officer at Colchester Borough Council, said the event had been cancelled ‘for reasons beyond our control’.
He said most ticket-holders had already been warned of the cancellation and would be given a full refund.
Anyone who still has tickets should contact the Charter Hall booking office on (0206) 766660.
Teachers asked to agree weekend and Bank Holiday working
Lecturers to strike over new contracts and longer hours
COLLEGE lecturers at Colchester Institute are to strike in protest over new contracts forcing them to work longer hours including weekends and bank holidays.
On April 1 this year the college became independent of local education authority control, and since then the college's management has been trying to introduce new employment contracts, as recommended by the College Employers' Forum.
Colchester Institute members of the University and College Lecturers union, NATFHE, have decided to take strike action because negotiations with management over the new contracts are breaking down.
Under the new contracts staff would work a 37-hour week and have 35 days holiday to be taken at the management's discretion.
Teachers would have to agree to unlimited teaching hours and weekend and bank holiday working.
Clauses in the new contracts prohibit freedom of expression and give the college copyright claims over research and writing carried out by teachers and lecturers.
The new contracts would also abolish the current 12-month redundancy notice.
Only newly-appointed and promoted staff are due to receive the new contracts which according to the Institute's NATFHE chairman, Denis Clinton, has led to the problem of new staff being appointed but not given contracts.
Today the union is meeting to plan tomorrow's day of action.
Yesterday Mr Clinton said he hoped some of the 230 members would be picketing at the college.
NATFHE members had threatened strike action in April but it was avoided when management agreed to start negotiations about the contracts.
No-one from the college directorate was available to comment.
Bowls
Scott Reading holds off Cambs fight back
THE FIRST round of the new National County Under-25s Two Fours competition sent Essex to Coton, on the outskirts of Cambridge, where they produced a great effort to win by three shots against Cambridgeshire.
Scott Reading was the focal point of a close finish as he tried to protect a five shot lead over the closing three ends after fantastic work by Paul Maynard's rink.
England Under-25 cap Colin Messer, playing at skip, clawed back three in two ends.
The pressure was intense for the final deliveries.
He stepped up with his last wood with Reading holding shot.
Into the ditch
He fired the jack into the ditch and Essex had the best back bowl to take a single and win the match although, after a tremendous start, it should never have been so close.
Maynard was 13–1 up after five ends and 18–4 in front after eight, but his opposite number pulled back with two four counts to leave Reading with a job to do at the finish.
Rink details
Essex rinks first:
Bryan Marshall (Chelmsford), Stephen Tucker (Tye Green), Paul Clapp (Tilbury), Scott Reading (Liberty) 18, C Messer 24.
Andrew Blake, Stephen Cooper, Andrew Skilbeck, Paul Maynard (all Essex County) 27, M Law 18.
Essex Middleton cup manager Norman Groves has selected his side for the second trial match against Berkshire Under-35s to be played at the Esso BC, Abingdon, on Sunday morning.
All the young contenders who played in the victory over Oxfordshire are given another chance to prove themselves.
There are some positional changes.
Established players Nigel Smith, David Jarrold, Pat Watford, Andy Cooper and Graham Arnold all come back into contention.
Rinks
Trevor Sadowski (Goodmayes), John Watson (Chadwell St Mary), Paul Maynard (Essex County), Nigel Smith (Liberty).
Derek Ross (Grays Town), Steve Cooper (Essex County), Andy Cooper (West Mersea), Chris Bryan (Liberty).
Andrew Blake, Andrew Skilbeck (both Essex County), Graham Arnold (Aldersbrook), Steve Pickford (Romford).
Pat Watford (Tye Green), Derek Hardy (Larsen), David Gildersleve (Chelmsford), Tony Nimmo (Tye Green).
Scott Reading, David Jarrold (both Liberty), Glyn Walls (Romford), Graham Brinkley (Grays Town).
Ian Barker (Chelmsford), Peter Ayling (Harlow), Alan Hayward (Pegasus), Warren Whiteman (Liberty).
Golf
Bullock sudden-death hero
DEAN Bullock was the hero for Three Rivers after a sudden death victory pushed his club through to the third round of the Thornton Cup.
Bullock and Keith Davies of the opposing club Channels were the last duo left on the course in the afternoon singles.
The result of the match was hanging in the balance with the teams level at 7–7 in the club house.
Bullock had been one up after 15 holes but Davies pulled back the deficit at the 16th and held on to finish the match all square.
So a sudden death play-off was required to settle the matter and it was almost all over at the 19th hole.
Bullock missed the green with his second shot and then chipped past the hole.
But he holed the long putt coming back to keep the match alive after Davies had safely made a par.
Costly mistake
Davies made a costly mistake at the stroke index one second play-off hole though.
Bullock found himself in the driving seat after Davies was forced to play sideways out of a ditch.
The Three Rivers star made no mistake with a chip and a par putt from four feet to seal victory and a third round tie away at Romford.
Colchester were also given a tough match by Woodford.
They scraped through by an 8–7 margin and now travel to Upminster in the next round.
Score: Channel 7 Three Rivers 8
Details
Foursomes details (Channels names first): Lee Lockwood and Sean Young bt Dave Challis and John Hills 3 and 1; Neil Manton and Peter Walker lost to Bryan Gower and Neil Gaur 3 and 1; Scott Clark and James Davey lost to Barry Wilson and John Dunan 4 and 3; Ian Morrison and Keith Davies lost to Dean Bullock and Steve Wise 1 down; Graham Joy and David Curtis bt Peter Alabaster and Bobby Platts 2 and 1.
Foursomes score: Channels 2 Three Rivers 3
Singles: Lockwood lost to Gaur 4 and 3; Young bt Gower 3 and 2; Manton lost to Challis 4 and 3; Clark bt Hills 3 and 2; Davey bt Wise 1 up; Walker bt Dunan 1 up; Morrison lost to Wilson 2 and 1; Davies lost to Bullock 20th; Curtis lost to Alabaster 3 and 2; Joy bt Platts 3 and 2.
Singles score: Channels 5 Three Rivers 5
Other Thornton Cup results: Chigwell 11, Bush Hill Park 3;
Braintree 10, Frinton 4; Warren 3, Rochford Hundred 12; Enfield 7, Orsett 8; Maylands 10, Bishop's Stortford 5; Thorpe Hall 15, Forrester Park 0; Boyce Hill 9, Basildon 6; Upminster 9, Warley Park 5; Romford 10, Muswell Hill 4; Colchester 8, Woodford 7; Wanstead 8, Theydon Bois 7; Royal Epping Forest 11, Clacton-on-Sea 4; Chelmsford 7, Stapleford Abbotts 8; Ilford 10, Toot Hill 4; East Herts 12, Castle Point 3.
Third round draw, The first team mentioned is at home: Romford v Three Rivers; Orsett v Royal Epping Forest; Boyce Hill v Wamstead; Upminster v Colchester; Maylands v East Herts; Ilford v Thorpe Hall; Rochford Hundred v Chigwell; Stapleford Abbotts v Braintree.
Youngsters go dancing in the sun
THE Cumberland Square, delightfully performed by a group of schoolchildren in Chelmsford yesterday, is just one of the many outdoor events organised as part of this week's Chelmsford Cathedral Festival.
Sunshine bathed the dancing children, all in Year Four at Perryfields School, Springfield, who enjoyed a morning out of the classroom entertaining shoppers in Exchange Way.
Other Festival Fringe attractions this week include films in the Chapter House.
One of the films on the programme is Chelmsford 1953…
Before and Since .
The East Anglian Film Archive presents the footage, which includes views of the town in Coronation Year and a later visit by the Queen to present the royal maundy money in 1963.
The showing is at 1pm tomorrow.
Tickets, price £2.50, are available from the Civic Theatre in Fairfield Road or Chancellor Hall in Market Street.
On Friday the classic Marilyn Monroe comedy Some Like It Hot will be shown at 6pm, tickets also £2.50, and on Saturday at 2pm Van Gogh , an award-winning new feature film by Maurice Pialat, will be screened: tickets, £3.
All films will be shown at the Chapter House, and the box office telephone number is (0245) 495028.
Brass bands, jazz bands, school bands and groups of dancers have been booked to perform each lunchtime at three Chelmsford venues up to and including Saturday.
The venues are: outside the post office in Exchange Way, the County Hall Atrium, and outside The Meadows shopping centre.
In step: Kirsty Good and Kate Davies enjoy a bit of country dancing
Danes vote to back Treaty
THE Danes voted for the same treaty yesterday that they rejected last June because they were misled by the media and politicians, claimed an East Anglian Tory Euro-rebel.
Colchester North MP, Bernard Jenkin, was speaking as it emerged that the Danes had approved the Maastricht Treaty in a referendum by 56.8 per cent to 43.2 pc.
The result came as a relief to John Major's Government, which would have been forced to scrap the treaty's ratification if the Danes had rejected it.
Mr Jenkin said a campaign by Danish newspapers and politicians had produced the result.
Referring to the concessions the Danes negotiated in Edinburgh under Britain's presidency of the European Community, he said: ‘The Edinburgh concessions were binding in international law, but have no value in Community law, and Community law overrides international law.
‘The Danes have just voted on exactly the same treaty.’
Mr Jenkin said he and other British politicians opposed to Maastricht had tried to get this message across in the run-up to the referendum, but had been defeated by those urging people to vote yes.
Another Tory Euro-rebel, Central Suffolk MP, Michael Lord, agreed with Mr Jenkin's analysis.
Most unbiased lawyers had said the Danish concessions ‘won't hold water’.
The voters had been put under ‘enormous pressure’ by politicians, the media and the business community, and they would regret yielding to their advice.
The Prime Minister said Britain had helped Denmark obtain opt-outs from key parts of the treaty, including a single currency and common citizenship and defence.
In the referendum, ‘this new position has been overwhelmingly approved’, he said.
‘It is now clear there is a very large majority in favour of ratifying the Maastricht Treaty.’
The ratification Bill receives its third reading in the Commons tomorrow.
The Opposition has agreed to abstain, which means the Government will win a clear majority.
But three of the region's Tory MPs — Mr Jenkin, Mr Lord and David Porter (Waveney)— are due to vote against it.
The Bill then goes to the Lords.
Providing no amendments are carried, which looks likely, it will receive the Royal Assent without being considered again by the Commons.
Mr Major hopes to complete ratification by the end of August.
New hospital phone system saves time
CALLERS to Colchester's hospitals are benefiting from a new £18,000 direct dialling system.
The computerised exchange — known as Direct Dialling In (DDI)— has already gone a long way to reducing delays for the thousands of callers daily using the Essex Rivers Healthcare Trust switchboards.
A recent survey showed that more than 7,000 people telephoned Colchester General in an average day.
Callers can now get straight through to the ward simply by adding the prefix ‘83’ to the extension number.
Since DDI, the number of calls at Colchester General's switchboard has fallen on average to 3,000.
Wards at Colchester General, Severalls and Essex County hospitals are on the system as are outpatient clinics and hospital management.
A GRANDMOTHER with nearly 40 years' experience behind the wheel has been selected as East Anglia's top woman driver.
Ruth Allen from Hadleigh beat 29 other candidates in a gruelling day-long test of their driving skill and knowledge carried out at Duxford Airfield, near Cambridge.
The competition, open to all paid-up members of the Women's Institute, was sponsored by Vauxhall Motors and assessed by experts from the RAC and the Institute of Advanced Motorists.
‘I'm very surprised,’ said Mrs Allen yesterday.
‘We had to do manoeuvrability tests in three different cars, including a Cavalier automatic and a Corsa which I'd never driven before.
‘Then we had a Highway Code-cum-driving practice test and a 30-minute test on everything from dirt roads to motorways, which was partly an economy test driving at the maximum safe speed.
‘I normally drive a Volvo 343; it's not a very new one, but my main criterion is to make sure I don't end up as the jam in the sandwich when I'm out on the motorway.’
Mrs Allen, 56, who passed her driving test a week after her 17th birthday, wins a year's free membership of the RAC's Reflex scheme.
Second-placed Barbara Hayward from Huntingdon won £75 of gift vouchers and Liz Knights from Wisbech, who came third, a £50 gift voucher.
All three will now compete in the national final at Millbrook, Bedfordshire, in September for the top prize, a Vauxhall Astra Si Hatchback.
Essex youngsters made to struggle
DUNSTABLE Downs Golf Club was the scene of untold misery for the Essex Colts team, who began their South East League campaign with a 7–4 defeat by a weak Bedfordshire side.
Manager Alan Lockwood was forced to bring in a number of young faces and he could only look on agonisingly as they struggled against more experienced golfers in gusting winds.
Already robbed of Robert Coles and Richard Hussey by Brabazon demands, and others through injury, he had to call up Warley's Nathan Smith at short notice when David Salisbury dropped out.
The County Union is looking into the Boyce Hill boy's absence and Lockwood will wait for the outcome before he names the squad to take on Hertfordshire in the second match in July.
He was defiant yesterday, saying: ‘If we win the next three matches we could still go through and we will have a much stronger side.
Our players are good enough.’
Even with the problems, he still believed the team should have done better and was disappointed with the standard of performance, although he conceded home advantage was telling.
New captain Terry Moncur and Alabaster both won in the afternoon singles, though not as handsomely as expected, but only Kenny Breeze managed to score points thereafter.
He came back from four down to halve with Paul Neverton, who plays off scratch.
Details
Foursomes: Terry Moncur (capt) & Matthew Hales (both Theydon Bois) lost 2 and 1 to Netherton & Wilcox, Peter Alabaster (Three Rivers) & Kenny Breeze (Orsett) bt Burr & Wilson 1 up, Ryan Adair (Orsett) & Matt Robarts (The Warren) bt Bifield & Parrott 2 and 1, Scott Downton (Thorpe Hall) & Nathan Smith (Warley Park) lost 3 and 1 to West & Wells.
Singles: Moncur bt Bifield 2 and 1, Alabaster bt Wells 2 and 1, Downton lost 3 and 2 to Wilson, Hales lost 6 and 5 to Wilcox, Breeze halved with Neverton, Smith lost 2 down to West, adair lost 2 and 1 to Parrott, Robarts (ret hurt) lost to Burr.
Round-up of results and fixtures
Thieves steal from brave cancer victim
A MOTHER has condemned thieves who stole the wheels off the family car just before her cancer victim daughter was to set off for a hospital check up.
Lyn Sweeting's daughter was due to travel from Chelmsford to London for a check up after months of chemotherapy for leukaemia.
The family was getting ready to make the journey when Lyn noticed the wheels had gone from her husband's Ford Fiesta parked in their drive at Paradise Road, Writtle.
Luckily, 21-year-old Emma, was well enough to make the trip to St. Bart's on Monday morning by train, said Lyn,— but a few months ago the situation would have been completely different.
‘A few months ago Emma was undergoing chemotherapy and was unable to walk, so a train journey would have been very difficult for her.
These appointments are stressful and quite honestly something like this just makes it even more traumatic,’ she said.
Mrs Sweeting said her daughter, a receptionist at County Hall, in Chelmsford, has never complained about her illness and always adopted a positive approach to life.
‘I hope the people who stole those wheels realise that this sort of thing has a knock on effect,’ she added.
Shy Emma has won the hearts of all who know her in County Hall through her brave fight against the disease.
A next door neighbour stepped in to help by lending his car to get her family to Chelmsford station, she said.
She said another member of the family would have been able to help after the theft but it would have caused more inconvenience.
‘Apart from anything else it makes you a bit uneasy being in the house,’ she added.
The good news is that Emma has been given the all clear and regular check up appointments at St.Bart's and Broomfield Hospital in Chelmsford will make sure she gets the right care from the experts.
Cricket
Champions hold on for exciting draw
CHAMPIONS Chelmsford finished just 10 runs short of victory in the opening round of matches in this season's Colour Assembly Essex League.
Replying to Wanstead's 194 for 2 declared, the champions finished on 185 with one wicket left standing to earn the draw.
But five wins were recorded in the First XI League.
Fives & Heronians won at Westcliff in the last over where new captain Glen Poulter scored 58 and Mel Hussain 93.
At Buckhurst Hill, despite Javed's 6 for 37, Hadleigh & Thundersley won by 2 wickets, Mark Seaden scoring 51.
Mike McEvoy scored 92 not out and Lorrie Austin 70 in Colchester & East Essex's 202 for 3 declared, but they lost at South Woodford by 3 wickets.
Loughton (M Brookes 74) lost at Hutton (Graham Spooner 54 and Richard Pryke 70).
Southend on Sea, losing by 10 wickets, were no match for visitors Woodford Wells, whose Mark Webber scored 51.
Chelsmford II had an easy win over Wanstead, Eddie Lawrence taking 5 for 38 and skipper, David Carr, scoring 54 not out.
Seven other Second XI matches resulted in wins with Southend on Sea reversing the First XI result, beating Woodford Wells by 7 wickets.
Taylor hit 122 in Orsett & Thurrock's draw with Old Brentwoods whose T. Harris scored 70.
John Agass hit 111 and N. Bardwell 60 followed by 5 for 51 for South Woodford in the drawn game with Colchester.
Doug Allum (6 for 62) bowled Fives & Heronians to victory over Westcliff on Sea after Steve Adcock 50 and S Marshall 52 set the pace for the home side's 223 for 6.
Third XI League batsmen had a good day, with Mark Severn's unbeaten 111 in Brentwood's defeat of Ilford, Cyril Hickson's 102 not out for Woodford Wells to beat Southend, and Jerry Trayler's 122 not out in Gidea Park & Romford's draw with Chingford.
Marconi link with Everest conqueror
NEWS of Rebecca Stephens' success in becoming the first British woman to reach the summit of Everest was flashed around the world with the help of an Essex-based company from the Marconi group.
Rebecca ecstatically relayed the news back to base camp through her Japanese-built VHF radio, shouting: ‘I'm on top of the world’.
Minutes later, Marconi technician Peter Earl was sending the joyous satellite phone message to expedition HQ in Kensington, west London, relayed by the Inmarsat satellite via Gnangara in Western Australia.
And at 0800 BST, a mere 19 minutes after Rebecca Stephens had made the summit and secured her place in history, the Press Association flashed the news —‘Rebecca Stevens reached summit of Everest’— to the world.
It was all a far cry from the first ascent of Everest 40 years ago, news of which took three days to reach London — on Coronation Day.
The message had to be carried by a Nepali runner 35 miles to an Indian police post equipped with a radio transmitter.
The walkie-talkie operated by Everest conquerors Sir Edmund Hillary and Sherpa Tensing had to be warmed in a waistcoat for 20 minutes, and proved useless above 24,000 feet.
For 1993, however, Marconi Marine, of Chelmsford, provided the first satellite communications terminal ever used on Everest.
Rebecca took the Japanese-made VHF radio, weighing no more than a bag of sugar, on her summit assault.
Only the effects of cold on its battery prevented her being ‘patched’ through direct to London on the satellite link.
The limits of possibility at 29,078 feet have always had a peculiar appeal for British expeditions.
Britain named the mountain after Colonel Sir George Everest — he pronounced his name ‘Everest’— who completed the trigonometrical survey of the Himalayas in 1841 and first fixed its position and altitude.
Nothing else was known of Everest until the Alpine Club and the Royal Geographical Society organised the first reconnaissance expedition in 1921.
In fact, from 1921–38 the British made no fewer than seven attempts on Everest.
Teenager badly hurt in car crash
A TEENAGE motorist suffered serious face injuries in a head-on collision on a country road.
Terence Bevan, 19, of Church Road, Thorrington, was driving a Volkswagen Golf along St Osyth Road, Alresford, when he was in a head-on collision with a Vauxhall Astra.
Mr Bevan was taken to Colchester General Hospital, where his condition last night was described as ‘satisfactory’.
The driver of the Vauxhall Astra, 20-year-old Ian Cannons, of Sturrocks Lane, Great Bentley, was not hurt in the accident which happened at 7.50pm on Monday.
He did, however, attend Colchester General Hospital, where he received treatment for shock.
Intimidating round the Deben Bar
FRESH southerly winds and s Deben Bar reduced the number of Felixstowe Ferry competitors in Sunday's Points races.
Deben YC
SATURDAY'S evening points was sailed at Deben YC on a good force 3–4 south westerly breeze.
The upwind leg took the fleets to Methersgate Quay which was followed by a superb broad reach back.
There was some close racing in the Mirror fleet until Tom Alexander capsized on the first spinnaker reach losing his second place leaving Chris Morgan to win convincingly over Chris Knights.
The Deben Yacht Club's Laser Open meeting takes place next Sunday (briefing 10.45am).
Allcomers welcome.
Mirrors: 1 Frizbee (C Morgan and R Morgan); 2 Rising Damp (C Knights and O Cottam); 3 Seven Twenty (P Morgan).
Handicap: 1 Smokey Grey (Wayfarer)(P Morgan and H Morgan); 2 Sol-eau-vent (Solo)(J Cox); 3 Super Sonic Mushroom (Kestrel)(T Wilman and K Snow).
Toppers: 1 26019 (A Thompson); 2 19538 (M Hanes); 3 Chaos (P Merrett).
Lasers: 1 Arsel (R Cooke); 2 100318 (A Rich); 3 Jazzy Blue Job (B Alexander).
Fencing
University challenge foiled by Colchester
COLCHESTER and District Fencing Club's foil fencers beat Essex University 13–3 at Highwoods.
The CADS team consisted of Daniel Owen, Alasdair Kines, Kevin Rushbrook and Chris Mackenzie.
The Essex University sports award dinner at the Embassy Suite saw Adrian Chew, assistant coach and vice captain of the University Fencing Club, presented with the award for services to University fencing.
At the Isle of Wight open tournament CADS epeeist Sandra Dawson was second and Cathie Davies fifth in the women's epee.
Dave Benford was second, Andy Somerfield fourth and Kevin Macknay were in the top 20 in the men's epee.
The CADS men's epeeists were best placed team of the competition.
Hand operation: WBC World heavyweight champion, Lennox Lewis, needs a minor operation on his hand before his next fight.
He is pictured showing off his Lonsdale Belt
Councils in bid to halt food poisoning
A SAFETY campaign to halt the rising tide of food poisoning has won the support of councils in Essex.
They are taking part in Food Safety Awareness Week organised by the Institution of Environmental Health Officers and the Food and Drink Federation.
It got underway yesterday.
Poisonings are on the increase, with 64,000 cases reported nationally last year.
However, Deborah Pattinson, health development manager at Braintree District Council, says it is ‘only the tip of the iceberg’.
She says the real figures are probably ten-fold because many cases remain unreported.
In Braintree 234 people suffered from food poisoning last year, with some outbreaks affecting ten or more people.
Nine people died from infectious diseases in the district last year, said Miss Pattinson, although not all could be attributed to food poisoning.
John Rood, director of community services at Uttlesford District Council, said the campaign and book an A-Z Food Link, aimed to raise awareness of safety.
The concern is that most contaminated food is caused by incorrect storage at home, where fridge temperatures may be too high.
There were 118 reported cases of food poisoning in Uttlesford last year.
Two tie for first place on 68
RICHARD WHEELER (Gosfield Lake) and John Blackmore (Felixstowe Golf Centre) tied for first place in the Panshanger classic pre-qualifying round with four under par scores of 68.
Blackmore dropped shots at the first and second but by the turn was two under due to birdies at four and five and an eagle three at the ninth.
He also had an eagle two at the 11th and two more birdies at 13 and 14 but dropped shots at 15 and 16 spoilt what could have been a six under par round.
Eagle three
Richard Wheeler who was leading qualifier in the Glenmuir Club professionals Pre-qualifier also had an eagle three at the ninth to be one under at the turn.
Three birdies on the back nine saw him home in 68.
Gosden's tasty treble
TRAINER John Gosden walked off a heavy lunch in Sussex yesterday and plotted a tasty treble at Goodwood.
And the Newmarket trainer duly collected the 230–1 trio of winners with Red Bishop, Half Term and Reflecting.
Gosden was undecided whether to pull Red Bishop out of Festival Stakes, fearing the ground would be too fast.
But he gave the all clear after testing most of the track in the post lunch stroll.
The risk was handsomely rewarded.
In a rough race, Red Bishop held off fast finishing 40–1 shot Bobzao by a neck with 5–4 Jeune third, clocking a time two seconds faster than the Derby trial, the Predominate Stakes, won by Geisway.
Lucky Carson
Former champion jockey Willie Carson was lucky to escape injury when 11–4 favourite Son of Sharp Shot fell leaving the starting stalls for the Chichester Festival Theatre Handicap.
Carson, 50, rolled several times, but was soon back on his feet.
He said: ‘When the gates opened the horse went straight down.
I don't know why.
It happened in a flash.’
Taxi drivers hit by new charges
TAXI DRIVERS will have to pay up after councillors voted to increase licence fees by double the inflation rate.
Colchester Hackney Carriage Association had pleaded with the borough council to relent after they were told cabbies would face five or six per cent increases on licence charges this year.
However, the new fees came into effect yesterday.
Vehicle licences will now cost £85, rather than £80.50, while driver's licences rise from £64.50 to £68.
Increases of up to 50 per cent on vehicle inspection rates signal further rises in cabbies' costs.
HCA chairman Derrick Murphy felt some of his members, already suffering a lack of fares in the slump, could not stomach the rises.
Two hurt in helicopter crash at airport
A PILOT and his woman passenger were taken to hospital yesterday after their helicopter crashed at Southend Airport.
The Robinson 22 light helicopter was on an auto-gyration practice flight when the tail rotor touched the ground during a steep descent.
Both were able to walk away from the wreckage but were taken to hospital by ambulance for treatment.
The pilot was being treated for suspected internal injuries and his passenger for a suspected broken arm and ribs.
A police spokesman said Board of Trade investigators would be notified.
New manager for three heritage gems
Council may take over running of historic sites
THREE historic sites in Colchester now run by English Heritage may be taken over by the borough council.
English Heritage chairman Jocelyn Stevens has said the organisation needed to hive off some of its responsibilities looking after the nation's monuments.
Now 48 sites which could be maintained by local authorities have been identified.
Yesterday Mr Stevens launched a programme to canvas local opinion about the transfer of management.
Colchester Borough Council has expressed an interest in managing the earthworks at Straight Road and Bluebottle Grove, which were built to defend Colchester during the Iron Age, and St Botolph's Priory.
The borough council already looks after the eastern end of the ruined priory which was the first Augustinian monastery.
Bob Russell, who was chairman of the council's now disbanded recreation, tourism and arts committee, said: ‘We are best-placed to look after monuments in the area.
Ideally, though, we would want the resources to care for them too.’
English Heritage will continue to maintain other historic buildings in the north and mid Essex area.
These include Audley End House, near Saffron Walden.
This Jacobean country mansion is set in magnificent parklands landscaped by Capability Brown.
Mistley Towers — the remains of one of only two churches designed by the great architect Robert Adam — and St John's Abbey Gate, Colchester, the remains of a Benedictine abbey, will also stay under its control.
English Heritage spokesman Adrian Baker said: ‘We will be keeping all the sites under our control indefinitely.’
Audley End, is not suitable for local management because of its national importance.
Change of management: St Botolph's Priory in Colchester
Golf
Local trio enjoy bright starts
THREE East Anglian players are bang on course for reaching the matchplay stage of the English Ladies Championship at St Enodoc Golf Club on the north coast of Cornwall (writes Lee Dinmore ).
Two plus-one handicappers from Felixstowe Ferry, Joanne Hockley and Julie Hall, are three and four shots off the pace respectively, while Essex's leading player Fiona Edmond is six shots behind the current leader, Nicola Buxton, on two under par.
Hockley was content with her opening one over par round of 74 yesterday in the event which was last played at St Enodoc in 1937.
She said last night, ‘I played steady golf and, although I could have been a bit sharper, I am not disappointed with my start.
Available
‘The course is a very tight and long links course.
It is a real test of golf and it is difficult to compare it to any other course I have played.’
There are 32 places available for the matchplay which begins tomorrow.
The leading 32 players scored 79 or better yesterday.
Hall has a four-shot buffer after her round of 75 while Edmond, who could not play for the Essex ladies in county week due to a wrist injury, is also well-placed after a 77.
Fine start: Joanne Hockley happy with an opening 74
French deserter was unaware of missing estate agent case
Lamplugh's sister fled knife man, court told
‘I did not think about Suzy at the time'
THE sister of missing estate agent Suzy Lamplugh escaped from a French air force deserter who tried to steal her car to use in a suicide crash, a court heard yesterday.
Oxford Crown Court heard how Antony Bourgois, 20, of Boulogne, had come to England, intending to kill himself.
He planned to steal a car — although he could not drive — and to strap a knife to his body before crashing the vehicle.
By coincidence, he chose publishing assistant Lizzy Lamplugh, 22, the sister of estate agent Suzy, who disappeared in 1986 while showing a client around a London house.
Bourgois approached Lizzie Lamplugh as she parked her car outside her home in Oxford, Mr David Bright, prosecuting, said.
‘I don't want to rape or kill you,’ Bourgois told Miss Lamplugh.
Mr Bright said she felt something sharp against her neck, a knife with the words Levi Eworp — an anagram for evil power — on it.
Bourgois asked how to use the car and she slipped away to fetch help from neighbours after saying she needed something from the boot, said Mr Bright.
A neighbour found Bourgois had crashed into another vehicle.
He was found to have two other knives, a roll of black masking tape and black cord.
Bourgois pleaded guilty to falsely imprisoning Miss Lamplugh and possessing an offensive weapon.
He denied attempting to kidnap her and this charge was left on the file.
Mr Richard Benson, defending, said Bourgois had had no idea who Miss Lamplugh was and had not intended to harm her.
Two psychiatrists said Bourgois had a mental illness and should be treated in hospital.
The case was adjourned to a date to be fixed so that Bourgois could be remanded to hospital to be further assessed.
After the hearing, Miss Lamplugh said: ‘I did not actually think about my sister at the time.
It was only much later that it hit me and that was more shock than something could happen again.’
Acts of destruction in the theatre
Spotlight turned on the critics
THEATRE criticism divides sharply into two schools of thought — depending on which side of the footlights you are standing.
It is argued the critic resembles the dentist; he cannot do his work without hurting.
But try telling that to the actor who reads: ‘He delivers every line with a monotonous tenor bark as if addressing an audience of deaf eskimos.’
An aunt of mine was a regular first-nighter at her local rep for more than 20 years and, apart from abhorring the bad language in some modern plays, rarely left the theatre less than exhilarated by what she had seen.
‘Oh yes, I agree entirely,’ she would say when I argued with her opinion at times.
‘Certainly it is a very poor play — but what a challenge for the actors and how well they rose to the occasion.’
The play may be the thing, but not necessarily the only thing.
Balanced and fair was auntie.
The great James Agate said that only two roles of dramatic criticism matter.
One: decide what the playwright was trying to do and pronounce how well he has done it.
Two: determine whether the well-done thing was worth doing at all.
Tough and uncompromising was Agate.
As one who loves the theatre and reviews on a regular basis, I fall somewhere between auntie and Agate.
Less forgiving than her, but unlikely to drop into the Butcher of Broadway category and, therefore, unlikely to get a mention in future updates of a new book just published:The Guinness Dictionary of Theatrical Quotations .
To get your name in here, you need to be master of the easy epithet, king of the cutting adjective.
Alan Bennett says: ‘Critics should be searched for certain adjectives at the door of the theatre.
Irreverent, probing and (above all) satirical.
I would have all such adjectives left with their coats in the foyer, only to be redeemed when their notices are written.’
So, what special skills are required of a theatre reviewer?
I quote Agate again: ‘When a play is crashingly dull the critic has only two resources.
One is sleep, in justification whereof I shall quote William Archer's dictum that the first qualification for a dramatic critic is the capacity to sleep while sitting bolt upright.’
The carousing Irish playwright Brendan Behan took another view.
‘Critics are like eunuchs in a harem.
They're there every night, they see it done every night, they see how it should be done every night, but they can't do it themselves.’
Peter Ustinov says of us: ‘They search for ages for the wrong word which, to give them credit, they eventually find.’
P G Wodehouse asked, ‘Has anyone seen a drama critic in the day-time?
Of course not.
They come out after dark, up to no good.’
But I am bound to agree with Kenneth Tynan who wrote this definition of a critic: ‘A man who knows the way but can't drive the car.’
The Guinness book of theatre quotes, which costs £7.99, is compiled by Michele Brown who readily agrees that actors and authors are every bit as cruel about actors as critics, viz Richard Burton talking about his wife Liz Taylor: ‘She has a double chin, her legs are too short and she has a pot belly.’
Noel Coward said after the opening night of the musical version of Gone With The Wind at Drury Lane, during which a horse misbehaved heavily on stage: ‘There's nothing wrong with the show that shoving the child (Bonny Langford) up the horse's backside won't cure.’
Coward appears not to have liked poor Miss Langford because he also said after seeing her in Gypsy : ‘Two things should be cut — the second act and that child's throat.’
But for the best bile you need to tune in to the critics.
Dorothy Parker said of Marion Davies: ‘She has two expressions — joy and indigestion.’
And of Katherine Hepburn: ‘She ran the gamut of expressions from A to B.’ One-liners that catch the eye include: The best play I ever slept through; I've seen more excitement at the opening of an umbrella; I saw the play at a disadvantage — the curtain was up; The scenery was beautiful but the actors got in front of it; When Mr Wilbur calls his play Halfway to Hell , he underestimates the distance.’
This is a delightful bedside dipper of a book and where better to end than an epilogue — Mae West's curtain speech to her play Catherine Was Great .
‘Catherine had 300 lovers.
I did the best I could in a couple of hours.’
Cutting remark: Noel Coward, above.
Mae West, above left, did her best
Top Mafia fugitive held after dawn raid
Rome: THE Italian authorities yesterday praised the capture of the Mafia's highest-ranking fugitive, Benedetto ‘Nitto’ Santapaola, held in a dawn raid on a vineyard in Sicily.
Santapaola allegedly headed the armed wing of the Mafia.
He is said to have taken charge of the organisation after the arrest of alleged Godfather Salvatore ‘Toto’ Riina in January.
‘Santapaola is the latest fallen legend, the latest ‘untouchable’ caught in the law's net,’interior minister Nicola Mancino told parliament.
Police arrested Santapaola without firing a shot.
A pistol was in his bedside cabinet, but he did not try to reach for it.
‘Everything must come to an end, even a long time spent on the run,’ police quoted him as saying.
Independent inquiry announced
Parents fury at Allitt probe
THE Prime Minister yesterday rejected demands for a full public inquiry into the Beverley Allitt child killer case, with powers to compel witnesses to attend.
Mr Major spoke out after Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley announced an independent — but non-public — investigation into the events at Grantham and Kesteven General Hospital between February and April 1991.
The families of mass murderer Allitt's victims are also demanding that any inquiry be held in public.
The families' lawyer, Ann Alexander, called on Mrs Bottomley to meet a delegation of parents so they could tell her ‘why the decision not to have a full public inquiry is wrong’.
In the Commons, Opposition leader John Smith provoked Tory shouts of fury when he asked: ‘Isn't it inappropriate for the inquiry to be set up and asked to report to the very regional health authority whose own actions may be the subject of the inquiry?
‘Isn't it totally unsatisfactory that the Health Secretary has apparently given more weight to the wishes of the health authority than the parents of the children?’
The Prime Minister retorted angrily: ‘I do believe that on reflection you might be ashamed of some of the things you have just said.’
Allitt, 24, has been convicted at Nottingham Crown Court of murdering four children at the hospital, attempting to murder three, and causing grievous bodily harm to six others.
Mr Justice Latham adjourned sentence until Friday week.
The Commons row took place against the background of a report compiled by Trent Regional Health Authority on the children's ward where Allitt worked, denounced as a ‘whitewash’ by Ms Alexander.
Amid cries of ‘shame’ directed at Mr Smith, Mr Major stressed the need for a rigorous and swift inquiry.
He said: ‘We want an inquiry that will deal with the most important thing of all — that is an inquiry that gets at the truth.’
This was greeted by angry Labour howls of ‘Cover-up!’
The families of the victims stepped up their campaign for a public inquiry yesterday.
Ms Alexander, calling on Mrs Bottomley to meet a delegation of parents, said: ‘Although it was Beverly Allitt who committed these crimes, my concern is that the hospital management failed to spot her character defects, failed to supervise her and failed to act on numerous clues, and delayed inexcusably before calling in the police.
‘It is absurd they should have any role at all in running this investigation.’
Yesterday's Trent Regional Health Authority inquiry report said all young patients at the hospital should have round-the-clock cover from qualified nurses.
The report also called for sweeping changes in the way medicines were given to children.
Inquiry call: Ann Alexander, above, with parents and a relative, from left, Stephen Gibson, Jo and Christopher Taylor and Margaret Hardwick
Medal handover
THE mother of the only British soldier to die in the Bosnian conflict will receive a posthumous United Nations medal on his behalf tomorrow.
Mrs Barbara Edwards, whose son Wayne, 26, a lance corporal, was killed by sniper fire, will attend a special parade at the base of the Cheshire Regiment at Fallingbostel, Germany.
Wayne, a member of the Royal Welsh Fusiliers, was attached to the Cheshires.
He died while driving a Warrior armoured fighting vehicle escorting a civilian ambulance.
Plea to exempt elderly from VAT on fuel
CLACTON is to be the launch-pad of an extensive campaign to save the poor or elderly from increases in fuel bills.
Roy Smith, councillor for Golf Green, Clacton, will be urging Tendring District Council to support his motion and express its opposition to Government plans to raise prices.
In the last Budget, Chancellor Norman Lamont announced the Government's decision to extend VAT to domestic gas and electricity at 8 per cent next year and at 17.5pc by 1995.
Mr Smith's motion, which he will put before the council as soon as possible, says this will increase the weekly bills of all households, but will particularly affect pensioners and others on low incomes.
‘The extra financial burden placed on those least able to afford such rises will inevitably impact on the services provided by this local authority,’ he said.
Mr Smith hopes that his campaign will attract the support of all organisations for the elderly or those on low incomes.
His motion is backed by Lionel Randall, last year's chairman of the council.
Mr Smith said that Tendring was probably going to be harder hit by the VAT introduction than other place in the country because it had such a very high proportion of elderly people.
‘And I understand in this district we have the highest pay-outs of social security,’ he added.
‘This demonstrates clearly the financial situation that everyone is in.’
The VAT imposition would also affect the unemployed.
Clacton has the third highest rate in Britain.
However, Mr Smith is really worried that some frail people, trying to economise, will put themselves in danger by not keeping themselves warm.
‘They are going to be afraid to use fuel,’ he said.
‘Already I go into houses, particularly in the winter, and I can see that some people do not realise how dangerous the cold is.’
He anticipates that the campaign will snowball and, depending on the results, he is considering taking it to the House of Commons.
A spokesman for Essex County Council, which is responsible for social services supporting the elderly, handicapped and those on low incomes, said it was impossible for the county council to comment on something political.
‘We cannot say anything at this stage,’ he said.
‘If Mr Smith makes a similar motion to our council, it will be up to individual members to decide how to vote.’
Minister visits endangered birds' sanctuary
‘A vehicle careered through the middle of nesting terns, destroying eggs’
POLICE and coastguards are to be asked to help increase surveillance of a former top secret defence site following damage to the nests of endangered birds.
The National Trust — new owner of Orford Ness ‘island’— said yesterday that law breaking by people with guns and off-road vehicles had increased there since the Ministry of Defence relinquished control.
Officials suspect the remote and narrow nine-mile long peninsular may also be used for smuggling, including drugs.
Disclosure of damage to the nests of a colony of little terns came yesterday during a VIP visit to the former defence research site led by Minister for the Environment, David Maclean.
His department contributed £2.3 million towards the fund set up to purchase what was described yesterday as southern England's last wilderness, a designated Site of Special Scientific Interest of international importance for its bird population.
National Trust regional director, Merlin Waterson, said ‘protected’ species of birds were being shot by trespassers and the shingle banks were being used by off-road vehicle enthusiasts.
‘We've had one case of a vehicle careering straight through the middle of nesting terns, destroying the eggs,’ said Mr Waterson.
‘That's the sort of thing we've got to stop.
We've got to bring proper control so that this site gets the protection it deserves.’
A warden has been appointed, Chris Martin, who lives in Orford, and he will be helping to deter trespassers and liaising with police over the detection of offences.
Suffolk Police said its launch, the Sir Ian Jacob , kept an eye on Orfordness as part of its routine surveillance of the Suffolk coast, but there was no evidence of a particular problem in the area.
Mr Maclean was taken across to the National Trust's new property by ferry and given a tour of the wildlife habitats and the crumbling buildings, some of which were once used by Barnes Wallis in the development of the bouncing bomb of Dambusters fame.
Some of the buildings are to be preserved, but the rest demolished.
Many of them are in a dangerous condition and at least one contains asbestos.
General public access is unlikely before 1995.
Mr Maclean said the use of £2.3 million of taxpayers' money in buying Orford Ness seemed a lot, but he was sure that future historians would regard it as money well spent.
‘Close to the 50th anniversary of the glorious Dambusters raid it is marvellous to be on the site where the bombs they used were developed,’ he said.
Other VIPs who took part in yesterday's visit included Lord Chorley, chairman of the National Trust, Sir John Johnson, chairman of the Countryside Commission, and Lord Cranbrook, chairman of English Nature.
Junior Environmental Minister David Maclean approaches Orford Ness on the Suffolk coast by ferry
POLICE and coastguards are to be asked to increase surveillance of a former top secret defence site after the nests of endangered birds were damaged.
POLICE and coastguards are to be asked to increase surveillance of a former top secret defence site after the nests of endangered birds were damaged.
Forklift driver banned
A FORKLIFT truck driver vowed never to touch another drop of alcohol yesterday after being caught drink driving.
Leonard Piper, 57, made his pledge at Witham Magistrates' Court where he admitted to driving while over the limit.
Piper, of Church Street, Witham, was banned from driving for 12 months, fined £64 and ordered to pay £29 prosecution costs.
Claire Cannon, prosecuting, said Piper was seen driving his vehicle from side to side on the A12 at 11.30 pm on April 21.
Piper told the court.
‘I have not touched a drop since and I never will again.’
Bold attempt to win back public confidence
PRISON officers are threatening to take strike action over the privatisation of the prison service.
John Bartell, chairman of the Prison Officers Association, said yesterday there was a ‘distinct possibility’ of a strike ballot being called when the union holds its annual conference next week.
Mr Bartell said privatisation of the service so far had been ‘farcical’ with escapes from the new Group 4 escort service and reports from the privately run Wolds Prison of drug and alcohol abuse.
Certainly these failings are indefensible, but if they are ‘farcical’ what does that make the performance of the rest of the prison service?
Drug and alcohol abuse inside prisons were already a national scandal when the television series Porridge was being made, some 20 years ago.
Escapes from Highpoint alone show that Group 4 is by no means alone in ‘losing’ prisoners.
The sad truth of the matter is that Group 4 has such low levels of performance to live up to that already, despite its much publicised failures, the Home Secretary is able to claim that it is outperforming the public services it is replacing.
If that is farcical how does the POA rate its own performance?
Beyond a joke?
Mr Bartell says the record at the Wolds, run by Group 4, is disgraceful.
How does he rate Highpoint?
Mr Bartell said staffing cuts were forcing down standards.
This may be true, but he should not be clouding the issue with irrelevant gibes at the ‘competition.’
The POA, he said, was becoming increasingly alarmed that official reports were becoming more strident in their criticism of the prison service.
How does he think his own strident criticism of Group 4 will help his case?
If he condemns people who are outperforming his members, he can hardly expect much respect for their standards.
And how do the prison officers imagine that striking will help their case?
The most likely outcome of such action would be to speed up privatisation of the service, since the Government could hardly empty the jails, and somebody would have to supervise the inmates.
The one positive thing to emerge from privatisation so far has been the degree of accountability that has been imposed on Group 4, far more stringent than the level the police and prison officers are used to.
The death of a single prisoner in Group 4 custody has rightly made headlines.
Deaths in custody elsewhere are no longer, alas, regarded as particularly remarkable.
A vital lesson that the prison officers could learn from Group 4 is in public relations.
Jim Harrower, managing director of Group 4, does not seek to blame anyone else for his company's failures.
‘We are a company based on reputation.
We will bring that reputation back through our performance,’ he pledges.
This will do more to inspire public confidence than the prison officers' negative attitude.
BR smoking ban ignored
Bosses hope people power halts PUFFS
RAIL bosses are hoping the pressure of ‘people power’ will defeat a campaign of defiance against the new smoking ban on trains.
For the second day running, up to 30 commuters yesterday took over a carriage on an early-morning service from Colchester to Liverpool Street and put up posters declaring it a smoking zone.
Commuters behind the campaign against the smoking ban, which came into force on Monday, have called their group PUFFS — Passengers United For the Freedom to Smoke.
So far no action has been taken against travellers refusing requests to stub-out their cigarettes, and the campaign group is waiting to see what the next move will be.
Police
Peter Northfield, public affairs manager for the Great Eastern division of BR's Network SouthEast, said some commuters were angry because they normally used the carriage which had been taken over by protesters.
‘I believe there will be a great deal of ‘people power’.
The man I spoke to threatened to rip the posters down.
‘We are not doing what we could have done, which is to go steaming in with lots of transport police officers and arrest them.
That would not get us anywhere and they are our customers,’ he said.
However Mr Northfield added there was no scope for compromise, and it was possible tougher action would be required, although he still hopes common sense will prevail.
The main reason for the ban was the problem of non-smoking coaches becoming crowded with people standing, while seats remained empty in smoking carriages.
Cleaning costs would also be reduced and the risk of lineside fires, he said.
Some fires last summer damaged signalling cables.
Feature
PUFFS Co-ordinator Sue Grant said they intended to make the unofficial smokers' carriage a daily feature until the ban is dropped.
She denied that many non-smokers had to stand up while seats remained empty in smoking coaches, and added: ‘If BR are that worried they should put on more carriages, and not blame smokers for overcrowding.’
She also rejected the claims that smokers were responsible for lineside fires.
Murder attempt on policeman denied
Pc tells court he was nearly strangled
A 49-YEAR-OLD man went on trial yesterday accused of attempting to kill an Essex traffic policeman.
Halstead-based Pc Ian Masheder was attacked and almost strangled with his own pullover, it was alleged at Chelmsford Crown Court.
Alec Saunders, said to live in accommodation at the Cut Maple Industrial Estate, near Sible Hedingham, denies charges of attempted murder and attempting to inflict grievous bodily harm.
Mr. John Cooper, prosecuting, said the incident happened on November 13 last year after Pc Masheder, in a patrol car, received a message to stop a white van.
The officer pursued the van but the driver, Saunders, stopped at the Cut Maple Industrial Estate and ran into a barn.
Pc Masheder chased and caught him and told him he was being arrested on suspicion of theft.
Mr. Cooper alleged that Saunders then attacked the officer, forced him to the ground and got on top of him.
He pulled off part of the officer's jumper and pulled it tightly across the back of his neck.
Pc Masheder began to choke and told his attacker, ‘Let go.
You are killing me.
I can't breathe.’
The officer became light headed and saw spots in front of his eyes.
He thought he was going to die, said Mr. Cooper.
Eventually he struggled free, ran to his car and called for help.
Saunders was arrested later and told police he ‘legged it’ after someone shouted at him from a car.
He thought he was being attacked so he defended himself.
In evidence, Pc Masheder described how he fell face downwards on the ground with Saunders on top of him.
He was aware of his jumper being pulled up and then felt the pullover against the back of his neck and something around the front.
Pc Masheder said, ‘I felt the tightness around my throat becoming even tighter.
I lay still hoping he would release his grip.
‘The tightness got worse and I just couldn't breathe any more.
I felt as though my eyes were popping out.
There were stars before my eyes.
‘I realised that if I didn't do something really quickly perhaps I wouldn't be able to.
I reached up with my left hand.
I just wanted to gouge his eyes out.
I stuck my fingers up his nose and pushed as hard as I could.
‘I struggled and twisted and got my right hand free.
I tried to pull his nose and he relaxed the tightening around my neck.
I took a gulp of air and pushed him off.
Then I ran back to my car and made an emergency call.’
The trial continues.
Piggott pinches Predominate
LESTER Piggott produced a stunning performance on Geisway at Goodwood yesterday — then hinted that he would reject the horse in the Derby.
Still last a furlong from home in the £30,000 added AR Dennis Predominate Stakes, Geisway produced a tremendous late burst to pip the favourite Beneficial by a short head.
Piggott, 57, gave himself much of the credit for the victory, cheekily telling trainer Richard Hannon: ‘I rode a brilliant race, didn't I.’
But the nine-times Derby winner indicated that he is likely to prefer the Vincent O'Brien trained Fatherland in the Epsom Classic two weeks today.
Piggott has doubts about Geisway's stamina and said: ‘He's just a good sort of horse, that's all I can say.’
A final decision on Piggott's Derby mount is likely to be made by the weekend.
Geisway is now a best priced 25–1 with William Hill for the Classic.
Labrokes and Coral quote 20–1.
Unlike Piggott, Hannon is convinced Geisway will stay the one and a half miles at Epsom.
‘His pedigree says it's well worth sending him there,’ he said.
Ladbrokes latest Derby betting: 2–5 Tenby, 7–1 Barathea, 10–1 Fatherland, 14–1 Planetary Aspect, 20–1 Bob's Return and Geisway, 33–1 bar.
Twenty-nine horses stood their ground at yesterday's forfeit stage for the Ever Ready Derby.
They are Advocat, Armiger, Barathea, Blue Judge, Blues Traveller, Bob's Return, Cairo Prince, Canaska Star, Coeur Battant, Commander In Chief, Dernier Empereur, Desert Secret, Desert Team, Enjoy Plan, Fatherland, Foresee, Geisway, Great Cabaret, Marchand de Sable, Planetary Aspect, Redenham, Reveur du Nord, Salatin, Shareek, Tales of Hearsay, Tenby, Wolf Prince, Zeami, Zind.
Renewed appeal for witnesses to early morning attack on driver
POLICE have renewed their appeal for witnesses to an attack on a Chelmsford motorist on Sunday.
The driver suffered serious head wounds during the incident at a hamburger stall near a school in the town's Princes Road between 2.45 am and 3 am on Sunday.
Two men from Barking, in London, face charges in connection with the attack.
Lee Brigden, 20, is accused of causing grievous bodily harm, possession of an offensive weapon, namely a golf club, violent disorder, resisting arrest and drink-driving.
He has been released on conditional bail.
Gary Howard, 20, is charged with causing grievous bodily harm, possession of an offensive weapon, namely a golf club, and violent disorder.
He was due to be released on conditional bail last night once a surety had been produced.
Both men will appear before Chelmsford magistrates on July 12.
Anyone with information about the attack is asked to phone police at South Woodham Ferrers on (0245) 320333 or Chelmsford on (0245) 491212.
An investigation will start today into a fire in a vacant office block in North Station Road, Colchester.
Crews with breathing apparatus searched the block after the alert was raised at 5.45 pm yesterday.
No-one was found inside.
Police rider is killed
A POLICE motorcyclist died and two others were injured yesterday when four machines on a training run collided on a busy main road.
Three of the riders, all men, were on an advanced motorcycle course — learning skills needed for high-speed pursuit, said a Kent police spokeswoman, who stressed that no other vehicle was involved.
They were being instructed by the fourth, who was treated in hospital for shock.
The crash happened at 2 pm on the A3 at Burpham, near Guildford, Surrey.
The three men on the three-week course, who were riding BMW K100s, were already Kent motorcycle patrol officers.
The force spokeswoman said: ‘How it happened we don't know at this stage.
Surrey police are investigating the cause.
We know that no other vehicle was involved.’
The dead man and his colleagues would not be named until all families had been told, she added.
A Surrey police spokesman said one of the officers was detained in the Royal Surrey County Hospital at Guildford, suffering from a broken leg.
Cricket
Ingatestone now the only team without a victory
THE TRIALS of poor Ingatestone continued in the T Rippon Mid Essex League as South Weald skipper Gary Fisher carved their bowlers for an unbeaten 140.
Weald set a formidable target of 239 for 2 in a match restricted to 40 overs.
The home side were well short at the finish on 112 for 8.
Ingatestone are now the only side in the Premier Division without a win following Broomfield's 27-run victory over Little Waltham.
Chasing 169, Waltham looked good at 109 for 5 off 30 overs with Culleton batting well, but Beal, Foster, Alexander and Copeman bowled Broomfield to victory.
There is no doubt they deserved the points after pushing title favourites Galleywood and Stock — who both won for the third time this season on Saturday — so close in their last two matches.
Galleywood again won narrowly, against Great Waltham, in a game reduced to 42 overs.
A superb 79 from Thompson, which included eight fours and four sixes, was the highlight of the champions' innings, which ended at 176 for 8.
A fifth-wicket partnership between Barber (50) and Broom (36 no) put Waltham in with an outside chance, but the run rate crept up and 15 from the last over was too much.
Stock set a total of 166 for 8, with Taylor's 52 the key, and visitors Danbury were killed with 73 runs to spare.
Old Chelmsfordians are finding form and they completed a clean sweep for the sides who batted first by playing aggressively on a dry, quiet strip with Charrington hitting 83 not out.
The spin of Cant and introduction of Grainger saw off the danger posed by Roxwell's Beard and Mizen and the runs dried up, giving OC's a 74-run win.
In Division One, Writtle are the pacesetters after beating Little Baddow by 40 runs.
Springfield, relegated from the Premier last season, edged past previously unbeaten Great Burstead by 15 runs.
Scott and Darg put on 72 for Writtle's first wicket at Little Baddow, with Cockerell adding 75 and Hicks 64 in a total of 245 for 5.
The reply was positive with Adams and Clarke scoring well, but Williamson and Irving, fresh from last week's seven-wicket haul, did the damage late on.
Springfield amassed 160 for 8, mainly through Mortimer, Jeffrey and Dance, although Dearmer and Williams both took a couple of wickets cheaply.
Burstead's openers put on 50 and Johnson tried to up the tempo in mid-innings, but Lightfoot, with 4 for 30, took out the tail.
Tillingham scored their first win of the campaign against a strong Hatfield Peverel side, with Wilkin the hero making 61.
Peverel lost their last six wickets for 26 and finished 39 short.
Suicide dilemma driver is banned
A MAN contemplating suicide asked police for help, Witham magistrates heard yesterday.
However, Stuart Roberts, 36, of Oak Road, Rivenhall, was over the breath-alcohol limit when he entered Witham police station.
Roberts, who pleaded guilty to driving with excess alcohol in his breath, was given an absolute discharge but banned from driving for 12 months.
Miss Claire Cannon, prosecuting, said that tests showed he had 74 microgrammes of alcohol per 100 millilitres of breath.
The legal limit is 35.
Roberts told the police that he had drunk five cans of beer.
Mr Chris Hayward, for Roberts, said the offence happened while he was having marital problems.
After an argument with his wife, Roberts left home, intending to drive to a quiet spot and kill himself.
When he reached the police station, he had second thoughts and turned himself in, admitting that he was probably over the drink-drive limit.
If Roberts had not given himself up, the offence would have remained undetected.
Mr Hayward said Roberts had tried to kill himself again in the last day or two with a drugs overdose.
Because of the driving ban, Roberts would lose his job.
Rugby Union
Sudbury in call for cash shake-up
SUDBURY Rugby Club are at the forefront of a campaign to give minnows of the new national league set-up a bigger slice of the game's sponsorship cake.
Already the club have learned they will receive in the region of £8,500 towards travelling costs when it makes its debut in the Courage National League Division Four next season.
First division sides receive around £13,500 Courage assistance, but Sudbury and Askeans have successfully called for a new look at the way the money is divided.
Making their debut as a member of the elite 40-member Senior Clubs Association, Sudbury and the Kent side won 18–16 backing at the weekend for a proposal to adjust the ratio of the sponsorship money.
It is not yet known whether any revision coming out of the move will be in place for the coming or the following campaign.
Last season Sudbury's share of Courage support when they became Division Four South champions was £2,500, but next season they face journeys from as far apart as Plymouth to Cumbria, and expenses of £10–12,000.
The brewery's £7 million backing for English league rugby is split among 1,187 clubs.
Yesterday Sudbury chairman Iain Hook said the club's case was based on the fact the division four clubs had a greater need for support as a result of their geographical locations and inability to attract the same amount of outside backing as top clubs.
He continued: ‘Having arrived at the party we don't want to be seen to be griping.
As a club we are very chuffed to be where we are and be able to have an input at such a high level of the game, but we believe their are grounds for an adjustment.’
Mr Hook pointed out many of the Division One sides were concentrated round the south-east, which meant they had less travelling expenses.
They also came from large conurbations able to provide additional revenue through commercial support and gate income.
In comparative terms the Courage income was not as crucial to the leading sides as it was to the Sudburys of the set-up.
Stabilised
The club holds its annual meeting next Wednesday and will hear its running costs have been stabilised after losses in the two previous seasons.
It has also committed itself to again engage a professional coach, with a decision on the appointment expected shortly.
Sudbury have been named by Whitbread as United Kingdom senior club of the month in Rugby World and Post.
Union motion put on ice
POLICE leaders have put off a warning to Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke that they might seek full trade union rights, including the option to strike.
At the Police Federation's annual conference, which opened in Blackpool yesterday, they protested strongly against Mr Clarke's plans to subject them to new disciplinary rules.
Mr Clarke said he wanted new measures to deal with officers failing to meet expected standards.
A motion went before the police conference saying that if Mr Clarke persisted in his plans to treat police like those in other professions they must press for officers to be treated as employees ‘with all the trade union rights associated with such a change in status.’
But although delegates opposed the Home Secretary's proposals, they decided to put the motion on ice until they saw the strength of his final document on the matter, said Chris Burgess, secretary of the Suffolk Police Federation.
‘If there are no changes whatever, we will have to think about invoking the motion,’ said Mr Burgess.
If police were treated as ordinary public service employees they could demand the right to strike and come under all the other Health and Safety regulations applying to other jobs.
‘Bosnia could be new Lebanon’
PEACE envoy Lord Owen warned last night that Bosnia-Herzegovina would not survive as a single state if Moslems and Croats continued fighting.
He said the former Yugoslav republic could become a ‘European Lebanon’ and fighting would spread beyond its frontiers if Bosnia crumbled into separate ethnic mini-states.
‘If Croats and Moslems cannot live together, side by side, there will not be a Bosnia-Herzegovina.
There are enough obstacles from the Serb side already,’ Lord Owen said.
‘There is no way I can imagine the Moslem population will allow the partition of the country.
They will fight.
It will be like Lebanon.
They will go on fighting…and that contagion will spread to Serbia and Croatia.’
Lord Owen spoke during a break in talks at Medjugorje, a Bosnian Roman Catholic pilgrimage town, as he tried to end eight days of fighting between Moslems and Croats in the city of Mostar.
His warning drove home the dangers the bloodletting posed to the plan he drafted with U.S. statesman Cyrus Vance to divide Bosnia into ten ethnically based provinces under a weak central government.
Russian foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev, in Belgrade on a new Balkan peace mission, and the European Community insisted they remained committed to the Vance-Owen plan.
But Russia's UN ambassador Yuli Vorontsov said after meeting Yugoslav president Dobrica Cosic that Friday's UN session of security council foreign ministers could be delayed until May 25, but he doubted it would be this month.
American officials have said U.S. secretary of state Warren Christopher would not attend the Friday session because the time for a meeting was not right.
The United States is lukewarm to the Vance-Owen plan while the Europeans are resisting U.S. pressure to lift an arms embargo against the Bosnian Muslims.
Mr Christopher said yesterday the United States would not act alone in the Bosnian crisis but would keep pressing for lifting the arms embargo.
Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, Vance's successor as UN envoy to former Yugoslavia, flew by helicopter to Medjugorje from the Adriatic port of Split.
The talks brought together Bosnia's Muslim president Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnian Croat leader Mate Boban, Danish foreign minister Niels Helveg Petersen, for the European Community, UN commander General Philippe Morillon and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia.
Teenager made menacing telephone calls after row
A TEENAGER subjected a family to a series of menacing telephone calls following an argument with their daughter, a court heard yesterday.
Samantha Cardwell, 19, was originally accused of making threats to kill and to damage property, but these charges were dropped when she appeared before Colchester magistrates yesterday.
Instead she admitted four charges of making menacing telephone calls and a further charge of making calls causing annoyance or needless anxiety, all in February.
Cardwell, of Mersea Road, Colchester, was discharged for six months and ordered to pay £53 towards prosecution costs.
Roland Hardy, prosecuting, said the family of 19-year-old Tricia Holt received about 60 calls in only three weeks.
Her mother answered the first call on February 2 when Cardwell gave the name Tara and asked Tricia to call her back.
When Tricia returned the call her mother listened to the conversation and heard Cardwell tell her daughter she was going to ‘get’ her.
Cardwell then added: ‘I am going to kick your head in and I am not going to stop until you are dead.’
Mrs Holt then began answering the phone to protect her daughter and received similar calls from Cardwell on February 7 and 9.
Another call was answered by Mr Holt on February 20.
Cardwell was interviewed by police on February 20 and released on bail.
However, she was then arrested after she called the family again.
She was remanded in custody on February 24 for a week and after being granted conditional bail, lived at a probation hostel for a further three weeks.
Kim Kennedy, mitigating, said Cardwell denied making the threats and also did not accept making the number of calls alleged.
The calls were the result of an argument over some jewellery.
Cardwell alleged it been stolen, and the row got out of hand, said Mr Kennedy.
Her time in custody was the equivalent of a one-month prison sentence and she had also had the punishment of spending three weeks at the probation hostel, he added.
Dessie at Newmarket
THE BFSS, in conjunction with The Game Conservancy Trust and The Lords Taverners, are holding the second Countryside Race Day on Newmarket's Rowley Mile course on Saturday.
A star studded array of jockeys are lined up to take part in the first of seven races, The Classic FM Celebrity Riders Handicap Stakes at The Newmarket Countryside Race Day.
The National Hunt contingent is comprised of recently retired former champion jockey Peter Scudamore, John Francome, Bob Davies, Ron Barry and Graham Turner, plus Champion Hurdle winner Richard Linley, and Desert Orchid's Gold Cup winning jockey Simon Sherwood.
The Flat Racing team is led by ex-champion jockey Joe Mercer, ex-Irish Champion jockey Walter Swinburn senior, plus Derby winning jockeys Greville Starkey, Geoff Lewis (Mill Reef) and Edward Hide.
Desert Orchid will be leading The Thurlow Foxhounds down the course.
New blow for Seles
MONICA Seles pulled out of Wimbledon last night — only hours after confirming her withdrawal from the French Open, which starts in Paris next week.
The announcement shattered hopes of an early comeback by the world number one following her courtside stabbing in Hamburg last month.
News of her absence from Wimbledon, for the second time in three years, was greeted sympathetically from All England Club officials.
Chief executive Chris Gorringe said: ‘We completely understand why Monica feels she is unable to play in the championships.’
Seles was knifed in the back during a quarter-final match at the Citizen Cup in Hamburg on April 30 by a German who allegedly wanted to help Steffi Graf regain her number one world ranking.
She has been recuperating from the shoulder wound at the Steadman-Hawkins Clinic and had made enough progress to prompt speculation that she might, after all, be fit to defend her French Open title.
Her controversial withdrawal from Wimbledon in 1991, at 72 hours' notice, met with a cool response from Wimbledon and the Press.
She gave the excuse that she had suffered ‘a minor accident’.
Wimbledon remains the only major title still to elude Seles.
Organisers of the French Open were dealt a double blow by the news that Wimbledon champion Andre Agassi has also pulled out due to a wrist injury.
Horse racing
Yawl to shed light on Oaks picture
YAWL went into winter quarters as a leading ante-post Oaks fancy and can justify her prominent place in the betting with victory in the Tripleprint Lupe Stakes at Goodwood today.
Yawl has not been in perfect health this spring.
She has been coughing but she worked with sufficient sparkle at Lambourn on Saturday to persuade trainer Barry Hills that she is ready to put her reputation on the line.
Her two Newmarket wins last autumn promised plenty to come and she is certain to be suited by middle distances.
Aughfad is slipping down the weights but he showed a bit more sparkle at Newmarket last time and can underline his liking for this very sharp track in the Citroen Xantia Sprint Handicap.
Southern Memories won in the style of a well handicapped horse as he cruised to a three-length win from Special One at Windsor last week.
The seven pound penalty he picks up in the Bagthorpe Handicap at Nottingham is negated by his apprentice jockey's claim and he should not be missed.
Selections
GOODWOOD: 2.10 Lunar Risk, 2.40 Aughfad, 3.10 YAWL (nap), 3.40 Dime Bag, 4.10 Trooping, 4.45 Majestic Heights, 5.20 Chapka.
NOTTINGHAM: 2.20 Don't Forget Marie, 2.50 Harlestone Brook, 3.20 Grotto Pool, 3.50 Ballet Shoes, 4.20 Southern Memories (n.b.), 4.50 Self Expression.
WORCESTER: 2.30 Arran View, 3.00 Romful Prince, 3.30 Mayfair Minx, 4.00 Copper Mine, 4.30 Assaglawi, 5.00 Storm Drum.
Sick-list sackings claim
A WORKER who broke a leg playing football for his bank was sacked in a wave of redundancies that included absence through sickness as a factor for selection, a conference was told yesterday.
Another worker — off sick after being the victim of a hit-and-run accident — was also made redundant by the bank, the NatWest, according to the main banking union.
Brian Puddicombe, from the Banking Insurance and Finance Union's NatWest Committee, told the union's annual conference in Llandudno, Gwynedd: ‘It is totally unacceptable that people should be sacked as a direct result of being sick.’
The two workers were among 1,500 staff made redundant by the bank last autumn when sickness absence was taken into account, according to BIFU.
Executive member Pat Lynch said people were too terrified to go sick in an industry which has shed 70,000 jobs in the past three years.
The delegates called for an end to workers being sacked just because they were sick or injured.
A NatWest spokeswoman said: ‘We would not be able to comment on individual cases.’
14,000 support Sunday trading
MORE than 14,000 shoppers have backed a campaign to support Sunday trading but the issue will remain in deadlock for another three weeks, it was revealed yesterday.
A petition signed by the thousands of supporters was handed to Chelmsford Borough Council leader Tony Sadler.
But yesterday a statement issued by Mr Sadler revealed the council's continued hard line over Sunday opening — which cannot be altered until councillors discuss the matter on June 16.
It said: ‘The council has written to a number of stores requesting undertakings that they cease trading in contravention of the Sunday trading provisions of the Shops Act.
In the absence of such undertakings the council have authorised the institution of appropriate legal proceedings.
‘The council have also agreed a procedure for dealing with future breaches of the Sunday Trading provisions of the Shops Act.’
The council would not say what the ‘procedure’ for dealing with stores will be over the next three Sundays until the matter is discussed by the Environment and Public Health Committee, but it has already authorised legal action against large stores which continue to open.
Thousands of shoppers who disagree with the council's stance put their names to the campaign last weekend at a number of staged events organised by many of the county's biggest retailers.
Sainsbury's, Texas Homecare, Do It All, Homebase, Comet and Dixons were among stores represented at the presentation of the petition at Chelmsford Civic Centre on Monday.
‘It was a terrific response, we've really given the council something to think about,’ said Sainsbury spokesman, Nick Green.
Chelmsford is one of only six local authorities nationwide which have threatened action.
Others are waiting for the outcome of a review now under way.
Bomb scare for police
HARWICH police got a nasty surprise yesterday when a member of the public placed a suspected unexploded bomb on their counter.
It had been washed ashore near the Carless refinery and was put in a bunker at the back of the police station until the bomb disposal team arrived.
They decided the object was the tip of a Second World War Two shell with no explosive capability.
Stop treating the parents as if they were idiots, Mr Patten
As pressure grows on John Patten to abandon this year's National Curriculum tests, parents are being asked their views.
CLIFF BRUNT, chairman of a Parent-Teacher Association, in Hadleigh, argues that the wrangle has already rendered this summer's exams worthless.
CLIFF Brunt is not against the principle of testing, he insists.
But he has a message for Mr Patten.
‘You ought to be listening to the grass roots and saying: ‘Look, we've started doing the tests, we've found they aren't working as they should.
‘Let's stop, let's get round the table and discuss it before we implement them.
Let's get them to be more meaningful.’
His comments come as up to eight million parents across England and Wales are being balloted on the topic of National Curriculum tests.
The National Confederation of Parent-Teacher Associations, organisers of the survey, estimate that 10,000 schools will be covered.
They will be asked if they want their children to be tested at the age of seven and/or 14.
Results, which many already believe will back up the stance of the teachers, should be published by the end of next week.
‘Everyone appreciates there is a need to test the children's ability,’ says Mr Brunt.
But the real issue is the consultation process — or the lack of it — by the Government.
The results of that blinkered attitude are exams that are, he feel, worse than useless.
‘The tests that the Government want to adopt, I think, fail from the points of view of the teachers, the children and the parents,’ he says.
Recent climbdowns over next year's tests fail to impress Mr Brunt.
He is concerned that anyone comparing a school's performance in the 1994 tests with this year will not be comparing like with like.
‘What are they going to mean?’ he asks, and answers his own question: ‘Nothing.’
Many parents hardened their attitudes against Mr Patten two months ago, when he dismissed their protests against testing as ‘Neanderthal’.
‘Ah well, he's got his head in the sand sometimes, hasn't he?’ says Mr Brunt.
‘It's not very clever, because it makes the parents look as if they're idiots when they're not — it says more about him than the people he's speaking about.’
Mr Brunt's children, aged nine and 11, attend Westwood Primary School in Hadleigh.
They are yet to be involved in the testing process: ‘My real concern for my children is that they haven't gone through the tests for 14-year-olds yet,’ he says.
‘Until we've got stable testing, that worries me a great deal.’
Cricket
Gooch sets out to secure his future
England captaincy still in balance
GRAHAM Gooch leads England into battle at Old Trafford today with his heart set on burying the bitter memories of last winter and securing his own future beyond mid-summer.
A Texaco Trophy victory over Australia cannot make amends for that 3–0 Test drubbing in India.
Nor will it immediately persuade England's selectors to extend Gooch's reign as captain beyond the third Ashes Test.
But a win in front of 21,000 fans would be a handy first step towards both ambitions.
Gooch has never publicly criticised Ted Dexter and Co for limiting his re-appointment to three one-day matches and three Tests pending a mid-term review.
But there is no doubt the 39-year-old batsman wants to be calling the shots when the Ashes series winds up at The Oval in August.
Part of England's concern is that Gooch has already declared himself unavailable for next winter's tour of West Indies.
But he said yesterday: ‘I don't think you should be worrying about what happens in the West Indies.
First priority
‘They don't come much bigger than the Ashes.
It's not my job to decide but if we do well hopefully it (his captaincy) might continue.’
Gooch's first priority this morning will be to finalise a side from the 14 players who reported to Old Trafford.
Much depends on whether Neil Fairbrother is fit following a hamstring strain.
If not, the batting options are almost limitless — including the possibility of Gooch dropping down the order, as he did for several one-dayers in India, and Mark Lathwell opening with Alec Stewart.
Lathwell, left-hander Graham Thorpe and fast bowler Andrew Caddick are the exciting new kids on the block, all of them awaiting their first England appearances.
‘When talent comes through you want to give it a chance,’ said Gooch.
‘We have brought in some new faces and we have to try to turn around what happened last winter.’
Gooch and rival captain Allan Border are agreed that Texaco results can be discounted when the Test series starts.
That much was proved four years ago with Australia taking the Ashes 4–0 after losing the opening one-dayer at Old Trafford by 95 runs.
Australia's main problem is who to leave out.
Young openers Matthew Hayden and Michael Slater have been in sparkling form but the tourists are likely to start with their tried and trusted one-day partnership of Mark Taylor and Mark Waugh.
The teams
ENGLAND (from): G A Gooch (capt), A J Stewart (wkpr), R A Smith, N H Fairbrother, G A Hick, G P Thorpe, C C Lewis, D R Pringle, D G Cork, R K Illingworth, P W Jarvis, A R Caddick, M N Lathwell, M R Ramprakash.
AUSTRALIA (probable): M A Taylor, M E Waugh, D C Boon, A R Border (capt), D R Martyn, S R Waugh, I A Healy (wkpr), M G Hughes, C J McDermott, T B A May, P R Reiffel.
Umpires: D R Shepherd, B J Meyer.
Tribute to classical artist shows love of architecture
Aspects of Valerie Thornton, Digby Gallery, Mercury Theatre, Colchester, until May 22
A WELL thought out tribute to the classical talents of the late Valerie Thornton, this exhibition of paintings and etchings takes in her love for architecture, both ecclesiastical and vernacular.
Beside the towering grandeur of Orvieto or San Salvatore,Spotik with its sensitive transition of colour tone, lie the no less grand geometric areas of colour on her Warehouse with its equally sensitive registration of tone.
Even her two notations of a seashore, surely a romantic subject, are expressed in the cool tones and subdued emotion of the classicist.
Seashore, East Anglian is composed with horizontals of grey and blue, as cool as the coast itself, while Shore is as near abstract as makes no difference.
Thornton's studies of medieval carving in churches gives a touch of drama to a show in which this quality is generally diluted and all these aspects are overseen by Bridge with Rooftops , a superb blocky composition of highly acceptable and tasteful colour and tone.RAY RUSHTON
Pupils' weather eye
PUPILS at an Essex school could soon be rivaling Michael Fish and other TV weathermen, thanks to a satellite link-up.
The movement of air masses and pressure zones globally are beamed to the science department of Thomas Lord Audley School, Colchester.
These images, which are used to help students of geography, information technology and maths, are a perfect tool for developing cross-subject links for the National Curriculum.
A grant by the Toyota Science and Technology fund of £500 was matched by the Essex Training and Enterprise Council, enabling the school to buy the system which takes pictures from two weather satellites via a relay station in Germany.
The system takes pictures from the Meteosat satellite in geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the equator and NOAA satellites which orbit around the earth via the poles.
The pictures can be down-loaded by the school to computers in its feeder primary schools.
Members of the public interested in the weather in other parts of the world are welcome to come and see for themselves.
‘We always had books and diagrams on meteorology but it has been a very dead subject up until now,’ said head of science Peter Simpson.
‘The interest shown by pupils has been really tremendous.’
‘We haven't got to the predicting level yet but the more familiar we are with the patterns, the better able we will be to make educated guesses.’
Space age: 14-year-old Rachel Kirby with the weather satellite screen
Court told of student's tragic death as she walked home
Fatal accident driver fined £60
Special Constable lost control of car
A SPECIAL Constable who lost control of her car, killing a pedestrian, yesterday escaped with a fine of just £60.
Tracey Williams was driving home with four friends after a hockey match at Essex University when her Vauxhall Cavalier spun across the road and hit student Chui Lei Hoong.
Williams, a 20-year-old fitness centre worker, of Aldiss Drift, Swaffham, Norfolk, admitted a charge of careless driving in Elmstead Road, Colchester, on November 15 last year.
Colchester magistrates assessed the seriousness of the offence under the Criminal Justice Act at ten units which, taking into account the defendant's income, resulted in a fine of £60.
Williams, who was given three months to pay, also had her driving licence endorsed with six penalty points and was ordered to pay £53 towards prosecution costs.
Roland Hardy, prosecuting, said 24-year-old Miss Chui, from Singapore, had arrived at the university the previous month and on the day of the accident was walking home with fellow student Cedric Xavier.
He told the police they normally walked to their accommodation in Forest Road by a different route, but on that day they went along Boundary Road because the other path was muddy.
They crossed the road to face the oncoming traffic and had just passed a 40 mph speed limit sign when he looked over his shoulder and saw a car heading towards them on the wrong side of the road.
It mounted the kerb, where it struck Miss Chui and then carried on to hit a fence and a lamp-post before coming to rest in the middle of Elmstead Road.
Witnesses in the car said Williams had not been driving at an excessive speed and had not been distracted in the moments before the car went out of control, said Mr Hardy.
Pc Richard Goold, who investigated the case, found no defect with the car or its tyres and concluded the accident was due to the speed of the car and the comparative inexperience of the driver.
However, said Mr Hardy, the road was wet at the time of the accident and the officer's report said the speed involved was probably ‘only marginally excessive’.
When interviewed by police, Williams put her speed at 30 to 35 mph, he added.
Williams was not in court for the hearing but was represented by solicitor Tony Smyth, who entered a plea of guilty on her behalf.
Mr Smyth said Williams worked as a leisure professional but also served as a Special Constable and was hoping to become a police officer in the future.
He reminded the bench that their sentence should be based only on the seriousness of the offence, and should not take into account the tragic consequences.
‘This is a sad and tragic business, with one young lady dead and the other knowing she has to accept responsibility for that death,’ he said.
The crucial evidence was that there was no indication that the manner of Williams' driving had been unsuited to the road conditions, and she had not been drinking.
‘You are not dealing with someone playing fast and loose with other people's lives,’ he added.
Airports to lose firm
A parcels carrier is pulling out of Stansted and Southend airports, putting 150 jobs in jeopardy.
UPS intends to move its operations to East Midlands Airport in August, because of better road links.
Last night, UPS European Communications manager Annie Garthwaite said the move would affect about 150 jobs at the two Essex airports.
Of the 16 at Stansted seven will be offered the chance to relocate, she said.
Of the 120 affected at Southend 43 will have the chance to move to East Midlands.
‘East Midlands is in the centre of the country.
It has excellent road links,’ she said.
During the three months before the move the two bases will continue to be maintained fully staffed.
The company has a DC8 cargo flight daily from Newark via Cologne.
Soccer wives in protest against Sugar
WIVES of Tottenham Hotspur players took their backing for embattled chief executive Terry Venables to the gates of Alan Sugar's mansion yesterday.
Defender Neil Ruddock's 23-year-old wife Sarah, another wife and a girlfriend — who declined to give their names — brought placards bearing the slogans: ‘Amstrad out!
Venables in!’ and ‘We want T, no Sugar’to the chairman's house in a country lane outside Chigwell, Essex.
Amstrad boss Mr Sugar was not at home, but a spokesman said if the demonstrators came back today they could have tea and biscuits with his wife.
Mrs Ruddock, who said she had been nominated as spokesperson for the wives, told reporters: ‘Some wives are working, but you can speak to any wife, and they will tell you they are 100 per cent behind Terry.’
She said the players felt the same way, and maybe seven or eight, including her husband, would want to leave if Mr Sugar succeeded in ousting Mr Venables.
‘Neil is adamant that if Terry goes, he wants to go,’ she said.
Forget
Mrs Ruddock was joined by her two children, her mother and father and sisters Lynsey and Rachel Bennett.
She said Mr Venables had turned Tottenham into a family club, adding: ‘He always talks to us and he set up a creche at the club.’
Asked about comments by Mr Sugar that if Mr Venables went and Spurs topped the League early next season, people would soon forget him, she said: ‘I can't see us being top of the League without Terry Venables to be honest, and we wouldn't forget him anyway.’
Mr Sugar was not at the house yesterday but it is believed his wife, Ann, was at home as a woman had driven a sports car into the grounds earlier, which bore the registration 1 AS.
The Spurs power struggle blew up on Friday when Mr Venables was sacked by Mr Sugar, then reinstated hours later by a High Court judge.
Mr Sugar offered to buy Mr Venables' 22 per cent shareholding in the club at what he called ‘a fair and reasonable price’, but Mr Venables dismissed the offer as ‘derisory’.
A SHADOW was cast over a sombre Royal wreath-laying ceremony yesterday when the Prince of Wales' convoy arrived on the wrong side of a monument to one of Poland's most painful wartime memories.
The mix up — at the monument to the 1944 Warsaw Uprising against the occupying Germans — caused arguments between both British and Polish security officials.
It is thought to have occurred because visiting dignitaries are regularly taken to either side of the monument — and yesterday the convoy drivers picked the wrong side.
Several standard-bearing veterans of the uprising were forced hastily to switch positions — and the soldier carrying the wreath sprinted 50 yards to take up a new position in front of the prince.
The prince appeared not to notice the confusion as he chatted to the veterans and stopped to greet well-wishers.
Later, in a speech at Warsaw University, the Prince spoke with admiration of the Polish people's struggle and talked to the veterans of the uprising in which people took to the streets against the Germans, expecting help which never came from the nearby Russian army.
After nine weeks the Germans suppressed the uprising, punishing the city by virtually destroying it.
Later, at Westerplatte, the prince handed over sets of campaign medals to the seven veterans of the British forces.
A number of them have been denied the opportunity to collect the awards for nearly 50 years by the former communist regime.
After chatting to the veterans for several minutes, the prince turned to an aide and joked: ‘I hope we have given the right medals to the right people.’
He went on to briefly visit the memorial to the 21 who died outside the vast shipyards where Lech Walesa, now the country's president, made his name as head of Solidarity.
The prince stood quietly as an old friend and electrician colleague of Mr Walesa, Stanislaw Bury, laid flowers at the foot of the three towering steel crosses which mark the site of the massacre.
Warsaw Uprising: the Prince of Wales talks with veterans at the monument
Angling
Bradley Bone is champion
WALTON-on-the-Naze Sea Angling Club held its annual meeting and presentation night when Bradley Bone became the overall champion for the 1992 season, collecting no less than seven trophies and a cheque for £88.
The trophies he won were: Seligman Cup, Roger Hawes Cup, Gerald Needham Cup, John Popplewell Cup, Ellis Cup, Reg Walker Shield and Bob Nunn Cup.
Other winners were Pete Rostrun, Richard Holgate, Wendy Metcalfe, Ken Brown, G Winter, Nick Andrews, Ricky Farrance and Alan White.
Bradley Bone has started well for the 1993 season by winning the first club match with a good bag of eels for 9lb 8oz.
Bradley picked up £38 out of £58 on offer.
Second place went to Colin Robertson with 11lb 14oz and third was Ricky Farrance with 1lb 8oz.
Tickets are now available for the annual open eel match to be held on Saturday, June 5, fishing from 8 pm to midnight along the Frinton beaches.
Tickets at £5 are available from John Metcalfe on 0255 675680.
Booking in from 6.30 pm at the bottom of Connaught Avenue.
The event is limited to 120 pegs.
It is an SAMF qualifier.
Pools and a raffle will be run.
General situation: Some central and southeastern parts of England will start cloudy with outbreaks of thundery rain, but will become brighter with some sunny spells for a time later.
Remaining parts of England, along with Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland will start dry and bright with some sunshine.
However, scattered showers over western areas will become more widespread and locally heavy during the day, perhaps accompanied by thunder.
Rain will reach the northern isles late in the day.
It will become misty near some eastern coasts.
Temperatures mostly similar to Tuesday.
East Anglia: Cloudy with outbreaks of rain in morning.
Brighter, drier later.
Wind light easterly.
Max 17C (63F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Friday: Continuing unsettled with rain moving north.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind variable, mainly westerly light or moderate.
Rain or showers, becoming mainly fair later.
Visibility moderate or poor, becoming good.
Sea slight.
Successful as a writer but not in politics
Novelist's aims still unfulfilled
Jeffrey Archer likes playing games with journalists.
Dropping hints here, dropping names there.
You constantly have the feeling you are being manipulated.
The office block on the Albert Embankment which houses his penthouse looks nothing special from the outside — a drab 1960s monstrosity in concrete and glass.
Reception consists of a uniformed man seated behind a shabby desk.
Even the lifts are tatty.
However, travel up to the top floor and you enter another world.
I am shown into a huge L-shaped apartment, where the walls, panelled in light, polished wood, are adorned with fine paintings.
The panoramic vista over the Thames to Westminster is breathtaking.As I sit, gazing at the glossy art books carefully laid out before me, I become aware of a clipped, militaristic voice behind me.
I turn to see Lord Archer of Weston-super-Mare standing theatrically on the mezzanine above, barking into a mobile phone.
I'm sure I catch something about meeting the Prime Minister.He bounds down to meet me, spruce and sporty in blazer and striped tie.
He is very busy, and can only spare half an hour.
We'd better get started.He resolutely maintains a fixed, matey grin until you ask him something dodgy.
Instantly, you are treated to the Archer frown of disapproval.
I earn my first of these by commenting that there were a few raised eyebrows when his peerage was announced last June.
Lord Archer's own eyebrows knit together.
‘I wasn't conscious of that.
I had over a thousand letters of congratulation.
Over 900 of them said: ‘It should have come a long time ago — very few people have done more for charity, public service and their Party than you have’.
I suggest you talk to the ten leading political editors in England, and see where they stand.’
Jeffrey Archer is fond of hurling alarming statistics at you.
Asked how he rates himself as a novelist, he replies: ‘All I can say is that every single book has sold more than the last.
There are some journalists who sadly are very envious of success.
The public aren't that stupid — it's very insulting of them to imagine they are, in their pompous, intellectual way.
Eighty-seven per cent of people who read me have read every book I've written.’
At 53, Jeffrey Archer's elevation to the Lords is his third and perhaps final chance to make his mark in politics.
He always wanted to become Prime Minister, and in 1969 he secured the safe Tory seat of Louth at the age of 29, becoming the country's youngest MP.The trouble was, he was in too much of a hurry.
In his eagerness to amass a personal fortune to fund his politics, he borrowed heavily to invest in an obscure Canadian company called Aquablast.
Victim of a share-pushing fraud, he became a near-bankrupt, with debts of £427,000.
He had to resign his seat.Then in the mid-80s, he found favour with Mrs. Thatcher, who felt his uncomplicated, cheer-leading brand of Conservatism and thrusting, go-getting style was just the ticket to rally the troops.
She appointed him deputy party chairman.But that too ended in tears, amid Press allegations about a prostitute, Victoria Station and £2,000.
He emerged from the subsequent libel trial against the Daily Star with his reputation intact and £500,000 in damages (he gave it all to charity), but his victory came too late to save his political career.
Again, he had had to resign in humiliating circumstances.So you can see why this time he is so anxious to avoid knocking copy.
And he does not like to be reminded of the gaffes he made as deputy chairman — branding the young unemployed as workshy, or musing on Radio Ulster whether Ian Paisley might like to be prime minister of a united Ireland.
He did rather acquire a reputation for speaking first and thinking later, didn't he?
‘It's interesting you should say that, because that was nine years ago, and you're still saying it.
Tell me something in the last eight years that I've said.
Show me a headline in the last year — show me anything.’
Now, ensconced in the Lords, he is keen not to remain a backbencher.
Would he be interested in a Government post?
‘I certainly would like to serve the Party again.’
He has a job in mind, but refuses to say directly what it is.
Instead, he drops heavy hints.Jeffrey Archer drops names like some people drop their aitches.
Within minutes, he has told me he will be seeing the PM this afternoon, and that he dined with Mrs Thatcher the previous evening.
But later, he lets slip another recent dinner date — with Andrew Lloyd Webber, Trevor Nunn and Richard Eyre.
Strange he should just happen to mention these artistic luminaries.A more direct hint comes when I ask him if he has influenced Government policy.
Quick as a flash, he replies: ‘I played a part in the formation of the new Heritage department.
I wrote the paper for it — it's still in my desk, signed and dated, to prove it.’
No prizes, then, for guessing what job he has set his sights on.During the General Election, Lord Archer worked tirelessly as John Major's minder and warm-up man at speeches up and down the country.
He describes, it, improbably, as ‘the most exciting 28 days of my life’.
‘Chris Patten called me in and said, ‘I want someone to run it so he doesn't have to think anything about it.
I want him sent home and put to bed feeling good so that when he gets to me in the mornings, he's feeling good’.
So I had him for five hours, normally from 6 pm to 11 pm.’
It is curious how he manages to make John Major sound about as animated and self-willed as a sack of potatoes.Ask him whether the PM takes his advice, and you get a similar impression.
‘People who have the most power over him — power's the wrong word, influence — are those who are with him every day.
If I was on his staff, as I was during the election, you can have a lot of power — influence — because you can say, ‘I think you should do this Prime Minister, I think you should do that.
Those who are living in No. 10 have the real influence.’
The half-hour is up, but as I turn off my tape recorder, Lord Archer shows no signs of wanting to finish.
Up to now, he has given pat, perfunctory answers, but suddenly he opens up — letting slip an emotion here, a telling reminiscence there.
All this is designed to tantalise — as soon as I ask if any of this can go on the record, he clams up.
He knows exactly what he's doing.
It is all part of the game.
‘Tell me something in the last eight years that I've said.
Show me a headline in the last year.’
Heart's desire: Jeffrey Archer who wants to play a bigger role in politics
Sailing
Robbie flushed with success
THE East Anglian Offshore Racing Association Medway Weekend featured Medway Yacht Club's Jane's Cup and the Royal Corinthian YC's Thames Estuary Race.
With two overall trophies to show for a blasting weekend double to and from the Medway, Robbie Stewart (Royal Burnham YC) and his merry men from Blush had every reason for celebration at the end of the fourth event of the East Anglian season.
Another with cause for celebration was ‘Morning All’, the S&S 34 sailed for Haven Ports YC by Mr & Mrs Dave Hunkin, who has already had two overall wins this season, and maintained her unbroken run in Class Three with two more first places.
The trip to the Medway was sailed in 25–30 knots of wind with a 30-mile beat all the way down the Barrow to Garrison Point which pretty well ensured that this race would be a big boat benefit.
And so it proved, with Class One taking the first four overall places until their monopoly was broken by ‘Fiona of Burnham’(David Geaves, RBYC) and her club-mate ‘Act of Defiance’(G Harrison and J Rankin) with ‘Abzoelutely’(Charlie Mills CYC) all from Class Two.
Conditions provided plenty of drama on the reach out of the Crouch, with a cold and vicious south-westerly and a lumpy sea which spread-eagled the unwary in broaches both to windward and to leeward, and a variety of spectacular gybes and blow-outs.
Sadly the most vicious of these brought down the rig on ‘Strictly Business’ on only the second outing for this interesting-looking Castro newcomer now owned by Nigel Musto (RCYC).
A second casualty was Nigel Theadom's fancied ‘Djinn Seng’ from Haven Ports who developed an alarming bend in her mast, while Nick Holland-Brown blew out a spinnaker aboard the Dehler 38 ‘Patriot’and in the resulting confusion took a gybe which wrapped the mainsheet around the binnacle and tore it from its setting.
Others who retired from the fray somewhere around this point included Ron Wigley's ‘Sorcery’, last year's champion boat, and the Jeanneau ‘Violet G’ from Royal Burnham who hit the Barrow sands.
First home to the Medway at the end of a 30-mile beat and despite damage to the top section of her mast track was ‘Crusader’(Richard Matthews) but an hour's lead was not quite sufficient to see off ‘Blush’ and ‘Sensor’(Mr & Mrs David Chatterton, WMYC) and the 12-metre slipped to third place.
After such a day of damage it was a somewhat depleted fleet which set off on the return journey on Sunday.
They were helped on their way with a fair tide, and a beam reach by a south-westerly of only marginally less velocity than on Saturday, although a lumpy sea gave some problems, and with only two or three short turns to windward it was again a benefit race for the top end of the fleet.
‘Carronade’ was the first boat home, but ‘Blush’and the First Europe ‘Fraggle’(Michael Nash CYC) together and breathing down her neck less than two minutes behind put paid to any idea of victory for Peter Clements (WMYC), and ‘Blush’secured her second trophy of the weekend by a comfortable margin.
‘Fiona of Burnham’ and ‘Morning All’both headed their respective classes for the second time, while the Contessa 32 ‘Space’(R Brooking and P Trudgett, HPYC) could feel extremely satisfied with a second and a third to show for her weekend efforts.
Results
MEDWAY Yacht Club's Jane's Cup:
Class One (11 starters): 1 Blush, R & P Stewart (RBYC) 9.03.53; 2 Sensor, Mr & Mrs D Chatterton (WMYC) 9.04.05; 3 Crusader, Richard Matthews (WMYC) 9.14.04.
Class Two (20 starters): 1 Fiona of Burnham, D L Geaves (RBYC) 9.24.32; 2 Act of Defiance, G Harrison & J Rankin (RBYC) 9.27.59; 3 Abzoelutely, C Mills (CYC) 9.31.25.
Class Three (13 starters): 1 Morning All, Mr & Mrs D Hunkin (HPYC) 9.34.30; 2 Scarlet, S Gosling (RBYC) 9.36.11; 3 Space, J Brooking & P Trudgett (HPYC) 9.45.53.
Sigma 38: 1 Bluebird of Burnham, R Williams (CYC) 9.51.06.
Overall: 1 Blush; 2 Sensor; 3 Crusader.ROYAL Corinthian YC's Thames Estuary Race:
Class One (seven starters): 1 Blush 6.49.39; 2 Fraggle, Michael Nash (CYC) 6.53.11; 3 Carronade, P Clements & H Spero (WMYC) 6.57.53.
Class Two (17 starters): 1 Fiona of Burnham 7.01.36; 2 Miss Piggy, M Vincent & S Larkman (HPYC) 7.03.32; 3 Destiny of Mersea, R J Gozzett (WMYC) 7.04.28.
Class Three (10 starters): 1 Morning All 6.59.53; 2 Space 7.02.56; 3 Rainbow, D R Ellis (HPYC) 7.11.49.
Sigma 38: 1 Bluebird of Burnham 7.09.34.
Overall: 1 Blush; 2 Fraggle; 3 Carronade.