

The Abasement and Revival of the Monarchy, 1322–37
The Rule of the Despensers
Although divided by the deposition of Edward II, the years from 1322 to 1330 possess a certain unity.
Throughout these years the powers of monarchy were in effect exercised for the advantage of ascendant magnate factions who enjoyed supremacy at court and aroused widespread hostility in the country.
Their ascendancy was ended only by the resolute action of the young Edward III himself, in a coup which restored the authority of the monarchy and freed the king from domination by faction.
These years were also marked by judicial executions and forfeiture of lands on a scale unknown, perhaps, since the Conquest, and the relations between the crown and nobility for the rest of the century were to be influenced by these upheavals and by the precedent set when the king himself was deposed.
Edward II's triumph at Boroughbridge was followed by a bloodbath which was unprecedented both in its scale and in the unease it aroused amongst contemporaries.
Lancaster himself, of course, was much the most significant of those who were executed: it was the first time that a man of such high rank had been put to death for rebellion against the king.
Although he had been convicted on the king's own record of his treason, a device used by Edward I against his Scottish enemies, many contemporaries thought that the judgement was of dubious legality.
The Lanercost Chronicler, for example, argued that he had been executed ‘without parliament and without consideration of weighty and wise advice’.
Lancaster had not been allowed to say anything in his defence, but was dealt with according to martial law, under which the mere recognition of his offence by the king was sufficient to ensure his condemnation.
Lancaster's execution was followed by the despatch of many of his followers.
Six of his retainers were put to death at York on the day of  his own execution, together with another eleven rebels, including Roger Clifford and John Mowbray, whose claim to the lordship of Gower had been set aside by the king in 1319.
Bartholomew de Badlesmere was captured and hanged at Canterbury; others, including Roger Mortimer of Wigmore, Roger Mortimer of Chirk, and Hugh Audley, were imprisoned, and those who escaped capture fled to France.
The property of the executed and imprisoned rebels was distributed amongst the victors: the Despensers, as might have been expected, were the chief beneficiaries.
The elder Despenser was rewarded with the lordship of Denbigh, and the younger Despenser received substantial grants not just of Lancaster's possessions but also the Bohun lordships of Brecon, Hay and Huntingdon, Mortimer of Chirk's lordship of Blaenllyfni, and the Welsh lands of Roger Clifford.
The effect of these grants was to place most of south Wales under Despenser's influence; only the Earl of Arundel, who was given the lordship of Chirk, could rival him in the Marches.
In June of the following year Despenser was pardoned all his debts at the Exchequer: he might indeed believe that he had become rich and had attained his ends.
Six weeks after Lancaster's execution, on 2 May 1322, parliament assembled at York to set the seal on the royalist victory.
The sentences against the rebels were confirmed, and a statute passed which formally annulled the Ordinances and sought to ensure that no such accroachment of royal power could ever again be lawful.
The statute laid down that measures ‘for the estate of the king and his heirs and for the estate of the realm and people should be granted only by the king in parliament, the implication being no doubt that such measures should not be forced upon the king by his subjects or drawn up by non-parliamentary assemblies.
The intention was to place a legal obstacle in the way of anyone seeking to imitate the Ordainers, but the Statute of York should not be taken to mean that the king and his supporters had a high view of the function of parliament.
Until 1321, parliament had been used by the king's opponents as an occasion when pressure might be brought to bear upon him; to the king, parliament was an inescapable necessity when taxes had to be raised but otherwise was of little significance.
Political life revolved around the court, and not around the occasional meetings of parliament.
Indeed, after 1322 Edward made little use of parliament.
The truce with Scotland, renewed in 1323, reduced the need to levy taxes, and opposition was so cowed that, as the Vita commented, it did not surface even when parliament was called: ‘Parliaments, colloquia and councils decide nothing these days.
For the nobles of the realm, terrified by threats and the penalties inflicted on others, let the king's will have free play.’
Apparently secure in their influence over the king, the ambition and greed of the Despensers reached new heights.
The flow of patronage towards them continued unabated, and some of their household expenses were financed by the king.
The most enduring memorial to the younger Despenser's wealth is the extensive building work he undertook at Caerphilly Castle in Glamorgan, where he rebuilt the hall and the private chambers and the western gatehouse of the middle ward.
When the castle fell to the queen's forces in 1327 they found there £1,000 in coin belonging to Despenser, together with royal treasure of £13,000 in coin in twenty-six barrels and over 600 pieces of plate and jewellery.
The Despensers also enriched themselves by harassing the widows and heiresses of great landowners.
Lancaster's widow was pressured into surrendering parts of the Lacy inheritance, and when Pembroke died in 1324 his coheiresses were subjected to unscrupulous treatment to persuade them to surrender portions of their inheritance to the Despensers.
It is not, perhaps, surprising that the younger Despenser feared his opponents were using unorthodox methods to get rid of him.
In 1324 he wrote to the Pope complaining that he was in danger from magic and occult practices, and the Pope replied by advising him to turn to God with a whole and contrite heart.
Set against the resentment which their greed aroused, the administrative reforms which the younger Despenser together with the Chancellor Robert Baldock and the Treasurer Walter Stapleton implemented between 1322 and 1326 were of little political significance, despite the fact that some of their measures, such as the reduction in the financial independence of the Wardrobe, had formed part of the Ordainers' programme in 1310.
These reforms have encouraged some historians to see the Despensers as ‘much more than greedy and irresponsible favourites’, but their contemporaries judged them by their behaviour towards other landowners and by their position at court, rather than by their responsibility, however great it was, for what were essentially technical reforms in government.
Of more immediate significance, perhaps, was the ending of the Scottish war by the truce of 1323.
The truce of 1319 expired in the summer of 1322, and after the parliament at York had been dissolved Edward prepared a new invasion of Scotland.
Bruce, however, laid  waste the country ahead of the English forces, who were unable to live off the land.
Their supply ships were held up by contrary winds, and Edward was faced with no alternative but an inglorious retreat to England.
Bruce meanwhile had launched a lightning raid into north-west England, and after burning Lancaster he crossed into the North Riding of Yorkshire and almost succeeded in capturing Edward himself near Byland Abbey, This humiliation of the king proved too much for Andrew Harclay, whose support had been of crucial importance at Boroughbridge and who had been raised to the earldom of Carlisle a few days after the battle.
Supported by many in the north who had had enough of war, Harclay entered into secret negotiations with Bruce for a peace settlement that recognized Bruce's title to the Scottish crown and the separate status of the Scottish kingdom.
Harclay's motives were entirely understandable, but his action was technically treasonable for he was ‘a private person to whom it in no wise pertained to ordain such things’.
Edward II ordered his arrest, and he was convicted of treason and executed in January 1323.
His execution was probably a mistake, for it deprived the north of its only effective military leader, and left Edward little option but to take over the same policy and conclude a truce.
Almost immediately after Harclay's execution Edward himself began negotiations with the Scots and a thirteen-year truce was agreed in March 1323.
The truce with the Scots was, however, opposed by some of the northern nobility, whose personal interest lay in continuing the war, and it could be argued that Edward had been forced into it by another military humiliation and a political misjudgement.
But the truce does not seem to have aroused general opposition in England; perhaps more serious in their implications for the regime were the disorders at Pontefract in the summer of 1323, when a mob killed two officials guarding Lancaster's tomb to prevent offerings being made there.
Some of Lancaster's supporters who had escaped justice in 1322 were at large committing acts of banditry in the north-west, and a more general change of sentiment perhaps lay behind the petitions in the parliament of February 1324 that the rotting corpses of the rebels who had been hanged should be taken down and given decent burial.
There was little sign yet, however, of any organized opposition to the king and the Despensers.
The heirs of the executed and forfeited rebels lacked the means and the backing to use force to regain what their fathers had lost, and the enemies Edward had made in the extreme north by concluding a truce with the Scots were in no  position to make their influence felt.
When the challenge to the court came, it was not from the heirs of the rebels or from the discontented northerners, but from the queen.
Her alienation from the court was one of the most significant, though least obvious, consequences of the Despensers' ascendancy.
In 1324 war broke out between England and France over the destruction by the Seneschal of Gascony of the fortress of Saint Sardos on the border between Gascony and the Agenais, the building of which had been authorized by Charles IV of France in the previous year.
Edward's officials ignored Charles's summons to make reparations, and Charles accordingly declared Gascony confiscated.
When the war broke out the queen, who was Charles's sister, was treated with some suspicion: her lands were seized and her servants sent to various religious houses throughout the country.
Edward had neither the money nor the enthusiasm for the war, however, and he sent the queen to France to negotiate peace with her brother.
In the spring of 1325 Isabella reached an agreement with Charles under which Gascony was to be occupied by the French until Edward did homage to Charles, when the duchy would be restored to him.
Such terms were scarcely to Edward's liking, but he confirmed the treaty on 13 June, and in a fatal misjudgement, for which the Despensers may have been in part responsible, Edward agreed to allow his son Prince Edward, now aged eleven, to go to France in his place to do homage.
Isabella was now in a position of great strength.
With the heir to the throne in her hands, she wrote to Edward saying that she and her son would not return to England until Edward had dismissed the Despensers from court.
On her arrival in France, Isabella seems to have associated with some of the exiles who had fled there after Boroughbridge.
Chief amongst them was Roger Mortimer of Wigmore, who had escaped from the Tower while under sentence of death.
In France Mortimer became Isabella's lover, and the two of them gained the support of other English lords who had travelled to France on diplomatic business and had then defected.
The most notable of these defectors were the king's half-brother the Earl of Rent, the Earl of Richmond and the Bishops of Hereford, Winchester and Norwich.
Richmond and Rent, who had been amongst the most consistently loyal of the earls in the earlier part of the reign, had probably been alienated by the arrogance and dominance of the Despensers.
The Bishop of Hereford was an associate of Mortimer and had been brought before parliament in 1324 to face charges that members of his retinue had helped  Mortimer to escape from the Tower.
He was found guilty and sentenced to the loss of his goods and lands.
John Stratford, the Bishop of Winchester, had not been the king's candidate for the see and had had to buy the king's good will for £1,000, which was then paid over to the younger Despenser; and the Bishop of Norwich had been the victim of the king's annoyance about the treaty with Charles IV in 1325, which the bishop had helped to negotiate.
The king had refused to grant him his temporalities and he sought exile in France.
There is no reason, however, to suppose that Isabella had deliberately tried to build up a party amongst the bishops.
Those who joined her in France had their individual grievances against the court, and the bishops in their various ways either suffered financially at the hands of the king or had been prevented from properly exercising their episcopal authority.
Mortimer and Isabella also had allies on the continent.
The Count of Hainault, who was ruler of Holland and Zeeland, had grievances against Edward II over the harassment of Dutch shipping and was willing to help Isabella as a reprisal against England.
In France itself the Valois family had good dynastic reasons for wishing to see Isabella removed from France and embroiled in English domestic politics: Charles IV was the last of the Capetians in the direct male line, and the question of Isabella's title to the throne, or her right to pass the title to her son, might soon arise.
Philip Count of Valois, however, was the nearest male heir to the last Capetian, and it was very much in his interests for Isabella to leave France and become involved in an English political upheaval.
Indeed, as the price of Valois support Isabella may have offered to renounce her son's claim to the French crown.
Philip of Valois was the Count of Hainault's brother-in-law, and it was probably the Valois family who prompted the betrothal of Prince Edward to the count's daughter Philippa.
It is a measure of Edward II's loss of control of his family that a matter as important as his heir's marriage could be arranged without his prior knowledge or consent.
Isabella and Mortimer began to plan an invasion of England in July 1326 and the Count of Hainault placed shipping and men at their disposal.
News of their intentions provoked little immediate panic in England.
There was no evidence yet that Isabella enjoyed widespread support in England, and Edward no doubt felt he could count on the loyalty of the nobles to whom he committed responsibility for the defence of the south coast.
In this he was to be sadly mistaken, and the  collapse of his position in the face of what was initially little more than a putsch organized by the queen shows how shallowly based his authority was, resting on fear and coercion rather than genuine loyalty.
The ascendancy of the Despensers had alienated many men from their natural loyalty to their king.
The numerous victims of their rapacity and greed had no reason to risk their necks for the king and his favourites; nobles such as the king's half-brother the Earl of Norfolk, who might have expected to enjoy some influence at court, hated the Despensers for their monopoly of the king's presence; and the heirs of the victims of 1322 had everything to gain from the overthrow of Edward's regime.
The Ascendancy of Mortimer and Isabella
The queen landed at Orwell in Suffolk on 24 September 1326 with a small force probably amounting to no more than 1,500 men, of whom almost half were Hainaulters.
Even before she landed the lack of enthusiasm for Edward's regime had become apparent, for the fleet which Edward ordered to muster to oppose her landing refused to do so ‘because of the great wrath they [i.e. the sailors]had towards Hugh Despenser’.’
Soon other signs of unwillingness to fight appeared: the Earl of Norfolk, the king's half-brother, who had been placed in charge of the defence of East Anglia, defected to the queen, and Henry of Lancaster, Earl Thomas's brother and heir, who had been ordered to raise troops in the midlands, also went over to Isabella.
Such a move on his part was entirely understandable, and it was perhaps unwise to have entrusted any military authority to one who had so much to gain by Edward's downfall.
More serious still for Edward was his loss of London.
He had been unpopular in the city since an inquiry in 1321 which led to the curbing of the city's liberties; the citizens had probably helped Mortimer to escape from the Tower, and Froissart, who was a Hainaulter himself and may have written on good authority, said that even before Isabella landed she had received secret assurances of support from them.
The king tried to rally the city to his defence, but failed utterly and withdrew westwards with the Despensers and a few remaining friends.
The city mob took Edward's flight as the signal for an orgy of destruction in which the unpopular Treasurer, the Bishop of Exeter, was lynched and the tablet commemorating the Ordinances which had been removed from St  Paul's on the king's orders in 1322 was replaced.
A Mortimer partisan was elected Lord Mayor, and with that the city's adherence to the queen's cause was assured.
Edward and the younger Despenser fled to Wales, perhaps hoping to rally forces and make a last stand in Despenser's Marcher lordships.
The elder Despenser was left in charge at Bristol, but on the approach of the queen's forces, who had now been joined by a group of northern magnates led by Henry Percy of Alnwick and Thomas Wake of Liddel, he surrendered and was tried and sentenced to death.
Isabella now sent Henry of Lancaster to the lordship of Glamorgan to hunt down the king and the younger Despenser.
He found them at Neath Abbey, and the king was taken to Renilworth Castle while Isabella and Mortimer proceeded to wreak their vengeance on his supporters.
The younger Despenser was brought before a ‘tribunal of judges’, as one chronicler put it.
He was charged with accroaching royal power and procuring the deaths of the Earl of Lancaster and other nobles, acquiring many lands that belonged to the crown, and disobeying the judgement of banishment pronounced against him in 1321.
‘The good men of the realm, great and small, rich and poor, by common assent’ found him guilty and sentenced him to death.
The sentence was carried out with great brutality, and his head was placed on London Bridge amidst general rejoicing.
The Chancellor, Robert Baldock, was imprisoned and died soon after; the Earl of Arundel, who was the younger Despenser's brother-in-law and the only earl to remain loyal to the bitter end, was executed.
The Pauline Annalist reported a rumour that Arundel confessed to having plotted the death of the queen, but it is more likely that Mortimer saw him as a territorial rival in the Marches of Wales, where he had held the lordship of Chirk since the confiscations after Boroughbridge.
There remained the question of what to do with the king.
On 26 October the queen and her supporters had issued a proclamation at Bristol declaring that since the king had deserted the realm, presumably by fleeing to Glamorgan, Prince Edward was to be Reeper of the Realm, and the prince issued writs in his father's name summoning parliament for 15 December.
When the Great Seal was recovered with the capture of the Chancellor, new writs in the king's name were issued postponing the parliament until 7 January 1327.
The fiction was still maintained that the king was responsible for government.
Whatever Isabella's private intentions may have been, the deposition of the king had so far formed no part of her publicly  declared programme, which amounted to little more than the removal of the Despensers.
It is impossible to discover when and by whom the decision to depose the king was taken, but when parliament assembled, Mortimer and his supporters embarked on a carefully orchestrated campaign to win support for the removal of the king.
According to the Lanercost Chronicle, the Bishops of Winchester and Hereford were sent to Renilworth to ask the king to come to parliament, but on 12 January they returned to Westminster and it was announced that the king refused to do so.
On the following day the Bishop of Hereford preached a sermon on the text, ‘A foolish king shall ruin his people’, and popular clamour for the removal of the king was encouraged.
Mortimer then told the assembly that at some earlier date the magnates had agreed that Edward should be deposed.
On the same day a series of articles against the king were presented.
The articles opened with the comprehensively damning statement that the king ‘is not sufficient to govern’ because throughout his reign he had been led and governed by others who had given him evil counsel, to the dishonour of himself and the destruction of Holy Church and his people, and he had refused to provide any remedy, or to allow one to be made, when he was asked to do so by the great and wise men of his realm.
He was also accused of having lost Scotland, of allowing many great and noble men to go to a shameful death or to be imprisoned, exiled and disinherited, and of breaking his coronation oath to do right to all.
The indictment concluded by declaring that he had been found ‘incorrigible without hope of amendment’.
In what appears to have been a carefully stage-managed cry of unanimity, it was agreed that Edward should never rule over them again, and the Bishop of Hereford took a delegation which was headed by William Trussell to Renilworth to inform Edward of the assembly's decision.
According to Geoffrey le Baker, the bishop first of all called upon Edward to abdicate, and in an emotional scene he agreed to do so.
On the following day Trussell renounced homage ‘on behalf of the whole kingdom’, and the delegation returned to London to announce the abdication.
The Bishop of Winchester then stated that the peers had unanimously agreed that Prince Edward should become king ‘if the people would accept this decision of the prelates and magnates’.
The people did so, and the Archbishop of Canterbury then addressed the assembly on the theme ‘the voice of the people is the voice of God’, saying that by the unanimous consent of all the magnates Edward had been deprived of the government of his kingdom because of his  inadequacy and his offences against Church and kingdom.
The people replied by crying three times, ‘Let it be done.’
There was no precedent in post-Conquest England for the removal of a crowned and anointed king, nor was there any clear guidance in civil or canon law about the means by which a king might be deposed.
Indeed, it has recently been argued that no ‘actual sentence of deposition, in the legal sense of the term’ was pronounced against Edward.
Canon law, however, gave grounds for supporting that an incompetent king, ‘rex inutilis ’, could be required to abdicate, and the articles against the king, which may have been drawn up by the Bishop of Winchester, allege that his ‘uselessness’ had brought damage and destruction to the Church, people and realm of England.
In April 1327 Edward was moved from Renilworth to Berkeley Castle.
Two attempts to rescue him failed, but in July his former confessor Thomas Dunheved led a band which succeeded in freeing him.
There is no specific evidence for his recapture, but it was announced in parliament in the autumn that he had died at Berkeley on 21 September.
Later sources had it that the king was murdered: Geoffrey le Baker, writing thirty years after the event, provides the vivid details of the brutal and degrading way in which he is supposed to have met his death, but Dr Cuttino and Dr Lyman have recently suggested that the story of his escape to Ireland and then via France to Cologne where he ended up as a hermit may not be wholly imaginary.
No one was ever convicted of Edward's murder, though when Mortimer fell in 1330 he was accused of procuring the king's death.
Throughout the reigns of his son and great-grandson he is referred to as Ring Edward ‘who lies at Gloucester, but it remains a mystery as to whether the body which lies in the splendid tomb there is his or not.
Edward's downfall had been sudden and complete; yet its instigators, the queen and Mortimer, had never been popular in England and had enjoyed little if any overt support there until they landed in September 1326.
The most striking feature of the revolution of 1326–7 is the unwillingness of anyone apart from Edward's immediate circle of friends to stand by him or to fight for him.
Few were even prepared to try to mediate, none to risk anything for the king and the Despensers.
The king did not lack military resources, but they were useless if the men who were placed in command of them defected to the enemy.
The Despensers lacked the military power to  underpin their ascendancy.
They had some support amongst officials at court, but they had not troubled to build up support amongst the magnates or the lesser landowners.
Their power lacked the firm basis in widespread territorial possessions and lordship over men that had made Lancaster such a formidable opponent of the king; they were essentially courtiers, who depended for their influence on royal favour.
The incompetence of the king, and the arrogance and greed of the Despensers, had so alienated men from the court that none except the few who profited from the king's favour would fight for him.
This is perhaps the fundamental reason for Edward's political failure.
Generosity was expected of a king; loyal servants expected to be rewarded, and patronage if skilfully used could bring the king much support.
But Edward proved incapable of using his powers of patronage in this way.
The concentration of favour and rewards first upon Gaveston and then on the younger Despenser was bound to alienate those who did not share the benefits of intimacy with the king, and it could be represented, more disinterestedly, as a waste of royal resources.
The manner in which Gaveston and Despenser monopolized access to the king was deeply resented: when the king's personal decision counted for so much, access to the king was the way to obtain grants and favours for a magnate and for his dependants.
If a noble was excluded from favour at court, his dependants might look elsewhere for a patron, and the noble's following would thus be weakened.
The monopoly of the king's presence by a particular favourite thus had serious implications for the position of other magnates, which helps to explain the bitterness of their hostility to both Gaveston and the Despensers.
Access to the king, however, implied more than just access to the fount of patronage; it also implied the right to give advice on the business of the kingdom.
The magnates saw themselves as the natural counsellors of the king, and argued in the Boulogne agreement and in the petition against the Despensers that they had a duty to act to protect the realm if the king was being led by unwise counsel.
It should not be assumed that such an argument was merely a cloak for self-interest and greed.
The honour and status of the realm was a matter of concern to the nobility, and Edward's military humiliations in Scotland were as much an affront to them as his lavishness towards Gaveston and the Despensers.
The deposition of the king was followed by a reversal of the forfeitures of 1322 and an annulment of the grants that the victors of  Boroughbridge had made to themselves and their supporters.
Henry of Lancaster, Earl Thomas's brother and heir who had successfully petitioned for the restoration of the earldom of Leicester in 1324, now sought a reversal of the sentence on his brother and the restoration of his other lands and honours.
Rather surprisingly, perhaps, this petition was not granted in full.
Henry was allowed to assume the title of Earl of Lancaster and to receive a great part of the Lancaster inheritance, but the Lacy earldom of Lincoln, which Earl Thomas had held in right of his wife, was not fully recovered until 1348.
The Earl of Hereford's son was granted livery of his father's inheritance, the Clifford family was restored, and the Mowbray inheritance was placed in wardship with the Countess of Warenne until John Mowbray's heir came of age.
In acquisitiveness and greed there was little to choose between the victors and the vanquished in the political struggles of the 1320s.
Isabella recovered her lands, which were augmented by additional grants worth about £9,000, including Despenser's lordship of Glamorgan; she also obtained the younger Despenser's movables, plate and jewels.
Mortimer not only procured a reversal of the judgement against his father, but also very substantial portions of the forfeited Despenser lands, including the lordship of Denbigh, and property in Shropshire which the Earl of Arundel had forfeited.
For the moment, the revolution of 1327 seemed to amount to little more than the replacement of one greedy and unscrupulous faction by another.
A regency council headed by Henry of Lancaster was set up to administer the realm, but Mortimer remained outside it, or perhaps more accurately above it, occupying a quasi-royal position as Queen Isabella's lover.
Mortimer used his position to advance his interests still further.
In 1328 he obtained the office of Justice of North and South Wales for life, and Chief Reeper of the Peace in Shropshire, Worcestershire and Herefordshire.
He successfully petitioned parliament to reverse the judgement of 1322 against his cousin Mortimer of Chirk, but declared himself his uncle's heir and expropriated his lands despite the fact that his uncle had a son and grandson living.
He also obtained the custody, and thus the control, of the lands of the heirs to the Audley and Pembroke inheritances.
He had created an empire in the March with all the speed and rapacity of his supplanted rival the younger Despenser, and from this base he ruled England.
In the September parliament of 1328 he received the title Earl of March, an honour which was amply justified in terms of his wealth and territorial power but which aroused some hostility amongst the other earls.
Mortimer and Isabella tried to cultivate support for their regime by lavish grants to the deposed king's half-brothers the Earls of Norfolk and Rent: Rent, for example, was granted Despenser's forfeited lands in Leicestershire.
Two of the northern lords who had supported the revolution, Henry Beaumont and Wake of Liddel, were well rewarded, and Mortimer tried to buttress his position in Ireland by conferring the earldom of Ormond on the leading Anglo-Irish magnate of Munster, James Butler.
The regime perhaps had little choice but to win support by making grants of land which might otherwise have gone to augment royal resources, and Mortimer and Isabella rapidly ran through the very substantial treasure inherited from Edward II.
Over £60,000 was in the king's Treasury in November 1326, but some of this was spent paying off the force of Hainault mercenaries which Isabella had recruited for her invasion in 1326; some of it was simply appropriated by Mortimer and Isabella for their personal use, and some of it had to be used to finance the war against the Scots which was renewed in the summer of 1327.
The political turmoil in England following the deposition of Edward II was too good an opportunity for Bruce to miss, even though the truce of 1323 still had nine years to run.
On 1 February 1327 a Scottish force made an unsuccessful attempt to seize Norham Castle, and a little over two months later Bruce himself landed in Ulster.
His purpose in doing so was to take advantage of the political uncertainty following the death of Richard de Burgh Earl of Ulster and win Irish support for an invasion of England.
The English response to these manoeuvres was to raise a large army for the invasion of Scotland.
Rather surprisingly, perhaps, the war seems to have been popular: Murimuth says there were more volunteers than conscripts in the army's ranks, and Sir Thomas Gray of Heton, the author of the Scalacronica , recorded that there was no lack of enthusiasm for service even amongst the northerners.
Perhaps they had more confidence in Mortimer as a commander than they ever had in Edward II: Mortimer held the lordship of Trim (County Meath) in right of his wife and although he had been defeated by Edward Bruce in Meath in December 1315, he had shown some skill in restoring order in Ireland after the Bruce invasion.
The campaign which Mortimer now led in Scotland turned out to be an ignominious fiasco.
The mercenary captain John of Hainault  brought a force of 500 men-at-arms from the Low Countries, and at York they became involved in a violent affray with a band of archers from Lincolnshire, which culminated in the deaths of a sizeable number of the Lincolnshire men.
The command of the army on the border was entrusted jointly to the Earls of Rent and Lancaster, but the two evidently found it difficult to work together, for after three weeks Lancaster was named as sole captain of the force.
English supply ships once more failed to keep up with the advance of the troops, and the Scots pursued their usual diversionary tactic of raiding into England.
After eluding their English pursuers for some days they encamped in Stanhope Park in Weardale on 20 July.
It took the English eleven days to discover where they were; they planned an attack on the encampment, but were dissuaded and the only military action was a surprise move by the Earl of Douglas against the English camp.
The Scots were allowed to escape, and Sir Thomas Gray of Heton portrayed the young Edward III in tears after such a humiliating failure.
Murimuth recorded that Edward returned south with grief and without honour, and it is not surprising that rumours of treachery were rife.
Murimuth, who observed that the English army outnumbered the Scots by three to one, believed that the decision not to attack was urged by some of the magnates who were in league with the Scots.
Treachery is unlikely, but the decision not to attack the Scottish camp, and not to pursue the Scots when they broke camp, suggests at the very least a lack of confidence and judgement amongst the English commanders, and there is some evidence of disagreement amongst them about the tactics they should adopt.
After the failure of the Stanhope Park campaign Mortimer and Isabella determined upon a negotiated peace with Scotland.
They could not afford another campaign: they had run through the treasure inherited from Edward II so quickly that they could not even pay their Hainault mercenaries, and they had to borrow both from the Florentine banking house of Bardi and from English merchants.
In the welter of recriminations that followed the Stanhope Park campaign, it is doubtful whether there was enough political will and unity amongst the magnates to launch another invasion of Scotland.
Discussions with Bruce were initiated immediately after the Lincoln parliament of September 1327, and the English seem to have been prepared to accept most of Bruce's proposals.
On 1 March 1325 Edward III issued letters patent embodying the terms of a settlement, which was then ratified at the parliament of Northampton in May.
The treaty conceded most  of what Bruce had been fighting for.
Edward III agreed that the realm of Scotland ‘shall remain for ever to the eminent prince Lord Robert, by the grace of God the illustrious king of Scots’, and he renounced any right he might have in the realm of Scotland.
There was to be a ‘true, final and perpetual peace’ between the two kings, and the peace was to be symbolized by the marriage between Edward's sister Joan and Bruce's son David, later David II of Scotland.
The Ring of Scotland for his part undertook to pay the Ring of England £20,000 over three years in three instalments, a concession which Mortimer and Isabella must have been especially anxious to procure in view of their financial difficulties, and which Bruce hoped perhaps would sweeten the agreement for the English.
The indemnity was described simply as a payment ‘for making peace’, but it has been pointed out that the sum of £20,000 is close to the amount thought to have been extorted by the Scots from the northern counties of England over the years since Bannockburn, and the payment may have been seen as compensation for the destruction wrought in the north.
There was no mention in the treaty, however, either of the estates in Scotland granted to English lords by Edward I and lost as Bruce gained control of the country, or of the Scottish lands held by Anglo-Scottish lords such as the Earl of Angus and forfeited when they adhered to the English cause.
In a private agreement made a few months after the treaty was concluded, Bruce restored Henry Percy's Scottish lands and he is said to have promised to restore the lands of Henry Beaumont and Thomas Wake of Liddel.
But even if such a promise was made it was not carried out, and the ‘disinherited’ were soon to form a powerful group at Edward's court seeking the renewal of the Scottish war.
The peace was widely condemned in England.
Murimuth called it ‘turpis pax ’, the shameful peace; Henry Knighton recorded that it had been made ‘without the advice and consent of the community of the realm and the magnates’, and the king himself showed his disapproval by refusing to attend his sister's wedding.
The government, nervous about the nobility's reaction to the agreement, issued an order banning tournaments.
It was believed that the treaty had been made simply for private gain, and this view was given substance by Isabella's appropriation of much of the £20,000 payment from Bruce.
Sir Thomas Gray of Heton said that the peace was not in accordance with the king's will and that the queen and Mortimer had used the opportunity of the king's minority to arrange the whole thing.
This argument reflects the official view disseminated after the war had begun again that Edward had been coerced into accepting the treaty while he was under the tutelage of Mortimer and Isabella and that therefore he could not be bound by it.
The peace with Scotland brought opposition to the regime of Mortimer and Isabella into the open, and, perhaps more significantly, marked the beginning of a breach, not as yet overt, between them and the young king, who was now sixteen years old.
The first challenge to the regime came from the Earl of Lancaster who perhaps felt that Mortimer had denied him the authority which was his due as chief councillor to the king.
He refused to attend the Salisbury parliament which ended on 1 November 1328, but stayed nearby at Winchester with a group of his followers.
Lancaster sent ‘certain knights’ to parliament to explain his absence, but his excuses were not accepted, and the Bishop of Winchester then declared that Lancaster had not come ‘because of the quarrel between himself and Lord Mortimer’.
Mortimer swore that he intended no harm to Lancaster, and the Bishops of Winchester and London were sent to persuade him to attend after all.
But Lancaster replied by attacking the government for extravagance and oppressively burdening the people, saying that he would come armed to parliament and seek to remedy these matters unless the king granted him a safe-conduct.
The king and the earls could not agree to the form of the safe-conduct, and Lancaster stayed away.
It is not clear whether Lancaster's men were in arms or not, but Mortimer regarded his absence as a sufficient threat to raise a force in the king's name, and on the way back to London from Salisbury in the company of the king this force encountered Lancaster's men near Winchester.
The engagement which followed was hardly even a skirmish, but it had been directed against the king, and in December, after Lancaster had moved to the midlands to gather reinforcements, the king wrote to the City of London complaining that Lancaster intended to attack him.
The king believed that although Lancaster and his followers claimed to be acting in the king's name they would in fact create disorder and in any case ‘it was not their duty to act as judge and do justice’.
Lancaster was now joined by the king's uncles the Earls of Rent and Norfolk and a group of lords who had lost lands in Scotland, chief amongst whom were Henry Beaumont, Thomas Wake of Liddel and David of Strathbogie, claimant to the earldom of Atholl.
Norfolk's and Rent's adherence to Lancaster was motivated by little more than  expediency, and when it looked as though he was not going to win after all they defected to Mortimer.
The disinherited, on the other hand, were opposed to the peace with Scotland, and the propaganda published by the Lancastrian faction condemned the court for giving up the king's right in Scotland and for inflicting the humiliation of Stanhope Park on the king.
Lancaster's objections to the regime, however, were concerned just as much with domestic affairs: he criticized the queen for her greed and acquisitiveness, singling out for special mention her appropriation of the lordship of Pontefract which had been held by Earl Thomas in right of his wife, He complained that the treasure left by Edward II had been ‘wastede and born away withouten the wille of Kyng Edwarde his sone, in destruccioun of him and of his folk’, and proposed that Mortimer ‘shouldd dwelle oppon his owen landes’.
In early December Lancaster attempted to negotiate with the court by sending Ralph Basset and William de Clinton with proposals for a settlement, but they were met with a firm refusal by Edward, who told Lancaster that he should not attempt to bargain with his king.
Both sides were now preparing for war, but Norfolk and Rent made another attempt at mediation in mid-December when they wrote to all the prelates asking them to attend an assembly in London to discuss the king's failure to abide by his coronation oath and Magna Carta.
Arising out of this the Archbishop of Canterbury sought a solution by asking the king to avoid the use of force and to summon a parliament to consider the grievances of the Lancastrian party.
The king, however, replied that he intended to proceed against the rebels but offered a pardon to anyone who submitted before 7 January 1329, except Henry Beaumont, Thomas Roscelin, William Trussell and Thomas Wyther, all of whom fled to France.
The archbishop hoped that this offer would be sufficient to restore peace, and Lancaster together with Wake and others swore a solemn oath that they had not done anything against the estate of the king or to the dishonour of his royal lordship.
Lancaster's oath, however, was not enough to satisfy the court, and Mortimer launched a punitive raid lasting eight days on Lancaster's lands in Leicestershire.
Rent and Norfolk now deserted Lancaster and accused him of sedition, and the king ordered the confiscation of all his property and the property of his supporters until they submitted unconditionally.
Lancaster meanwhile was encamped near Bedford, and seeing his support ebb away he made another offer of submission.
This time the terms imposed upon him and his followers were much more humiliating: they had to ‘give such surety as it shall please to our  lord the king’ that they would make no further trouble.
Lancaster himself had to enter into a recognizance of £30,000 and similar large sums were required from his most important followers.
His protest against the court had come to nothing.
Lancaster's action in the winter of 1328–9 scarcely deserves the name of rebellion.
There is no evidence that he attempted to start an armed rising against Mortimer and the king, and even after his submission Mortimer made no move to have him condemned for treason.
Perhaps neither side was prepared for open civil war once again, with its inevitable aftermath of executions and forfeitures.
For his part, Lancaster had evidently hoped for the support of the king, but Edward firmly refused to have anything to do with his protest.
It was not in the king's interest to associate himself with a movement which at most would merely ensure the removal from power of one magnate clique and its replacement by another.
During the rebellion both Rent and Norfolk had given Mortimer grounds for doubting their loyalty.
Norfolk survived unscathed, perhaps because his son was married to Mortimer's daughter; but in March 1330 Rent was arrested on a charge of treason.
It was alleged at his trial that he was involved in a conspiracy with the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of London, Henry Beaumont and other exiles in Paris, and even some former associates of the Despensers, to put Edward II back on the throne with the support of a Scottish army.
Rent's supposed allies appear little more than an improbable amalgam of all those who might be opposed to the regime of Mortimer and Isabella, and it is hard to believe that the conspiracy had such wide-ranging support.
The conspirators apparently believed that Edward II was still alive, for Rent had been arrested after visiting Corfe Castle where the deposed king was supposed to be hiding.
Rent was found guilty and executed, but all the other conspirators except the Archbishop of York were either imprisoned or released after entering into recognizances for their good behaviour.
The case against the archbishop was adjourned, however, and abandoned when the regime fell in October 1330.
After Rent's execution the regime probably felt confident that it had overcome its enemies.
Lancaster's opposition had received little determined support, and Rent's conspiracy, if conspiracy it really was, had come to nothing.
The recognizances which had been required from several of the most powerful nobles gave the regime an effective hold over them, and none of the movements against Mortimer had gained the support of the king himself.
The only serious threat  appeared to come from a small group of exiles in Paris, chief amongst whom was Henry Beaumont, who had gathered together exiles from Lancaster s movement and some of the nobles who had lost lands in Scotland.
These men were in touch with Edward Balliol, the heir of the Scottish king dispossessed by Edward I, and they may have been planning some move to recover their position in either England or Scotland.
They were forestalled, however, by the coup which the king and a group of trusted household servants carried out on 19 October 1330.
The Reassertion of Royal Authority
As early as March or April 1330 Edward III was attempting to assert his independence of the regime at court and to build up a body of supporters loyal to him rather than to Mortimer and Isabella.
One of his associates was the noted bibliophile Richard de Bury, later Bishop of Durham, and it was he who informed the Pope, in response to a message conveyed verbally, that requests which the king himself really wished to be carried out would bear the words Pater Sancte in his own hand.
Edward sought papal approval for the coup he was planning and as his intermediary in the negotiations he relied on Sir William Montague, a knight of the household whose family had served Edward I and Edward II in the Scottish and Welsh wars.
His father had been a prominent supporter of Edward II, and had been described by one chronicler as ‘worse than Piers Gaveston’.
In the autumn of 1330 Mortimer got wind of a plot being hatched in the king's immediate circle and he interrogated Montague and others.
Montague managed to convince Mortimer of his innocence, but his narrow escape did not discourage the king, and when the coup came it had all the appearance of being carefully planned.
The king held a council at Nottingham from 14 to 19 October 1330, and on 19 October the king and a small band of followers made their way by a subterranean passage into Nottingham Castle, where Mortimer and Isabella were lodged.
They were discovered by Sir Hugh Trumpington, who raised the alarm, but one of Montague's men seized a mace ‘and smote the same Hughe oppon the hevede, that the brayn burst out and felle on the Ground’.
They then entered Isabella's chamber, where they found her together with Mortimer and the Bishop of Lincoln.
Isabella's plea to Edward to ‘have pity on gentle Mortimer’ was brushed aside, and Edward ordered him to be arrested and placed in safe custody.
On the  following day his supporters who had come to Nottingham with him were arrested as well.
Mortimer and Isabella were hurried off to London and arraigned before parliament in November.
Mortimer was accused of accroaching the royal power and the government of the realm, and removing Edward II from Renilworth Castle to Berkeley and there murdering him.
He was also charged with forcing the king to bestow the earldom of March upon him in the Salisbury parliament of 1328 and then leading an armed band against the Earl of Lancaster, with procuring the death of the Earl of Rent, fomenting discord between Edward II and Isabella, and other offences which together amounted to a comprehensive indictment of his rule since 1326, The earls and barons, ‘the peers of the realm’, were asked to give their judgement on these charges and they declared that they were notorious and manifest to all.
Sentence then followed: Mortimer was condemned to death and to forfeiture of all his lands and honours.
Isabella was sentenced to lose all her lands, but was given an allowance of £3,000 a year to maintain her estate.
Knighton suggests that she too came close to being condemned to death, but was spared because of the king's natural tenderness towards his mother.
Mortimer's estates were taken into the king's hands, but, in contrast to his father in 1322 and Mortimer himself in 1327, Edward did not immediately use the confiscated lands to underpin the power of another group of favourites.
Indeed, although parts of the inheritance were granted out, the lords successfully petitioned in the parliament of September 1331 for the restoration to Mortimer's son Edmund of the family's lands in mid-Wales, including Wigmore, Maelienydd, Caedewen and Cwmwd Deuddwr.
After Mortimer's condemnation Edward granted pardon and restitution to the families which had suffered at his hands in 1329 and 1330.
The fines imposed upon the Earl of Lancaster and his followers were remitted, and Lancaster received confirmation of his right to Pontefract, Tutbury and Leicester, which he had not been able to recover after the revolution of 1327, though he had to lease Pontefract from the queen for £1,000 a year.
Wake and Beaumont were restored to their English lands, and this aroused hope that they might receive some support in trying to recover their estates in Scotland as well.
The judgement on the Earl of Rent was annulled, and his son, a minor, was granted the right to succeed to his father's title and lands.
The Earl of Arundel's heir was restored to his inheritance and granted the lordship of Chirk, forfeited by Mortimer, despite a petition from the grandson of Roger  Mortimer of Chirk seeking to recover the lordship.
The family of Mortimer of Chirk were one of the very few permanent victims of the political upheavals between 1322 and 1330: they abandoned the attempt to recover Chirk, and settled in Rent.
Finally, Edward rewarded the group of household knights who had helped him to overthrow Mortimer and Isabella.
Sir William Montague, who was the king's chief supporter and evidently the leader of the group, was granted £1,000-worth of land because he ‘had nobly laboured’ in arresting Mortimer; the £1,000 included the Mortimer lordship of Denbigh.
Edward Bohun, a younger brother of the Earl of Hereford, received 400 marks, worth of land and was granted the office of Constable in view of the infirmity of the earl himself; John Neville of Hornby and Robert de Ufford, a knight of Suffolk who had served in Gascony in 1324–5 with the Earl of Rent, were given 200 marks for ‘helping in the same enterprise’.
The Brut suggests that others who were not rewarded in this way also supported the coup, including the younger Bohun brothers Humphrey and William, together with Ralph de Stafford and William de Clinton.
Clinton and Neville of Hornby seem to have been followers of the Earl of Lancaster; Neville had been taken prisoner at Boroughbridge but was pardoned in return for a fine of £500, of which he paid only £50.
Clinton on the other hand had fought for the king at Boroughbridge, and after the coup of 1327 associated himself with Lancaster: he was one of the two lords appointed by Lancaster to take his proposals for a settlement to the king in late November 1328.
Clinton had also been a member of the group of knights sent to Hainault in 1327 to escort the count and his daughter Philippa to the English court prior to Philippa's marriage with Edward III.
Clinton and Neville thus had links both with the court and with Lancaster, and these links perhaps helped to ensure the tacit support of the Lancaster following for Edward's coup.
Edward's coup was not, therefore, followed by the lavish displays of patronage which had followed Edward II's victory in 1322 or the triumph of Mortimer and Isabella in 1327, and there was no immediate and general reversal of the judgements of 1326–7.
Despenser's heir was released from prison in July 1331, but had to wait until 1337 before receiving any of his father's inheritance.
The reabsorption into landed society of those families who had suffered in the upheavals of the past decade was to be a slow process, and was to give rise to fresh disputes over lands claimed by families who had been on opposite sides, but Edward showed over the next twenty years that loyalty and service would receive their due reward.
The significance of the coup of 19 October 1330 should not be underestimated.
By successfully conspiring to remove Mortimer and Isabella from power Edward had established himself in a position of unchallenged supremacy.
His support came from a small group of household knights who were to be well rewarded for their work, but he was not indebted to any great noble for his position.
He had rightly judged that it would have been unwise for him to associate himself with the movement of the Earl of Lancaster or with Rent's conspiracy.
If he was to rule as well as reign he himself had to overthrow Mortimer and Isabella and to do so in a way which would not enhance the power of the magnates.
In his first independent act as king he established his authority on a sure foundation and revealed both a sound political judgement and a determination not to allow himself to be dependent upon a small group of powerful nobles.
Both characteristics were to distinguish his rule over the next forty years.
Sir Thomas Gray of Heton suggested that the atmosphere at court after the coup of 1330 was one of harmony and tranquillity.
‘For a long time,’ he says, ‘the king acted on the advice of William of Montague, who always encouraged him to excellence, honour, and love of arms: and so they led their young lives in pleasant fashion, until there came a more serious time with more serious matters.’
Other chroniclers convey the same impression, recording that the king and the young knights at court passed their time in jousts, tournaments and the chase, feasting and court ceremonies.
The king took the lead in the creation of a court which exemplified the values of chivalry and which proved attractive to the nobility.
In doing so, Edward developed strong ties of sympathy and affection with the nobles, and the contrast with the court of Edward II could scarcely have been more marked.
This was especially true in Edward's encouragement of tournaments.
Edward II had tried to suppress tournaments, because he feared that they might be used as occasions to form political conspiracies against the court, but his son now encouraged them as occasions when king and nobles could together demonstrate their knightly prowess.
From the start of his personal rule Edward showed the qualities of leadership, affability and sympathy with the aspirations of the nobility which were to characterize his reign until its last decade, and which underlay the domestic political harmony of the ensuing years.
‘So this king,’ wrote Sir Thomas Gray, ‘led a gay life in jousts and tourneys and entertaining ladies, until the lords who had been  disinherited in Scotland for the cause of himself and his predecessors made supplication to him that he would restore to them their inheritances which they had lost on his account and allow them to take their own measures.’
These lords viewed Edward III's seizure of power with enthusiasm, believing not only that Edward might wish to wipe out the stain of the Stanhope Park campaign and the shameful peace, but also that they themselves might reap some political reward for their opposition to Mortimer in 1328.
Their hopes were raised still further by the death of Robert Bruce in 1329 and the accession of his son David II who was only five years old.
In December 1330 Edward wrote to David asking him to give effect to his father's promise and restore Wake and Beaumont to their Scottish lands; but the Scots prevaricated, and in the autumn of 1331 Edward's policy towards Scotland hardened, influenced no doubt by the fact that the final payment of Bruce's indemnity had been received at midsummer.
Beaumont meanwhile, despairing of any settlement by diplomatic means, began to seek support amongst those disinherited lords whose claims Bruce had ignored in 1328, and he brought to England Edward Balliol, whose father had lost not only his kingdom but also his family estates in both Scotland and England.
Balliol appears to have had his eye on his English lands rather than his Scottish inheritance, but his claim to the Scottish crown was encouraged by the disinherited lords who now paid court to him.
In the early months of 1332 these lords began to organize an invasion of Scotland to recover their lands and place Balliol on the Scottish throne.
Edward reacted cautiously to the conspiracy of the disinherited.
He saw the advantages that England might gain from a successful coup in Scotland by them, which would take their political pressure off him at home.
Yet he was not at this stage prepared to risk open war on their behalf; although he disliked the peace of 1328 he had neither the resources nor the general political support for a renewal of the Scottish war.
It was likely that both the leading magnates and the commons in parliament would see a war on behalf of the disinherited as merely a factional struggle in which neither the honour nor the safety of the community was at stake, and which therefore did not merit support.
In public, therefore, Edward gave the impression that he was opposed to any plans to invade Scotland.
In March 1332, for instance, he ordered the sheriffs of five northern counties to forbid the assemblies of men-at-arms preparing to invade Scotland, and to arrest anyone found infringing the peace between the realms.
In private, how  ever, Edward was quite content, as the Earl of Moray put it, to let ‘le pellot aler ’, the ball roll.
He gave Beaumont and David of Strathbogie some limited help in raising the money they needed to launch the invasion, and some time before the expedition left for Scotland he received Edward Balliol's homage for the kingdom he hoped to conquer.
In face of Edward's formal prohibition of an invasion, the disinherited could not mount an attack by land from England, and they therefore sailed from the Humber on 31 July 1332.
On 6 August they landed near Ringhorn in Fife.
They achieved an immediate and resounding success.
Although greatly outnumbered they engaged the Scottish forces at Dupplin Moor south of Perth on 11 August 1332 and routed them.
Balliol was crowned king at Scone six weeks later and then marched to Galloway to rally the support which the men of that region had traditionally shown to the Balliol family.
He spent November at Roxburgh, where he issued letters patent in which he recognized Edward III as lord superior of Scotland and declared that he had already done homage to Edward, in return for which Edward had agreed to maintain and protect him and his heirs in the kingdom.
Balliol also agreed to repay Edward for the help he had given in preparing the expedition by handing over to him land worth £2,000 a year to be selected from those parts of Scotland adjacent to England: in effect, the southern counties of Scotland were to be permanently ceded to England.
This dismemberment of the kingdom he had just won is indicative of the underlying weakness of Balliol's position.
Despite the rout at Dupplin Moor David II still enjoyed much support in Scotland and Balliol realized he could only hold his gains with English assistance.
The cession of the south was not so much payment for help already given, but a concession designed to ensure future support and give Edward III a vested interest in the endurance of Balliol's rule.
Balliol's hold on his kingdom proved even more tenuous than he feared: in December 1332 he moved to Annan, where he was surprised by Sir Archibald Douglas and the Earl of Moray, both partisans of David II, and forced to flee to Carlisle, whence he sent an appeal for support to Edward III.
Edward, however, was still reluctant to commit himself wholeheartedly to Balliol's cause.
Balliol's letters patent acknowledging the English king's overlordship of Scotland were discussed at an ill-attended parliament which met at York in December 1332.
Edward made his own views clear by stating that he regarded the 1328 treaty as invalid because it had been made when he  was a minor and under the tutelage of others and that his title to the overlordship of Scotland should be reasserted.
He asked parliament whether he should proceed to assert his own authority over Scotland, or seek to persuade one side or the other there to acknowledge English superiority.
The response of the prelates, magnates and commons was notably cautious and they declined to support either alternative.
Edward indicated that he was not committed to Balliol's cause, and the arrival of Balliol at Carlisle as a fugitive must have made both king and parliament have second thoughts about his value as an ally.
Parliament reconvened at York in late January 1333, and once again declined to offer Edward any positive support for action in Scotland.
It is abundantly clear that there was no enthusiasm amongst the English nobility for a renewal of war, and the triumphant campaign that now ensued was prepared by the king himself and a small group of his military supporters, notably Henry Percy of Alnwick and William de Clinton.
In the spring of 1333, Edward assembled an army in which those who had helped him to overthrow Mortimer and Isabella took a prominent part.
Amongst those who served were Edward Bohun, William de Montague, Robert Ufford, Hugh Audley and John Neville of Hornby, together with the ‘disinherited’ and the northern magnates.
Even they, however, had to be encouraged to serve by gifts of money from the subsidy granted by the York parliament.
The king marched north to besiege Berwick, and by the end of June 1333 the defenders, exhausted by the English assaults, agreed to surrender if no relieving force arrived by 11 July.
The Scots thus faced the same challenge that Edward II had faced in 1314, and the outcome was the same.
The Scottish army marched to relieve Berwick and encountered the English forces drawn up on Halidon Hill, which lies about two miles north-west of the town and commands all approaches to it from the north.
The English had the advantage of a dominating position and they subjected the Scots to a devastating hail of arrows as they struggled up the slope to engage the English forces.
The Scots were put to flight with heavy casualties, and Berwick surrendered.
Balliol was re-established as king; the disinherited lords received their inheritances, and more besides; and an English administration was established to govern the southern counties which Balliol had ceded to Edward.
Balliol did homage for his kingdom at Newcastle on 17 June 1334.
Edward III left for the south feeling well satisfied with the outcome.
Once again a single victory had given the English king the illusion of conquest in  Scotland, but, like his grandfather Edward I, he was soon to discover how little support there really was in Scotland for his settlement.
In 1326 Scotland and France had concluded a new alliance, the Treaty of Corbeil, under which the French, while not being required to take military action on behalf of the Scots in any future conflict with England, agreed to give them diplomatic support, while the French obtained from the Scots an agreement to attack England in the event of war between the French and the English.
The treaty imposed more onerous obligations on the Scots than on the French, but in the spring of 1334 Philip VI invited David II to seek refuge in France, and Philip now began to step up the diplomatic pressure on Edward 11I.
At the same time, Balliol's position in southern Scotland began to crumble.
The disinherited fell out over the distribution of some of the fruits of their victory: Beaumont was captured at the siege of Dunlarg Castle and had to raise loans, including one from Edward III, to pay his ransom, while in September 1334 David II's supporters reoccupied much of the land ceded to Edward III, forcing the English administration to retreat to Berwick.
Faced for the second time with the collapse of Balliol's rule, Edward once again mobilized an army, this time for a winter campaign which proved unpopular with the troops and which was abandoned under pressure from Philip VI to conclude a truce, which was to last from Easter to midsummer 1335.
The truce gave Edward a useful breathing space in which to organize a much more substantial force, and in July 1335 a two-pronged invasion of Scotland began, led from Carlisle by the king himself with over 13,000 men and from Berwick by Edward Balliol.
The campaign was reminiscent of those of Edward I's reign: the armies reached Perth without meeting serious resistance, and Edward obtained the submissions of a number of David II's supporters.
He returned south, believing that what little resistance remained would soon be mopped up.
But in November 1335 a small band of troops under Sir Andrew Moray defeated and killed David of Strathbogie at Culblean in Aberdeenshire, and from then onwards, as the chronicler Fordun remarked, the fortunes of war favoured the Scots.
The disinherited s adventure had collapsed.
The English held the principal castles, especially in the south-east, but they could not control the countryside and by May 1337 English power was limited to Lothian, the Borders and Dumfriesshire.
The disinherited lords themselves were ruined by Edward Balliol's failure to hold his  kingdom: Gilbert de Umfraville, for example, titular Earl of Angus, had had to mortgage a number of his manors to raise money for the invasion of Scotland and he never recovered from the collapse of his cause.
Eventually, most of his estates in Northumberland were entailed upon the Percy family, who may indeed have advanced him some of the money he needed in 1332.
The war did not prove particularly popular with the English nobility, who served when called upon to do so but gained little from it.
Apart from the victory at Halidon Hill, which in retrospect was of great military significance but which gave Edward only a temporary and illusory supremacy, the war did little to enhance Edward III's military reputation.
The chroniclers report the campaigns in muted terms, and give little impression of a will to war amongst either the nobility or the community generally.
The campaigns in Scotland were accompanied by the familiar grievances of the community over taxation and prises.
As early as January 1333 the commons petitioned for new restrictions on the activities of royal purveyors, and the king agreed, in an unprecedented move, to set up ‘justices of purveyors’ to hear complaints against them.
Complaints about the grievous burden of purveyance reappeared the following year, and the Meaux Chronicler complained about the outrageous burden of taxation imposed for the campaign of 1335.
Extensive prises were levied in 1336 and 1337 to supply the English armies in Scotland and the garrisons of English-held castles there, and the new method of levying the lay subsidy, first adopted in 1334, yielded larger sums than before and increased the fiscal pressure on the poorer sections of the population.
The military demands of the crown also aroused opposition, both to the methods of arraying men for service and the levying of money to pay their wages and provide their equipment.
It is, however, indicative of the political harmony and stability Edward had already achieved that the nobility did not seek to exploit the grievances of the community over taxation, purveyance and military service in order to impose measures of restraint upon the king.
Despite the increasing difficulties which Edward faced in financing his wars in Scotland, the parliaments of these years are free of the political and constitutional arguments which had characterized the last years of Edward I's reign.
Although the war in Scotland was neither popular nor notably successful, Edward carried his nobility with him and showed a degree of sensitivity to the grievances of the community which contrasts with  the approach of his father and grandfather.
Edward had not yet covered himself with military glory, but he had revealed a sureness of political judgement which was to stand him in good stead in the greater military endeavours that he embarked upon in 1337.
The War with France, 1337–64
The Opening Phase, 1337–41
Towards the end of October 1337 Henry Burghersh Bishop of Lincoln arrived in Paris with a letter from Edward III addressed to ‘Philip of Valois who calls himself king of France’.
The letter contained a renunciation of Edward's homage to Philip, an assertion of his right to the French crown, and a declaration of war.
The war which Edward thus inaugurated was to endure, with many intervals of truce and several attempts at a final peace, until the expulsion of the English from Gascony in 1453.
Although there had been brief conflicts between England and France in the reigns of Edward I and Edward II, the reasons for war were now much more substantial than they had been in 1294 or 1324, and the will to war on the part of the king, if not yet on the part of most of the nobility, was much more apparent.
The opening phase of the war, however, produced domestic difficulties and grievances not dissimilar to those experienced by Edward's father and grandfather; and it was only with the military successes and material gains of the 1340s that a change in attitude to war amongst both the nobility and the commons became apparent.
Philip of Valois ruled a kingdom which was both wealthier and more populous than England.
The population of France was perhaps as high as 20 million, compared with England's 4.5 million, and the extent of the lands over which the French king claimed suzerainty, together with the richness of their agricultural resources, made France potentially the wealthiest kingdom in western Europe.
Eventually these advantages were to tell against England in the war, but in its early phases such disparity was of less account, and the ability of the two kings to mobilize the financial resources of their realms and to command the support of the nobility was to be of greater  consequence.
Here, for much of the fourteenth century, the advantage lay with England.
The immediate reason for the outbreak of war was the French king's confiscation of the Duchy of Aquitaine on the ground that Edward was harbouring Robert of Artois, a rebellious vassal of the French king who had fled to England in 1336 after being condemned as a traitor.
Edward's sheltering of Robert of Artois, however, was a symptom rather than a cause of his deteriorating relationship with Philip VI.
Of much greater importance was Philip's support for David II of Scotland and Edward's fear that Philip might launch an invasion of England on behalf of his Scottish ally.
The alarm that such a prospect generated in England was real and intense: in March 1336 Philip VI ordered the French fleet which had been assembling in the Mediterranean for a crusade to transfer to the mouth of the Seine, and Edward felt convinced that Philip was planning a large-scale invasion of England.
In a manifesto issued in August 1337 Edward accused Philip of aiding the Scots and committing acts of war in support of England's enemies, and a pre-emptive strike against France seemed the most effective way of preventing the Franco-Scottish alliance from growing into an ever more serious threat to England.
Philip VI, however, was not acting simply in support of his Scottish ally.
He had grounds of his own for concern at Edward's policies, particularly in the Low Countries where Edward's marriage with Philippa of
Hainault had led to the development of close diplomatic ties between England and Hainault, Holland and Zeeland.
In Flanders, where the count was loyal to Philip VI and perhaps alarmed at the expansionist tendencies of Hainault, Edward pursued a policy of exploiting the social and political tensions between the Flemish-speaking industrial towns and the nobility of the predominantly French-speaking countryside.
In the manifesto which Edward published in August 1337, however, he hinted at another issue.
He maintained that Philip was trying to keep him at war in Scotland ‘so that he might not pursue his rights elsewhere’.
The right which he had most clearly in mind was his claim to the French crown, which he asserted formally in his renunciation of homage three months later.
When Charles IV of France died in 1328, the direct male line of the House of Capet came to an end.
Charles's sister Isabella, Edward II's queen, was still alive, and his two predecessors, Louis X who died in 1316, and Philip V who died in 1321, had daughters — Philip had five.
The nearest heir in the male line    was Charles's cousin, Philip of Valois; the nearest male heir in the direct line was Isabella's son Edward III.
The issue of principle in 1328 was whether women were excluded from ruling, and, if so, whether they were also excluded from transmitting to their sons the title to rule.
If both these exclusions were accepted, the throne was Philip's, if it were allowed that a woman could transmit a right but not exercise it, the throne was Edward's.
The argument was not without precedent: in 1316 Louis X's daughter Jeanne had been passed over in favour of his brother Philip V, and Philip's own daughters had been excluded in 1321 in favour of his youngest brother, Charles IV.
These precedents encouraged lawyers to talk of the immemorial law of the Salian Franks under which women were excluded from the succession.
Lawyers' history, however, had little basis in reality and the exclusion of women was by no means settled practice before the fourteenth century in the great fiefs of France; indeed, Edward III's title to Gascony derived from a woman, Eleanor, wife of Henry 11.
Philip of Valois's claim, however, had the virtues of clarity and logic, whereas Edward's claim, as French lawyers pointed out at the time and French historians have not hesitated to remark since, rested on the unsatisfactory assumption that a woman could transmit a right which she could not exercise.
His mother the dowager Queen Isabella survived until 1358 and if she could transmit title to Edward III, why could not Jeanne of Navarre, Louis X's daughter, or any of the daughters of Philip V do likewise?
Indeed, Charles of Navarre, Jeanne's son born in 1332, was as close as Edward III to the last Capetians, and he did not hesitate to point this out in the 1350s when it suited him.
Perhaps therefore Edward's claim was not as strong in principle as has sometimes been suggested, and if accepted in 1328 it might eventually have been subject to challenge by sons born to other Capetian females.
In practice, of course, there was no chance of Edward 11I successfully asserting his claim in 1328.
It is even possible that Isabella had renounced her son's claim in 1326 in return for Valois help in preparing her invasion of England, and in any case Isabella was scarcely more popular in France than in England: the last thing the French nobles wanted was Mortimer, Isabella and their cronies installed in Paris.
Furthermore, the French nobility did not relish the prospect of a foreign ruler, whether or not he was the grandson of Philip IV.
One lawyer at the French court observed that it had ‘never been seen or known for the kingdom of France to be subjected to the government of the king of England’.
perhaps the clinching argument  for Philip, however, was that he was already in possession: he had been appointed as Regent at Charles IV's death and the royal administration was full of Valois clients.
Philip was accordingly proclaimed king, and received proof of divine approval when he routed the Flemish rebels at Cassel within two months of succeeding.
Edward made a formal protest, but he was in no position to do more.
In 1331 he went to Amiens to do liege homage to Philip for Gascony, and it seemed that he had tacitly abandoned his claim.
Contemporaries believed that Edward was persuaded to revive his claim in 1337 by Robert of Artois who, according to a story which may well be apocryphal and which has attracted widely differing interpretations, placed a heron before the king at a banquet.
This bird was the symbol of cowardice, and Robert's action was taken to imply that it was a suitable dish for a king who did not dare to claim his lawful inheritance.
But it is doubtful whether Edward embarked on war in 1337 specifically in pursuit of his claim to the French throne.
His claim gave him a useful propaganda weapon, some bargaining power in negotiations, and a basis on which to appeal to discontented French vassals; it was also a convenient argument with which to counter Philip's confiscation of Aquitaine.
As later events were to show, the Valois monarchy had its weaknesses and the successful assertion of Edward's claim might not be beyond the bounds of possibility.
Almost certainly, however, the underlying cause of the war was the problem of Aquitaine.
The Treaty of Paris in 1259 had defined the relationship between Aquitaine and the French crown: the English king, as Duke of Aquitaine, agreed to perform liege homage to the French king for the duchy, and the English king was recognized as a peer of France.
But the relationship thus defined was fraught with all manner of difficulties.
It ill became the English king, who was sovereign in his own country, to behave as a vassal towards his French suzerain, and the French king had great difficulty in controlling the behaviour of a vassal who was also a sovereign.
Furthermore, as the French kings developed and extended their legal powers they increasingly intervened in the affairs of the duchy, and cases arising in the duchy might be taken on appeal to Paris, thus undermining the authority of the duke.
The uncertain boundaries of the duchy gave rise to numerous disputes, any one of which might flare up into a major conflict, as the war of Saint Sardos demonstrated.
The tension on the border encouraged both sides to maintain themselves in a state of  armed readiness and this made conflict even more likely.
Neither the last Capetians nor Philip VI wished to deprive the English kings of their French fief, but they intended to maintain their rights as overlords and in particular to hear appeals from the duchy in their own court.
The English kings, however, were unlikely to be willing to relinquish a part of their inheritance which brought them revenue in the early fourteenth century of about £13,000 a year, and whose subjects accepted English rule.
For Aquitaine was the Ring of England's inheritance, not his conquest; the Gascons saw the maintenance of the English connection as vital to the preservation of their liberties and customs, and the mercantile community of Bordeaux, together with the wine producers of the Bordelais, regarded the link with England as vital to their prosperity.
The Gascons did not consider themselves French; their language was barely intelligible to those who spoke the langue d'oil of the north, and their culture and society had more in common with Languedoc than with northern France.
But although it was the Ring of England's inheritance, it was an alien land to the English nobility.
They had no estates of any size there, and although the king's representative in Bordeaux and a number of high officials were English, the government of the duchy was in the hands of the Gascons and places in the Church were filled by Gascon prelates.
In supporting the king's right to Aquitaine, the nobility were seeking to maintain his honour and his inheritance, but they had no personal interests there to safeguard.
In the 1330s, the problems created by the feudal relationship between the two kings became even more difficult to resolve.
The policy of centralization and definition of royal rights adopted by the last Capetians exposed the incompatibility between the French insistence on the full rights of suzerainty and the English king's desire for freedom of action for himself and his officials in the duchy.
Like his predecessors, Philip VI used the obligations of liege homage, and the threat of confiscation of the duchy if Edward defaulted on these obligations, as a means of putting pressure on the English king when his policies appeared to threaten French interests.
From his point of view, Edward could reasonably argue that the obligations which liege homage entailed interfered with his freedom of action as sovereign ruler of England.
For Edward, the solution was to hold Aquitaine in full sovereignty; but the French would concede this only in the face of overwhelming defeat, and no settlement based on such a concession  could endure.
The problem of Aquitaine underlies the whole of the war, and its solution by the expulsion of the English in 1453 marks the end of the conflict.
In preparing for war in 1337 it was essential for Edward to gain the support both of the nobility and of the wider political community.
War in France had not hitherto been popular: in the thirteenth century it had been said that the English knights ‘did not give a bean for all of France’, and resistance to service in France had been an important element in the political crisis of 1297.
There had been little enthusiasm for the renewal of war in Scotland in 1332, and apart from his victory at Halidon Hill Edward had scarcely distinguished himself on his Scottish campaigns.
The ground had therefore to be carefully prepared; the nobility had to be encouraged to rally to his cause, and the commons had to be persuaded to support it with grants of money.
Archbishop Stratford maintained in 1341 that in March 1337 the king obtained the assent of parliament to go to war against Philip of France.
The record of this parliament is incomplete, but the recollection of contemporaries seems unequivocal, and in later, more difficult, circumstances parliament was to be reminded more than once that it had given its assent to the war.
The parliament of 1337 culminated in a series of festivities in which Edward honoured many of the nobles who were to be his companions in arms.
His eldest son, Prince Edward, was made Duke of Cornwall, the first time a dukedom had been conferred in England, and six new earls were created.
Four of them, William Montague Earl of Salisbury, William de Clinton Earl of Huntingdon, Robert de Ufford Earl of Suffolk and William de Bohun Earl of Northampton had supported Edward's coup in 1330, and Edward understandably still felt gratitude towards them.
The earldom of Derby was conferred on Henry of Grosmont, son and heir of the Earl of Lancaster, and Hugh Audley, the old rival of the Despensers, received the earldom of Gloucester, to which he had a claim by virtue of his marriage to the second of the coheiresses of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester who fell at Bannockburn.
In their patents of creation, Edward explained the principles behind his bestowal of the honours:
To a king about to embark on war, the support of wise counsels and mighty powers was indeed essential, and the men honoured in 1337 repaid the king's generosity by loyal support for him in the forthcoming campaigns.
These new powers, however, were buttressed by substantial grants of land, which led one chronicler to remark that the resources of the crown had been dissipated and a modern historian to comment rather sourly that ‘hereditary offices and jurisdictions were scattered in a way hardly compatible either with the interests of the crown, or with sound finance’.
The distribution of titles, however, was very much in the interests of a king who was about to lead his nobility in war, and in any case the king intended to finance the war out of the proceeds of taxation rather than the income from royal estates.
The titles were granted in parliament with the consent of the community: there was no question of the new earls being created merely by the royal will.
Edward's generosity extended beyond the creation of earls.
According to Murimuth the bestowal of titles on the six earls was followed by the dubbing of twenty-four new knights, and other nobles were rewarded at the same time.
The Earl of Arundel was made Justice of North Wales for life, and in a gesture of reconciliation towards the Despenser family Hugh Despenser, the heir to Edward II's favourite, was restored to some of his father's lands.
On the eve of war it was desirable to heal some of the wounds that still remained from the convulsions of the 1320s.
Once parliament had given its assent to the war and Edward's prospective companions in arms had been singled out for honours, Edward set about mobilizing the financial support he needed.
In July 1337, after a series of negotiations with the wool merchants, the king obtained an agreement under which a select group of wealthy merchants would be empowered to buy up and export 30,000 sacks of wool.
This syndicate of merchants would in effect become monopoly purchasers and exporters of wool; in return they would lend the king £200,000 immediately and pay him half the proceeds from the sale of the wool.
The scheme had been widely approved: now as always Edward was careful not to proceed without consent, and had the scheme worked it would have proved highly lucrative.
In the next  parliament, which assembled in September 1337, the commons granted a tenth and a fifteenth to be levied each year for the next three years.
This grant was unprecedented in extent; it represented a significant political victory for Edward, and suggests that at this stage there was a considerable degree of support for the war amongst the knights.
In view of the king's highly expensive schemes for securing allies in the Low Countries, however, even so substantial a grant was likely to prove insufficient.
By the end of 1337 Edward had committed himself to spending £124,000 on his allies, and his parliamentary grants would bring in only about £38,000 a year.
In July 1338 Edward crossed to Brabant and established himself at Antwerp.
There was no organized campaigning throughout that year, and Sir Thomas Gray, who took a dim view of the conduct of the war, complained that Edward did nothing at Antwerp except ‘jousting and leading a jolly life’.
The real problem was the mobilization of resources: Edward experienced difficulty in collecting revenue in England, and relations between the king's advisers in Brabant, chief amongst whom were the Earl of Salisbury and the Earl of Northampton, and the council in England, dominated by the clerical ministers of state, gradually deteriorated.
Not until September 1339 did Edward feel able to move.
He took his forces into the Cambrésis, but they failed to take Cambrai and although the French and English armies confronted one another at Buironfosse neither would engage in battle.
Edward retreated to Brussels, but in the winter of 1339–40 he achieved an important diplomatic success in Flanders when he persuaded James van Artevelde to enter into an alliance with him under which Artevelde recognized his title to the French throne and agreed to give him military aid.
Artevelde was a wealthy burgess of Ghent who became the champion of the economic interests of the Flemish weaving cities, whose prosperity depended upon supplies of wool from England.
He assumed the leadership of the Flemish-speaking urban proletariat of Ghent, Bruges and Ypres who were sympathetic to the English interest both from economic necessity and as an expression of their hostility to the French-speaking nobility of Flanders.
To lend substance to this agreement with the Flemings, Edward now formally assumed the title and arms of Ring of France, to be borne by his descendants until 1802.
In a proclamation issued at Ghent on 8 February 1340, Edward declared that Philip of Valois had ‘intruded himself by force into the kingdom while we were yet of  tender years, and holds that kingdom against God and justice’.
He went on, ‘Lest we should seem to neglect our right and the gift of heavenly grace or be unwilling to conform the impulse of our will to the divine pleasure, we have recognized our right to the kingdom and have undertaken the burden of the rule of that kingdom, as we ought to do.’
Edward's formal assertion of his title to the French crown introduced a new element into the conflict.
Once assumed, the title could only be renounced in return for the most substantial concessions, and as long as Edward called himself Ring of France he could pose, with some success, as an alternative government to the Valois monarchy.
Edward's diplomatic achievement in Flanders was substantial, but it did little immediately to improve his position.
He still faced financial and administrative difficulties at home, and English convoys in the Channel were harassed by French privateers.
In the summer of 1340 a substantial French fleet assembled in the estuary of Zwijn, near Sluys, intent on preventing English forces from landing in Flanders.
The French fleet was crowded together in a confined space, and on Midsummer Day 1340 the English fleet crashed into the French ships, which were unable to deploy in so cramped a position.
The English archers poured a deadly hail of arrows into the French troops, and the English men-at-arms finished them off in hand-to-hand combat.
The victory at Sluys enhanced Edward's military prestige, but he was unable to follow it up.
The English forces laid siege to Tournai, but Edward withdrew and agreed to the Truce of Espléchin on 25 September 1340.
Edward's allies in the Low Countries proved unwilling to fight, and he was unable to pay them the promised subsidies in full.
Philip himself had avoided giving battle to the English, and a lengthy campaign of sieges was beyond Edward's means.
The opening campaign of the war had achieved little except the Flemish alliance and the destruction of the French fleet, and Edward returned home on 30 November to face a domestic political crisis.
Despite Edward's concern to obtain a wide measure of support for the war and consent for the financial exactions it necessitated, the measures the government took to raise money and supplies in 1338 and 1339 gave rise to grievances which resemble those which underlay the conflicts of Edward I's last years.
The financial measures which led to the crisis of 1340–1 and the grievances that the commons laid before parliament in 1339 and 1340, have been analysed in great detail.
The significance of the crisis remains obscure, however, and the extent to  which the nobility aligned themselves with the commons in seeking concessions in return for grants of taxation is especially difficult to assess.
Between 1336 and 1341 the burden of taxation was unprecedentedly heavy, and the oppressive conduct of the royal officials appointed to levy taxes and prises gave rise to widespread complaints.
The king provoked hostility by seeking to use his prerogative rights to raise money, and by requiring the payment of debts, many of which had been respited for many years.
More seriously, Edward's scheme to create a monopoly in the export of wool broke down in the early months of 1338.
The syndicate which had been established as a monopoly purchaser of wool found difficulty in enforcing its monopoly.
There was much smuggling and evasion, and the syndicate found difficulty in selling the wool, for Edward had imposed an embargo on trade with Flanders and had instructed the merchants to sell their wool at Dordrecht in Brabant to please his ally the Duke of Brabant.
The king eventually agreed to purchase the wool from the merchants, but to pay them in the so-called Dordrecht Bonds, promissory notes offering the merchants relief from future payments of tax.
The holders eventually disposed of most of the bonds at a ruinous discount.
When the king's agents bought the wool it fetched much less than the expected price and the scheme collapsed, leaving resentment amongst the producers, the lesser merchants who had not participated in the scheme, and those who had been paid in Dordrecht Bonds.
It was not the affair of the Dordrecht Bonds, however, but the traditional grievances over prises and taxation which formed the burden of the commons' complaints in the February parliament of 1339.
The commons presented a series of articles in which they objected to the levying of prises and insisted that ‘no free man should be assessed or taxed without the common assent of parliament’.
The commons also complained about the burden of military service, saying that the cost of wages and equipment for the troops was especially hard to bear because the ‘land was much grieved and charged by many taxes and other burdens’.
The king's concession that the cost of troops should fall on the rich and powerful rather than the poor of the community was insufficient to placate the commons, and in the October parliament of the same year they presented a petition entitled ‘La demande de la Commune ’ in which they called for the abolition of the maltote, the punishment of purveyors who took prises without making payment, and pardon for debts.
The petition was  accompanied by one from the magnates, who also sought the withdrawal of the tax on wool: it appears that for the first time since the Ordinances of 1310–11 the commons and the magnates were joining together to seek concessions and measures of reform from the king.
The principal concern of Edward's ministers, as always, was to raise money for the war, and they hoped by making concessions to receive the grants the king needed; but the concession of pardon for all debts of £10 or less was insufficient, and the commons insisted that they dare not grant a tax without consulting their communities.
In the spring parliament of 1340 the commons offered a grant of tax subject to conditions which now went much further than the concessions they had sought in the previous year and which were reminiscent of the concerns of the Ordainers in 1310–11.
The king, who had returned from Flanders in February and was present in person, was asked to agree to confirm and observe the charters; to agree that no taxes should be levied without the assent of parliament, and to appoint a council which would supervise the expenditure of money raised for the war and exercise jurisdiction over ministers.
This proposal to establish a council which would in effect supervise the government of the realm while the king was overseas was the clearest echo of the Ordinances, though with the crucial difference that it was to function only as long as the king was out of the realm: it was not the intention of the commons to subject the king permanently to conciliar restraint.
The king agreed to most of the measures demanded by the commons, and a council was set up with Archbishop Stratford and the Earl of Huntingdon acting as chief councillors, assisted by the Earls of Lancaster and Warenne.
In return the king was granted the tax he sought, a ninth, which was to be used exclusively for the war.
The concessions in the spring parliament of 1340 did not, however, allay the discontent in the countryside.
Indeed, one chronicler suggests that a rising against the oppressive behaviour of royal officials might easily have occurred.
The difficulties the administration encountered in enforcing the collection of taxes made it impossible for it to maintain a flow of funds to the king in Flanders, and Edward was now suffering the severest financial embarrassment.
He had to borrow to pay his troops, and he even had to require the Earls of Derby, Northampton and Warwick to submit to imprisonment in Malines as sureties for the debts the king owed there.
It is not surprising that those around the king developed hostile feelings towards those responsible for government in England, particularly Archbishop  Stratford, whose support for the war had always been lukewarm.
At the same time the council in England believed that the king's familiares were exercising undue influence over him: the unity which Edward had been at such pains to build up in 1337 was on the point of fracturing.
In November 1340 Edward returned to England, furious at what he regarded as the mismanagement of government during his absence.
He ordered the dismissal of the Chancellor and Treasurer, and the arrest of four judges and two of the merchants most heavily involved in the wool monopoly, William de la Pole and Reginald Conduit.
Special commissions of inquiry into maladministration were set up, but Edward reserved his special venom for Archbishop Stratford, who was sent to Brabant as surety for the king's debts.
The king seemed to regard Stratford's conduct of government as tantamount to treachery, and the king's supporters issued a statement, the Libellus Famosus , denouncing his conduct of government during the king's absence and declaring that the delay in providing money for the army in Flanders had arisen from the fault, or the neglect, or even the malice of the archbishop.
Such a public attack was unprecedented, and created some sympathy for Stratford, whose position was fraught with difficulty.
In the face of royal financial demands he had to bear in mind the interests of the clergy as well as his duty to the king, and he was subject to some pressure from the Pope to urge the king to pay heed to papal diplomatic overtures aimed at bringing an end to the war.
The conflict between the king and the archbishop came to a head in the parliament of April 1341.
Edward began by attempting to exclude Stratford from the assembly, but failed in the face of support for the archbishop from the Earl of Arundel, Earl Warenne, and other lay magnates who shared their suspicion of those round the king.
Both Arundel and Warenne asserted that it was the right of the magnates to advise and support the king in the great affairs of the realm, and that the charges the king had made against Stratford should be heard by his peers.
The king agreed to this, but then had to face petitions for further concessions from both magnates and the commons, who demanded that the charters should be observed, the laws and statutes maintained, and the concessions of 1340 upheld.
They also demanded that the king should appoint the great officers of state in parliament with the advice of the magnates, and that the ministers of the crown should be answerable in parliament for their conduct.
This attempt to  assert baronial control of the king's officers, reminiscent both of the Provisions of Oxford and the Ordinances, was the most far-reaching of all the demands made during the crisis of 1339–41.
Both Geoffrey le Baker and Murimuth are clear that this was the crucial issue under discussion in the parliament, and both record that the king refused to agree to such a proposal.
The most he would concede was that positions should be filled by the advice of the lords and the council around the king, and that officers should take an oath in parliament to act justly.
The king agreed to parliament's other requests, however, and was rewarded with a grant of one-ninth.
Both lords and commons had won some important concessions.
The king had agreed that peers should be tried only in parliament and before their equals, and that accusations against ministers should be heard by the peers in parliament.
The commons had gained a paper declaration upholding the charters and franchises, and the concessions embodied in the statute of 1340.
The proceedings against Stratford were referred to a committee of two bishops and four earls, including Arundel and Salisbury, and nothing more was heard of them until 1343, when the king ordered the charges to be annulled.
The commons played a more substantial and a more independent part in this political crisis than they had done in the conflicts of Edward I's last years and Edward II's reign, and they showed some awareness of their power to demand concessions in return for agreeing to the king's financial demands.
Edward for his part had to accommodate himself to political and financial realities, and was prepared to compromise with the commons in return for taxes, though he would not give way on the fundamental issue of the right to choose his own councillors.
His approach, however, was more flexible than that of his father and grandfather; except perhaps in his clash with Archbishop Stratford he showed a surer political touch, and by his readiness to make concessions on many of the issues raised by the commons he prevented the political crisis from escalating into a full-scale assault on royal government in the manner of 1310–11.
The crisis revealed, however, that the king's war no longer had the wholehearted support of the community, and more ominously, that some members of the nobility were prepared to associate themselves with the commons' demands for concessions and reforms.
The crisis cannot be interpreted in terms of independent action by the commons; the magnates too petitioned for reforms, and a group of them vigorously supported Archbishop Stratford in 1341.
They were never united in  their opposition to the king, and they never found a leader comparable to Hereford and Norfolk in 1297 or Thomas of Lancaster in 1310–11; but their opposition reveals the fragility of the political settlement Edward had achieved after 1330, and the danger that his close associates who had helped him to power might now be seen as a new court clique, the king's familiares .
Some of the magnates were motivated by personal or local considerations: the northern lords, Wake, Neville and Percy, were concerned at the neglect of the defence of the northern border as Edward's continental campaigns swallowed up all the available resources; but Arundel, Warenne and Huntingdon do not seem to have had personal grievances against the king, and their role in the crisis still awaits a satisfactory explanation.
Suspicion of the king lingered on after the conclusion of the parliament of 1341, and was probably intensified by his solemn revocation of the concessions he had made in that parliament at a council attended by all the magnates in early October 1341.
The expedition which the king led to Scotland in the winter of 1341–2 was unpopular: according to Murimuth he was attended only ‘by a few knights’, and Arundel, Huntingdon, and five other earls declined the invitation to serve.
Only the Earl of Derby and the northern lords accompanied the king.
Restoration of political harmony was essential, however, if Edward was to continue the war in France, and in re-establishing good relations between the king and the nobility the Earl of Derby seems to have played an important role.
In late October 1341 the king and Archbishop Stratford were solemnly and publicly reconciled, and a record of the occasion describes Derby as ‘mediator in the settlement’.
On his return from Scotland, Edward held a tournament at Dunstable at which he no doubt hoped to revive the jollity and jousting of earlier years.
Murimuth remarks, significantly, that almost all the young knights of England came, together with all the young earls, Derby, Warwick, Northampton, Pembroke, Oxford and Suffolk.
Both the Brut and the Chronicle of London commented on the youth of those who attended, and Gloucester, Arundel, Devon, Warenne and Huntingdon excused themselves on grounds of age and infirmity.
The absence of Arundel and Huntingdon is especially interesting since both were only in their mid-thirties and neither showed any signs of infirmity in their subsequent military careers.
In all probability they were not yet reconciled with the king.
Victory and Profit, 1341–64
The young earls who attended the Dunstable tournament were now to take a leading part in Edward's wars, and with a new generation of earls came a new strategy.
The first phase of the war had brought Edward little apart from the victory at Sluys and the Flemish alliance.
There had been no major engagements in the field and the sieges that the king had undertaken had been abandoned.
These failures arose not only from Edward's lack of adequate financial resources, but also from the effectiveness of Philip VI's resistance and the reluctance of the English to take on the French in pitched battle, as the stand-off at Buironfosse showed.
But in the 1340s Edward sought to exploit the growing opposition within France to Philip VI by deploying two or three armies at the same time in provinces where the English cause might expect to receive support.
In this context, Edward s assumption of the title and arms of Ring of France at Ghent in 1340 is of the utmost significance, for it allowed him to pose as an alternative government in France and attract the loyalty of those who for whatever reason were discontented with Valois rule.
This is not to say that even at this stage Edward's principal war aim was the throne of France, but rather that the most effective way of bringing pressure to bear on Philip was to subvert the provinces and establish English military bases there.
Edward had won over the industrial towns of Flanders in 1340, and the maintenance of the English position there was to be a basic strategic principle until its decisive failure in 1385.
Neither Count Louis de Nevers, who died in 1346 fighting on the French side at Grécy, nor his successor Louis de Mâle supported the towns in their negotiations with Edward, and both remained loyal to their French suzerain despite the pressures which Edward brought to bear on Flanders.
In 1341, the opportunity presented itself to intervene in Brittany, where a succession dispute developed when Duke John III died without leaving a direct heir.
The two claimants were John de Montfort, younger half-brother of John III, and John III's niece Joan of Penthiévre, who was married to Charles of Blois.
Charles of Blois was the candidate favoured by Philip VI, and Edward accordingly supported Montfort, offering him not only military assistance but also the earldom of Richmond, with which the Breton ducal family had a connection going back to the Norman Conquest.
Froissart suggests that Edward intervened in Brittany merely to distract Philip, and  there may be something in this; but it was also important for him to protect the sea route from England to Aquitaine around the Finistère peninsula, and above all the allegiance of the Duke of Brittany would be a great prize in Edward's campaign to undermine Philip VI's authority in France.
By the end of 1341 Charles of Blois's forces had overrun most of the duchy and accordingly in 1342 Edward sent three expeditions to help his ally de Montfort.
The first, in March, was led by Sir Walter Manny, a Hainaulter and companion of the queen.
In July the Earls of Northampton, Oxford, Pembroke and Devon together with Sir Hugh Despenser, Sir Richard Talbot and Sir Richard Stafford took an army to the duchy and put Charles of Blois to flight at the battle of Morlaix on 30 September, while in October the king himself embarked for Brittany, aware that part of the duchy had already been regained for the Montfort cause.
Arundel, Huntingdon and Warenne still declined to go with the king, though in November they acceded to his plea for reinforcements and agreed to send troops.
The English laid siege to Vannes, Rennes and Nantes, but the English troops were greatly outnumbered by French forces in the duchy, and in January 1343 Edward agreed to the truce of Malestroit, which stabilized the position and left John de Montfort in control of about half the duchy.
Edward's intervention had at least saved Montfort's cause from complete collapse.
The campaigns were not only successful politically, but they also became famous for the deeds of prowess and valour done by the leaders of the English forces and the booty and ransoms they won.
While Edward had been preoccupied in northern France, the English position in Aquitaine had deteriorated.
Philip VI's armies had taken key English positions along the Garonne, and Philip had been promising grants and pensions to those Gascons who would enter his obedience.
Edward's first move was to counter any possible threat to Aquitaine from the south and from the sea.
He sent Henry Earl of Derby to Castile in October 1341 to undermine French influence there that threatened to bring Castile's navy into play against English shipping in the Bay of Biscay.
Derby handled the complex politics of the Castilian court with considerable insight and deftness, and when war between England and France was resumed in 1345 Castile remained neutral.
The English position in Aquitaine remained insecure, however, and the government in Bordeaux was rapidly running out of money.
Direct English military intervention was now necessary if the duchy  were not to collapse into chaos.
In the spring and summer of 1345, therefore, Edward denounced the truce of Malestroit and began the planning of a three-pronged attack on France.
The first expedition, under the king himself, was to sail to Flanders; the second, under the Earl of Northampton, was to go to Brittany; and the third and largest was despatched to Aquitaine under the command of the Earl of Derby, who succeeded his father as Earl of Lancaster in that year.
Lancaster's campaigns in Aquitaine in 1345–7 were highly successful; the area under English control was greatly extended, the prestige of the English government was restored and reforms were undertaken in the government and finance of the duchy.
It became clear in the course of the campaigns, however, that the duchy could no longer finance its own defence, and henceforward the costs of campaigning there had to be subsidized by the English Exchequer.
Lancaster proved himself one of the most outstanding of Edward's commanders, and he and his men not only covered themselves with glory but also substantially enriched themselves.
Northampton's campaign in Brittany also produced some notable successes: the expedition remained in the duchy for two years, and in 1347 Northampton's lieutenant Sir Thomas Dagworth captured Charles of Blois at La Roche-Derrien.
The king's own achievements were the least substantial, and the murder of James van Artevelde by his enemies in Ghent weakened the English position there.
In the spring of 1346, however, Edward's attention was directed towards Normandy.
A Norman baron, Geoffrey de Harcourt, Lord of Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte in the Cotentin, fled to Edward's court in England and sought to persuade him to invade Normandy.
Harcourt's reasons for fleeing Normandy are not entirely clear: he was at odds with the Comte of Tancarville over the office of Chamberlain of Normandy, and he appears to have had personal grievances against Philip VI.
More significantly, perhaps, he revealed to Edward that there was much opposition in Normandy to the fiscal oppression of the Valois administration and the centralizing policies which seemed to threaten the provincial liberties of the duchy.
For Edward, the prospect of gaining Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte was attractive in itself.
It was the key to the Cotentin and western Normandy, and would be a strongly defended and well-placed military base for the English.
But Edward had a more substantial motive for planning an invasion of Normandy: his strategy was to take the pressure off Lancaster in Aquitaine by providing a diversion in Normandy and another in  Flanders, were Sir Hugh Hastings had been appointed Lieutenant and given the command of Flemish troops who would advance from the north against Philip.
A very substantial force, perhaps numbering 15,000 men, assembled at Portsmouth in July 1346.
Their destination was kept secret, and many assumed that the expedition would sail for Aquitaine; but on 12 July Edward landed at Saint-Vaast-la-Hogue in the Cotentin.
The expedition acquired the character of a vast plundering raid.
Burning and looting the countryside as he went, Edward took Caen and subjected it to a brutal sacking.
He was only restrained from burning it to the ground by Harcourt, who urged him to ‘be a little less impetuous and content yourself with what you have done’.
The English had every reason to be content with what they had done, and great quantities of loot were shipped back to England.
Edward now moved north-east, but heard that Philip was at Rouen with a large force.
He advanced to the Seine, slipped across it at Poissy and, with Philip's army hard on his heels, he crossed the Somme at Blanche-Taque by a ford which was revealed to the king in the nick of time, possibly by a prisoner to whom Edward offered enough money to buy the vital information.
At Crécy, in the English-held County of Ponthieu, Edward decided to stand and fight.
The English established themselves in a strong defensive position and on the evening of 26 August the French approached.
Disregarding an order to halt, the knights advanced on the English and as they did so they drove their Genoese crossbowmen before them.
They were halted by a hail of arrows from the English, they failed to break the English positions and each advancing wave of cavalry bore down on those who had gone before, leading to utter confusion and heavy losses.
Edward himself watched the battle from a windmill to the south-west of the English positions, and Northampton, Arundel, and king's eldest son, Edward Prince of Wales, now aged sixteen, bore the main burden of the day.
According to Froissart, the prince and those fighting with him, faced with a fierce attack from the French, sent word to the king asking him to send them reinforcements.
But the king replied, ‘Tell them not to send for me again as long as my son is alive.
Give them my command to let the boy win his spurs, for if God has so ordained it, I wish the day to be his and the honour to go to him and those in whose charge I have placed him.’
Shortly before midnight, the French retreated in disarray, leaving the field to the English.
The French suffered enormous casualties, including Ring John of Bohemia, the Duke of Lorraine and the Counts of Blois and Flanders, and Froissart suggests that only Edward's decision not to pursue the remnants of the French forces saved them from even more serious losses.
Contemporaries believed that the English archers played a decisive part in the victory, but poor leadership and indiscipline in. the French forces also contributed to their downfall.
After his victory Edward rallied his troops and marched north to lay siege to Calais.
The strategic significance of Calais was obvious, and its possession would mean that Edward no longer had to rely on Flanders as a bridgehead for invasion.
The siege lasted almost a year,; Philip VI put in an appearance with a relieving army at the beginning of August 1347 but he came to the conclusion that the English could not be dislodged and went away again.
His departure was, understandably, followed immediately by the surrender of the town, which Edward proceeded to turn into an English base.
It was his intention to people it with English colonists, but it is difficult to say how far he succeeded, since there is virtually no information about the civilian population of Calais.
Edward's absence from England at the siege of Calais gave the Scots an opportunity to assist their French ally by invading the northern counties.
In October 1346 a Scottish army under David II moved into Cumberland and extorted money from the inhabitants; they then moved east, and on 17 October were confronted at Neville's Cross, near Durham, by an English force led by the Archbishop of York.
The English archers broke up the Scottish positions and the Earl of Dunbar and Robert the Steward fled with their troops.
David himself, however, was wounded in the face and taken prisoner by a Northumbrian knight, John of Copeland: he was to remain a prisoner in England for eleven years.
The defeat was a disaster for the Scots.
The losses sustained by the Scottish nobility left something of a vacuum at the centre of Scottish politics, and the king, in captivity in England, lacked the means to make his will felt in government.
In the following summer the English reoccupied the border counties and Dumfriesshire, and for the next ten years the principal concern of the Scots became the recovery of their king and their lost territory.
The victories at Crécy and Neville's Cross and the fall of Calais were greeted with euphoria in England.
When parliament heard the news of Crécy the commons ‘thanked God for the great victory He  had given their king and they said that all their money had been well spent’.
But the campaigns of the 1340s have a wider significance, for they mark the beginning of a change in attitude to foreign war amongst the English nobility.
This change arose from a realization that war provided opportunities for the nobles not only to increase their honour and their prestige but also to enrich themselves.
The campaigns in Brittany had offered a foretaste of what might be gained in loot and ransoms, but the expeditions to Aquitaine and Normandy were of much greater importance in demonstrating how much wealth might be won from war.
At the surrender of Bergerac in August 1345, for instance, Lancaster is said to have taken loot worth 52,000 marks, which he subsequently spent on his palace of the Savoy in London.
After his victory at Auberoche, prisoners were taken whose ransoms were said to be worth over £50,000, and in 1346, according to Froissart, Lancaster's army returned from a raid into Poitou so laden with riches that they had difficulty in transporting all their gains.
In Normandy, the army under the command of the Earl of Warwick sacked Carentan and carried off huge quantities of plunder, while Froissart observed that after the sack of Caen the English ‘won an amazing quantity of wealth for themselves’, and ‘sent boats and barges laden with their gains — clothes, jewellery, gold and silver plate and many other valuable things — down the river to Ouistreham where their main fleet lay’.
Well might Walsingham remark that there was scarcely a woman in England who did not have some household possession from the sack of Caen, the seizure of Calais, and other English successes in France.
Even in Brittany, which was a much less wealthy province than Normandy, there were rewards to be won: Sir Thomas Dagworth, for instance, was paid 25,000 gold écus as a reward for his capture of Charles of Blois, and the English garrisons in Brittany plundered the surrounding countryside.
Eventually they devised a support system based on levying charges in enemy territory: each fortress had a number of parishes attached to it, and these parishes were obliged to pay a levy to the commander of the garrison.
This system was extended to Normandy in 1350 and to other English-occupied parts of France after the victory at Poitiers in 1356.
The profits of war were not to be found only in France: a grateful king rewarded his commanders with grants at home, and the wounds of 1341 seem to have been healed by success in war.
In 1348 the king restored the Earl of Lancaster's title to the Honour and castle of  Pontefract, which he had hitherto held on lease from the queen, ‘having regard to the good service and great honour which our…cousin has done us in Gascony’.
This amounted in effect to a grant of £1,000 a year, the annual amount of the lease which was now extinguished.
Lancaster also received some lesser grants in England, and some small estates in Gascony.
The Earl of Warwick was made Sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire for life, and Arundel Sheriff of Shropshire for life, a sign than his reconciliation with the king was now complete.
These material rewards were accompanied by the development of a court life which embodied the military ethos and chivalric ideals of aristocratic society.
Tournaments were a regular feature of noble life in these years, and in 1344 at an especially magnificent tournament held at Windsor the king took an oath to establish an Order of Knights of the Round Table as it had existed in the days of Ring Arthur.
According to Murimuth the Earls of Derby, Salisbury, Warwick, Arundel, Pembroke and Suffolk ‘and many other barons and knights’ took the same oath.
A building to house the round table was begun, but otherwise nothing came of the idea.
Four years later the Order of the Garter was formally instituted as a fellowship of twenty-six knights bound together by oath as companions to help one another and their king.
Once again, Arthurian legend underlay the idea of the Order, but the adoption of the garter as its symbol was said in later years to have occurred when, at a ball at Calais in 1348, the Countess of Salisbury dropped her garter and the king, who was rumoured to have been in love with her, picked it up and in the face of derisive cries from the onlookers put it on his own knee with the remark, ‘Honi soit qui mal y pense ’— shame upon him who thinks ill of it.
The king's chivalric reputation attracted men to his service from all over Europe in the 1340s, and it greatly strengthened the bonds between him and the English nobility.
It may be hard to reconcile the ideals of chivalry at Edward's court with the burning, looting and killing which were so much a part of the campaigns the nobles fought in France, and difficult to argue that the idea of chivalry had any substantially mitigating effect on the horrors of war.
But the nobles fought for both profit and honour (probably in that order) and they gained renown at home by their prowess on the battlefield as well as by the material success they enjoyed.
It is not surprising that the nobles' traditional attitude of hostility to foreign war gave way to growing enthusiasm for continental campaigns that brought them both riches and renown.
The capture of Calais and the foundation of the Order of the Garter mark the high point of Edward's military and chivalric reputation, and for seven years after 1348 the war languished.
In the summer and autumn of 1348 the Black Death swept through France and southern England, and moved steadily northwards and westwards to reach Scotland and Ireland by the following year.
In England, the mortality from the plague has been variously estimated at between 20 per cent and 35 per cent of the population, and it may be that the higher figure is the more accurate.
The impact of the plague on rural society has been the subject of numerous studies, but its effect on English government between 1348 and 1350 has never been fully discussed.
No parliament met between April 1348 and February 1351, and Geoffrey le Baker noted that the sessions of the king's bench and common pleas ceased while the plague was at its height.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Bradwardine, died of the plague in August 1349, but none of the chief officers of state succumbed, and amongst the titled nobility only the death of the Earl of Pembroke in August 1348 may possibly have been caused by the plague.
Indeed le Baker observed that ‘few nobles died’, and this comparatively low mortality is almost certainly to be explained in terms of their better standard of living.
In the immediate aftermath of the plague, neither combatant was anxious to resume the war, and both were willing to listen to Pope Innocent VI when he attempted to mediate between them and bring about a lasting peace.
by 1355, however, some stability had returned after the Black Death and two new protagonists had appeared on the scene, each in his different way determined to enhance his prestige through war.
On the English side the king's eldest son, the Black Prince, had grown to manhood anxious to win his share of the glory and profits of war, of which he had had a taste at Crécy.
The Black Prince was to show that he was a man of considerable military flair but rather less political sensitivity than his father, and that he was capable of adopting a harsh and inflexible approach in government which would have augured ill had he ever become king.
On the French side the Black Prince's principal opponent was Ring John II, who succeeded his father Philip VI in 1350 and who was to allow his enthusiasm for chivalric deeds to outrun his political and military judgement.
In 1355 Edward III appointed the Black Prince his Lieutenant in Aquitaine, and the prince took a small force there in the autumn of that year.
He found no French to fight, but kept his troops happy  looting and destroying in Languedoc.
Edward III's intention was that the Black Prince's campaign in Aquitaine should be accompanied by an expedition to Brittany under Lancaster and an invasion of Normandy led by Charles of Navarre, king of the small Pyrenean kingdom lying between Aquitaine and Castile.
Charles was the grandson of Louis X of France, and had a claim to the French throne which was arguably as good as Edward III's.
His chief importance to Edward was that he was a substantial landowner in Normandy and was at odds with John II over the succession to the counties of Angoulême and Mortain.
He was potentially a useful ally and one with whom Edward needed to keep on good terms, if only because of his claim to the French throne; but he proved unreliable and the expedition to Normandy was aborted when he suddenly came to terms with John II.
Lancaster's expedition to Brittany also had to be postponed, probably because of the need to recover Berwick, which had fallen to the Scots in October 1355.
Edward had had to defer rather than abandon his plans, however, and in 1356 he sent Lancaster to Normandy with a small force of no more than 1,000 archers and 1,400 men-at-arms, which included supporting contingents from Normandy and from the Breton garrisons.
It was a highly successful chevauchée : Lancaster relieved Pont Audemer, captured Verneuil, took a large number of prisoners and carried off much booty.
But there may have been a broader strategic plan behind the expedition.
In August, the Black Prince led a raid northwards from Bergerac towards Bourges.
He described his intention in only the vaguest of terms, saying that ‘it was our purpose to ride forth against the enemies in the parts of France’, but it is likely that he and Lancaster hoped to join forces.
Lancaster moved towards the Loire in August, but he found his advance blocked by the French, who destroyed the bridge at Angers.
He retreated, leaving English garrisons in a string of fortresses in Anjou and Maine.
The Black Prince reached Tours in early September, but Ring John barred his way northwards, and he accordingly turned south, planning to retreat to Bordeaux.
The French pursued him, however, and although it is doubtful whether the prince intended to force them to fight it became clear that a battle could not be avoided.
The encounter took place near Poitiers on 19 September 1356.
Once again, as at Crécy, the English were outnumbered, but the prince, imitating his father's tactics at Crécy, drew up his forces in a strong defensive position in hilly, wooded country.
The French cavalry charge which opened the  battle was halted by the English archers; the main body of the French army then advanced on foot, but was halted by the English and after bitter fighting withdrew.
The Duke of Orléans left the field with his contingent, perhaps objecting to Ring John's novel decision that his army should advance dismounted, and the king then moved forward on foot with his troops.
The Black Prince led a cavalry charge against them and forced them back towards the River Miosson.
The king himself was captured, and the remnants of the French force fled.
The English haul of booty and prisoners was enormous: the list of those captured was headed by the king himself, together with his son Philip, the Archbishop of Sens, the Comte of Tancarville, the Comte of Sancerre, the Vicomte of Narbonne, the Seneschal of Poitou and the Comte of Ventadour.
Geoffrey le Baker lists in all thirty-five noble Frenchmen who were captured; the Black Prince, acting on behalf of the king, bought fourteen of these noblemen from their captors for £66,000 and shipped them back to England.
On the battlefield the English took vast plunder.
Froissart says that the English found ‘plate and gold and silver belts and precious jewels in chests crammed full of them as well as excellent cloaks’, and the Black Prince made off with Ring John's own jewels.
The king, of course, was the chief prize of Poitiers, and Edward intended that the price of his release should be not only a substantial ransom but also a definitive peace with France: the gains of battle needed to be consolidated by a diplomatic success.
The French had little room for manoeuvre, and in May 1358 a treaty known as the ‘First Treaty of London’ was drawn up, under which Edward was to have a Greater Aquitaine in full sovereignty, together with Calais, Ponthieu and Guînes.
Ring John was to be ransomed for 4 million écus to be paid within six months.
The treaty was never implemented, however, perhaps because the French could not raise the first instalment of the ransom in the six months specified, and in May 1359 the ‘Second Treaty of London’ was concluded.
This drove a much harder bargain and, it has been suggested, represents the moment at which Edward overplayed his hand.
Under this treaty, a vast area from Calais in the north to Aquitaine in the south was to be ceded to Edward to hold in full sovereignty.
Edward was not only to regain the Angevin inheritance in France, but also the coast of Picardy, the Counties of Guines and Boulogne, and suzerainty over Brittany.
The whole western seaboard of France and all the western provinces would thus fall into English hands.
The ransom was set at 4 million écus  once again, but this time the French were given four months to raise three-quarters of it, which was clearly impossible.
In return for all this, Edward agreed to drop his claim to the French throne.
King John may have been willing to agree to anything, even the dismemberment of his kingdom, in order to ensure that he did not die in prison; but, as Professor Fowler remarked, the treaty was ‘so preposterous that it is difficult to believe that it was ever intended seriously’.
It was totally unacceptable to the Dauphin Charles and his court, and the Estates-General rejected it out of hand.
Perhaps Edward expected no other outcome, and indeed preparations for another campaign in France were well in hand when the treaty was concluded.
Evidently Edward's purpose now was to inflict a final blow on the Valois monarchy by marching to Rheims and having himself crowned Ring of France.
He assembled a vast army and laid siege to the city on 4 December 1359.
With France in chaos, its king a prisoner, Navarrese forces in control in Normandy and English garrisons established not just in Brittany and Aquitaine but also in Anjou, Maine and Touraine, it must have appeared to Edward that his ultimate triumph was in sight, and it is arguable that now, after the failure of the Second Treaty of London, Edward's aim was nothing less than the crown.
Indeed, the intention of the English negotiators when the Second Treaty of London was drawn up may well have been to make the French an offer they would be bound to refuse.
But Rheims closed its gates to him; its Captain, Gauchier de Châtillon, conducted an effective defence, and on 11 January 1360, after a siege lasting only five weeks, Edward withdrew.
His supplies had run short, the army was dispirited by the uncomfortable winter conditions, and the king himself proved remarkably reluctant to take the city by storm.
Despite all the obvious practical difficulties that Edward encountered in maintaining the siege, its abandonment after so short a time must raise questions about the extent of his commitment, even at this stage of the war, to the French throne.
The setback before Rheims was followed by a campaign of devastation in the Ile-de-France and Beauce, but shortly after Easter Edward and the Dauphin agreed to resume negotiations.
At Brêtigny, on 8 May 1360, a treaty was concluded under which Edward was to receive much less than had been envisaged in the Treaty of London.
He was to hold an enlarged Aquitaine in full sovereignty, together with Calais, Ponthieu and Guînes; but there was no question, of transferring the rest of western France to him, and Ring John's  ransom was reduced from 4 to 3 million écus.
Edward in return undertook to renounce his claim to the French throne.
This treaty was ratified at Calais on 24 October 1360, with one important modification.
The clauses under which Edward renounced his claim to the French throne and John renounced sovereignty over Aquitaine were excised from the treaty and embodied in a separate document which laid down that the renunciations were to be carried out no later than 1 November 1361, and were to be conditional upon the transfers of territory agreed in the treaty being implemented by June 1361.
Edward's hopes of the crown had vanished before the gates of Rheims, but he was still in a strong enough position, with Ring John as his prisoner, to insist on a final solution to the problem of Aquitaine.
The Treaty of Brètigny provided for this, and a treaty which the French appeared for the moment willing to accept was a much more substantial victory for Edward than one which gave him a vast area on paper but which the French would be bound to resist.
Edward probably realized, after the failure of the Rheims campaign, that he lacked the resources to mount the kind of campaign that would be necessary to compel the French to accept the Treaty of London.
His campaigns in Aquitaine, Normandy and Brittany in the 1340s and 1350s had been essentially plundering raids which had brought a substantial return for a modest outlay and had therefore enjoyed the support of the nobility and the commons.
The sudden and catastrophic nature of the French defeat at Poitiers placed Edward in a powerful negotiating position, but in no way removed the difficulties that he would face in financing and sustaining the campaigns that would be necessary if negotiations with the French broke down.
It was not long, however, before difficulties began to arise.
Ring John was released on the understanding that his ransom would be paid, and Edward retained some noble hostages as sureties for the payment.
One of these, the king's younger son Louis Duke of Anjou, broke his word and returned to France, at which King John, showing a misplaced sense of honour, returned voluntarily to captivity in England and died at the Savoy in April 1364.
The exclusion of the renunciation clauses weakened the force of the treaty; it gave both sides the opportunity to prevaricate and, in the event, the renunciations were never carried out.
The Dauphin's interest in delaying the transfer of territory and renunciation of sovereignty is obvious, but it has been suggested that Edward too might have been glad of an excuse to resume the war if he wanted to.
Such a suggestion  should, however, be treated with caution.
Edward stopped using the title and arms of France for eight years, and only resumed them when war began again after Charles V had taken advantage of the failure to carry out the renunciation clauses and heard appeals in his court from discontented subjects of the Black Prince in Aquitaine.
Even though the Treaty of Brêtigny represented a retreat from the terms Edward had offered in 1358, it was the culmination of a period of outstandingly successful warfare.
Edward had captured his adversaries of France and Scotland; he had gained, on paper at least, the sovereign lordship of Aquitaine and had turned Calais into the most substantial military town the English kings had possessed in France since 1204; while his companions in arms had enriched themselves and won renown in battle.
Even though the ultimate prize had eluded Edward, his prestige, and the military reputation of his countrymen, was at its height in 1360.
The Sinews of War: Manpower and Money
Edward III's victories at Crécy and Poitiers did much in themselves to generate enthusiasm for the war, and the profits both from these victories and from the chevauchées in Aquitaine, Normandy and Brittany helped to ensure the support of the nobility for the war.
The successful prosecution of the war, however, required not just aristocratic support but also the plentiful, and as far as possible the willing, supply of manpower and money.
In the 1290s and again in the 1330s the pressure of taxation and resistance to the crown's recruiting methods led to political crises which undermined the king's ability to wage war successfully.
Yet the campaigns of the 1340s and 1350s do not seem to have generated such political tension at home: victory and profit undoubtedly provide part of the explanation, but so too do changes in the methods of military recruitment and a conciliatory approach on the part of the king to the question of taxation.
Both Edward I and Edward II had made substantial use of the traditional feudal levy for raising an army, summoning all tenants-in-chief of the crown to serve unpaid with a set quota of men for forty days.
The feudal summons had some attractive features from the nobility's point of view: service without pay by virtue of tenure and according to an oath of homage was considered an honourable obligation; and whenever a feudal muster was ordered the tenants-in-chief  were entitled to levy scutage on their own tenants.
The crown too stood to gain financially from fines paid by those tenants-in-chief who were unable or unwilling to serve in person.
At best, however, the feudal summons could produce a cavalry force of little over 500 men, and even in Edward I's reign it had obviously been insufficient in itself as a means of raising an army.
Since there was no requirement to attend in person, there was no way of knowing how many men were likely to appear in arms.
To raise the cavalry force needed in his French and Scottish wars, Edward I sought to extend the principle of military obligation to all members of the knightly class and others who held land worth either £40 a year or, if the need were especially pressing, £20.
In effect the king was seeking to make wealth rather than feudal tenure the basis of military obligations, but he met much resistance, and for the final campaigns of his reign he relied upon appeals for voluntary paid service from all except those summoned personally by virtue of their tenure.
His armies in his last years were partly feudal and partly mercenary, and his attempt to establish the principle of compulsory unpaid service had been decisively defeated.
The infantry of Edward I's armies were recruited by commissioners of array who were required to select men from each shire for service in the army.
The methods by which men were chosen remain obscure; it was probably left to the village assembly to decide who should serve, and no doubt much bribery and corruption attended the process.
The local communities had to pay for the equipment of the men selected and their expenses until they reached the county boundary, after which they served at the king's wages.
Faced with a mounting burden of debt, Edward II tried to shift the burden of support back on to the local communities.
In 1311, for example, he demanded one foot soldier from each vill for service in his projected campaign in Scotland, and the vill was to pay the soldier's wages for seven weeks by means of a special aid levied on each vill by the sheriff.
The campaign never took place, however, and Edward did not try to revive this method of payment for those who served in the army which was defeated at Bannockburn.
At the Lincoln parliament of 1316, with Lancaster at the head of the council, a campaign in Scotland was planned and the proposal to levy one man from each vill was revived, with the vill responsible for wages for sixty days' service.
At the same time all £50 landowners were summoned to serve without pay.
The opposition to these measures Provides one reason for the failure of the campaign and the growth of hostility within the community to Lancaster's rule.
After Edward's triumph at Boroughbridge in 1322 he once again sought to levy one man from each vill for service in Scotland, with the vill this time paying the wages for forty days.
The Brut blames the Despensers for this measure, but the king was able to raise almost 7,000 men who served for four weeks at their vills' expense.
After the revolution of 1327 the commons in parliament sought statutory protection against the measures Edward II had taken.
It was enacted that the vill should not be required to pay the cost of service beyond the county boundary, that the equipment required of troops should not go beyond that laid down in the Statute of Winchester, and that service overseas should not be required as an obligation of tenure.
However, this legislation did not put an end to complaints about military obligation.
In Edward III's wars in Scotland in the 1330s he made great use of hobelars and mounted archers who were paid more and required more expensive equipment than foot soldiers.
Local communities thus had to find more money to fulfil even their admitted obligations under the statute of 1327, and the regular wearing of military uniform, which began in the 1330s, added to their burden since it too had to be paid for by the community.
Arrays of this kind were also used to raise men for the campaigns in France in the 1340s, and the crown's failure to observe in every instance the legislation of 1327 led to renewed complaints from the commons about the burden borne by the local communities in providing wages and equipment for the troops.
The feudal summons, the summons of the £40 or £20 landowners, and the use of commissions of array thus provided troops for armies led by the king, while the royal household provided the administrative machinery by which wages were paid.
From Edward I's reign onwards, however, it became increasingly common for the crown to use contract armies on campaigns where the king and the household were not present and to defend castles and towns in enemy territory.
A magnate would engage to serve with a specified number of men for a particular time in return for wages which were agreed in advance and paid by the Exchequer.
Lancaster and Lincoln served on this basis in Gascony in 1294 and 1298; and in Edward II's reign contract armies became more common as a means of defending the northern border in the absence of the king.
A precedent was set in 1337 when the commanders of an army going to Scotland were engaged by contract, but their troops were raised by array.
The ready response on this occasion no doubt did much to establish the contract system as the  principal method of raising armies during the war with France.
The feudal levy now fell into disuse: it was summoned in 1327, and then for the last time, and probably for financial reasons, in 1385.
Although commissions of array continued to be used for major expeditions led by the king or the Prince of Wales, such as those of 1346 and 1359, the armies which fought in France came increasingly to consist of volunteers rather than conscripts; and this in itself goes some way towards explaining popular support for the war.
The contract army had a number of advantages for the crown.
Above all, service was voluntary and thus not liable to produce the grievances that accompanied selection for compulsory service.
There was no limitation on the period of service overseas that a man could agree to undertake, and the crown was relieved of the burden of administration: recruiting, mustering and paying the troops were carried out by the officials of the magnates who made the contracts.
On the other hand, the crown lost direct control over military recruitment, and allowed the magnates to command their own troops and direct their own campaigns.
The system allowed the nobility much more initiative in war than they had enjoyed under Edward I and Edward II, and their wishes and interests, together with their willingness and ability to raise troops, had to be taken into account in planning a campaign.
The war thus became very much a joint concern, with the nobility playing as important a part as the king in recruiting and commanding armies and conducting campaigns.
The captains who contracted with the king to provide troops were not, however, directly responsible for recruiting all the troops they agreed to provide.
They made extensive use of sub-contractors, some of whom might agree to bring as few as a dozen men-at-arms and archers to the force.
The contract army thus extended responsibility for military recruitment very widely through society, and the many knights who brought a handful of men-at-arms and archers were as important an element in the make-up of the contract army as the retainers of the magnate himself.
The recruitment of volunteer, contract armies could not have been successful unless the war had been widely popular.
Although men who were retained for life by a great magnate had an obligation to serve him in peace and war, and although there is little evidence about how the sub-contractors recruited their troops, neither the magnate captains nor their sub-contractors seem to have encountered much difficulty in persuading men to serve.
The most important reason was, of course, financial.
The wages themselves were good: a mounted archer was paid 6d a day, the wage a skilled craftsman might expect to earn in civilian life, and a man-at-arms received Is a day.
It was also customary to add to the men's wages a bonus payment or ‘reward,(regardum ) paid quarterly to the leader of each group, usually at the rate of 100 marks per quarter for every thirty men engaged.
The first instalment of wages was generally paid over by the Exchequer in advance of the campaign, but subsequent instalments were often delayed until after the campaign was over, sometimes long after.
Captains had therefore to use their own resources to pay their men and bargain as best they could with the Exchequer; but there is little evidence that delays in payment became a political issue.
The prospect of booty was probably more important than wages in persuading men to serve.
Some of the gains made by the nobility in the campaigns of the 1340s and 1350s have already been discussed, but the opportunities for enrichment were open to men of all ranks.
Knights as well as nobles took prisoners at Poitiers, and the Black Prince granted lands, offices and annuities to many yeomen and bachelors who served him on his campaigns in Gascony between 1355 and 1357.
By the last decade of Edward III's reign it had become customary for the contracts of service to specify how the gains of war were to be divided.
Usually, a soldier was expected to pay one-third of his profit to his captain, who then paid one-third of that, in other words one-ninth of the original sum, together with one-third of all profits of his own, to the crown.
The ‘rule of thirds’ has been treated as the standard method of division, but other arrangements were sometimes made which might reflect the contractor's view of the likely profits to be won from a particular campaign.
The careful and precise manner in which these financial arrangements were laid down suggests that many who served saw the war as essentially a business enterprise holding out the promise of substantial rewards for those who were fortunate or who distinguished themselves in the field.
Some individuals enjoyed spectacular success: Sir Robert Salle, for example, who was a bondsman from Norfolk, rose through his gains of war to become a landowner in East Anglia.
John of Copeland, a Northumbrian knight of modest means who was fortunate enough to capture David II of Scotland at the battle of Neville's Cross in 1346, was rewarded by the king with an annuity of £500.
Robert Knolles, whose origins were said to be very humble, made a fortune out of war service in the 1350s and 1360s, and may be taken as typical of the successful captains with no  inherited wealth who raised themselves by their military skills.
Sir John Chandos and Sir Hugh Calvely were men of a similar kind, while on the French side Bertrand du Guesclin s career showed that the hereditary nobility had no monopoly of skill and prowess in war.
There is, of course, another side to the story.
Soldiers who were captured by the enemy had to seek redemption where they could, and the cost of their ransom might be ruinous.
Luke de Warton, who was captured by the Scots in the early 1320s, had to mortgage his lands to the Captain of Berwick Castle to raise the money to redeem himself, and he ended his days living on the charity of a religious house in York.
Walter Ferrefort, a soldier serving with the Earl of March in Brittany in 1375, was held in the gaol of St Brieuc as surety for a debt.
He wrote a pathetic letter to his lord, describing his condition in prison where he lay bound with fetters of iron and beseeching aid from the Earl of March to secure his deliverance.
The careers of John of Copeland and Sir Robert Rnolles on the one hand, and Luke de Warton and Walter Ferrefort on the other represent the extremes of success and failure.
More typical, perhaps, were the modest gains of a group of Cheshire archers who divided £8-12-6 amongst them as their share of the proceeds of a silver ship belonging to the Ring of France and seized at Poitiers.
Such small gains were incentive enough for many.
The prospect of good wages and modest gains provided ample inducement to serve; but there were no doubt other motives as well.
A recent study of the Gloucestershire gentry has shown that many of those from the knightly class who served were young men, whose elders carried the burden of local administration.
The disproportionately large numbers of recruits from Cheshire, and the martial reputation that the men from that county acquired, may have something to do with the successful recruiting drives organized by the Black Prince, who was Earl of Chester as well as Prince of Wales; but it also, perhaps, reflected the problems of underemployment in a predominantly pastoral society.
Many young men were attracted to the profession of arms for its own sake, and the excitement and glory of successful war were reasons in themselves for service, but some at least of those who engaged with a captain may have been responding to pressures at home and in the local economy rather than to the material incentives that war offered.
From the political point of view, the successful development of the contract army had important implications.
The frequency with which  campaigns were organized in the 1340s, 1350s and 1370s and the need to provide substantial forces for the defence of English-held castles and towns encouraged the nobility to maintain permanent forces which might be augmented by the use of sub-contractors when necessary.
The crown alone still had the power to compel military service, especially for defence against invasion.
The array did not fall completely into disuse, and the crown still relied on the sheriffs to call the posse comitatus to deal with local disturbances.
But none of this could disguise the fact that the great nobles had substantial bodies of experienced soldiers at their disposal.
This was nowhere more true than on the northern border, where the nobles who held office as Wardens of the Marches, a system that had reached full development by the end of Edward III's reign, were in effect allowed to maintain permanent standing armies at the Exchequer's expense.
The ambitions of the northern nobility were to play a crucial role in national politics at the end of the century.
The development of the contract army also led to a change in the financial relationship between the crown and the nobility.
In the reigns of Edward I and Edward II the crown had used the indebtedness of great subjects as a means of political discipline, gaining support by respiting debts and applying pressure by distraining debtors.
Granting respite from debts was a means of encouraging men to serve in the army, and in Edward I's and Edward II's reigns each campaign was prefaced by a whole series of respites granted by the Exchequer.
The use of the contract army, however, placed the king in the position of debtor to the military captains, most of whom were members of the titled nobility, and the sums owed by the crown to individual nobles might often be very substantial: in 1386, for instance, the Earl of Northumberland reached agreement with the Exchequer whereby in return for £700 he discharged the king of all debts owing to the earl ‘from any time past until the making of this indenture’, and the earl was discharged of the debts he incurred when he held the office of Admiral.
By the early fifteenth century the Exchequer had become so overcommitted that creditors had to queue for payment, and a creditor's place in the queue was determined as much as anything by political favour.
Furthermore, many of the great nobles enriched themselves through war: the Earl of Arundel, for example, was reputed to be fabulously wealthy and apparently had 43,981 marks in bags in the tower of Arundel Castle when he died in 1376 and another 57,000 marks elsewhere.
The king had his share of the spoils too; and  Windsor Castle was substantially rebuilt with the proceeds of the ransom of John II.
But as Edward exhausted his foreign creditors he came to rely on his own nobles and the London merchants for loans, and this necessitated a greater sensitivity to the political views and interests of his creditors than his predecessors had had to show.
The successful use of contract armies also enhanced the prestige of the nobility.
Almost all the great noble families served Edward III abroad, and the freedom of action they enjoyed allowed them to win glory and renown for themselves, as Lancaster succeeded in doing in Aquitaine between 1343 and 1345, Northampton in Brittany in the 1340s and the Black Prince in Languedoc in 1355.
The triumphs of war were a source of pride to them, and strengthened their loyalty to the crown.
But the successes of the 1340s and 1350s created expectations which were not fulfilled when war was renewed in 1369.
A new generation of nobles who were not to taste the sweetness of military success and knew only at second hand of the prestige and profits gained in the 1340s and 1350s led the opposition to the court in the last years of Edward III's reign and during the reign of Richard II.
In so far as the political stability of mid-century depended upon the success of the king's cause in France, it was shallowly based.
The use of contract armies to fight the war depended, of course, not just upon the readiness of men to serve but also upon the willingness of parliament to vote taxes to pay for the war.
Under Edward I and Edward II, and in the early years of Edward III, grants of money had generally been made with reluctance, and had been accompanied by many complaints about the conduct of royal financial officials.
The commons had shown themselves increasingly adept at procuring political concessions in return for grants of taxes, and although they were at their most effective when they enjoyed the support of at least some sections of the nobility, they had gained substantially in experience and cohesion by the time the crisis of 1340–1 arose.
Yet after that crisis Edward's political skills, together with the popularity of the war, enabled the king to maintain the flow of funds for the war without provoking opposition of the kind that had arisen in 1297 or 1339–41.
The opening campaign of the war, in 1338–41, taught Edward some important financial lessons.
The construction of a network of alliances in the Low Countries had been enormously expensive and brought the king little real diplomatic or military support.
The problems of financing and supplying expeditions to the continent  provoked political opposition which had a wide popular basis and in which some of the nobility allied themselves with the commons in seeking redress for the grievances of the community.
Edward's manipulation of the wool trade for his financial advantage intensified the divisions between the small group of wealthy merchants who stood to benefit from Edward's schemes and the lesser merchants who eventually made common cause with the producers in opposing the monopolistic structure that Edward tried to create.
After 1341, however, the costs of war fell sharply from the levels they had reached between 1338 and 1341, and not until the 1370s did they begin once again to approach those levels.
It is important to realize in explaining Edward's success in handling the commons in the 1340s and 1350s that successful war was being fought comparatively cheaply.
Even the Crêcy-Calais campaign cost only £150,000, and the expeditions to Normandy and Brittany were significantly shorter and less expensive than the campaigns of the opening phase of the war.
It has been estimated that, even allowing for Lancaster's expenses in Aquitaine, the campaigns between 1344 and 1347 cost only about two-thirds of the amount spent between 1338 and 1341.
The burden of war was thus more manageable, but large sums still had to be raised by parliamentary grants and the commons were seldom disposed to make such grants unconditionally.
The grievances of the commons have a familiar air: in 1344, for instance, they offered a grant of two tenths and fifteenths, and presented a series of petitions in which they complained about purveyance and other administrative abuses.
They granted the second subsidy only on condition that the king himself went abroad to try to bring an end to the war.
After the fall of Calais, when war ceased for some years, the king had to persuade the commons that direct taxes should continue in order to finance the defence of English positions abroad, notably Calais itself, and to maintain English forces in a state of readiness in case the enemy broke the truce and resumed the war.
The commons accepted these arguments, and direct taxation became in effect a regular impost, levied both in time of war and time of truce.
For some years direct taxation ceased to be contentious, and much the bitterest arguments in the 1340s arose over the taxation of wool and the king's manipulation of the wool trade to raise money for the war.
Between 1337 and 1353 the tax on wool formed part of a series of schemes under which the king attempted to establish a body of powerful and wealthy merchants who would be granted a monopoly in  the purchase and export of wool in return for making loans to the king which would be repaid from the maltote, the export tax on wool.
Borrowing and taxation were inseparably linked in these schemes, and the merchants would use their monopolistic powers to enrich themselves and ensure that sufficient cash was available to satisfy the king's need for loans.
From the king's point of view these schemes had many attractive features, but in practice they did not work.
The monopolistic merchants found that they had insufficient capital to advance the loans required; there was much evasion of the monopolies; and the export trade itself was disrupted by the crown's impressment of merchant shipping for war, and its political pressures on Flanders.
The commons, too, objected to the king's manipulation of the wool trade.
In 1336, as on earlier occasions, a tax of 20s a sack had been agreed by an assembly of merchants, and in 1338 the merchants agreed to increase it to 40s.
Since the tax was paid out of the financial resources of the merchants it was quite proper to seek consent from them rather than from parliament, but the merchants were suspected, no doubt with some justification, of seeking to pass the real burden of the tax on to the producers.
The tax thus came to be seen as an impost on the whole community, to which the general assent of the community was required.
In 1340 the king conceded that parliament should have the right to grant the maltote, which it proceeded to do for a period of fifteen months.
The commons granted it again from 1343 to 1346, from 1348 to 1351, 1353 to 1356, and in 1356 for a period of six years.
The willingness of the commons to grant the maltote in these years should dispose of the argument that they wished to see the tax abolished.
Their object was to control it themselves and to use their control over it as a means of persuading the king to abolish the monopolistic cartels which exploited the trade.
Thus in 1343 the commons granted the maltote in return for a concession that the minimum price for wool should be increased and that no one should be allowed to purchase wool below that price.
In 1348 they demanded free trade in wool, and in 1351 achieved a definitive victory when the king agreed that the maltote should be granted only in parliament and that all merchants should be permitted to deal in wool ‘without being restricted by those merchants who call themselves the king's merchants’.
The destruction of the monopolistic purchasing cartels, which was the commons' real object, ensured that the tax would no longer be passed on to the producer in the form of lower prices, and the establishment of the  Company of the Staple as a selling cartel enabled the real burden of the tax to be imposed upon the purchasers, the cloth manufacturers of Flanders.
The maltote too thus became a regular impost, though the commons were not prepared to grant it for more than a year or two at a time for fear of losing control over it and to prevent the king from reviving the monopolistic schemes for exploiting the producers which they had struggled against between 1336 and 1351.
Both king and commons had an interest in compromise rather than conflict on the question of taxation in the 1340s and 1350s.
In their struggle to gain control of the wool tax the commons arguably gained more by agreeing to grant the tax and receiving in return concessions on free trade in wool than they would have achieved by seeking to abolish the tax.
The king ensured that vital funds continued to flow, and was in any case disposed to make concessions on the question of cartels because many of the monopolistic companies had gone bankrupt and were useless to him.
The assembly of merchants had become of little value as a tax-granting body not just because of the hostility of the commons but also because Edward's monopolistic schemes had so divided the mercantile community that it could no longer speak with one voice.
Edward's handling of the commons on matters of taxation showed his pragmatism and political skills at their best.
Support for the war was readily given, and the heavy burdens of the Crécy-Calaig campaign and the Rheims campaign of 1359–60 produced few political problems.
The concessions Edward made on matters such as purveyance and unparliamentary taxation went a long way towards meeting the grievances of the commons, and the king was able to mobilize the resources he required for war.
The part played by the nobility in the debates about taxation in these years has never been satisfactorily analysed, but it appears that the initiative lay almost entirely with the commons.
Indeed, Professor Roskell has gone so far as to suggest that the nobility could not be relied upon to attend parliament in the 1350s and 1360s even when they were present in England, and that these parliaments amounted to little more than tax bargaining sessions between the king and the commons.
There is undoubtedly some truth in this; the nobility  frequently sent proxies to parliament in these years; they were too preoccupied with war to have any reason for opposing the king in parliament, and their independent campaigns on the continent took some of them away from England for several years at a time.
It would be wrong, however, to suggest that the commons ensured  the flow of funds for the war simply in return for concessions on their most persistent grievances.
They also responded to the king's skilful use of propaganda to generate support for the war.
Throughout the 1340s and 1350s the king played on the commons' fear of a French invasion of England: the threat that the French might ‘destroy the English tongue and occupy the realm of England’ was used more than once to persuade the commons to grant money for the war, and the discovery at the sack of Caen of a French plan for the invasion of England in 1339 was a gift to royal propaganda.
It was read out in parliament to persuade the commons in the euphoric aftermath of Crécy to grant two subsidies and publicly proclaimed at St Paul's to arouse popular enthusiasm for the war.
Edward's rhetoric was not, however, wholly defensive.
In assuming the title and arms of King of France in 1340, he laid much stress on his God-given duty to recover his right, and in the speeches made by the Chancellor at the opening of parliament in the 1340s and 1350s the commons were asked to grant aids ‘in pursuit of the king's quarrel to recover his rights’, or in consideration of ‘the pursuit of our right’.
The offensive and defensive aims of the war were skilfully linked in the argument deployed in 1352 that the security of England was threatened by the French king's denial of Edward's right.
In case such arguments failed, the king also reminded the commons frequently that the war had been undertaken with their consent and that this consent had from time to time been renewed, as Sir William Thorp pointed out in the parliament of 1348.
Edward's war propaganda was designed to reach a wider audience than the commons in parliament.
Bishops were ordered to ensure that prayers were said in every church for the success of the king's expeditions to France, and news of the great victory of Crécy was proclaimed throughout the realm.
Newsletters were circulated giving details of campaigns, and some of these, such as those sent by Bartholomew Burghersh to the Archbishop of Canterbury in 1346, were carefully phrased so as to generate public support for the invasion of Normandy.
Such propaganda could only be successful, however, if it corresponded to some genuine feeling both amongst the commons and in the country generally that the king's cause was just and worthy of support.
There seems little doubt that such feeling existed, especially in the 1340s and 1350s.
Popular verses echoed the sentiments of royal propaganda, and a crude xenophobia appeared in lampoons about the French and the Scots.
An Invective against France , probably written around 1347, opened with these words: As Dr Barnie points out, such lampoons show how ancient and persistent are national stereotypes: the English accused the French of sexual promiscuity, while the French assiduously propagated the idea that the English were violent and gluttonous drunkards, and that they all had tails.
Criticism of the war seems to have been confined to a few individuals.
Complaints about the burden of taxation, the oppressive behaviour of royal officials and the costs of the army did not develop into outright opposition to the war on principle.
The king's willingness to remedy such grievances helped to allay the disquiet of the commons and public opinion outside parliament.
As John of Reading observed in 1362, the passage of a statute in that year dealing with the problem of purveyance put an end to discontent amongst the common people.
More fundamental doubts about the war were expressed by Richard de Bury Bishop of Durham in his Philobiblion , where he said that ‘war, wanting discretion of reason, furiously attacks whatever falls in its way, and not being under the guidance of reason it destroys the vessels of reason’, and he beseeched ‘the ruler of Olympus and the most high Dispenser of all the world, that he may abolish war, establish peace, and bring about tranquil times under his own special protection’.
Only the Lollards, however, seem to have elaborated a pacifist doctrine founded upon the Biblical injunction against killing: the tenth of the twelve Lollard conclusions published in 1395 declared that ‘manslaute be batayle or pretense lawe of rythwysnesse for temperal cause or spirituel withouten special revelaciun is expres contrarious to the newe testament, the qwiche is a lawe of grace and ful of mercy’.
Until the 1380s, however, the belief that the war was just found almost universal support.
The English, of course, could well afford such sentiments, for they largely escaped the horrors of war.
Even in the northern counties, Scottish raids were never as frequent or as deeply penetrating as they had been in Edward II's reign, and although the inhabitants of those counties made the most of their plight in petitions for relief from taxation, the raids in the years after 1332 did little long-term damage to the region's economy.
The southern coastal counties of England were at risk from seaborne  invasion, but here too the raids were spasmodic and localized.
Neither the extreme north of England nor the south coast had to endure the kind of onslaught that brought a plaintive cry from the Prior of St Thibaut-des-Brûlês, south-east of Paris, describing how an English force had burnt his village and ransomed the inhabitants and asking those who dwelt in towns and castles whether their suffering was anything like his.
His letter was written ‘behind our grange, for I dare not write anywhere else’.
Nor did England ever approach the state of social and political collapse which France faced after Poitiers.
A successful and popular war was not only one which brought victory and profit, but also one which was fought well away from home.
The King and the Nobles
Edward III's orchestration of support for the war was skilful and successful, yet fundamentally he depended on the co-operation of the nobility, who recruited and led the contract armies that became increasingly important as the war continued.
Victory and profit, together with the king's affable personality and chivalric reputation, ensured that this co-operation, once offered, would not lightly be withdrawn; but in dealing with the nobility Edward showed a degree of political skill and a sensitivity to their interests which went beyond simply sharing in a glorious and profitable enterprise abroad.
Although the principal activity of many of the nobles in Edward III's reign was war, their fundamental concern was always their inheritance, the lands and rights which formed the basis of their wealth and power and which they expected to hand on to their heirs.
Edward III's attitude towards questions of tenure and inheritance suggests that he sympathized with the outlook of his peers and was prepared to encourage their aspirations even at the expense of the rights of the crown.
The oligarchic tendency within the nobility which had shown itself in Edward II's reign was intensified by the practice of granting new earldoms, and regranting old ones, in tail male.
This encouraged the growth of a clearly defined body of hereditary peers, for it eliminated the risks that an earldom would pass into other hands by marriage, that the lands would become separate from the title, or that they would be divided up amongst coheiresses.
The earldoms granted by Edward III in 1337 were all granted in tail male, and in the course of the century the earldoms of Oxford, Warwick, Arundel and Surrey  were surrendered to the king and regranted in tail male.
Such grants had some advantages from the crown's point of view, for in the event of the failure of direct heirs the lands and title would revert to the crown and would augment the resources of royal patronage, as happened with the Audley, Clinton and Ufford inheritances; but the underlying reason for limiting descent to heirs male was the wish of the nobility to preserve the integrity of their inheritances and to ensure that the title descended with the land.
Edward was also generous in granting licences to entail, under which lands would not revert to the crown even if the male line failed, and this too helped to preserve the integrity of great estates.
The nobles' freedom to do what they wished with their lands was enhanced by the development of the legal device known as the ‘use’.
The idea was similar to that of a trust.
Lands were granted to a group of men known as feoffees, who became the legal owners of the land, while the grantor enjoyed the use of the lands — in other words, all the rights and profits arising from them.
But because the feoffees were the legal owners, the lands could not be taken into wardship if the grantor died leaving an heir under age, nor could the crown require the payment of a relief when the heir entered upon his inheritance, and lands held in trust in this way could not be forfeited for treason.
The device also enabled the lord to mitigate the rigour of primogeniture and make provision for younger sons, for daughters, and for the endowment of Masses for his soul and the souls of members of his family.
The development of the use greatly enhanced the landowner's freedom of action, while the crown's rights of wardship, escheat and relief were lost.
Edward III, however, seems to have made little effort to safeguard these rights.
He readily granted licences for enfeoffment to uses, and although Chancery officials made some effort to track down unlicensed or fraudulent uses, such cases ‘form a very small minority of all those tenants in chief who had conveyed land to uses’.
These devices protected the integrity of the inheritance, and both the patronage of the crown and the wealth won from war enabled many inheritances to grow larger in the course of Edward III's reign.
The concentration of extensive territorial power in the hands of a small number of great nobles became more marked than ever.
For example, between 1338 and 1376 the Earl of Arundel bought over twenty manors in Sussex and Surrey.
His purchases cost him in all over £4,000, and those who sold property to him were mainly small landowners, widows and heiresses.
Lancaster too augmented his  inheritance with purchases from lesser men, particularly in Lancashire and Cheshire, where a number of members of the knightly class conveyed manors to him.
Both landowners were also granted legal rights, the most significant of which was the establishment in March 1351 of Lancashire as a county palatine, in which royal powers were in effect devolved to Henry of Lancaster, now raised to ducal status.
None of these measures to protect and augment the inheritance, however, were proof against the greatest misfortunes that could befall a noble family in the fourteenth century, failure of heirs and political miscalculation.
Two of the earldoms that Edward created in 1337, those of Gloucester and Huntingdon, died with their first holder, and a third, the Ufford earldom of Suffolk, survived for only two generations.
None of these earls had male heirs, and the lands and titles reverted to the crown.
When the Earl of Surrey died in 1347 he left no direct heir.
The inheritance had earlier been surrendered to the king and regranted in tail male, with reversion to the king if the male line failed.
But in 1348 the Earl of Arundel, who was Warenne's sister's husband and sole legitimate heir, petitioned the king to revoke this agreement, for it would ‘disinherit the petitioner of his right to premises which should descend to him in the event of the death of the earl…without lawful heir.
The king gave way, and much of the Warenne inheritance eventually passed to Arundel.
Failure of heirs, or the survival only of heiresses, was exploited by the king himself for the benefit of his own sons, who expected endowments and titles as befitted their rank and who by virtue of their birth played a leading part in aristocratic society.
Indeed, the politics of the last thirty years of the century cannot properly be understood without reference to the wealth and ambition of the members of the king's own family.
When the last de Burgh Earl of Ulster died in 1333 he left only a daughter, Elizabeth Countess of Ulster in her own right, whom the king married to his second son, Lionel of Antwerp, created Duke of Clarence in 1362.
Edward no doubt hoped that part of the Clare inheritance and a substantial Irish patrimony would thus provide for Clarence and his heirs, but he died aged thirty in 1368, leaving as the only child of his marriage a daughter, Philippa.
The king married Philippa to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March in 1368, and thus the earl came to possess not only the Mortimer family lands in the Welsh March which had been restored to his father in 1354, but also the Clare lordship of Usk, the Clare lands in Dorset, Somerset and East Anglia, and the de Burgh earldom of Ulster.
The earl became the  largest landowner in Ireland, and second only to the Duke of Lancaster in England, while his descendants had royal blood in their veins.
The revival in the fortunes of the Mortimer family is an outstanding example of the working of Edward III's patronage, first in setting aside the forfeiture of 1330 and then in permitting Edmund Mortimer to marry his granddaughter.
Royal patronage and unexpected death also laid the foundation of the power of Edward's third son, John of Gaunt.
Henry of Grosmont, whose earldom of Lancaster had been raised to a duchy in 1351, died of the plague on 23 March 1361, leaving two daughters as his coheiresses.
The elder, Maud, was married to the Count of Zeeland, while the younger, Blanche, had been married in 1359 to John of Gaunt in the expectation that he would eventually receive half the Lancaster inheritance.
But Maud died childless little more than a year after her father, and thus the inheritance was unexpectedly reunited in Gaunt's hands.
Rumour had it that Gaunt had poisoned his sister-in-law in order to gain possession of the whole of the inheritance.
Edward took advantage of the failure of another earldom, that of Hereford, to endow his youngest son, Thomas of Woodstock.
Humphrey Bohun Earl of Hereford died at the age of thirty in 1373 leaving, like Lancaster, two coheiresses, though both were under age when their father died.
The elder sister, Eleanor, was married to Thomas in 1374, and Thomas received her share of the inheritance when she came of age in 1380.
The other sister, Mary, was four years younger than Eleanor, and Froissart tells the story that Thomas took responsibility for educating Mary in the hope of persuading her to go into a nunnery, so that he would receive the entire Bohun inheritance.
Froissart goes on to relate that while Thomas was abroad in 1380, ladies of Mary's family removed her from Pleshey, and soon afterwards she was married to Gaunt's son, Henry Bolingbroke, later Henry IV.
It is hard to say how much of the story is true.
Mary's marriage to Henry had certainly taken place by February 1381, and Thomas might well have done what he could to prevent her marrying, but Froissart casts Thomas as a villain in his account of English politics in Richard II's reign, and not every detail in the story should necessarily be accepted at face value.
The division of the Bohun inheritance produced bad blood between Thomas and Henry Bolingbroke, however, and the disagreement between the two rumbled on throughout Richard II's reign.
In his concern to endow his sons adequately, Edward behaved in  much the same way as other members of landowning society, and although he exploited the marriage market for the benefit of his own family he did not monopolize it: both the Earl of Arundel and the Earl of March gained substantially from the king's bestowal upon them of wealthy heiresses.
No small group of favourites emerged to monopolize access to the king or royal patronage: even the Hainaulters at court attracted little of the obloquy that surrounded the Savoyards and Henry III's court, and the families which had suffered forfeiture in the political violence between 1322 and 1330 were gradually restored.
The political stability of Edward's reign thus removed, for a time, the threat that political miscalculation and the penalty for treason presented to the integrity of the aristocratic inheritance.
The Statute of Treason, passed in 1352, set out a limited definition of the crime, and implicitly excluded from its scope political offences of the kind that had brought so many families to destruction between 1322 and 1330.
This was not, in all probability, the intent of the statute: it seems to have arisen from concern expressed by the commons in parliament at the tendency of the judges in the 1340s to construe as usurpation of royal power, and thus treason, such offences as riot and highway robbery.
The statute defined treason as an ‘open act’ designed to encompass the death of the king, the Chancellor, the Treasurer or the judges; the violation of the queen, the king's eldest daughter or the wife of the heir to the throne; making war against the king in his kingdom; and bringing false money into the realm.
The narrowness of the definition gave the nobility some security against the construction of political offences as treason.
Edward's achievement in the years between 1341 and 1369 was substantial.
He built up popular support for a war which, in its opening phase, had given rise to a political crisis similar to those that had broken over his father and grandfather.
He succeeded in harnessing national resources for war on a basis of regular national taxation and with a degree of consent and co-operation which had eluded his predecessors.
Above all, he established a rapport between himself and the leading noblemen, his companions in arms, which formed the basis of the longest period of political stability the country had known since the early years of Edward I. These achievements, however, had their price.
Money flowed to pay for the war, but control of taxation lay firmly with the commons in parliament.
The nobility readily supported the king's ‘just quarrel’, but at the same time their military importance was greatly enhanced, the financial relationship  between the king and the nobles moved substantially in favour of the nobles, and both the profits of war and the generosity of the crown enabled them to extend and safeguard their inheritances.
The king and his nobles understood one another, shared common interests and ideals, and enjoyed the glory, prestige and profit that success in the common enterprise in France brought them.
But when victory gave way to stalemate and defeat, when the king's early vigour gave way to senility, and when he was succeeded by a king with a very different personality, the limitations of his achievement became all too apparent.
Military Stalemate and Political Conflict, 1364–89
The Renewal of the War
In June 1364, shortly after the accession of Charles V to the French throne, a spy of the Black Prince wrote to his master reporting a conversation between Charles of Navarre and the Count of Foix, in which the count had claimed intimate knowledge of the new king's intentions.
Charles was determined to string Edward III along with fine words until he had recovered the hostages from England and settled accounts with the Duke of Brittany and with Charles of Navarre.
He then proposed to gather an army to use against Aquitaine, to secure his alliance with Scotland, establish an alliance with Castile, foment rebellion within Aquitaine, recover what had been lost to the English and then attack and destroy England.
This was a formidable programme for a king whose father had been defeated and captured by the English only eight years earlier, and who had agreed to a treaty which conceded a Greater Aquitaine in full sovereignty to Edward III; but in the sixteen years of his reign Charles achieved each one of these objects except the last, and even though he did not attack and destroy England, French and Castilian naval raids along the south coast induced a sense of panic and defensiveness unknown in England since the very earliest months of the war.
Charles V was a ruler of a very different calibre from his father, John II.
He was determined to regain what his father had lost, and raise the French monarchy from its abasement after Poitiers; but his methods were to be diplomacy, subversion, and limited campaigns rather than a great battle in which, as he appreciated, the French were liable to be defeated yet again.
At the beginning of his reign, Charles V had such pressing problems within his kingdom that an early renewal of the war with England was scarcely conceivable.
The most serious immediate threat to Charles came from Charles of Navarre, who held several  castles on the border between Normandy and the Ile-de-France and who was thus in a position to threaten Paris.
In the last months of John II's reign Charles of Navarre had raised a rebellion over the succession to Burgundy, which Navarre claimed by virtue of descent from the great-aunt of the last Capetian duke, Philip of Rouvres.
Charles V, showing that good judgement of men which was to stand him in good stead throughout his reign, chose Bertrand du Guesclin to command his forces, and du Guesclin defeated Navarre at the battle of Cocherel in May 1364.
Navarre lost his castles and was lucky not to lose his life; he was to attempt further intrigues with the English, but his double-dealing made the English wary of him.
In 1370 he negotiated an alliance with Edward III, but the Black Prince would have none of it, and in the following year Navarre made his peace with Charles V in the Treaty of Vernon, though even this did not mark the end of the Anglo-Navarrese relationship.
In 1365 the succession dispute in Brittany was solved in an agreement, the Treaty of Guêrande, under which John de Montfort, son of the John de Montfort who had allied with Edward III in 1341, became duke but agreed to do homage to the King of France, though many Englishmen remained in the ducal household, and some English captains who owed their fortunes to war, such as Robert Knolles, stayed on in the duchy.
Of even greater importance than the settlement of the Breton succession or the defeat of Charles of Navarre was Charles V's skilful and successful handling of the question of the Flemish succession.
The Count of Flanders, Louis de Mâle, had only one child, his daughter Margaret, whose marriage was eagerly sought by both protagonists in the war, for with her went not only the County of Flanders itself with its substantial revenues but also Artois, Nevers, Rethel and the County of Burgundy.
The count himself appears to have been anxious for an English husband for his daughter, and negotiations opened for her marriage to Edward III's fourth son, Edmund Langley.
The effect of such a marriage, had it ever taken place, would have been to create a substantial English-dominated fief on France's northern and eastern borders which would have been a northern equivalent of Aquitaine.
Charles V's policy was to prevent this at all costs, and his candidate for Margaret's hand was his brother Philip, who had been created Duke of Burgundy in 1364.
Margaret's marriage to either candidate required a papal dispensation, for both were within the forbidden degrees, and Charles put pressure on the Pope to refuse a dispensation for Margaret  to marry Edmund Langley.
Charles's diplomacy eventually bore fruit, and on 19 June 1369 Margaret was married to Philip in the Abbey of St Baaf at Ghent.
Although Margaret's father lived on until 1385, English interests in Flanders were now gradually eclipsed.
Bruges was closed to English vessels, and Calais was isolated.
A few months before Margaret's marriage to Philip of Burgundy Charles V had also gained an important victory in the Iberian peninsula.
In 1362 the Black Prince had concluded an alliance with Pedro I of Castile.
Under this alliance the Black Prince agreed to give Pedro help against his enemies, and the enemy whom Pedro had chiefly in mind was his illegitimate half-brother Henry of Trastâmara, who was in exile at the French court and was seeking French support for his designs upon the Castilian crown.
In February 1366 du Guesclin took a force consisting mainly of members of the Free Companies into Castile.
Within a few weeks they had put Pedro to flight and Henry was crowned king.
The Black Prince, however, raised an army in Aquitaine and marched into Castile in support of his deposed ally.
At Nâjera on 3 April 1367 he routed Henry's forces and restored Pedro to the throne.
Pedro, however, was an unreliable ally: he was unpopular with many of the Castilian nobles, and with their connivance Henry of Trastâmara had him murdered in March 1369.
Pedro's heiress was his eldest surviving daughter Constanza, who married John of Gaunt in September 1371.
By this marriage Gaunt acquired a claim to the throne of Castile which, if successfully asserted, might reverse the most important consequence of Pedro's murder, the movement of Castile into the French orbit.
On the other hand, as long as John of Gaunt remained titular head of the rival faction in Castile, the Trastâmara dynasty would look to France to maintain its hold on the crown.
The price the French exacted for their support was the deployment of the Castilian fleet against England.
The Castilian fleet, based in the Cantabrian coast ports, was perhaps the most professional and well-organized navy in western Europe in the 1360s and 1370s, and it was well placed both to attack English shipping on the route between England and Bordeaux and to harry the south coast of England.
Castilian admirals also gave the French advice on re-establishing their own navy in the Clos de Gallées at Rouen, and the combined power of the French and Castilian navies presented a formidable threat to England in the 1370s.
None of these military and diplomatic successes for Charles V was in itself a reason for the renewal of war in 1369, though they  strengthened his hand and were an indispensable preparation for the war which Charles believed would eventually reopen.
The immediate reason for war was, once again, the French king's confiscation of Aquitaine.
The duchy had been elevated to the status of a principality and placed in the Black Prince's hands in 1362.
He established a glittering court at Bordeaux, but his administration was not popular with his Gascon subjects.
Pedro of Castile had promised to pay the wages of the troops the Black Prince took to Spain, but he reneged on his obligation, and the prince had to tax his Gascon subjects heavily to raise the money he needed.
A hearth tax agreed in the autumn of 1367 aroused particularly bitter opposition, and two Gascon lords refused to levy the tax in their domains.
The Black Prince insisted, and the lords, realizing that the renunciation clauses in the Treaty of Brètigny had never been carried out, appealed to the King of France as their suzerain.
Charles kept the appellants waiting, bribing them from time to time to stop them becoming too impatient; meanwhile his younger brother Louis Duke of Anjou concentrated on building up a party in Aquitaine, winning over many of the nobility of Pèrigord, Rouergue, Quercy and the Agenais by a judicious mixture of bribes and promises.
In January 1369 Charles summoned the Black Prince to appear before the parlement of Paris.
The prince said he would do so only at the head of an army of 60,000 men; the parlement pronounced him a contumacious vassal, and sentenced him to loss of the duchy.
The English were poorly prepared for the renewal of the war.
France's diplomatic successes had made little impact on English opinion, and English military leadership was markedly weaker than it had been during the first phase of the war.
Above all, the king himself was a very different man.
Queen Philippa died in August 1369, and the removal of her influence may have hastened a deterioration in his character which became all too apparent in the 1370s.
He became increasingly preoccupied with his mistress, Alice Perrers, and could no longer offer the leadership which had united the nobility behind him in the 1340s and 1350s.
The chroniclers were kind to Edward in these years, aiming much of their criticism at his mistress, at those around him at court, and in 1376–7 at John of Gaunt; but his loss of touch does much to explain the growing political factionalism in England in these years.
The Black Prince might have been expected to step into his father's shoes and fulfil the promise he had shown at Crécy and Poitiers; but he developed an illness in Spain in 1367 which never entirely left him.
His  spirit was as warlike as ever, but he could no longer offer effective military leadership.
Chandos Herald, the Black Prince's biographer, makes the prince reply to Charles V's letter citing him to appear before the parlement of Paris by saying, ‘Lords, by my faith it seems to me that the French think I am dead; but if God gives me comfort, and I can get up from this bed, I will do them a great deal of harm even now, for God knows that they lack a good case, and they will have real cause to complain of me.’
In September 1370 the prince, together with Gaunt, Langley, Pembroke and one of the leading Gascon noblemen, Jean de Grailly, Captal de Buch, took Limoges by storm and ruthlessly sacked it.
Its destruction marred the prince's reputation, and it marked the end of his military career.
According to Froissart he had to be carried to Limoges on a litter; his health deteriorated still further over the winter of 1370, and in January 1371 he returned to England.
He never fully recovered, and died in April 1376.
His eldest son Edward had died in 1370, and his heir was now his younger son Richard, born at Bordeaux in 1366.
After the prince returned to England it must have seemed increasingly unlikely that he would live to inherit the throne, and the prospect of Richard's succession as a child served only to increase uncertainty.
Edward's other sons could not offer the leadership that the king and the Black Prince had once provided.
His second son, Lionel Duke of Clarence, had died in 1368, and his third son, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, spent much time abroad in the early 1370s.
He only came to the forefront as ‘governer and ruler of the kingdom’, to use Walsingham's words,’ after the Good Parliament of 1376.
Gaunt showed consistent loyalty to his father and, after 1377, to his young nephew Richard II, but he lacked the charismatic authority of his father and eldest brother, and he was widely if unfairly blamed for the misfortunes that befell England in the last years of his father's reign.
Edward's two youngest sons played an insignificant part in politics in these years.
Edmund Langley, born in 1342 and created Earl of Cambridge in 1362, was granted part of the Warenne inheritance to maintain his estate, but his marriage to Isabella, youngest daughter of Pedro I of Castile, was used to further Gaunt's diplomatic schemes rather than to provide him with an adequate endowment.
Thomas of Woodstock, Edward's youngest son, was born in 1355 and was thus barely of age when his father died.
He had to wait until the coronation of Richard II before receiving an earldom, and his endowment with part of the Bohun inheritance was scarcely sufficient for one of his  rank.
Edward's treatment of his youngest sons was markedly lacking in generosity, and noted by contemporaries: in a political sermon delivered during the crisis of 1376 Thomas Brinton Bishop of Rochester argued that the king should place his sons above the servants, for it was not right and just that servants should become lords and lords beggars.
Edward's sons-in-law, on the other hand, received generous treatment.
His youngest daughter Margaret married John Hastings Earl of Pembroke in 1359, and although she died two years later, Pembroke remained high in favour at court and, with royal encouragement, embarked on a plan to reunite the inheritance of his ancestor William Marshall, which had twice been partitioned in the previous century and a half.
The king's eldest daughter, Isabella, long remained unmarried but in the early 1360s she met and fell in love with Enguerrand de Coucy, a French nobleman who came to England in 1360 as a hostage for the payment of John II's ransom.
Coucy soon rose high in favour at court: in 1363 Edward granted him lands in north Lancashire, Cumberland and Westmorland to which he had some claim by inheritance; two years later he married Isabella, and in 1366 the king created him Earl of Bedford with an endowment of 1,000 marks a year.
Lands to the value of 300 marks were found for him in England, but half the endowment was found by persuading Guy de Blois, another French hostage, to surrender to Edward the County of Soissons, worth 500 marks a year, which Edward then granted to the new Earl of Bedford.
Bedford's position as a landowner in both countries became difficult to sustain after the renewal of the war in 1369, and his allegiance to England rested essentially on his friendship with the king.
After Edward III's death he resigned his allegiance and his title, and returned to France, leaving his wife in England.
After she died in 1379 some of the Bedford inheritance found its way to his son-in-law Robert de Vere, Richard II's arch-favourite.
Bedford was the only new earl created by Edward III after his family settlement in 1362, and his patronage of the nobility was markedly less generous than it had been in the first two decades of his reign.
His companions in arms, the nobles who had shared the glory and profits of victory in France in the 1340s and 1350s, were a vanishing generation by the 1370s.
William Bohun Earl of Northampton died in 1360; Henry of Grosmont Duke of Lancaster in 1361; the Earls of Warwick and Suffolk in 1369; the Earl of Hereford in 1373; and the Earl of Arundel in 1376.
The significance of the weakening of the royal  family and the ranks of the nobility through death and illness in the 1360s, and especially in 1368 and 1369, those two years when English fortunes seemed suddenly to be reversed, should not be underestimated.
In the years after 1369 the king more and more sought the company of his privata familia , a small group of his personal followers, some of whom were suspected, perhaps rightly, of using their position to enrich themselves.
The most important members of this courtier group were the king's mistress Alice Perrers, William Latimer and John Lord Neville.
Alice Perrers's intimacy with the king began in the 1360s, and she received lavish gifts of jewellery and clothes, together with enough property to establish her as a substantial landowner in her own right.
She also exercised much informal influence at court and procured favours for her husband William of Windsor, though when she was accused of corruption in 1376 the king declared that he did not even know she was married, let alone that Windsor was her husband.
William Latimer, who became Chamberlain in 1371, was a figure of rather more political consequence and seems to have been regarded as the leader of the group around the king.
He had enjoyed a distinguished military career: he fought with the Black Prince at Crécy when he was only sixteen, and served in Brittany between 1360 and 1367.
He was appointed Keeper of Bécherel in 1368 and of Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte in 1370.
He was a wealthy man, and although some of his wealth may have come from the profits of war, he benefited substantially from Edward's patronage.
His son-in-law, John Lord Neville, became Steward of the Household in 1371, and he too enjoyed the profits of royal patronage, though he was a man of substantial inherited wealth from his estates in Durham and Yorkshire.
Both Latimer and Neville were soldiers and diplomats.
They played a leading part in the organization of the war after 1369; they both had considerable experience of Breton affairs, and their influence at court may be one reason for the important position occupied by Brittany in English strategy from 1372 to 1375.
Latimer and Neville were probably the dominant figures at court between 1369 and 1376, and their influence over the king may well have been greater than that of John of Gaunt and his brothers.
Closely associated with Latimer and Neville was a small group of chamber knights, who also benefited substantially from Edward's patronage, and a London merchant, Richard Lyons, who became a member of the king's council, an unusual distinction for one of his status.
He lent considerable sums to the crown, perhaps as much as £50,000 between  1373 and 1376.
This group's unsuccessful conduct of the war incurred them much unpopularity, and discontent at their domination of the king, together with rumours of corruption, self-seeking and extortion, underlay the commons' attack upon them in the Good Parliament of 1376.
When the war reopened in 1369 Charles V was in a position of some strength.
The need to raise money for John II's ransom had led to the levying of a salt tax and taxes on merchandise throughout the kingdom, and by 1367 these taxes had come to acquire a look of permanence.
Charles was thus able to mobilize French resources for war more effectively than his predecessors, and to pay his troops more regularly.
He could also count on the co-operation of his brothers, Louis Duke of Anjou and Philip Duke of Burgundy, and in Bertrand du Guesclin he had perhaps the ablest commander on either side in this phase of the war.
The opening campaigns of the war went well for the French.
In Aquitaine many towns in the Lot and Garonne valleys went over to them, and by the autumn of 1370 most of the eastern part of the duchy was in French hands.
The English response was ineffective: the campaigns of the 1340s and 1350s had been essentially plundering raids, launched into enemy territory from secure bases; but after 1369 England was thrown on to the defensive in Aquitaine, and she had little idea how to fight a defensive war.
Her response was to revive the tactics of earlier campaigns with chevauchées which might lead to the capture of strongpoints in northern France and put pressure on Paris itself.
In 1369, for instance, John of Gaunt took an army from Calais to Harfleur, and devastated the Pays de Caux, while in the following year Sir Robert Knolles led an army from Calais which did much damage in the Ile-de-France; but Charles V refused to give battle and neither chevauchée achieved anything.
The tactics adopted by both sides produced stalemate.
Charles's avoidance of battle denied the English their chance of victory, but he could not succeed in driving the English out of their strongholds around Calais and Bordeaux which they had the will and the resources to defend.
And Charles's tactics were damaging to his own subjects: the peasant who declared that he dare not get out of bed in the morning for fear of the English spoke for many of his compatriots, and the unchallenged presence of English armies on French soil not only caused substantial physical hardship to the population but also lowered Charles's prestige.
The Good Parliament
The first signs of political discontent in England over the conduct of the war surfaced in the parliament of February 1371, when the commons refused to grant a subsidy until the king's clerical ministers of state had been replaced by laymen who, unlike their clerical counterparts, would be liable to answer for their misdeeds in the royal courts.
The king gave way; William of Wykeham Bishop of Winchester was removed from the office of Chancellor and Thomas Brantingham Bishop of Exeter was removed from the Exchequer.
The commons then agreed to a subsidy of £50,000 which was to be raised by the novel expedient of imposing a levy on each parish in England.
Unfortunately, however, the government grossly overestimated the number of parishes in the country, and the tax brought in much less than had been expected.
The attack upon the clerical ministers in the parliament of 1371 has sometimes been compared with the similar attack in 1340–1.
Both crises arose from discontent over the financing of the war, but it is perhaps a measure of the king's failing powers that whereas in 1340–1 the lead in attacking his ministers had been taken by the king himself, the initiative now rested with a group of lay nobles, chief amongst whom, if some of the chroniclers are to be believed, was the young Earl of Pembroke.
Pembroke was well placed to speak for those who wanted a more vigorous and successful war: he had a special place in the king's affections, and he had acquitted himself well in Aquitaine.
In April 1372 he was appointed Lieutenant in Aquitaine and assembled a fleet to take money and reinforcements to the garrisons there, which were hard pressed by the French.
But in June Pembroke's fleet was defeated by the Castilian navy off La Rochelle and Pembroke himself was captured.
The defeat deprived the garrisons in Aquitaine of the reinforcements they needed, and less than a month after the destruction of Pembroke's fleet du Guesclin entered Poitiers.
By the autumn Poitou, Angoumois and Saintonge had fallen to the French.
Pembroke himself spent three years -in captivity, and although he was ransomed in 1375 he died soon afterwards of an illness worsened by the rigours of his imprisonment.
His closeness to the king and his enthusiasm for the war would have ensured him a place as a leader of the younger generation of nobles, and his death was yet another misfortune for the king.
After the defeat off La Rochelle, the English government seems to have lost interest in the defence of Aquitaine.
For the next three years  little more than £1,000 was sent to Bordeaux for the defence of the duchy, and Edward concentrated his attention on Brittany.
In July 1372 Duke John IV of Brittany renewed his alliance with England.
He had been under pressure from Edward III to do so for some time, but he seems also to have feared that Charles V's forces, which were advancing into the duchy, might revive the rivalries of the civil war period.
Edward undertook to place a force of 600 men at the duke's disposal and to grant him the earldom of Richmond, to which his family had an ancient claim and which John of Gaunt relinquished for the purpose.
Duke John for his part promised military support to Edward if he came to France.
An English army under John Lord Neville landed in Brittany in October 1372, but its arrival sparked off a reaction against the duke by many of his subjects.
Edward promised further help, and a force of almost 5,000 men under the Earl of Salisbury was mustered in March 1373; but du Guesclin invaded the duchy and subjected much of it to a French military occupation.
At the end of April Duke John, left with only a handful of fortresses, fled to England.
The collapse of Duke John's position made an English response inevitable.
A force was assembled under John of Gaunt which was to sail for Brittany in May, but its departure was held up until July, and when it eventually set out it made for Calais instead of Brittany.
From Calais Gaunt took his force on a long march southwards, pillaging some of the richest country in France.
His army eventually arrived in Bordeaux, but it achieved little, and Gaunt lost almost half his men as they marched over the Massif Central in winter.
Froissart remarked that ‘the greatest and the grandest among them sometimes went for six days without tasting bread’, and Walsingham observed that ‘a great part of his army perished of hunger and disease and almost all their horses died’.
The author of the Anonimalle Chronicle, however, who evidently had some admiration for Gaunt's achievement, believed that the army only began to suffer in this way when it wintered in Gascony.
If the purpose of the march was to force the French to battle it failed; Charles's council debated whether to go on the offensive against Gaunt's army, but in the event their belief in the military superiority of the English was still sufficiently strong to inhibit them from offering an open challenge, and they agreed to pursue the usual defensive tactics.
Some French troops had to be withdrawn from Brittany to pursue and harry Gaunt's forces, but the diversion of the expedition from its original destination served to  embitter relations between Duke John and Gaunt, which were in any case strained after a quarrel between them over the wages due to their troops, and the English garrisons at Brest, Bécherel (a fortress some twenty miles south of St Malo), and Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte were still hard pressed by du Guesclin's forces.
Preparations for another expedition to Brittany were under discussion in May 1374, and in August Duke John, together with Edmund Langley Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of March and Edward Despenser agreed to take 4,000 men to the duchy for a year.
The leaders were to receive wages for their men for six months, and for the rest of the year they were to pay the troops out of the ransoms they expected to take.
But the expedition was held up all through the winter, and Bêcherel fell to the French on 1 November.
Not until April 1375 did the army land in Brittany.
At the same time, the English government responded favourably to peace overtures from Pope Gregory XI, who was anxious on the one hand to unite the rulers of western Christendom in a crusade, and on the other to tax the western churches so as to fund both this endeavour and his political and diplomatic schemes in Italy.
The papal mediator, the Archbishop of Ravenna, accordingly proposed a meeting between English and French negotiators at Bruges in March 1375.
In effect, the English government was pursuing two policies at once.
It may be that the Breton expedition was intended to keep up pressure on the French to make the sort of concessions the English would feel able to accept, but it is equally possible that the confused direction of English policy reflected conflicting influences at court.
Latimer and Neville had substantial experience of campaigning in Brittany, and Latimer had some personal interests there to protect.
Gaunt, on the other hand, lent his weight to the policy of negotiating a settlement with France, perhaps in the hope that a peace or lengthy truce would reduce the financial pressure which was politically damaging to the crown.
Both policies went ahead successfully.
Duke John and the Earl of Cambridge laid siege to Quimperlê, probably on 23 June, and after a heavy English assault the garrison agreed that if they were not relieved within a week they would surrender.
Meanwhile at Bruges a truce for one year was agreed on 26 May.
Under the terms of the truce and the modifications agreed to it on 27 June, the siege of Quimperlé would be lifted, Duke John would withdraw his army from Brittany, Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte would be handed over to papal mediators who would deliver it to the King of France when the truce expired, and the  English would receive 40,000 francs in compensation.
The truce also provided for the continuation of discussions about a permanent peace between the two realms.
To many in England the truce of Bruges seemed literally a sell-out: the French forced the garrison at Saint-Sauveur to hand the fortress over to them directly in return for 53,000 francs.
Some of this money was pocketed by the English captain there, Thomas Catterton, who was regarded as an accomplice to the deal and was subsequently accused of treason.
Meanwhile Cambridge and March were ordered to raise the siege of Quimperlè and return home at once.
They had engaged soldiers for a year, but had been deprived by the truce of most of the ransoms which were to pay the troops' wages for the second half of the year.
The response in England to the agreement reached at Bruges was hostile.
Walsingham wrote that the English broke off the siege of Quimperlê and returned home sadly and slowly, and rumours of treachery and corruption soon began to circulate.
Anger at the court's conduct of the war burst into the open at the meeting of parliament in April 1376.
Ever since its own time this parliament has been known as the ‘Good Parliament’; it has been thoroughly analysed by modern historians, and the Anonimalle Chronicle of St Mary's Abbey, York, preserves an account of the deliberations amongst the commons which surpasses in its detail any other surviving account of the debates in a fourteenth-century parliament.
Such unique detail has its dangers, however, and it may be that historians have tended to overemphasize the independence and initiative of the commons.
The records of the parliament say very little about the nobility, yet it is probable that without their support the commons would have achieved few if any of their more substantial demands.
The parliament opened on 28 April with the usual request for a subsidy.
Two days later, according to the Anonimalle Chronicle, the commons assembled in the Chapter House of Westminster Abbey, and a knight from the south country opened the debate on the subsidy with an attack on the government for misspending earlier subsidies.
He suggested that the king should finance the war out of his own resources, and he hinted at corruption at court.
Another knight, perhaps emboldened by his companion's hints, argued that the removal of the wool staple from Calais, where it had helped to pay part of the cost of defending the town, had been for the private profit of Lord Latimer, Richard Lyons and others.
But a third knight made the significant point that the commons were not likely to progress far  without the agreement of the lords, and suggested that they should ask the king to appoint a group of prelates and magnates to help them in their deliberations.
All agreed to this, and then another knight, Sir Peter de la Mare, who was the Earl of March's steward, summed up the debate so skilfully that he was chosen by the commons to speak on their behalf before the lords.
This was the first recorded occasion on which one member of the commons was chosen to act as a spokesman for them all.
The Anonimalle Chronicle's account of de la Mare's selection does not give the impression that it was usual to choose a speaker, though it is possible that the small groups which had appeared before the lords on behalf of the commons in earlier parliaments had chosen one of their number to speak on their behalf.
De la Mare's connections probably did as much as his eloquence to ensure his choice as speaker.
The Earl of March had substantial grievances of his own against the court, and if the complaints of the commons and the hostility of some of the nobility were to be effectively co-ordinated, de la Mare's influence would be crucial.
De la Mare asked for the Earl of March to be appointed to the advisory group, together with the Earls of Warwick, Stafford and Suffolk.
Henry Percy, Guy Brian, Henry Scrope and Richard Stafford represented the barons and bannerets, while the Bishops of London, Norwich, Carlisle and St Davids were appointed from amongst the prelates.
This committee held a series of meetings with the commons, and the commons, led by de la Mare, appeared before the lords on a number of occasions, with John of Gaunt presiding in place of the king who was too ill to attend.
De la Mare made a series of charges against Latimer, Neville, Alice Perrers and Richard Lyons.
He also declared that the commons would not proceed with the business of parliament until the king had removed Latimer, Neville and Alice Perrers from court and agreed that a new council consisting of three bishops, three earls and three barons should be named in parliament.
The lords agreed to this proposal immediately, and established a new council which consisted of the Archbishop of Canterbury, William of Wykeham Bishop of Winchester, and eight of those who had been appointed to the advisory committee, including March, Arundel and Stafford.
The commons then proceeded with their charges against Latimer and Lyons.
The principal charges against Latimer were that he had made improper profits out of the campaign in Brittany and that he was responsible for the loss of Bécherel and Saint-Sauveur.
Bécherel had  been under the command of one of his retainers, and another had been Constable of Saint-Sauveur, though in all probability he had not been involved in its surrender.
This charge against Latimer was almost certainly baseless, though it is more difficult to assess whether he had made undue profits for himself out of the campaign in Brittany.
Lyons was charged on his own with two relatively minor financial offences, but much more important were the accusations against Latimer and Lyons jointly.
The commons alleged that they had lent the king 20,000 marks at 33 per cent interest, that they had sold licences to export wool to ports other than Calais, and had imposed a charge of 11 s per sack for each licence granted.
It is doubtful whether these last two charges could properly be regarded as offences, for such licences had frequently been sold in the past, and the surviving evidence does not provide conclusive proof one way or the other about the usurious nature of Latimer's and Lyons's financial dealings.
The commons also brought charges of corruption and extortion against Neville and a number of other courtiers and merchants, while Alice Perrers was accused of misappropriating the king's goods and of bribery; but it is quite clear that Latimer and Lyons were the principal objects of the commons' hostility.
The commons acted as a body in putting the charges against Latimer, Lyons and their associates, and they were tried before the lords in parliament.
This process, which became known as impeachment, seems to have arisen by accident when de la Mare declared that he and his colleagues would maintain their charges in common.
The lords had acted as a jury in state trials earlier in the century, and communal accusations outside parliament were not unknown, but there appears to be no precedent for the hearing of communal accusations in parliament before a jury of lords: this was the essential novelty in 1376.
The precedent thus set by the commons became of great significance in later political crises, for it gave the commons a means of dealing with unpopular royal officials and ministers, with the sanction of nonco-operation in the business of parliament if their charges were not heard.
Latimer pleaded for time to prepare a defence to the charges against him, but William of Wykeham insisted that he should answer them immediately.
He was eventually placed in the custody of the Earl Marshal, the Earl of March, while Lyons was sentenced to imprisonment and all his goods were forfeited.
Alice Perrers was removed from the royal household, and Neville was dismissed from the king's council, though he was not imprisoned.
The initiative in pressing the charges against the courtiers, and in  making political demands on the crown, came from the commons, with de la Mare acting as their spokesman.
Yet the successful pressing home of their attack owed much to the advice of the committee of lords established at the beginning of the parliament, and the council of nine nominated in parliament on 24 May.
The grievances which the commons presented were not just their own but were shared by some amongst the magnates, and it is doubtful whether the commons' will could have prevailed without this support from amongst the ranks of the nobility.
Within the ranks of the nobility, the king's youngest sons in particular benefited from the fall of the courtiers: Edmund Langley was appointed Constable of Dover Castle, an office previously held by Latimer, while Woodstock was granted the office of Constable of England, which was hereditary in the Bohun family but had been delegated when necessary to other lords after the death of the last Earl of Hereford, Woodstock's father-in-law.
Both men also received annuities of 1,000 marks, which went some considerable way towards endowing them at a level appropriate to their rank.
But the victories of the court's opponents did not endure for long.
John of Gaunt, who had represented the king throughout the parliament, regarded its proceedings as an unacceptable interference with the royal prerogative.
According to Walsingham, whose account of the parliament is admittedly full of malice and prejudice, Gaunt was amazed at the commons' attitude: ‘Do they think, he said, that they are kings and princes in this land?
Do they not know how powerful I am?’
The death of the Black Prince and the illness of the king meant that Gaunt was in effect ruler of England in Edward's last year, and it was his intention to reverse the acts of the Good Parliament and punish those who had instigated them.
His fiercest wrath was reserved for William of Wykeham, because of the part he had played in the impeachment of Latimer, and for Peter de la Mare.
Wykeham was arrested, deprived of his temporalities, and accused of corruption when he was Keeper of the privy Seal and Chancellor before 1371, while de la Mare was arrested and imprisoned in Nottingham Castle.
The council of nine ceased to be active, Latimer and Lyons were released from imprisonment and Alice Perrers was reinstated at court.
The Earl of March resigned the office of Earl Marshal, which was conferred upon Henry Percy of Alnwick.
The royalist reaction was complete, and those who had opposed the court were duly punished.
Gaunt had used the strength of his position as the representative of  the king to break up the opposition and to reassert the authority of the crown.
It would be quite wrong to accept Thomas Walsingham's opinion that Gaunt had designs on the crown himself.
Throughout his career, Gaunt was conspicuous for his loyalty to the king, and even when Richard II spurned that loyalty for a time, Gaunt did not associate himself with opposition to the court.
Indeed, Wycliffe maintained that Gaunt regarded political instability as one of the greatest evils that could befall a state; and Gaunt's political career suggests that he believed that political stability was best ensured by the maintenance of the prerogatives of the monarchy.
The Good Parliament had refused to grant a subsidy, and accordingly another parliament was summoned for January 1377.
Despite Gaunt's reversal of many of the acts of the Good Parliament this parliament proved remarkably compliant.
It quashed the sentences imposed on those convicted in the Good Parliament, and, at the suggestion of the commons, agreed to a poll tax of 4d on every lay person over fourteen years of age.
Parliament's acquiescence in the reversal of the acts of its predecessor has led to suggestions that Gaunt interfered with the elections to the commons.
A smaller than usual proportion of members who had sat in the Good Parliament were re-elected to this parliament, but it is hard to find evidence that the government tried to ensure the election of their own supporters.
Indeed, although the commons appointed as Speaker Sir Thomas Hungerford, who was Gaunt's Steward of South Parts, they were not quite as docile as has sometimes been supposed.
They demanded the release of de la Mare and submitted a petition protesting against the annulment of statutes except by parliament.
They seem, however, to have had little support amongst the lords, and the opposition which undoubtedly existed to Gaunt's reversal of the acts of the Good Parliament lacked leadership and co-ordination.
The ease and speed with which the acts of the Good Parliament were set aside revealed the strength of the court in the face of opposition from the commons and a group of discontented nobles.
But although Gaunt's defence of the royal prerogative, and particularly the royal right to choose ministers freely, was vigorous and effective, he drew upon himself much unpopularity.
Thomas Walsingham, who stood in the St Albans tradition of writing history from the baronial point of view, wrote a ferociously hostile attack on him which may well reflect popular feeling.
Gaunt aroused the opposition of the Church by his attack upon William of Wykeham  and his refusal to include Wykeham in the general pardon offered in honour of the king's golden jubilee.
This so incensed William Courtenay, the Bishop of London, that he summoned John Wycliffe, whom Gaunt had used to stir up public opinion against Wykeham, to St Paul's to answer for his erroneous teachings.
Gaunt was determined to defend Wycliffe, and he ordered the new Marshal, Henry Percy, to arrest anyone who opposed his heterodox protégé.
This was taken by the Londoners as a threat to extend the Marshal's jurisdiction to the City itself, and intensified rumours that Gaunt was intent upon curtailing the City's liberties and replacing the Lord Mayor with a captain appointed by the crown.
The mob rose and attacked Gaunt's palace of the Savoy, hanging his coat of arms upside down as the sign of a traitor.
Rumours that Gaunt had designs on the crown were flying about, and it was alleged that he was a changeling, a butcher's son, substituted for the queen's own son who had been smothered at birth.