

MONET AND THE MODERNS
Bernard Denvir comments
At the end of the last century when Impressionism was still a dirty word in England, and anyone who bought a Monet was considered as being more than half-way on the road to Bedlam, the Americans were taking to him with something of the enthusiasm which they were then displaying for the newly discovered chewing-gum.
No other of the Impressionists, with the possible exception of Degas, was so popular, and the pathway to his studio was worn out with transatlantic visitors, trying to circumvent his dealer and secure a bargain by buying directly from the artist himself.
They were fortunately innocent of the fact that Monet charged them some 60 per cent more than he charged his fellow countrymen.
Durand-Ruel, the dealer, only added 30 per cent.
It was not only collectors who flocked to the tiny village of Giverny, students and more mature painters sis in ever increasing number, swamping the homes of those villagers who provided lodgings, and so increasing the revenue of the local inn that it started calling itself the ‘Hôtel’ Baudy.
Of these the most important was Theodore Robinson, who did become a close friend of the painter, and who produced some paintings of the haystacks on which Monet was working at the time, which are almost indistinguishable from those of the master.
Others include Willard Metcalf, Theodore Butler, Carroll Beckwith, Lila Cabbot Perry and less eminent idolators, who eventually were to irritate Monet beyond the point of endurance.
their influence was to stay however.
Giverny has become a monument to America's infatuation with Monet — an infatuation which has been at least partly responsible for the exorbitant prices until recently given for his paintings, and one which is now shared with the Japanese Monet had lived there since 1884, first renting a farm house with two and a half acres, then buying it, gradually making additions such as a studio, and extending the attached land to accommodate his famous Japanese garden and lake.
Later he built another studio, a garage (he was inordinately fond of his car) and a dark room for photography.
On his death Money left the place to his son Michel, who did not live there, but it was looked after by his step-daughter Blanche until her death in 1940.
The whole complex then fell into disrepair.
In 1977, however, it was taken over by the institut, and when their funds were depleted a mainly American foundation came to the rescue.
It included Readers' digest , and a host of other benefactors, who have made it possible to restore the house and gardens to their pristine splendour.
More recently an American Museum has been opened in Giverny in tribute to Monet's American disciples.
All this is admirable, but what is really remarkable is that Monet's influence in America has gone far beyond creating a not very long-lived school of American Impressionists.
One of the recent visitors to Giverny was Roy Lichtenstein, who in 1969 had used Monet's Rouen and Haystack series as the basis for a series of lithographs. then in 1991 he used the water-lilies theme of the Nymphéas for a series of works employing a new technique, the decorative machine turnings made by abrading metal in shining whirls, which, while looking like water have the reflectiveness of stainless steel.
Six of these were shown in November at the Mayor Gallery in Cork Street.
But the impact of Monet on the American pictorial imagination goes beyond this; indeed it could be said that the whole Abstract Expressionist movement was deeply influenced by him.
The works of painters such as Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko show the same ability to leap the boundaries between the space of the painting and that which the audience occupies, so clearly seen in the Nymphéas paintings in the marmottan Museum.
Kandinsky when first he saw Money's later paintings noted, ‘they gave to painting a fantastic strength and brilliance.
But unconsciously, the object, as an indispensable element of a painting was also discredited.’
it is this ‘discreditation’ of the object which has dominated art for the last half century — it all goes back to Monet!
Readers' FORUM
Readers whose letters are published will receive one of our attractive The Artist binders.
Please send your correspondence to 
Joyful inspiration
As a relative newcomer to The Artist I am revelling in many of your articles.
Having spent some of my limited time pouring over heavy (in weight)‘how to paint’ library books, and investing in impulse art book buys, I find articles by I am Simpson, Robin Stemp, Jenny Webb and many others a simple joy for a struggling amateur.
Thank you so much.
A true serendipity!
I have just visited the Hilliard Society exhibition where I found your magazine.
I have so enjoyed the magazine, and am very impressed by the diversity of topics covered and the high quality of the reproductions.
I have read from cover to cover with great interest, and now hasten to enclose my subscription.
What a delightful find — a true serendipity!
One of the first
It was with interest that I read Audrey Haagensen's letter in the September issue of The Artist , saying she was the owner of a 1938 edition of your magazine.
This prompted me to look through my own collection, where I discovered a copy dated August 1931, priced 2/
Through being a regular reader of The Artist I have achieved considerable success as an artist, selling most of my work through clubs and local exhibitions.
When I retired four years ago, I decided I would like to help and encourage other people to paint, and hopefully get as much pleasure form the hobby as I do, and since that time I have been able to meet up with groups of friends and pass on to them the knowledge I have gained through the pages of your magazine.
Long may it continue to inspire all fellow artists.
A binder for old copies?
After reading the letter from Audrey Haagensen in the September issue I felt I just had to write to you.
Recently my grandmother sadly passed away leaving me her whole collection of The Artist magazines.
They fill several large cupboards around the house.
The earliest copy I have found is August 1935, price 2/.
Every single volume is in order and neatly tied with string, and most are in mint condition.
She collected right up to 1985, when I took over buying them.
I'm ashamed to say my Artists can be found anywhere around the house, not at all in order.
I have started buying the binders to get them organised, the old Artists were much larger and don't fit into the binders.
Does anyone have any bright ideas (and cheap) how to bind these old copies?
A unique teacher
I was delighted to read in my copy of The Artist which arrived today, of Mr Sherrington Legg's connection with Hayward Veal (Readers' Forum).
As a fellow Australian I first became aware of him and his unique style of teaching and painting through The Artist of March, April and May 1968.
Later I was lucky enough to obtain a copy of his Impressionist Painting in Oils , a, small handbook published by The Artists' Publishing Co.
I still occasional refer to these especially when I need a ‘refresher’ so well expressed by Veal in his unique manner.
Artists for animal welfare
I am a professional artist and also an officer of the RSPCA and a very active member of wildlife conservation organisations.
I am beginning to organise artistic events for all kinds to raise funds for the RSPCA and to promote animal welfare and wildlife conservation issues.
I would very much like to make contact with other artists concerned about animal welfare and the environment who would like to be involved in thematic exhibitions, performances or other types of artistic projects.
If anyone is interested could they please contact me at 
Pencil lengtheners
Further to the letters in Readers Forum (April and August 1992 editions) regarding pencil holders I am writing to let other readers know that these are available from Lyra (UK) Ltd.   at the cost of £1.80 each plus VAT.
They are known as pencil lengtheners and are made in Germany.
Although they tend to fit one pencil size only, there are rather more expensive holders available for use with wide pencils and industrial chalks which may be of some help to artists.
Whitechapel Open
It was with considerable interest that I turned to Bernard Denvir's ‘In View’ report on ‘Art and the East End’.
Having recently spent a day at the Whitechapel Open I would strongly urge that some consideration for selection should be introduced.
I feel sure that this is a marvellous concept and should introduce people to a number of talented new artists.
However, the day I attended was hugely disappointing for all members of my party and such an experience will not encourage future attendance.
If anyone is thinking of booking a place on one of these tours they would be strongly advised to study the list of studios beforehand and to ensure there is at least one artist they know of that is of interest.
The tour was badly administrated with far too much time allocated at certain studios.
The artists we met were on the whole very unmotivated and their lack of enthusiasm (not to mention talent) rubbed off on us.
I would, however, like to offer one word of encouragement deviating from our tour we visited a nearby studio and came across the artist Chris Stevens, whose vision was so extraordinary and talented that we were overwhelmed with excitement.
As a graduate in art history I have been working in the commercial fine art market for several years and frankly I am tired of hearing how galleries make soul destroying demands on artists to become more commercial.
Art dealers are looking for quality work and if the dispirited pastiches I came across in the East End are representative of the best on offer this is clearly going to be an increasingly difficult task.
Kyffin Williams
‘in conversation’
‘I like to lay in the paint with a knife and draw into the wet paint with a brush, especially when working on a portrait,’ Kyffin Williams told Julian Halsby in this special interview for The Artist
I first met Kyffin Williams in 1961 when I went to Highgate School.
His energy, his sense of humour and his melodious voice made a deep impression.
Over 30 years later, and in his 75th year Kyffin has changed remarkably little.
He still works with great enthusiasm, his voice is still used to brilliant effect as he tells one of his marvellous stories, and his caustic wit cuts through the humbug and pretence of much of the art world.
He claims that he has always been an ‘outsider’, ‘unique’ is perhaps a better description.
Kyffin Williams never intended to be a painter, he planned to go into the army but was rejected on medical grounds.
In 1941 he enrolled at the Slade, which had been evacuated to Oxford.
‘Artistically I was certainly the weakest student.
I had hardly even drawn before; my attempts were inept, but I fumbled on until I had at least mastered the proportions of the human body’.
Farmers on Fluder Fach, oil on canvas 36×48″. (91.5×122 cm).
collection National Museum of Wales
Williams doubts whether he was really influenced by his teachers or contemporaries at the Slade.
‘My main influence is always make my subject matter — the landscape and its people.’
But he has been influenced by Old Masters.
‘At first I thought art was simply a matter of reproducing what I saw; but one day I saw a reproduction of Piero della Francesca's Pietà, and I suddenly realised that there was a huge spiritual element in painting.
It moved me so much that I started to weep, and to this day I'm often physically moved by great paintings.’
Williams made friends at the Slade including the late Allan Gwynne-Jones RA and Bernard Dunstan, who had left the Slade but was still working in Oxford, and who, with his wife Diana Armfield, has remained a close friend.
‘When I went to the Slade my sole intention was to become art master at some comfortable school.
I was lucky to get a job at Highgate, and after a few years was able tor educe my teaching to three days a week.
By the late 1940s I was beginning to paint landscapes of Wales.
Secure in my Highgate post unassociated with any art school.
I was able to survey the London art scene with detachment.
What I saw I didn't like.
I developed in my own way, free from the pressures of fashion.
I have always been an outsider; my epilepsy has prevented me  from taking part in many normal pursuits such as drinking or dancing, and this has encouraged me to be an individualist in art.
Van Gogh was also an epileptic and I think I can understand his passion and sense of isolation.’
Farms, Llangwyfan. oil on canvas, 24×30″ (61×76.2 cm).
Waterfall, Ink and wash.
24×11″ (61×28 cm).
The Estuary, Laugharne, oil on canvas, 20×30″ (51×76.2 cm).
Collection: Richard C Bing
Working methods
We turned to working methods.
‘For 30 years I always painted on the spot, even in deep snow.
More recently I have worked in the studio from drawings and watercolours made on the spot.
I have no objection to photographs, although I never use them, as long as they are used intelligently.
The danger is that they stop you looking.
I often draw in pencil, adding watercolour washes, but I also like to use the wrong end of a brush sharpened to a wedge.
I always use Indian black ink mixed half-in-half with sepia or peat brown to add warmth.
I never use stretched paper as these are working sketches.
‘I am blessed with great energy.
I have always got up early and even now in my 75th year I can hunt, climb mountains and cover an 8 ‘ft ‘by 4 ‘ft ‘canvas in one day.
I believe that artists can be part of society, and I am deeply involved in the Anglesey community.
How many artists have been Deputy Lieutenant of Gwynedd?
I like to know the farmers and their landscape — it's the only way I can paint Wales.’
Williams uses a restricted palette of Winsor & Newton paints, flake white No. 2, ivory black, lemon yellow, aureolin yellow, yellow ochre, raw and burnt umber, cadmium red for portraits and a cobalt blue from Daler-Rowney.
He always mixes his own greens, ‘I have absolutely no colour sense.
A good colourist is like a juggler with ten balls in the air at once and able to catch them all.
I can handle at most five colours and I recognise that I am no colourist.’
The palette knife is Williams's preferred instrument.
‘I don't know why I started using a palette knife; maybe because I wanted to mould the paint to show the other side of the mountain.
I work in a very intuitive way rather than in a calculated manner.
I like to lay in the paint with a knife and draw into the wet paint with a brush, especially when working on a portrait.
there is a rule in most art schools ‘Thou shalt not use the palette knife’, but it's a rule the public doesn't know.
Anyway I like breaking rules’.
Subject matter
Portraiture has played an important part in Williams's work and in 1993 an exhibition of his portraits is to be held in Anglesey.
‘As far as I'm  concerned, likeness is essential.
I have no interest in the psychological interpretation of my sitters, I want to convey their physical appearance.
As in my landscapes, I work quickly and the portrait has to be completed in one sitting.
It works or it doesn't.
In the past I have done many portraits on commission — the last was Lord Flowers of Imperial College, London — but nowadays I will not accept commissions.
I paint the people that interest me — local farmers, schoolchildren, young girls and blind people.
For years I couldn't catch the bloom on a child or young girl's cheeks, but more recently I managed to capture this with one stroke of the knife.
Hugh Rowlands, oil on canvas.
30×30″ (76.2×76.2 cm).
Collection: Miss Elizabeth Lindsay, London
Sunset Llangwylan, oil on canvas, 24×24″ (61×61 cm)
‘My portraits are simple and direct; no complicated backgrounds.
I am always amazed that the basic rules of portraiture are rarely taught.
For example, the placing of the head: a dynamic, powerful man should be made to fill the canvas, whereas children's heads are better placed low on the canvas.
Similarly, a nervous person should be placed low down, and to one side.
The glance is also vital.
Nervousness can be expressed by the sitter glancing sideways or even backwards, whereas a more confident sitter will look directly towards you.’
Williams is known above all for his North Wales landscapes, but he has painted in France, Greece, Holland, Austria, Scotland and Ireland.
He also likes working in Venice.
‘An ancestor, Thomas Williams the copper millionaire, bought a house in Venice in the late 18th century, and I always enjoy working there.
I also enjoyed my stay in Patagonia.
However, it is Wales that I can paint with the greatest freedom.
Here I have found the mod that touches the seam of melancholy that is within most Welshmen, a melancholy that derives from the dark hills, the heavy clouds and the enveloping sea mists.
I paint directly using simple compositions, which tend to be linear, even flat, rather than based on any sophisticated concept of leading the viewer's eye into the picture.
I am topographically accurate, I know the area so well that I simply couldn't allow myself to make topographical mistakes.’
Kyffin Williams is known for his strongly held views on the current state of much art.
‘The public is treated with contempt by the art establishment, and there is a huge gap between what the public likes and wants and what is officially accepted as art.
The critics never review my work, but this concerns me little as they have no power and little influence.
My family have lived in Anglesey for 500 years, mostly as parsons, and I am deeply tied up with the people and landscape.
From this I derive a great sense of security, and I can stand on my own without worrying about the critics or the art establishment.
The funny thing is that I never expected to be an artist.
All I really wanted was to teach quietly in a sleepy public school, to marry a nice quiet girl and to sleep my way through life…
It has all turned out so differently.’
ASPECTS OF LANDSCAPE
John Newberry on water and reflections in watercolour
In this new series each month a different artist will explain how they approach a particular aspect of landscape painting, and will offer advice on some of the most common problems encountered when tackling this subject matter
Forty-five minutes after agreeing to write this I was down on the bridge at Abingdon watching the sun set across the Thames.
I finished painting when it was too dark to see and later, in the nearest pub, I asked myself why I find water the most satisfying of all foregrounds. what follows gives some of the answers.
The sky with after-glow had a series of arching clouds overhead.
Its reflection on the water surface of the river at Abingdon advanced towards me, in this case not exactly to my feet because I was up on the bridge, but whatever else I managed to achieve in the picture I had to make this plane of the river advance.
With water everything helps to establish distance.
Farthest away its surface acts as a mirror and the sky's colours will be almost identical to those of its reflection — almost but not quite.
Because the mirror is not perfect the reflection will be darker and slightly richer.
As the surface of the water advances towards you the colours of the sky will be more and more affected by the colour of the water itself, until finally below you will be a dark combination of the overhead sky and the rich liquid into which you are looking.
With pavements and roads or fields the lines of the drawing may suggest recession but the changes of colour usually do not and are hard to recognise.
Shines on leaves become visible near to darks and transparencies become richer, but not with as much emphasis as the changes caused by the transparency of water.
Abingdon church, the trees as the two banks were also reflected in the water below me.
Though the actual trees stood back against the sky their reflections had to be made to advance so that their topmost branches felt close.
Their colours, too, were progressively enriched by the colour of the water.
For me a badly painted reflection fades away, while in a good painting it lies on the surface and itself creates a consistently advancing plane.
this water was full of waves — small ones from the stiff breeze that destroyed the reflections, larger waves that had recognisable reflections in each of their troughs.
If the individual waves are large enough you can see that the object being reflected occurs twice, once the right way up, once reversed, all in the trough of one wave.
More usually, however, each wave shows an elliptical strip of the sky, light, from the horizon, with a dark reflection in its middle; the whole surrounded by the less dark but increasingly rich colour made up from the sky above added to the colour of the water itself.
So much for what I saw and thought.
This is how Sunset form the Bridge, Abingdon was painted.
Sunset from the Bridge, Abingdon, 8¼×9¾″ (21×24.7 cm)
Development
I set out the sunset quickly starting with the yellow around the sun and growing darker and more towards blue as I moved out from the centre, using a mixture of water and  ox gall to make the paint stay wet.
When I put in darker clouds using a gel to keep the paint mixture stiff they lay gently on the damp paper, forming soft edges as they dried instead of the hard patches which otherwise would have destroyed the luminous envelope.
Detail from Sunset from the Bridge, Abingdon
The water had to be put in immediately to correspond to the sky above it.
Close to the farthest bank the colour mixture was similar to the sunset it reflected, but darker.
As the water surface came nearer and nearer, however, the colour changed increasingly, becoming less influenced by colours of the sky and more like the actual colour of the water beneath.
This wash, also using ox gall, represented the lightest tones of the river.
While the areas of sky and water dried with two wings of the picture, the banks with trees and spire were put in dark enough for the water to clean light against them.
where branches are silouetted against the colours of the sunset they must be rich and strong enough to help intensify the sense of the light coming through then, but not so rich that they seem to close, or start to compete with the same thing happening in the ripples that form their reflection.
This is a problem inherent in any subject in which the brightest colours belong to the distant parts of the picture's spatial structure.
In spite of the brightness and richness of the sky the sequences of recession across the water must dominate.
The whole space of the picture must hold together.
ABOVE The Avon Gorge, Bristol, 8×10¾″ (20.3×27.3 cm)
RIGHT The medley Boat Station, Port Meadow, Oxford, 6½×10¼″ (16.5×26 cm)
The evening was damp but most of what had been painted was now fairly dry.
Darks laced with gel were laid on.
Where sharp edges and light cut into them the pointed back end of the brush was used to draw through them.
If the underlying layer of paint is dry marks made by the brush end will be of the colour beneath.
If the surface is still wet the brush end will cut right through to the white of the paper.
Although the glow of the sunset was the most intense colour in the scene the darkening blue of the rest of the sky began increasingly to take over.
A wash of a bluer version of the grass and tree colours was applied last, on top of the first dry coats of colour on the banks and water.
Now, drawing vigorously with the back end of the brush I picked out the light sides of the foreground waves.
Here handwriting and excitement can energise a picture.
As darkness made it impossible to continue, all that remained was to put in a few of the darkest reflections.
For some of the later applications of paint, white was used in the mixtures, making them more opaque and contrasting with the areas of maximum transparency through which the white of the paper shines out.
Next morning I looked at the picture critically in the white daylight.
The sunset sky and its flow on the surface of the river seemed to have worked out quite well.
But the trees to the right and left, purposely  made brownish at the beginning when the setting sun was dominant, now looked too rich and not dark enough.
Rapidly changing light at any time, especially at sunset or sunrise, makes it very difficult to get this kind of balance right.
The trees would be improved by some firm, blacker over-painting but I have not made this alteration.
I prefer to leave pictures just as I finish them in front of the subject.
I hope to have learnt something by doing this painting to help me to get the next one that much better.
Other problems
In view of The Avon Gorge the tide is low and the water not clear but opaque with mud.
This mud transforms the reflections of the dark cliffs and lightens them; it even tints the shining area where the light sky is reflected.
Sunlight in The Medley Boat Station falls on the boats and trees and on the water where they are reflected.
there is a continuing struggle between accurate reflections on the distant surface of the river and increasingly rich golden browns as the eye sees down through the clear water in the foreground.
Each patch of colour in the boats and trees has its equivalent patch on the water but these colours, even the whites, move increasingly towards the amber of the water and enable you to see through.
Thus the blacks on the boats reflect as lighter richer browns.
The Fisherman standing in the Thames shows this clearly.
He is near enough for his bulk to cut out the reflection of the sky and so his own reflection does not reproduce his colours but allows us to see into the water.
this area should be light and the richest possible golden brown.
The shallow stream, part of The Frome at Dorchester , is the most complicated of these examples.
The sunlight is strong and as the water gets nearer the bright blue of the sky has less and less effect on the colours of the gravel bed and waving weeds until at the bottom of the picture you can see straight down into the clear water.
However, there the little building on a bridge and the building on the right are reflected, all shine from the sky is cut out and some of the colour of the river bed comes through even in the middle distance.
The cast shadows of the buildings fall across this patter; shadow plus reflection gives areas where the blue of the sky reflects most strongly.
Here the turbulence of the water gives the richest blues to electrify the scene.
The Fisherman, Port Meadow, Oxford, 6¾×10¼″ (17.1×26 cm)
The Stream of the River Frome, Dorchester, 6×7¾″ (15.2×19.7 cm)
It is not possible to hold all this in the mind while actually painting however often you attempt this sort of subject.
But direct observation does give you the colours and you do become more accurate, even though sunlight and shadows move so fast during the time it takes to paint such a scene that the particular arrangement that caught your eye in the first place has long since gone by the time the picture is finished!
Next month: Texture and pattern in oils
John Newberry RWS
Studied under Lawrence Gowing and Victor Pasmore at Newcastle University, where he gained his BA in Fine Art from 1963 to 1989, since when he has devoted himself to his painting.
His work has been exhibited regularly at the New English Art Club, the Royal Institute of Painters in Watercolours and Royal Watercolour Society.
His work can be seen at Chris Beetles Ltd.,
Beautiful BALI
Jackie Simmonds recounts her experiences of The Artist's painting trip to Bali, in which she participated after winning first prize in our Art in Nature competition
To win a prize of any kind is exciting — to have won the Chevron FIRST PRIZE in The Artist's Art in Nature competition filled me with exultation — and disbelief!
Did they really mean to choose me ?
I didn't know who to telephone first — my husband, to tell him the amazing news — or Sally Bulgin, editor of The Artist , to ask if she was really sure my picture was the chosen one!
The sense of disbelief grew when I realised what a truly wonderful prize I'd won.
Along with a super cash prize I'd won the opportunity to travel, and paint, anywhere in the world of my choice!
It wasn't too hard to decide.
I had read all about The Artist's painting trip to Bali, and had longed to go — now I could.
I was thrilled, beyond words.
Sixteen of us travelled to Bali, together with tutor Paul Riley, whose marvellous books I had read and enjoyed.
I was delighted to have the opportunity to meet, and work with paul, who proved to be a lively, fun-loving character and a patient, helpful, inspiring tutor.
Bali is very special; a tiny island, barely one-quarter the size of Wales, densely populated with nearly three million inhabitants.
The island is a lush, rich, tropical ‘paradise’.
Shimmering rice fields clothe the land — sometimes brilliant jade green, when freshly planted with young rice shoots; sometimes, when flooded with water, they appear silver, pink, grey, blue, reflecting the ever-changing skies; sometimes they flow sharp acid yellow, when the rice is ready for harvesting.
Temples abound on Bali, from humble, small shrines in the rice fields to magnificent huge complexes, ancient and imposing.
by the sea on desolate promontories; in family compounds — large and small temples appear as a natural complement to the island's geography.
We were fascinated by the lither, graceful women, effortlessly balancing judge, beautiful towers of fruit on their heads, which they took daily to the temples for blessing.
Our group stayed in thatched, Balinese-style cottages, on the outskirts of Ubud, a bustling town famous for its arts and crafts.
Art galleries flourish in Ubud, together with wood-carving, fabric printing, and jewellery-making.
Brilliantly coloured sarongs, tablecloths and clothes, tie-dyed, batik-printed, fluttered gaily outside the busy little shops.
Exquisitely carved wooden animals, birds, masks, flowers, and hanging mobiles, twinkled in the sunlight, enticing visitors into doorways which led into shops resembling Aladdin's caves.
Among The Rice Terraces, chalk and pastel, 15×22½; ″ (38×57 cm).
The terraces were flooded with water, reflecting light and colour from the sky.
The feminine curving forms of the landscape appealed to me strongly — I loved this spot, which felt so particular to the island
Market days in Ubud were a breathtaking riot of colour.
Traditionally, women control the goods, and do nearly all the buying and selling.
They wear sarongs of every possible hue, and atop their heads are colourful swirls of fabric which they use to support huge baskets of exotic produce.
We were assaulted by — and loved — the scents of pepper, cinnamon, mace, coconut oil, dried fish, fried sweetbreads.
After a morning visit to the market, we repaired to the tranquility of a nearby cafe — The Lotus Cafe, where we were treated to the sight of enormous lotuses, entirely covering a large pond.
The giant leaves, swaying gently in the breeze hypnotised us, and we stayed  to paint, bewitched by their outrageous size and strange beauty.
Escaping from the hustle and bustle of the town, to our cottage complex which nestled quietly among rice fields and terraces, was bliss.
We watched — and drew — the amusing Calinese ducks, which bobbed and weaved among the rice shoots, alongside out open-air restaurant area.
Our ever-smiling guide, Raka, ensured that we missed little.
We painted by lakes and volcanoes; we watched ceremonies and festivals; we visited artisans and temples.
We travelled the length and breadth of the island, stopping to paint as often as we could persuade him to do so…which wasn't always easy, as he was so keen that we should see everything .
We painted the sinuously curving rice terraces; the flower market; temples; breathtaking views.
We visited Sanur Beach, where we painted fishermen working on their outrigger boats, extraordinary craft with huge ‘arms’, looking for all the world like giant multi-coloured sea creatures.
We painted women washing clothes in the waters of Lake Bratan — a timeless ritual conducted with quiet dignity.
As I painted, I was often surrounded by crowds of gorgeous kids, whose cheerful little faces I will never forget.
They encouraged me with smiles and cries of ‘good good’ as I worked!
There is a universal sense of happiness and gentleness among the Balinese people, and their polite ways and deference are natural and unaffected.
The philosophy of life is a simple, and moving one.
They believe in being contented with their lot.
This philosophy of life is a simple, and moving one.
They believe in being contented with their lot.
This philosophy is evident in their genuine warmth and friendliness towards visitors.
I was conscious that they were materially poor by Western standards; but as I watched women patiently and happily preparing, with love, exquisitely beautiful thanksgiving offerings perishable decorations made from stripped palm fronds, flower petals and seeds, which they offer three times a day to their Gods, I knew that they were infinitely rich in other ways.
My very sincere thanks to everyone involved in the Art in Nature Competition — thank you for choosing me, and giving me the opportunity to spend a little time on this magic island, which so generously allowed me to paint, and to enjoy, its special beauty.
Details of our 1993 Art in Nature competition are on pages 6 to 7 of this issue.
Information about our next painting trip, tutored by Peter Partington is on page 2
Next month Jackie Simmonds demonstrates the development of a still life in pastels.
ABOVE Sanur Beach Outriggers, chalk pastel, 17¾×23½″ (45×60 cm).
These extraordinary craft commanded attention on the warm, sunlit beach; the wind catching the awning and enlivening the scene further.
Some fishermen watched as I worked — they seemed to approve of the end result!
BELOW The Lotus Cafe, chalk pastel, 17⅓×23½″ (45×60 cm).
Giant lotus leaves swayed slowly in the soft, warm breeze — they were so huge they were almost surreal — and other-worldly.
I tried hard to capture their strange beauty, and flowing movement
Painting to Commission
Christopher Baker explains the development of a recent commissioned painting of a view of London, and gives us an insight into the materials and techniques used for the studies and final work
My brief was to provide a large painting of London with the Thames and the Richard Rogers Lloyd's building somewhere in view, to fit a space that was large, long and thin in one of the client's boardrooms at the Royal Mint.
A number of meetings were set up during which we discussed how I would approach such a project.
I was careful to explain my own attitude to commissioned work — that in order for me to work it would have to be within the broadest of limitations.
The company's managing director understood my initiative and the degree of freedom I required, and encouraged me — so a delicate trust was established between client, painter and agent.
My first step was really to get to know London by walking and drawing it from all angles.
A large sketchbook especially put aside for this project allowed me to work freely, and clear my head of the fact that I was working to a commission.
The drawings and ultimately the painting were things I wanted to do for myself as well.
I began working at Canary Wharf alongside the river, working in all sorts of media in order to unlock certain ideas.
In the first half of my drawing book the views had a fairly traditional format.
In the second half the work began to change dramatically.
I moved from ground level to tower block level, which produced a dynamic image more in keeping with a 20th century view of city life.
So from high above London I began a series of drawings, often adding extra leaves to my sketchbook to extend the rectangle.
I found I wanted to include more and more of London within one frame.
The work was fast and furious; working up in the top of buildings in January and February made this easy.
In many ways it was an advantage to work broadly with such a mass of detail — cranes, windows, cars and a myraid of tower blocks.
I had to achieve an impression of London; to find a series of marks that would give a visual cue rather than deliver a mass of topographical detail.
After some weeks of work in London gathering material from such places as the Canary Wharf Tower, Millbank Tower and the roof of the Economist Building, I eventually spotted a tower block across the Thames from the City which I thought must have an amazing vantage point.
Somehow, I would get up there.
Nobody seemed to be in so I entered a rear door and took the lift to the top and knocked on the door of someone's flat.
The occupant kindly allowed me to work there.
He understood a little of my behaviour as he was a photographer, who also provided me with many useful photographs.
The view was amazing.
it has all the ingredients I wanted; Figure 1 was the result of my first visit.
FIGURE 1
The Thames from Rotherhithe , watercolour, gouache and ink, 28×42″ (71.1×106.7 cm).
This work was done on hand-made double elephant Indian rag paper.
The fibres of this paper are meshed absolutely at random, which gives it a special surface character and also makes it very strong and long lasting.
I used watercolour and gouache with an Indian ink and Quink ink sub-structure.
The drawing was initiated with graphite only in the broadest terms; horizon, river angles, and a few roof tops — these were the key structural definitions.
The watercolours I used were raw sienna, French ultramarine and Indian red, which produced a series of slate greys and browns to match the London brick.
Gouache was used straight from a  tube — French ultramarine and alizarin crimson.
Crimson crossed with blue gave a brighter face to the distance and was used in conjunction with raw sienna and Indian red to give a range of yellows and reds.
The predominantly transparent colours of the gouache gave my washes a strong tint, and so allowed me to apply the broad washed demanded by a large watercolour.
This would have been more difficult with the single pans of watercolour.
As well as the colour washes I used a gutta nib to apply waterproof clack ink and Quink ink, which is non-waterproof.
When dry, black waterproof ink can be worked over with washes without it bleeding.
This is particularly so with Sennelier ink, which has a binder of acrylic, resins and shellac which dries hard.
However, you may see that I worked over many lines before the ink had been allowed to dry, so in some places the black ink has become fused with the watercolour.
If I had wished to create a hard and more definite edge or accent then I would have had to ensure that everything was dry.
In the distance I used Quink ink with its more blue tinge and in parts diluted this to maintain a lightness of touch.
On occasions I also added acrylic medium to the Quink to prevent any unnecessary bleeding of the line, although at times I enjoyed its non-waterproof qualities and allowed the ink to run.
Finally, candle wax was applied as a highlight on the river then worked over with colour to complete the study.
The vibrant use of colour contrasted well with the areas of white paper and fluidity or mark to give energy and unity to the image
right FIGURE 2
Charcoal cartoon on Fabriano white cartridge paper, 38×38″ (96.5×213.4 cm).
Having decided that the vantage point for the watercolour in Figure 1 was the right one I then began to work on the overall design of the final work.
Establishing the outside measurements, I completed a scaled drawing of the boardroom space and placed a suitable rectangle within it.
Once the work was hung I wanted it to occupy the space comfortably without dwarfing the area or appearing lost.
So 38×84″ was my conclusion and I made up the stretchers.
This charcoal cartoon was completed with a large stick of scene painter's charcoal and Maimeri triangular charcoal.
For complete removal of marks a white plastic rubber was used and a soft cloth to achieve the mid tones and to lighten dark areas
Above FIGURE 3
Oil on linen canvas.
This was the start of my oil painting.
First, a word about the preparation of the support.
The linen canvas was stretched over a chassis with two vertical crossbars and a chamfer bead used to lift the canvas off the chassis.
Once stretched the linen was sized to stop the canvas absorbing any of the ground.
The most suitable size is rabbit skin glue — two thin coats, each allowed to dry.
I then applied three thin coats of oil primer for my ground.
At this stage nearly a month had elapsed since the watercolour, so it was important to return to the first study to establish some kind of modus operandi for the oil.
Although different, I wanted to capture something of the sensation of being high up in a tenement block overlooking London.
In order to do this I decided to work loosely with the oils as if I was using watercolours, thinning with genuine turpentine and allowing colours to bleed into one another.
I deliberately used transparent colours for their clarity as well as for their resemblance to the watercolour.
No white was used at this stage — only the white reflecting from the ground
left FIGURE 4
Eventually I made a commitment to some edges, particularly the diagonals and verticals, carefully placing my principal vanishing point and then co-ordinating the parallel lines to this point on the horizon.
Gradually a scaffolding type of structure emerged.
It seemed that with so much life in the foreground, resonant colours and dramatic changes in tone, the distance should have an element of stillness with close tonality and harmonised colours.
white was therefore introduced into the distance and predominantly transparent hues into the foreground 
left FIGURE 5
A close-up of the bottom right corner clearly shows the working method described in Figure 4.
Transparent hues predominate, while the edges are drawn in by both scraping back to the white ground and by applying dark lines with a gutta nib, a method also used with the watercolour.
You can also see that zinc white has been applied to establish a large area of light
FIGURE 6
In the final stages I attempted to draw together the wide ranging tones and then to punctuate these closer tones with an occasional tonic of colour in the foreground — a turquoise yellow or a red.
the more I worked on it the more it began to evolve into another kind of idea and the more removed it became from my initial study which had so much freedom and energy, so I stopped.
The commission was not complete.
I delivered it to my agent to be framed and for the final hanging in the boardroom.
The unveiling was happy but nerve-racking.
All the staff of the company director delivered a speech.
I in turn thanked him for his careful encouragement and support at the various stages of the project.
Christopher Baker teaches at West Dean College and Herringbroom Studios in Sussex.
If you are interested in finding out more about the courses at either of these establishments please write to Christopher c/o The Artist magazine, and we will forward your letters on to him
On reflection
I have now had time to reflect on whether the inherent constraints of working within the structure of a commission can appreciatively reduce the impact of a painting.
Does it make it impersonal and stilted, lacking in conviction?
I believe the effectiveness of a work does not rely upon whether or not it is a commission.
It is, however, dependent upon the attitudes of both artist and client.
For the artist, whatever else art may be it is an attempt to express deeply held beliefs about the nature of being.
The work is a result of an elaborate synthesis of intellect and emotion that is expressed through selective use of forms, colours, lines and tones.
If these complex and individual selections are frustrated by the client a weaker piece of work will inevitably result.
it is the job of the painter to make visible generalised and universal truths, feelings and ideas by the most potent means known to him; that is individual perceptions though an individual language.
He can give no better value than to state the truth as he sees it, clearly and eloquently. this should be the aim of the painter and so also the ultimate aim of a commissioned work.
Working with traditional drawing media
Pip seymour looks at the range of drawing media available to today's artists and shows the great variety of marks available to us when we draw
Today's drawing materials are produced for the mass market in ready-to-use form.
Compressed charcoal, charcoal and carbon pencils and easy-to-hold crayons are all available in good art shops and offer you a wide range of possibilities and excellent standards of quality.
Here, I shall look at a variety of drawing media, both ancient and modern.
In general, modern drawing implements are improvements on ancient materials.
For example, sanguine Conté Carres crayons are made with a mixture of native earths plus softeners such as China clay, while the natural lump sanguine you can buy does not have these softening additives and so has a different texture.
Also, because it is a natural product, its textures may vary from one batch to the next.
It would be wrong to conclude that either material is inferior and far wiser to use such information to your advantage when choosing drawing materials.
It may be appropriate sometimes to use a material which does not confirm to a given-set of standards; equally some artists need their materials to be consistent.
My purpose here is to show what is available, so that you have access to the widest possible variety of marks when drawing.
Silverpoint
Drawing with metalpoint was commonplace amongst artists of the late 15th and early 16th century.
Amongst the many metals employed in this technique were silver, lead-tin, gold, copper, brass, bronze or mixtures of alloys including these metals.
Silver became the most popular, surviving to the present day, in a minor capacity, as a drawing tool.
Whilst metalpoint drawings survive in their own right, it was as underdrawing for egg tempera painting towards the end of the 16th century, and the rise of oil painting, demanding more flexible underpainting, the use of metalpoint lessened.
Silverpoint enjoyed a brief period of popularity in the 1890s when silverpoint kits, including specially prepared papers, were made commercially available by Winsor & Newton.
Demand for these materials declined, however, and production ceased after the Great War.
Despite being a little known and often misunderstood technique, silverpoint is still in use by contemporary artists and some specialist suppliers in the UK offer silverpoints and prepared paper.
Sheila Bryan Goose, willow charcoal, 7×14″,(17.8×35.5 cm) The artist comments: ‘I mainly work in Conté Carres black 2B crayons and occasionally use the Conté sanguine series crayons.
Conté Carres gives a rich, dense black which suits my needs: I often use tissue paper to smudge the Conté.
I prefer a smooth hot pressed surface paper.’
Sheila Bryan Foxhall heath, Conté crayon, 12×8″ (30.5×20.2 cm)
In the past metalpoints were sold, rather like vintage fountain pens, in the form of over elaborate styluses, often adorned with fancy decoration.
sometimes a metalpoint would have a point at either end of the stylus, for sake of balance, or perhaps containing a different type of metalpoint.
Today, silverpoint is available in cut lengths of wire with a clutch type holder (from ), or as a six inch length of silver with a sharpened point (from ).
Both these makes also produce specially coated papers.
Silverpoint can be resharpened on a metal file so that as the silver is worn down the point can be redefined easily.
Silverpoint gives a fine, grey line and remains remarkably true to the expression of the artist.
It is difficult to mask mistakes (you will become adept at cross-hatching!) but, if you have a facility for fine and detailed drawing, you must try this technique.
All metalpoint drawings give  a grey mark.
In the case of silverpoint this grey quickly turns to a darker brown colour as silver sulfide forms on exposure to the atmosphere.
This process of ‘tarnishing’, as it is known, can be aesthetically very pleasing.
Silverpoint must be worked onto a specially prepared ground.
In Botticelli's time this could have included a linseed oil and lead white mixture or, more frequently, a ground based on bone white (from pulverised bone), combined with gum water (gum arabic), or parchment size (from goat skin).
Sometimes earth pigments such as terre verte would be mulled into such mixtures to provide a toned ground.
These grounds would have been applied to paper, parchment or wood, much like traditional gesso, in as many as nine layers.
The introduction of the modern white pigments — titanium and zinc white — made the use of pulverised horse bone unnecessary.
These pigments are more stable and give a brighter key when mixed with the gum or size solution.
To prepare silverpoint paper you will need 300 gsm (or heavier) hot pressed (satin) watercolour paper, three parts gum water (gum arabic, sold as a medium for watercolours, or prepared from crystals) and two parts zinc or titanium white.
Apply the solution in thin layers and leave each layer to dry; two or three layers will do.
Rabbit skin glue (one part glue to 12 parts water, leave to soak, then warm in a double boiler), can be used in place of the gum.
Once properly dried the ground will be ready for use.
Fine sandpaper may be used to achieve a finer surface.
Quill pens
Quill pens, properly cut and ready to use, are difficult to obtain but worth the trouble if you want to make good ink drawings.
Mr Phillip Poole, formerly of Drury Lane, is probably the only outlet at present who keeps a stock of cut quills.
He was rescued from breathtaking rent rises by Cornelissen, from where he continues to supply artists and calligraphers.
Uncut quills are also available, as well as bamboo reed pens and a range of steel dip pens.
Cornelisssen  keep a good stock of parchment for drawing, which is prepared for drawing by rubbing the surface with pulverised gum sandarac.
This is a hard tree resin from Morocco which, when rubbed into the parchment, gives a slight tooth.
The quill nib produces a crisper line as a result.
Sandarac is available from pigment suppliers, who will also supply crushed colophony rosin, which is cheaper than sandarac and can also be used for roughening parchment.
Traditional drawing inks
The inks in common use from the Renaissance included black carbon ink (today referred to as Indian ink), sepia ink, bistre ink and iron gall ink.
Today carbon ink is made from lamp black pigment in an aqueous binder giving a rich deep and lustrous, permanent black ink which can be diluted with water.
Always ask for ‘pigmented’ inks as dyes are more prone to fading.
Indian ink is widely available: Winsor & Newton, Saler-Rowney and Sennelier make good quality Indian ink, although there are many other brands available.
Always choose a permanent ink rather than buying the cheapest you can find.
Sheila Bryan Greenwich, Conté crayon, 7×10″ (17.8×25.4 cm) sheila Bryan's work can be seen at the Battersea Contemporary Art Fair, Battersea Town Hall, from April 3–4.
Lisa Wright Figure Study, vine and willow charcoal, 30×22″ (76.2×55.8 cm)
chinese ‘stick’ ink is related to carbon/Indian ink, in that usually the same pigment has been used, although these inks are formed into hard cakes.
The binder is not always disclosed but may be gum arabic.
Such inks are made liquid by rubbing against a stone (supplied with the stick), with a little water.
Inscribe, Cornelissen and Falkiner Fine Papers can supply these inks.
Sepia ink is alas no longer available.
Although it is sold under that name it will have been replaced with a pigment or dye colourant.
Cornelissen make a reasonable substitute but other commercial manufacturers, such as Pelikan, offer it too.
It is really a case of finding the right shade of ‘sepia’ to suit your requirements, as there can be huge differences in appearance!
If you cannot find a good substitute, try using prepared ‘sepia’ watercolour, diluted with water, or use Mars brown dark pigment, which is easy to prepare with gum water for brush wash drawing.
Using a pigment to approximate an ink colour in this way also ensures lightfastness of the ‘ink’.
ABOVE Lisa Wright Church Interior, vine charcoal, 36×22″ (55.8×91.5cm) the artist comments: ‘I like to work on good quality cotton rag paper, such as 300 gsm Aquarelle Arches.
‘Buying paper in rolls in economical and, because I like to work on a large scale, provides greater potential for expression.
Aquarelle Arches is 100 per cent cotton rag, tub-sized (gelatine) and has a beautifully soft texture.
I prefer the Not surface which has just enough tooth to catch fine particles of charcoal.
Bistre ink is prepared from beech wood soot.
Rembrandt made many drawings using bistre with both brush and pen.
Kremer bistre ink is made to an original recipe and has a deep transparent brown colour.
It can be reduced with water into washes.
Cornelissen have a ‘Prout's brown’ ink which has a similar colour.
Iron gall inks are not readily available.
In any case, this form of black ink is prone to discolour quickly from black to brown.
natural earth chalks
Pigmented natural earths, dug from the ground as lumps, were previously widely available, being sawn into smaller lengths for drawing purposes.
Whilst these original materials are no longer available, with the exception of red sanguine, modern equivalents in the form of crayons, chalks and pastels and made from related materials, are on sale in most art shops.
Conté Carres crayons are well known and very popular, especially for life drawing.
These short square-ended drawing crayons hold together well but give a soft smudgeable line.
Sanguine, bistre, black, grey and white shades are available, although the full range includes 72 colours.
Faber-Castell have a similar range of Pitt Artists ‘Crayons in earth tones, plus black and white.
These manufactured crayons differ from lump sanguine in that they are based on special recipes, including China clay admixtures, to soften the natural properties of the colouring matter used.
Both Conté and Faber-Castell offer these crayons in a pencil format, which may be more applicable to refined, detailed drawing work.
A selection of Faber-Castell's drawing materials are available in an attractive wooden compendium case, which includes auxiliary materials such as erasers sharpener, paper wiper (paper stump) and a sandpaper block for sharpening drawing points.
Zecchi sanguine (soft) is a native iron oxide with clays, from Tuscany, and has a bright  orange-red tone.
It has a soft texture but is firm enough in lump form to be sawn or broken into smaller pieces as required.
It is sold by weight and can be fixed, just like other chalks or pastels.
Graphite
Graphite was once a highly prized material.
The Borrowdale mines in the lane District, discovered in 1564, yielded such fine graphite that it was jealously guarded, extractions only being sold for six weeks of the year.
this source of graphite produced a material so fine that it could be sawn into drawing and writing sticks.
Less pure grades of graphite were discovered all over the world but none had the structure of the Borrowdale type.
It was not until Conté fused graphite with China clay that loose powdered graphite could be formed into drawing lengths, so avoiding the English monopoly on their cut lengths from Borrowdale.
As a result, pencils were easy to make and very cheap to produce.
By changing the amount of clay included when firing the graphite, pencils could be graded according to softness.
Faber-Castell's Blacklead 9000 range is of particular note, featuring grades of softness from HB to 9B.
They also produce graphite sticks in the form of giant hexagonal crayons (2B, 4B, 6B, 9B) and graphite leads (HB, 2B, 4B, 6B).
They also have a Graphite Pure Stick Pencil, which is again available in a series of grades and has a plastic casing so that hands can be kept clean whilst working.
Osborne & Butler offer a range of top quality American made pencils, including three grades of superior quality graphite sticks which have a flat profile.
Rexel Derwent's Graphite Sketching Pencils are worth look at too.
these thick wooden cased pencils can be reworked into a watercolour type wash by adding water, once applied to the paper.
Berol's Karisma Graphite pencils produce a wash effect, as so Osborne & Butler's Sketch and Wash pencils.
A mixture of clay and graphite are used for these pencils which produces an extremely soft dense black mark which can be blended further with water.
Cornelissen and Kremer powdered graphite (available from A.P.
Fitzpatrick) offers another option for artists.
The loose graphite powder can be rubbed into paper surfaces to give a silvery-grey tone.
A.P.
Fitzpatrick also supply raw English lump graphite in three sizes, which gives a soft, silver-grey tone.
Charcoal
Whilst charcoal is now available in pencil form (from Conté, Osborne & Butler and Faber-Castell), most artists will be accustomed to using charcoal in its pure form as simple lengths of varying size.
P.H. Coates's willow charcoal is well known and ranges in size from extra thin, up to large round scene painters’ charcoal.
Major art suppliers offer their own willow charcoals in similar formats.
Pip Seymour Duomo, Siena, Graphite pencil, 6×8″ (15.2×20.3 cm)
Lisa Wright, figure Study, India ink.
16×12″ (40.6×30.5 cm)
vine charcoal gives a slightly colder tone and is supplied in larger stick format (from Zecchi) than willow.
Beech and poplar charcoal (from Zecchi) comes in a variety of grades of softness and is sold in thin sticks, with ready pointed tips for fine drawing.
Kremer offer charcoal in three grades of powder.
The coarser type takes the form of tiny splinters of charcoal which can be rubbed into the paper surface.
such materials can be used, like powdered graphite, to provide background tone for subsequent drawings.
it may be advisable to fix such applications before continuing drawing in subsequent layers to prevent disturbance.
Supports
The question of choosing relevant supports for drawing is quite important.
Acid-free cartridge paper is available (from Falkiner fine Papers, Cornelissen, T.N. Lawrence and Atlantis) and may suit most requirements.
Paper should be robust enough to withstand erasers, paper stumps and hard drawing points.
With this in mind it may be better quality papers, such as Cockingford 150 gsm paper.
This comes in sheets or pads from Saler-Rowney, and is able to withstand much reworking.
It is also very suitable for light wash applications with inks, so that dry drawing materials such as charcoals can be readily mixed with wash techniques.
Other watercolour and drawing papers are available.
Try Fabriano 4, from Osborne & Butler, which is supplied in rolls (1.5 by 10m) and pads of loose sheets.
This fourdranier made paper is available in two surfaces: smooth or cold pressed.
It is ideal for all drawing work, especially when working to scale.
It may also be a good option if you purchase materials as a group; you can then share out the paper, cut to size as required.
The key to finding a good paper is to look for those which are acid-free and firm enough to withstand your own drawing technique.
This may mean, of course, that you can manage on very fine papers, in which case spend some time looking at handmade papers (for example Khadi).
Falkiner Fine Papers or T.N. Lawrence in central London have a huge stock of all types of paper to choose from.
Fixing and storing
For a comprehensive list of fixatives, see my article on soft pastels in the October 1992 issue.
Remember that a light application of spray is better than over-spraying.
Store finished, fixed work between sheets of glassine paper to avoid disturbance.
The paper suppliers mentioned, and may good art shops, keep stocks of this.
Finally, if problems of perspective and vanishing points have overwhelmed you, a device is available which may be helpful.
Colours Unlimited have recently launched the ‘Perspector’, manufactured in polished wood and brass, which makes perspective drawing understandable.
The perspector comes complete with full instructions for use and has been developed for fine art use.
MATERIALS AND TECHNIQUES by Jonathan Stephenson
Possibilities in Pastel there are a hundred vital values to work from
the materials
Faber-Castell's Polychromos pastels are aptly named, for here is a range that rejoices in the richness and variety of its colouring.
There is an intensity and brilliance not usually seen in pastel ranges and the emphasis is on a clear cut, ordered and resonant scale of colours, rather than a clutter of derivative shades and tints.
there are a hundred vital values to work from, each one offering a distinctive hue and supported by Faber-Castell's guarantee of lasting colour brilliance.
They have tested the range with the equivalent of 1300 hours of exposure to sunlight and state that the intensity and brightness of the colour remains unchanged.
This means that under normal conditions of display, a work in Polychromos pastels should retain its original freshness and colour quality for many years to come.
The character and reliability of the colour is not the only attraction of the Polychromos Pastels.
Their slim, square sectioned format and firmer than usual consistency offer certain technical advantages too.
By using the corner, edge or side of a Polychromos Pastel, marks ranging from the very fine to the very broad can be achieved with ease and, by varying the pressure of the stroke, the colour deposit may be varied in strength between delicate and intense.
The firmness of the Polychromos Pastels is due to their slightly higher than average binder content; this accounts for the crayons' notable strength and low dust factor, reducing accidental breakage and keeping the hands relatively clean during use.
It also explains the precision that they are capable of, yet Polychromos Pastels are also blendable and workable in layers and are therefore adaptable to a very wide range of styles and techniques.
The paper stump, sandpaper block and kneadable eraser from Faber-Castell's Pitt drawing materials range also work well with Polychromos Pastels.
They can be used for  mixed media work as well with Faber-Castell's Polychromos Colour pencils and Albrecht Dürer Watercolour Pencils, since the colours are carefully co-ordinated across each of these product ranges.
FIGURE 1 Working on brown Ingres paper I started to experiment with the graphic qualities of the Chisel-edged pastels by reversing out a basic shape for the hedge
Straight to the point
The point, or rather the angled corner, of the Polychromos Pastel and its chisel-like leading edge gives it is immediate graphic potential.
They suit the range to very direct methods of sketching and drawing, where varying the contact between the pastel and the paper can provide all the necessary elements of technique.
To begin with I decided to pursue this possibility in a straightforward sketch.
Working on brown Ingres paper I started by reversing out a basic shape for the hedge (Figure 1).
this was done by colouring in a pattern of small, irregular shapes using pastel No. 230, cold grey 1, on its narrow front edge.
The untouched paper was left to represent the dense central mass of twigs, and the more open lattice of branches above and below it silhouetted against a lighter background.
Then, to build upon that simple, flat definition of the hedge's shape, pastel No. 199, black, was scribbled across the same area, covering all but a strip at the top with an irregular criss-crossing scrawl.
This put in texture and shade at one go to further the impression of a dense mass of twigs.
To refine this even more, random strokes of Polychromos pastel No. 176, Van Dyke brown, were added to give a colour and tonal variation.
Dashes of the dark emerald colour, called night green, No. 155, and a lighter apple green No. 170, were then placed here and there to represent the few remaining leaves.
All these narrow strokes were done from the corners of the pastel sticks.
The colour was applied in a graphic, unblended way almost exclusively, but for the stained and rusty sides of the wheelbarrow, the merest touches of burnt ochre, No. 187, moss green, No. 168, Van Dyke brown, No. 176, white No. 101, and light ochre, No. 185, were casually smudged into each other to give a stained and weathered look.
This done, the rest of the barrow was completed by simply drawing, in colour, using the same range of colours, plus No. 175, sepia dark, to emphasise the outline in places and black and cold grey 111, No. 232, for the wheel.
the corners of the Polychromos Pastels produced the finest lines; rubbing them backwards and forwards on the leading edge gave the greatest intensity of colour.
The grass was added in staccatto strokes from the angular corners of a selection of Polychromos Pastels, offering a tonal scale of green colour values.
Moss green, No. 168, was the central background value with apple green, No. 170, and sap green, No. 167, providing overall variations around it.
Night green, No. 155, and viridian, No. 161, provided local emphasis and shading.
Of course the brown paper shows in the gaps between the strokes and contributes to the colour, sense to texture and tone.
Beneath the wheelbarrow, for example, it is more openly exposed and is combined with the darker greens to show the barrow's shadow falling on the grass.
Smooth operation
Now, I wanted to look at the possibilities of a rather softer approach and tried out some alternative ways of using eh Faber-Castell Polychromos Pastels.
The slim angular shape was definitely well suited to a graphic style, but was the lay down of pigment soft enough to blend out in a more painterly manner?
It was quickly apparent that the answer was ‘yes’.
First, I worked on a rapid landscape sketch, using a technique that was not dissimilar from the one used previously.
This time I used a grey Ingres paper and left it exposed in parts of the sky, as well as using it as an undertone to modify the colour put over it elsewhere.
The difference was that, having applied my colours in the same direct way, drawing from the end and edge of the pastel stick.
I then used a fingertip roughly to blend and spread them for a hazier and more subtle finish.
When I had done that, I touched over the same areas again to strengthen a colour or restate an edge or detail as I felt necessary.
From start to finish the sketch took minutes, and whilst it amounted to no great work of art, it was nevertheless an agreeable experience and an insight into what the pastels could do.
I particularly like the effect along the skyline where the smudge of No. 137, blue violet, into the white of the lower sky was lightly overdrawn with phthalo blue dark, No. 152, as a representation of far distant hills.
FIGURE 2 It soon became apparent when I started working on this quick landscape sketch that the Polychromos Pastels are equally well suited to a more painterly method of handling too
FIGURE 3 Pastel dust gives a very delicate effect when spread out thinly
The foreground was less expertly done, but that it no reflection on the pastels.
The light was changing very rapidly and I simply ran out of time.
I did get the feel, however, of using the pastels on a tinted background and noted the  ease with which they could be spread in different thicknesses to achieve variable effects of colour and tone.
FIGURE 4 I wanted to explore the wealth of rich and brilliant colours available in the Polychromos pastel range, so a colourful still life seemed a good choice of subject
Another method I tried involved the use of pastel dust.
This technique involves spreading out the pastel dust with a tissue as an exceptionally thin film into which delicate variations can then be introduced, either by dabbing on more dust, perhaps of different colours, or by lifting it away with a putty eraser.
Afterwards, it can be tidied around with heavier and more direct pastel to give it the definition it would otherwise lack.
You can generate the dust by rubbing the Polychromos Pastels against fine sandpaper, a practical use for small remnant pieces that would otherwise be difficult to use up, or you can do as I do and spread the dust from very lightly applied pastel strokes, placed to allow a very deliberate development of the effect over a localised area.
This is how I achieved the elaborate sky in Figure 3, using the dust of black No. 199, cold grey 111, No. 232, blue violet, No. 137, and phthalo blue dark, No. 152.
Brilliant colour
I decided to use a varied by essentially loose technique for the still life that I attempted next.
The most instantly apparent feature of Faber-Castell's Polychromos Pastel range is its wealth of rich and brilliant colour.
So a colourful still life seemed a suitable choice of subject for an exploration of the pastels' most obvious potential.
I started by assembling a collection of objects that would provide me with the type of image I had in mind.
These included things that presented bold shapes and vivid colouring with pattern and texture.
Rather than spend too long on developing a perfect composition, I settled for a core arrangement of objects that looked good together and added to it as the drawing and colouring progressed.
This meant that I was free to respond to the effects that developed as I worked and I got a feel both for the subject and the pastels I was using.
the arrangement was placed low down so that the angle of view presented me this as interesting a set of shapes as possible.
FIGURE 5 After the initial laying in of colour I began to introduce more of a feeling of form to the objects while retaining the strong sense of pattern
To begin with I made a rough drawing and then began to place the colours using the nearest equivalent values from a set of 36 Polychromos Pastels: blue violet, No. 137, lemon, No. 107 and night green, No. 155, for the mass colouring of the plant; an African violet, rose carmine, No. 124, light blue, No. 147, and blue violet, No. 137 again for the silk scarf; orange yellow, No. 109 and orange light, No. 113 for the vase and so on, until I had an abstract pattern of colour distilled from the still life subject.
Fixative was applied between layers to allow a solid build up of pigment.
the corners of the pastels produce the finest lines
An overlay of interactive colouring them followed to bring an element of form, though intentionally avoiding too detailed a degree of modelling.
Light blue, No. 147, and rose carmine, No. 124, were used on the flower heads.
Blue, white and green were  worked into the leaves and pastel No. 180, raw umber, was used to shade the vase.
FIGURE 6 Finally, I added detail by using the pastel in a more graphic way
Finally, a network of graphic colour was dropped into place, giving the piece sufficient definition to be recognisable, enough contrast to seem solid and enough contrast to seem solid and enough content to be of interest.
Black, No. 199, cold grey 1 and 111, sap green, No. 167, geranium red light, No. 121, light blue and rose carmine, were all used at this stage.
Canary yellow, no. 108, ochre, No. 184 and brown ochre, No. 182 were applied for the golden glazes on the coffee pot, cup and saucer, with an ultimate highlight of white.
Black brown, green and blue were used to accent the drawing with sharp outline as seemed necessary.
This feature is sponsored by Faber-Castell and independently produced by The Artist magazine  in association with Jonathan Stephenson Jan 1993.
Aspects of OZ
In the first of a new series Raymond Spurrier , still travelling hopefully, encounters some visual shocks in a trip down under
It is all very well expounding the theory that an artist should cultivate an innocent eye, seeing things as if for the first time.
it is a good theory so far as it goes.
but it falls down in front of the unexpected, when you actually do see things for the first time.
When the sun slides across the sky from right to left and the new moon faces the wrong way you are ready to bet the stripes of the rainbow are inside out, yet curiously unprepared to find the Plough fallen from its high point in the heavens and collapsed face down on the night horizon.
All in all, a trip down under can be an unsettling experience, liable to trigger off spasms of creative impotence.
Not everything in Australia is upside down, though there is a disturbing reversal of tine values.
Swans, for example, are black while the dazzle value of corrugated iron, painted white or left in its pristine silvery state, means that a roof can be the lightest thing in view, with tree trunks running a close second in their pale greys and pinks and the tattered cream of the paperbarks.
Dead trees turn out to be commonplace — hundreds of them standing knee deep in the wide, slow meanders of the Murray River or more loosely scattered in a macabre parkland where what passes for good grazing has been toasted a mauvy brown by the long summer sun.
In contrast, picture an array of mountainsides clothed in dead trees, all of them silver white and close packed in an uncanny fairyland.
And in further contrast, miles from anywhere, the odd experience of driving through the night with flames licking through the forest on either side of the long deserted road.
Backroad in the bush, New South Wales, watercolour, 10×14″ (25.3×35.5 cm)
Up in the Northern Territory mile upon mile of forest contains as many anthills like lumpy church spires as trees.
In a shopping forecourt in Darwin an example of this termite architecture stands ten feet or so tall with all the presence of a work of art: a piece of high-tome sculpture of the kind that might be shortlisted for a Turner Prize.
Art depends a lot on contrast and in urban areas there is plenty of that — even in a place like Darwin repeatedly bombed by the Japanese in World War 11 and further flattened by Cyclone Tracy in 1974, now rebuilt as an up-to-date hotelsville in a style of architecture that, trying hard to be modern, succeeds in being already dated.
But throughout much of this empty continent where the trees come in unfamiliar shapes, and the animals too, horizons are a terrible long way off with nothing much in front of them.
It would be unfair to say that the landscape was featureless geology has provided some outstanding, literally outstanding, items of topography, yet they are far flung and, in general, the landscape components are not keen to assemble themselves into the kind of artistic compositions we have grown used to.
there is little that might look good on a calendar.
Over vast distances the monotonies, as well as the varieties and contrasts, elide with such painful gradualness one into another as to be scarcely noticeable.
Then there is the matter of colour.
English painters who complain about the persistence of green should imagine a landscape that for hours on end is the bright  colour of Heinz tomato soup, spiked with the burnt black twigs of the wattle bushes and bottlebrush trees.
The only other colours are provided by a snaking blue-black ribbon of tarmac stitched to the undulations of the terrain by a dotted white centreline and then, over a distant rise, a purple blister that is the far away Ayer's Rock, famous for its colour changes at sunset.
When we eventually get to it the Visitor Centre there explains with diagrams and scientific data why this is the driest place in Australia.
Outside, it is pouring with rain.
Blacktop highway in a tomato soup landscape.
the road to Ayer's Rock, watercolour, 3½×8″ (8.9×20.3 cm)
Small town street scene.
Byron Bay, New South Wales, pencil, 10×11″ (25.4×28 cm)
A strange land
For anyone brought up in the European tradition of Claudeian vision, the picturesque, and so on, the impact of all this can be startling and pictorially disconcerting.
An imagination nurtured among northern latitudes is here at a distinct disadvantage.
But I am happy to find that I am not alone.
From the evidence in city museums, artists among the early settlers brought their European attitudes with them too and, failing the innocent eye test, also failed to interpret the essence of their new found environment, while those who subsequently practised the new styles of modern art in the early decades of this century did so with the same little effect.
It is mere speculation on my part — and probably an oversimplification — that the confusing post-war crop of art styles in America grew out of refugee Europeans reacting to a strange land.
At all events some of these artistic fashions have by now accompanied the dollar lifestyle to Australia, thus enabling contemporary painters there to at last meet the challenge of a unique set of landscapes, particularly those of the raw and empty outback.
A principal character in Neville Shute's epic tale A Town Like Alice somewhere remarks, apropos the outback, that artists cam up from the south to try and paint it.
‘I only ever met one who got it right’, he says, ‘and he was an Abo called Albert out of Hermannsburg.
Somebody gave him a brush and paints one time and he started in and got it better than any of them, oh my word he did.
but he's an Abo, and he's painting his own place.
I suppose that makes a difference.’
Back country farm buildings, pen and pencil sketch, 4×5¾″ (10.1×14.6 cm)
Well yes, I suppose it does; though it should be possible to observe the unfamiliar with cool detachment and still make  perceptive drawings.
On the other hand, any artist who has been at the game long enough will have developed preferences for certain kinds of subject matter, for example Degas' dancing girls, Céanne's mountain, or Connard's bathroom.
In travelling around Australia I soon found out there was not too much of my kind of thing — little enough that feel within my category of the picturesque.
Certain combinations of landscape elements that I tend to search for were in short supply.
Other excitements took their place but I was more inclined to stare at them in amazement than paint them.
So perhaps the moral for itinerant artists is to stay at home and work with what you know.
On the other hand, being faced with visual novelties was a useful jolt to artistic complacency and the habit many of us get into of working to a well tried formula.
Australian cityscape.
Elizabeth Street, Brisbane, pen drawing, 12×16½″ (30.5×41.8 cm)
But now back to Albert the Abo who stayed at home and painted, very successfully, his own place.
For Albert Namatjira was no fictional character.
After his one and only lesson in watercolour from a visiting European called Rex Battarbee he went from strength to strength, passing on his considerable skills to four sons and various other members of an extended family.
He was the first Aboriginal to have mastered a western mode of painting and by 1940 his was a household name.
The tradition has continued so that work by the Hermannsburg school now fetches good prices.
But this is a transitional style, somewhere between the white man's painting and native Aboriginal art.
In a sense it is an aberration — an infection, if you like, picked up (like many another) from the marauding white man.
And much as I coveted a wonderful watercolour by Albert that I came across in an Alice Springs gallery for 4,000 dollars I was even more taken with the traditional native art, particularly since it seemed to offer useful hints about a problem I had of seeing the outback in ways other than through the window-on-the-world vision that developed in Renaissance Italy.
But more about that in later articles.
Termite architecture, Darwin, pencil and wash, 5×5¾″ (12.7×14.6 cm)
An exploration
Meanwhile I am exploring the edges of a continent where most of its people are clustered and, except in city and suburb, well scattered where settlement is at the mercy of geography, as indeed is the peroipatetic topographer, constantly on the lookout for some assembly of landscape elements that can be turned into pictures and — because of indoctrination by a European culture — pictures of a particular sort.
Like most artists, I hope to give shape to a reality that often seems wilfully chaotic.
Of course, some sort of pattern can be teased out of the most disordered subject though it may take half a dozen attempts before a pictorial structure emerges; such an unhurried approach is not always possible for the long distance traveller.
Thus I am dangerously near looking for the ready made composition that has been done to death by generations of landscape painters.
But art, like travel, should be a journey of exploration, a venture into the unknown.
So we continue travelling hopefully, traversing the geography, and absorbing impressions that may get me out of the pictorial routine that all artists are prone to.
I ought therefore to be grateful for being disorientated by the unfamiliar and the chance to focus the innocent eye.
TALK OF THE TRADE
Product news and reviews
LASCAUX AQUACRYL Pip Seymour reports
Lascaux Aquacryl is an acrylic based artists' watercolour which, as with gum arabic remains water-soluble after drying.
Whilst it is not a direct replacement for traditional gum based watercolours, this recently introduced paint range does offer watercolourists some distinct advantages.
Perhaps the most important fact is that all the pigments used in Aquacryl are lightfast.
Lascaux Aquacryl uses only finely dispersed, transparent and very lightfast pigments, the numbers for which are published on the colour chart.
I decided to take this new paint to task on a painting trip to the island of Sark, in the Channel Islands.
It was my intention to spend my time there simply painting the landscape and I wanted to work with strong colour on a large scale.
I had already made a number of smaller works with Lascaux Aquacryl on watercolour pads and clocks, so I was aware of the colour range and paint handling.
I took stock of full imperial size Bockingford tinted watercolour paper (300gsm) because I wanted a robust paper with a slight background colour.
The Bockingford papers are invaluable for working on outdoors, as the tint of the paper is very soft, giving a beautiful ground colour to work against.
I stretched the paper onto a full size Peter Welton Frame, which makes life easier as regards stretching paper, but also gives you a firm support to work against.
Having already been struck by the intensity and depth of colour of Aquacryl, I turned this to my advantage.
In the bluey greens of the sea, for example, I was able to make even, intense washes of colour, and was amazed at how soft and delicate the washes became when watered down.
If colour is too intense, or in the wrong place, it is possible to ‘take it out’ with a dry squirrel mop or similar whilst the colour is still wet.
These brushes soak up unwanted colour but are soft against the paper — mind you, as the Bockingford paper will withstand a lot of scrubbing, you could lift colour out with other stiffer brushes if you wanted to.
ABOVE Pip Seymour Dixcart Bay from Rougie Terriere, Sark, Lascaux Aquacryl on tinted Bockingford 300 gsm paper, 20×30″ (50.8×76.2 cm)
BELOW Pip Seymour L'Etac form Little Sark, Lascaux Aquacryl on tinted Bockingford 300 gsm watercolour paper, 20×30″ (50.8×76.2 cm)
If the colour dries on the paper but does not look right, I found that by carefully washing over with water and then gently lifting out as before, unwanted passages can be partially or completely taken off.
The resoluble nature of Aquacryl is best exemplified when the colour is squeezed out into a ceramic palette and left to dry.
when dry, the colour can be reconstituted in the well of a palette with water and a little agitation with the brush.
This means that the required colours can be squeezed out into the palette before painting.
Once the colour has solidified in the palette you can treat it as normal ‘pan’ watercolour: the colour can be lifted off by applying a wet brush.
Lascaux recommend that a tiny percentage of glycerine keeps the colour slightly moist.
Be careful not to use too much glycerine or the colour will become too moist and sticky.
I found, after experimenting that I did not need any glycerine at all as I managed to get the colour to work well with just a smudge from the wet brush.
I began by squeezing colour into a small ceramic well palette but found that I did not have enough colour for what I wanted to do.
I improvised by putting colour into an ice cube tray — thus giving me deep wells and plenty of colour.
Once the squeezed out colour dried (I left it overnight), I was ready for painting!
I wanted to use Aquacryl in fairly traditional watercolour technique: wet in wet, working wash into wash.
As I hinted before, the resolubility of these colours allowed me really to play about with colour and experiment.
I was  particularly interested in creating deep blues in the sea areas, which I did by mixing up different strengths of ultramarine blue.
this colour has great depth and, when thinned out, provides delicate and pale washes for skies.
I obtained bluey greens by intermixing ultramarine with azure blue and/or Lascaux green.
These colours are so strong that you have to thin quite a bit to gain softer tones.
Once this property is understood it can really work to your advantage.
It means you use less paint (cheaper!) and the binder used in these paints leaves behind no residue, as can be the case with gum arabic.
All the colours dry, as watercolour should, to a very matt film, providing a uniform finish.
For the deeper shades of blue in the sea I mixed ultramarine with anthracite black to give an approximation to Paynes grey.
Anthracite black is more of a black grey than a true black, so it is great for tinting other colours to get softer washes.
I used it a lot mixed with transoxide yellow when painting in rock outcrops.
The transoxide colours in the Aquacryl range (transoxide yellow, orange, red, depia and maroon) are very valuable in their own right for transparent earth colours, or for mixing.
I found them perfect for mixing up warmer greens.
The two greens in the Aquacryl range, Lascaux green and Lascaux yellow green, are very intense and strong.
When used neat they may be a little too sharp for most tastes.
I countered this by intermixing with the transoxides.
I also took with me a bottle of Aquacryl Medium.
This milky fluid is the binder for Aquacryl, but without colour.
It can be used for carry colour in washes even further.
Without further dilution with water, the medium can be used to hold the edges of washes.
If you do not want washes to fuse into each other, use a little extra medium with one of the washes.
This should prevent the two washes from intermingling.
It can also be used to make deeper colours and give stronger definition to details.
Mix a little extra medium into undiluted colour and you will find that you have a stronger, deeper colour, which holds up well (brushes out slower).
I used this technique for areas of detail, or when I needed deeper areas in large washes.
I painted such areas first and then worked around and/or over with diluted washes.
Some traces of the deeper areas would then merge slightly if agitated gently with a wet and loaded brush.
By clever use of the medium and washes, all sorts of possibilities open up.
I enjoyed the intensity and versatility of this colour range.
There is a selected range of 25 colours, available in 85ml, 250ml and 500ml bottles, with handy squeezy tops.
The paint is a bit more fluid than standard tube watercolour but, as I have pointed out, colour can be poured into palettes, empty pans or even ice cube trays and reconstituted.
WINNERS OF THE FABER-CASTELL MINIATURE GARDEN DRAWING COMPETITION LEFT First prize of a presentation set of 100 Polychromos coloured pencils and 100 Polychromos pastels, goes to Trevor Hodgkinson from Derbyshire for his Garden Shadows
TOP Second prize of a presentation set of 100 Polychromos coloured pencils goes to Mavis Nwokobia from Bolton for her Winter Garden by Moonlight
ABOVE Third prize of a presentation set of 80 Polychromos pencils goes to Ms. B. Jones from Avon for her Summer Day
For further details about Aquacryl and all other Lascaux Colours, please contact:
12 of a series The art business COPYRIGHT
Copyright is a complex subject and it is vital that the professional artist is aware of the issues involved so that he or she can make the most of opportunities and guard against exploitation.
Oliver Lange explores this important aspect to the business side of being an artist
Because it applies to every piece of work created by the visual artist and designer, copyright is another important aspect of the business side of art.
It is a complex subject, further complicated by the fact that actual points of law are sometimes obscured by myths and inaccurate assumptions.
Therefore it is vital that the professional artist is aware of the broad issues involved, not only so that he or she can make the most of opportunities to promote work, but also in relation to commissions, contracts and other business ventures.
Equally, you need to protect original work from unlawful commercial exploitation, just as you need to ensure that any ideas developed from elsewhere do not infringe someone else's copyright.
The Copyright Design and Patents Act 1988 came into force on August 1 1989 and replaced the rather ambiguous series of Copyright Acts which existed before then, including the Copyright Act of 1956 and the Design Copyright Act of 1968.
Although the new Act reinstated much of the previous copyright law, it also introduced various new measures, including design right, as well as legislation concerning ‘passing off’ and other areas of infringement.
Whilst the Act protects the rights of artists in this country, those whose work is sold or published abroad may need to examine carefully how their work is likely to be affected by laws in other countries.
In fact, many countries are signatories to the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention which lay down agreed minimum standards for all their members.
As far as Europe is concerned, it is hoped that variations in copyright laws can soon be harmonised, especially in respect to the introduction of the Single European market on January 1 1993.
Additionally, the International Association of Art is pressing for an EC Charter for the visual arts.
What is copyright?
Copyright protects your work from being copied or commercially exploited by someone else without your consent.
It gives you the exclusive right to reproduce your work.
To qualify for copyright protection a work of art must be original and must be realised in some medium or form of expression.
Whilst drawings, sketches and designs are all protected because they appear on paper or in some visual and tangible form, the concept or idea for a work is not in itself protected.
you cannot protect the general theme or idea for a piece of sculpture, for example, but rather the fixed expression of it in stone or marble or, as mentioned, specific drawings in charcoal or some other medium worked on paper.
Terms such as‘artistic work’ and ‘original’are, of course open to debate.
The Act does not define what actually constitutes an artistic work, though it is generally accepted that it would cover any product made by an artist or craftsperson, which is normally unique, hand-made and makes a personal expressive statement.
Such work may involve research and reference to other existing works but obviously will not be copied.
Originally infers that the work is innovative rather than derivative, and that it has involved skill and creativity.
Craft items are sometimes more difficult to categorise, for example, a hand-crafted chair or a ceramic pot.
There is a distinction between an article created as a one-off work of art and something made as a practical, utilitarian object and perhaps destined for a production line.
where an item is to be commercially reproduced this will come within design right protection or registered design right protection, and this should be checked.
Individual craft items with a discernible artistic quality will be covered by copyright.
The new Act also covers moral rights.
This means that you are entitled to due attribution where the work is used for some commercial product, display or other purpose and that basically you have the right to object to modification, distortion or any form of derogatory promotion of your work, unless of course you have sanctioned it!
As with  other aspects of copyright where clients and commercial organisations are concerned you should always set down clearly in writing the agreed terms and conditions.
Who owns copyright?
In the context of the Act, all writers, artists, composers and other originators or a work of art are referred to by the title ‘author’.
In most cases the creator (author) owns the copyright, although there are exceptions.
For a work which is specially commissioned or purchased, you may agree to transfer the copyright.
If so, a proper contract should be drawn up to specify this, if, on the other hand, you are employed by someone, perhaps the local council, and the work you create is done under the terms of your employment, then the employer owns the copyright.
The physical ownership of a work does not automatically include ownership of copyright.
When a painting, sculpture or other item of craftwork is sold the ownership of the copyright remains with the artist.
Copyright comes into force immediately on completion or publication of the work and does not normally have to be recorded or registered.
All artists living in Great Britain as well as British subjects overseas are regarded as qualifying persons and are therefore protected under the Act.
The term of copyright protection is for the lifetime of the artist plus 50 years.
if two or more artists collaborate on a project then each can own a separate copyright if the contributions are distinct, or they may own joint copyright int he work if this is not the case.
Similarly, a single work of art can involve more than one copyright — a work which has been photographed, for example.
In such an example, the photographer will own the copyright of the photograph and the artist copyright in the original work.
Many designs and three-dimensional articles are automatically covered by unregistered design right which will protect the work for a maximum of 15 years.
Where a design has been commissioned, the commissioner own the copyright.
Design work can also be registered by application to the Design Registry (ass address).
The design must be new and once registered, will be protected for 25 years.
If the artist dies then copyright becomes part of his/her estate and ownership will pass to any heirs.
A copyright owner can, of course, grant permission or issue a licence or contract for a work to be copied or reproduced in some way, either in part of whole.
Normally, such an agreement will impose strict limitations and involve a fee or royalty payable to the artist.
Various organisations and societies will act on the artist's behalf in this respect and, in return for an annual subscription fee, will deal with necessary paperwork and pass on agreed fees.
The Design and Artist's Copyright Society Ltd (ALCS) are two such organisations (see addresses).
A wide variety of artforms is covered by copyright legislation and, particularly with some of the craft disciplines, it is as well to check the details of the Act of see precisely how your work is classified and covered.
Copyright legislation includes books (both traditional and one-off artworks), calligraphy, cartoons, ceramics, collage, computer works, carious crafts, drawings and designs, engravings, glass, design, paintings, photographs, prints, sculpture, and textiles.
Other works, such as those using photocopying processes, typeface and so on, will also be covered if they are deemed to fit the guidelines described for ‘artistic work’ and ‘original’.
Infringements and enforcements
As a copyright owner you have a legal right to prevent unauthorised copying of your work and as a practising artist you need to be aware of what you can and cannot do with regard to using ‘second-source’ material as ideas for your own work.
There is some provision made within the law for copying a work of part of it without the need to obtain permission.
Remember also that the actual concept or general idea for a work is not normally covered.
Taking the rather obvious theme of the mother and child, for example, this is used over and over again by artists, though each time it must be expressed or interpreted in an individual way.
Indeed, you are permitted to make a faithful copy of a famous painting if you wish, as a means to master a particular technique or learn something of a process or style.
If this is done as an exercise or in an educational context, this is fine.
You must not subsequently display or offer it for sale as your own work!
Other permitted acts include the reproduction of your work by a gallery owner to promote an exhibition which includes your work, and reproductions used in criticisms, reviews and news features.
Many artists work from photographs in books and magazines.
In general, the photograph will be protected by copyright which will be owned by the publisher or perhaps a freelance photographer.
Strictly speaking, if, without permission, you make a painting which is directly based on the photograph you are infringing the copyright.
True, you could argue that you had worked from exactly the same spot as the photographer, but in a court of law the onus would be on you to prove it!
Infringement may take one of two forms: primary or secondary.
Primary infringement means that someone has copied your work and made such copies public, or has authorised someone else to do this.
Secondary infringement is when someone has knowingly dealt with illegal copies of your work from another source.
Copying need not entail the whole of the work, not is it necessary to prove that it was done intentionally.
Copying also includes the use of one image to make another, like constructing a model from someone else's drawing.
Infringements can be dealt with by an out-of-court settlement or if necessary by civil proceedings.
In either case it is advisable to seek professional legal advice.
YOUR QUESTIONS answered
Problems with your painting?
Need some advice?
Send your queries to The Artist and our team of experts will do their best to help
Marine painting
A short while ago I posed a question to the Daily Mirror about the method used by marine artists for putting in the mass of rigging in their paintings — is it put in by brush, pencil, or inks?
A long while ago I watched Tom Keating on TV painting a ship during which he discussed putting on a varnish and painting in the rigging through the varnish as the only means of getting a nice line.
However, I am doing as the Daily Mirror suggested, and am contacting you in the hope that you can give me the answer.
Pip Seymour replies:
I suggested that you experiment in order to find out how to gain the finest and most even line possible.
It is likely that Tom Keating was painting with egg tempera (made by combining egg yolk with dry pigment) onto a varnish, probably a fine resin varnish such as mastic or, even more likely, varnish with linseed oil added, which was still wet.
Mastic varnish will dry in around 15 minutes, so you would have to work quickly.
As the varnish dries, so the egg tempera closes up into a perfectly fine line.
I do not guarantee that this method will work first time and it would be wise to practise first.
My recollections of the programme are vague, but I do recall Keating saying that such methods are easy to adopt, once understood.
Why not lay in the line of tempera, holding the brush against a straight edge, such as a ruler.
I recommend that you use a good brush and learn to paint with it well; if you can master using the brush there will be no need to mess around with varnishes, which in my case will alter the appearance of the painting.
Try using a fine sable rigger brush which will make very precise lines, although this does require patience!
Stretching watercolour paper
How do I stretch watercolour papers so that they remain completely smooth during use?
Obviously, as a watercolourist I often need to flood an entire paper's surface with water.
Currently I use 140lb papers ranging in size from A5 to A2.
However, the larger size paintings cause me considerable problems with buckling and associated paint runs.
My current technique is to soak the paper entirely for five to ten minutes before carefully placing the wet sheet onto a roughly scratched formica board.
I them place gummed strips onto each side with an overlap of about half an inch, which I press firmly until almost dry.
Pip Seymour replies:
it sounds as though you may be over-soaking the paper prior to stretching.
This will cause too much of the size in the paper to leach out, reducing the stability of the paper structure so that when heavy washes are applied the paper simply swells too much.
Watercolour papers are usually internally sized with gelatine (Hot Pressed papers tend also to have a surface sizing) which prevents water and colour from seeping into the paper fibres and through to the back.
Instead of immersing the paper in a bath for five to ten minutes as you mention, simply dampen the paper surface on both sides with a sponge.
It should also help if you leave the paper to rest for a few minutes before stretching with gum strip.
use as little water on the paper prior to stretching as possible.
The papers you are working on are fairly heavy and, unless you are flooding the paper with watercolour, should stand up to washes without the need for stretching.
However, for you it may be best to stretch the paper, in order to avoid buckling during painting, which can be quite a nuisance, as you know!
It may help to take off any surplus moisture from the edges of the paper before you apply the gum strip.
This will help the adhesion of the gum strip to the paper fibres, so eliminating later buckling.
The formica board you are working on may also be contributing to the buckling, as gum strip may not adhere too well.
Try a wooden board and, again, use as little water as possible to moisten the gum strip; too much will make the operation slippery and difficult.
The Peter Welton Paper Stretcher permits wet-in-wet painting without fear of the paper buckling, or the need to use gum strip.
I can flood the paper using this frame and be sure that once dry it will return to a perfectly flat surface.
Peter Welton paints on an ambitious scale (working often on imperial sheets using the frame) and developed the frame to accommodate his technique.
I hope that this advice is useful.
However, I would add that it is best for you to experiment with your paper stretching technique.
All too often advice is taken as being definitive when in truth it is cased only on one person's experience, or a particular way of working.
painting supports
I've a sizeable and airy garden studio — but with much glass and unheated when not in use.
Paper and board alike absorb moisture in the winter.
Platicized oil painting boards curve concavely.
Can you offer any useful ideas?
Pip Seymour replies:
I recommend that, unless you can afford to fit extractor fans and a controlled heating system, you look at the support materials you are currently using.
Acrylic primed canvas boards are prone to warping even in normal atmospheres.
They are often cheaply made and whilst the canvas surface itself will flex with any warpage, this becomes a problem when you have to frame your pictures.
I suggest that instead of these boards you prime thick plyboard or medium density fibreboard with acrylic primer.
use boards of at least 12mm thickness, which should solve the problem.
Store any works away from the studio in a dry, dust and moisture free environment.
If you continue to buy canvas boards, look for those which are advertised as non-warping.
You should also try painting onto stretched cellulose canvases.
Cellulose, unlike cotton duck and linen, does not contract or expand due to atmospheric conditions.
Cellulose canvas is a bit difficult to find in most art shops.
Try Lefranc & Bourgeois' Constant Tension canvases which I believe are made with cellulose, and are acrylic primed and ready stretched.
A. P. Fitzpatrick also stock rolls of acrylic primed cellulose artists' canvas from Viktoria Schutzmann (sold in rolls or metre lengths).
in view
Bernard Denvir reports
Fair art
Art 93, London's Contemporary Art Fair, is alive and well and five years old.
That it still attracts a nucleus of prestigious and established art dealers: Waddington, Raab, Flowers East, Glasgow print Studio amongst others, is a reflection of its vitality, and that new ones are appearing emphasises its buoyancy and optimism.
This year for the first time oceanic and African tribal art will be exhibited by Elms Lesters Painting Rooms and Savannah Gallery.
A popular feature will surely be musician Peter Gabriel's ‘US’ project for which he has commissioned 11 international artists of hugely diverse styles to create images inspired by the tracks on his new album ‘US’; amongst these are British artists David Mach and Andrew Goldsworth, German Rebecca Horn, Israeli Sculptor Zadock Ben David, and Zush who exists in his own self-created state of Evrugo.
Another feature will be an exhibition of portraits by Zsuzsi Roboz of great British artists, and the launch of a book by Edward Lucie-Smith both entitled British Art Now — A Personal View .
Last year's enormously successful ‘Starter's Corner’ is being repeated, presided over by the Contemporary Art Society, who will be stressing the accessibility and affordability of contemporary art with minimum prices at £150.
Festival finale
The European Arts Festival which enlivened the scene throughout 1992 goes out with a bang at the Barbican Centre with an explosion of artistic events.
The Fine Arts will be represented by an exhibition ‘Twelve Stars’, which offers the British public an opportunity to view a selection of contemporary art from the European parliament's Collection.
it was initially the brainchild of Patricia Rawlings MEP, spokesperson on the European parliament's Cultural Committee, and though it includes both established figures from the UK and Europe, focuses on the emerging talents of young British artists showing the innumerable ways of interpreting old ideas.
Painting and innovative photography predominate in work such as Helen Chapman's illuminated portrait of her brain, and Paul Graham's probing analysis of the destruction of the Berlin Wall.
All of them show as Tate Gallery director Nicholas Serota states ‘a renewed interest in abstract painting, often based on a distilled observation of the urban or material world, and exploration of that world by means of the camera.’
The masks of Matisse
New light on an Old Master is illuminated indeed, and it's what you will find at Canada House Gallery where for the first time, an almost forgotten body of work by Henri Matisse, relating to his fascination with the Canadian Inuit, has been mounted together with much original source material in the way of Inuit masks, photographs and books which the artist studied.
That early 20th century artists were bewitched and influenced by so called‘primitive’ artefacts is a commonplace fact of art history, but the specific plotting and documentation of this interest is rare.
it was Matisse's son-in-law Georges Duthuit, a scholar of Iniut culture, who initially alerted the artist's eye with his collection of Eskimo masks.
This initial introduction was supplemented by texts and photographs of the 5th Thule Expedition to Arctic America currently of great topical significance.
Much explanatory and archival material is on display and it will round off 1992's anniversary celebrations: the discovery of the new World and the 125th year of the founding of the Canadian Confederation.
Drawings and watercolours
Once again the popular show ‘The World of Drawings and Watercolours’ will be taking place at the Park Lane Hotel, and Spink and Son will be at Stand M1 with as distinguished a collection as ever.
Work from the 18th, 19th and early 20th century will be on view and travelling artists such as Samuel Prout, David Roberts, Edward Lear, George Chinnery will be specially featured.
Camden Town and Bloomsbury will be represented by choice examples.
For those who like botanical studies the tropical plants of Catherine Planney who worked in India at the end of the 18th century, will be an attraction.
Satanic mills transformed
The rapidly changing and fast disappearing ‘industrial  landscape’ of England is making the familiar works of L. S. Lowry a rather whimsical soft-focus evocation of the history of these islands, as though they are recording just another aspect of embalmed English heritage.
The Towner Art Gallery in Eastbourne is giving the denizens of the south coast an opportunity to experience the start bleakness of the northern territories so empathically visualised by the unique and eccentric rent-collector with his visionary eye and ability to create beauty out of mean streets and the world of factories and warehouses.
Oxonian collation
Wintry blizzards and January gloom may be ameliorated at the start of this year by a warming ragout of exhibitions at various venues in Oxford.
Food is the theme at Oxford Gallery in the High Street from January 11 to February 10, where its interpretation will be as multifarious as the artists themselves.
Sophie MacCarthy is a potter, whose connections with the Bloomsbury group are strongly evident in her resonant use of subtle colours and glazes.
Howard Raybould, a wizard with wood, makes free-standing carved pieces of bowls of fruit and wreathes mirror frames with ribbons and garlands possessing the baroque virtuosity of a latter-day Grinling Gibbons, while Robert Jones, a Cornish painter, produces still lifes as nourishing to the spirit as the stomach.
Other talents add tapestry, toys and ceramics to the groaning board.
The Museum of Modern Art, 30 Pembroke Street, from January 24 to March 28 is reviewing the opus of that doyen of American minimalist and conceptual art, Sol Le Witt, presenting a concise historical survey of his career from 1963 to the present rooted in the Bauhaus, and fruiting so to speak in the fashion and perfume house of Nina Ricci (sponsors of this show) for which he has designed packaging for the manly fragrance Ricci Club.
A more exotic course on the menu can be sampled at the Ashmolean Museum which is displaying until February 7 Indian paintings and drawings of the Mughal period (16th to 19th century) from the collection of the painter Howard Hodgkin, one of the most individual and visually exciting in private hands.
it is especially rich in work from the Rajput courts, many unusually large in size, and vibrant in line and colour.
For desserts and digestifs where better than the Christ Church Picture Gallery, Canterbury Gate & Oriel Square where a selection of the College's renowned collection of Old Master drawings will be on view.
All kinds of wild beasts and domestic animals may be enjoyed in ‘All Creatures Great and Small’ until January 11, as well as pictures of The nativity by such Italian practitioners as Passarotti, Polidoro, and Cavedone, until march 2.
Norwegian pair
To compliment and complete the Scandinavian experience we ‘ve been having this winter, The Whitworth Art Gallery and the Fitzwilliam Museum have collaborated to organise the first exhibition here of Norway's most outstanding landscape painters, Johan christian Dahl (1788–1857) and Thomas Fearnley (1802–42).
Both painters worked and studied outside their own country.
Dahl for much of the time in Dresden, in the same house as the German Romantic painter Caspar David Griedrich, and both were dazzled and bewitched by the golden luminosity of Italy.
They were working at about the same time as Turner and Constable and shared those artists’ concerns in relation to painting directly from nature, which Dahl described as Naturvei — nature's Way .
On extended trips to their native land they produced vigorous and fluent drawings and sketches of their dramatic and mountainous country using all their collected expertise to capture and convey that image or Norway by which we know it today.
OPPOSITE PAGE Untitled Inuit face, 1949, aquatint, 33×26″ (83.8×66 cm).
Copyright Succession Henri Matisse.
On show at Canada House
LEFT Thomas Fearnley the painter and the Boy, 1834, oil, 10¼×14½″ (26.5×37 cm) BELOW J.C.
Dahl Scene from the Villa malta, 1821, oil 13¾×15⅛″ (13.5×38.5 cm).
Both paintings on show at the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester
Around the Art Societies
In the first of a new series Jane Stroud examines the opportunities offered to artists by the AOI
1 THE ASSOCIATION OF ILLUSTRATORS
ABOVE Simon Stern The Pan Book of Famous Quotations, cover illustration, commissioned by Jim Stanton, and exhibited at last year's AOI Images show.
Simon comments: ‘I have been involved with the AOI since it started in 1973.
At that time the only market for illustrators was in children's books, the Radio times and realistic stuff for women's magazines and paperbacks.
The AOI set out to change all that and has succeeded beyond anybody's expectations, illustration in the UK is better in quality and greater in quantity and variety than in any other European country.
I am still surprised, when I consider what loners most illustrators are, that the organisation continues to survive — though it suffers from the fact that too many artists leave once they have become established and feel they no longer need its help so much.
I don't think they realise how much background work on things like copyright it does, which benefits everyone.’
Since 1973 the Association of illustrators has been fulfilling a much needed role in the illustration industry.
its primary aims were, and still are, to encourage professional standards in the industry by supporting and promoting illustrators — the only body of its kind in this country to represent and campaign for illustrators' rights.
the Association now has a membership of approximately 1,500, comprising freelance illustrators and agents, tutors, students and clients.
The benefits offered to members are excellent, giving practical help and advice on all aspects of self-promotion from presentation of art work, legal rights, gallery space competitions and exhibitions, to making the right contacts and indeed making friends, through the Regional Groups of AOI members who regularly organise both social and professional activities to stimulate interest and support for the profession.
Some of the main areas are listed here, but the AOI stresses that staff are always at the end of the telephone to answer queries on a whole range of subjects.
Benefits
On the practical side all members are offered a free portfolio consultation with a professional consultant who will give advice on your strong and weak points as well as make suggestions about the most suitable clients and agents to approach for your particular type of work.
Exclusive to AOI members is The Image File .
This is a comprehensive slide collection of illustrators' work, which is open for clients to visit and from which they can select the illustrators' work, which is open for clients to visit and from which they can select the illustrators they consider to be most suitable for a particular job.
it's an ideal way of making sure that your work is continuously on display to the right people.
Another practical consideration is the cost of art materials, and AOI members are automatically entitled to a ten per cent discount at one of their nationwide discount stores on production of their membership card.
The AOI staff are always at hand to advise members on legal aspects of the industry, such as contracts, copyright, ownership of artwork, royalties and fees.
For particularly difficult legal queries, the AOI has a specialist solicitor available to clarify certain points and if necessary advice will be given about how to take further steps to resolve a particular case.
Members are also offered an hour's free business advice from a chartered accountant.
A bi-monthly journal, free to members, gives up-to-date information on news and current issues, exhibition listings and advance notice of competitions, opportunities and open exhibitions for illustrators.
Entry forms to all illustration competitions are automatically sent to members, making sure that no opportunities are missed.
A major event of the illustrator's diary is the annual images exhibition, now in its 17th year.
This is the only major exhibition of contemporary British illustrations, run as a competition, with a major touring exhibition of selected works.
Seminars and talks
The AOI itself also organises a number of seminars and talks on a wide range of topics.
As well as receiving priority bookings, members are entitled to reduce tickets to these events.
Students interested in a career in illustration are also welcome to attend their annual student seminar.
Publications
The AOI has published guides on both the practical and business sides of being an illustrator,Rights: The Illustrators Guide to professional practice , gives indispensable advice on all aspects of the law that are likely to affect illustrators.
Rights costs £15 to members, £25 to non-members.
Survive: the Illustrators Guide to a Professional Career covers all you'll need to know about getting started and self-promotion.
Survive costs ‘7 to members; £9 to non-members.
Annual membership fees to the AOI are on a sliding scale dependent on the member's gross profit.
For example, student: £35; first year out: up to £8,000: £70; up to £13,000: £80; up to £18,000: £90; over £18,000: £110.
For an application form contact the Association of Illustrators,
Opportunities
ART FAIRS/FESTIVALS
World of Drawings and Watercolours
The 1993 Fair will be held at the Park Lane Hotel, Piccadilly W1, between January 20 and 24.
This is the only fair of its kind devoted exclusively to original works on paper and provides a showcase for over 50 leading galleries and dealers.
Work ranges from Old Master drawings from the 16th century to early watercolours, later 19th century examples, the pre-Raphaelite school European works and modern and contemporary drawings and paintings, ranging in price from £100 to many thousands.
Coinciding with the Fair will be a major exhibition at the Royal Academy of Arts, Piccadilly ‘British Watercolours — the Great Age (1750–1880)’ which runs from January 15 to April 11.
The Fair opens at 11 am and closes at 8 pm; 7 pm on the last two days.
CHRISTMAS OFFER
Tate Gallery Liverpool Supporters
the Tate Gallery Liverpool are discounting their subscription rates for new members by up to 50 per cent until January 2, offering an unusual and original christmas present.
The cost of a single membership will be reduced from £15 to £10; joint membership from £20 to £15 and concessionary membership from £10 to £5.
Subscriptions to the Supporters affords a wide range of benefits including free admission to paying exhibitions at the Tate Gallery Liverpool and the Tate Gallery in London, invitations to exclusive private views, special Supporters events and visits to other galleries.
Cheques should be made payable to Tate Gallery Liverpool Supporters and addressed to the Membership Secretary,
EXPEDITION
Raleigh International
Raleigh International (formerly Operation Raleigh) is looking for a number of fine artists to accompany its three month expeditions during 1993 to some of the most remote and beautiful parts of the world.
The successful applicants will join the expeditions as voluntary staff members and will be responsible for maintaining a full portfolio record of the conservation and community projects which form the central focus of the expeditions.
In addition they will be expected to encourage the young participants, aged 17 to 25, to create a record of their own experiences through a series of workshops.
Those interested should write, enclosing a c.v.
to:
LECTURES
Edvard Munch: the Frieze of Life
To coincide with the major exhibition at the national Gallery, which continues until February 7, a series of lunchtime lectures will be held in the Sainsbury Wing Theatre at 1 pm.
Admission is free and no booking is required.
For details contact the national Gallery on & 
On Saturday January 23 there will be a Study Day on the theme of the exhibition.
Tickets cost £12 and are bookable in advance through the Theatre Administrator;
On Tuesday January 26 Michael Wilson will give a special lecture prior to late evening admission to the exhibition.
Tickets cost £8.
To book pease telephone the Theatre Administrator on 
Tate Gallery Lectures
On Thursday, December 17 in Room 24, Alex Seago will talk on ‘Peter Blake: An English Pop Artist’; Friday 18 in the Lower Galleries at 1 pm Charles Hustwick will talk on ‘Beardsley to Bomberg: British Drawings and Watercolours’, on Saturday December 19 in the Auditorium at 1 pm Laurence Bradbury will talk about ‘Peter Blake: original Pop’; Sunday December 20 at 2.30 pm in the Auditorium, Laurence Bradbury will talk on ‘Ivon Hitchens: natural Abstraction’, and on Sunday December 27 at 2.30 in the Auditorium, Laurence Bradbury will talk about ‘A Sequence of 20th Century ‘Isms’, Lectures are free and no prior booking is required.
For further details contact the Tate Gallery,
SENDING-IN DAYS
Lasting Impressions
lasting Impressions is an open print exhibition at the Victoria Art Gallery, Bridge Street, Bath, to take place from January 30 to march 13.
The sending-in days for entries are January 22 and 23 between 10 am and 4.30 pm.
Entry forms must be received by Monday January 4 1993.
For entry forms and details, send a sae to: The Exhibitions Secretary,
LEFT Samuel Prout (1783–1852) Strasbourg, France, pen and brown ink and water, 10¾×8″ (27.3×20.3 cm)(Spink & Son) on show at the World of Drawings and Watercolours at the Park Lane Hotel.
Two lectures will take place at the Fair on January 21; the first at 2.30 pm.
Anthony Lester ‘Watercolours for the Modest Collector’; the second at 6 pm, Mary Anne Stevens ‘The Watercolour Reconsidered’.
Tickets (£12 each) can be ordered from: 2 Barb Mews, London W6 7PA
the Society of Women Artists
The 132nd annual open exhibition of the Society of Women Artists will take place at the Westminster Gallery, Westminster Central Hall, Storey's Gate, London SW1 from march 19 to 30.
Handing-in day for works: January 19 between 10 am and 5 pm.
Entry forms and details are available on the day or by sending a sae to SWA (Schedules),
Manchester Academy of Fine Arts
The 134th annual open exhibition will take place at the Manchester City Art Gallery, Mosley Street, Manchester from February 7 to march 14.
This is open to painters, printers and sculptors and over £6,000 worth of cash prizes are to be awarded.
The submission days are January 22 and 23, sculpture will be selected by photographs will be selected by photographs received by January 20.
For details send a sae to:
FRAMING
This month SHEILA FAIRBRASS advises on how to attach a watercolour painting or etching to a firm backing board and explains the safest method for sticking collage pieces in place
Regular readers of The Artist and this column may sometimes wonder if there is any method in the choice of subjects that I cover.
Well, yes, there is; in my head at least.
However, my master plan is invariably dropped in favour of readers' questions.
After all, this magazine is produced for you.
Those of you who write in enclosing a stamped addressed envelope will eventually get a personal reply.
Any questions of general interest are also answered on this page, In the last month I have given advice on queries ranging from where to buy exactly the right picture hook to setting up a framing project group in a school.
This month I shall being by answering a query from a reader in Surrey, who starts by asking if he should glue a watercolour or etching to a backing board, or hinge it by one edge only.
He suggests using masking tape or brown sticky tape hinges.
First, you should not use masking tape under any circumstances.
My five-year-old godson's grandparents brought him a small, framed drawing for his christening present.
Last year his parents gave it to me to restore.
It had a nasty, disfiguring stain running along the whole of the top edge.
When I opened the frame I found, as I expected, that the drawing had been hinged with masking tape.
It took me a long time to remove the stain.
So the lesson is that if you use masking tape, or any other pressure sensitive tape, to hinge your works of art on paper, you should expect them to be showing yellow stains form the adhesive in four to five years time.
It is no use blaming the manufacturers.
These tapes are not made for hinging pictures.
I use either Japanese tissue and wheat starch paste or acid-free framer's tape to hinge pictures.
Gummed framing tape and wheat starch paste, packaged in small quantities, are included in the Lineco range and can be ordered by mail order from Preservation Equipment Ltd,.
If you contact them ask for the Lineco Catalogue No L533–1000.
As a paper conservator, I cannot unreservedly recommend all of the products in this range but the gummed tapes are very useful.
If you are really desperate you can use ordinary brown gummed paper tape as hinges but do try and experiment first.
Take an imperial sheet of cartridge paper and a small roll of gummed tape.
This will probably be about three-quarters of an inch wide.
Cut off two, inch long pieces of gummed tape and, moistening no more than one-quarter of an inch on each strip, stick them on the top edge of your cartridge paper by holding the brown paper hinges and give it a good shake.
See if you can dislodge the hinges.
You will have to be very rough to make any impression on the brown paper tape, and even then the chances are that you will rip the cartridge paper before you break the bond between the two papers.
The glue on brown gummed paper is very strong.
You do not need to stick huge amounts of it onto your works of art to hold them in place.
Collage
The second question was about sticking collage pieces in place.
Our reader does not like using water-based gums because they stretch and buckle the paper.
He has used Cow Gum but this has eventually resulted in a yellow stain coming through the paper.
He thought the paper might have been unsatisfactory.
Unfortunately, I have to say that it is the Cow Gum that is at fault here.
If my godson's picture had been hinged with this we would have to had to learn to live with the stain.
I have never been able to remove the inevitable bright yellow stain it produces and neither has any other paper conservator that I know.
Cow Gum is made for lay-out work.
Because it has low ‘tack’ you can peel the collage pieces away and reposition them.
But if you leave it on the back of the paper it slowly dries out and turns bright yellow, staining the paper in the process.
The only safe method is to use water-based pastes, despite all their difficulties.
After all, if Matisse and Picasso used this method, then so can you.
Damp and stretch out your backing paper onto a drawing board, tape it round the edges with gummed tape and let it dry.
Cut out the collage pieces and position them on the backing and mark their places lightly with a pencil.
If you look closely at L'Escargot by Matisse in the Tate Gallery you can just see the pencil marks round the collage pieces.
Put your collage piece face down on a wad of white kitchen paper and paste the back.
Position it on the backing and cover it with two or three sheets of white blotting paper and a weight (books are quite useful).
After about five minutes you may need to change the blotters but, eventually, when it looks as if it is not going to curl, you can remove the weight and let it air dry.
You might get a slight off-set onto the blotters and you may have to retouch some areas.
It is all really a matter of manual dexterity and self-confidence.
Finally, should you stick works of art on paper down onto a backing board?
On the whole I would advise against it, even if you are using a conservation board backing board.
Surprisingly it does devalue the works for collectors and museums who will want to see the back of the picture.
Perhaps more important is the loss of aesthetic value.
All paper, especially hand-made paper, is never really flat.
It expands and contracts with the moisture in the air.
Sticking it down puts the paper under tension and, for me at least changes the surface qualities of the picture.
Book Reviews
ART IN PRINT
Townscapes in Watercolour
I have been fortunate recently to review several well-written books in which the author's genuine dedication and enthusiasm for his or her subject is obvious and contagious.
Richard Taylor's book is no exception.
Any doubts about the potential or the urban scene are soon diminished as we sense the excitement of stalking streets and alleyways, docklands, terraces or quiet corners discovering the rich contrasts of shapes, textures, skylines and architectural features.
Convincing, too, is his argument that watercolour is the ideal medium for capturing the street ‘atmosphere’, the paly of light and suggestion of form, especially when time is limited.
Advocating the use of pen sketching as a means of quick and decisive location drawing, the author's line illustrations are a delight.
Indeed, the use of the sketchbook is rightly emphasised.
there are some brief notes on materials and equipment before we are urged to make a start by considering perspective and look for blocks of light and shade and the elements of geometry and symmetry.
Each of the section on Urban Architecture.
Cityscape, Hight Corners, and Terraces, has plenty of examples and demonstrations as well as introduces specific technical considerations and encourages us to look at and study architectural characteristics.
The text details the methods used in the selected illustrations and is spiced with good advice and instruction.
Townscapes in Watercolour is splendid in every respect.
it is well designed and produced, attractive, informative, and inspirational.
Though illustrated in colour throughout with many fine paintings by the author the book is nevertheless a touch expensive at £17.99.
My one, half-hearted reservation is that there seems just a hint that the ‘rural’ artist with his scenes of idyllic country peace has an easier task.
Something which I can positively refute!
See What I mean?
An Introduction to Visual Communication
In its wide range of forms, whether a road sign, a photographic image, or a subtle advertisement, visual communication is a constant influence in shaping out daily lives and colouring our attitudes and opinions.
for the artist as well as developing an awareness of the variety of the theoretical and practical skills which aid good visual impact and help others see that you mean, there is added value in exploring the subject in an historical contact.
What can we learn, for example, from the communication skills of Munch, Escher, Lichtenstein, Goya or Gainsborough?
In soft-back format with 150 pages, the new, revised edition of See What I Mean is co-authored by John Morgan and Peter Welton, who is well-known to readers of The Artist as a holiday course tutor and regular contributor.
The book is primarily concerned with the different aspects of communication theory.
How, for example, education, culture, psychological and physiological factors influence the way we react to an image.
The relevance of visual communication and the reasons why pictures are designs provoke a certain response are unravelled with an absorbing ind informative text backed by numerous skilfully selected examples and illustrations.
Visual communication is not the exclusive domain of the graphic designer or the advertising executive.
Fine artists, too, have a message to get across and equally can benefit from a better understanding of their ‘consumers’ and the associated concepts and theories.
And, whether you are at the communication source or its destination, this book proves fascinating reading.
H.R.H.
The Prince of Wales Watercolours
Always an important and influential patron of the arts, the Royal Family has recognised that a necessary part of any civilised person's education is to acquire a knowledge and appreciation of painting.
therefore it is not surprising occasionally to find a member of the Royal Family who is keen to develop this interest in a more practical manner.
The Prince of Wales has an obvious love of the countryside and for 20 years he has somehow found some private time to express this through the medium of watercolour painting.
In his excellent introduction to this book, John Ward describes the Prince as ‘an amateur in the best sense of the word…he works for the love of it; seriously, modestly, with much thought as well as appetite.’
Certainly, in many of his works the Prince has juggled well with the varied problems of painting and has produced a sensitive and interesting result.
The idea for the book developed from exhibitions of the prince's work in Urbino and Salisbury.
Over 70  paintings from the last five years are included, each with some comments by the artist on the facing page.
This creates a very personal album of immense interest, with location paintings from places as varied as Windsor and Wensleydale, Balmoral and Botswana.
Years ago, the young Prince used to watch Edward Seago at work.
He learnt one thing: ‘that to paint in watercolour is far more difficult than it looks.’
But, unperturbed and dissatisfied with photography, the Prince has persevered to express his love of nature through paint.
Absorbing both to read and to view, the book will, I am sure, tempt many others to follow the Prince's example.
Oil Painting — Beginners' Guide
Studio Vista Guides are unrivalled in their informative straightforward reference for the beginner.
When I say ‘beginner’ I don't mean dabbler!
These volumes are aimed to provide serious students with the rudiments of the craft, and yet to launch them from the craft into inspired practice.
As Patricia Monahan says ‘oil-painting should be a journey of exploration and pleasure’, adding that ‘the artist sets off in a particular direction but ends up somewhere else.’
How to get ‘somewhere else’ is laid out clearly.
Fully illustrated demonstrations and three easy-to-follow projects have been planned and here I quote ‘to help the beginner create lively, colourful and successful paintings’.
Stage paintings are laid out clearly and well photographed.
Methods and techniques are covered from priming your canvas to laying out colour on the palette.
From studio furniture to choice of subject matter (indoors or out), a great deal of ground is covered.
In no-nonsense fashion Stan Smith shows us in stages how to tackle a still life, a flower piece, or an outdoor scene — like a boatyard.
And sturdy paintings they are too.
Only experience and personal teaching can do more than this to sharpen your talents.
Confidence grows with experience, but a book like this, chockful with essential reference, will provide a solid stepping-stone.
It is full of ideas to try out and everyone should do just as it recommends.
An explanatory and stimulating reference.
Gardens in Watercolour
With plenty of helpful information and illustrated throughout in full colour, Wendy Jelbert's delightful book will prove an inviting source of encouragement and inspiration to many watercolourists.
From her work as a professional painter and teacher she passes on the many tips, secrets and techniques that she has learned over the years and shows how gardens, with their immense variety and colour, can provide the artist with endless ideas.
Watercolour is taken to include gouache and bottle artists' colour as well as the traditional transparent medium.
There is a brief but pertinent section on materials and techniques, including some illustrated exercises.
This is followed by a look at the structure of some plants and trees and hints on composition.
also included are sections on painting different types of gardens, such as water gardens and large gardens, as well as individual features, figures, pets and garden wildlife, some ‘tricks of the trade’, and several step-by-step demonstrations.
This is a lively book, full of friendly advice and interesting ideas.
As the author says, ‘All the would-be garden painter has to do is to stop and look.’
Alwyn Crawshaw paints on Holiday
Alwyn Crawshaw is, as usual, our cheerful tutor and guide on this liberally illustrated painting trip of some 130 pages.
He proves, once again, how well he writes.
Few can help but be enthused by his confidence, common sense, and bonhomie.
His talent for inspiring, and his rational working demonstrations explain his ongoing success.
The journey starts in Majorca where the TV series was made and of which this book is the progeny.
It moves on afterwards to a variety of holiday destinations throughout Britain and Europe.
Sometimes he is accompanied by his wife June, who also paints; at others, his students are in tow.
Subject matter can often be fleeting — never more so than when on holiday.
When this is combined with film deadlines, the resulting anecdotes are often highly entertaining.
The book is full of sound advice however.
Lucidly, for instance, he explains how to counteract the ‘around the next corner’ syndrome which bugs all painter-travellers; that will o' the wisp that tempts us all to go on ad infinitum , seeking the ‘perfect’view, leaving us dispirited and fruitless.
He writes on the virtues of travelling light — his ‘pochade’ box always with him.
He shows how to keep our painting eyes skinned for the people and landscapes we will encounter.
And machines, like the lovely old tram car in Majorca, or a rusty car in Provence, nestling among the weeds.
In a sense it's this, the unexpected, we all hope to bring back with us from such trips.
There is a long and useful section on making the best of your snap-shots when you return home.
Alwyn shows us what a valuable tool the camera is, in conjunction with on-the-spot sketching.
The very phrase ‘taking a photograph’ suggests a felony, and it can upset the natives.
Sometimes there are often religious objections.
On the other hand painting in situ often arouses friendly interest.
The paintings you bring back retain so much more in memories and association than photographs.
A painting holiday demands a little more input than a vacant fortnight on the beach.
But what rewards!
Alwyn's book conveys all this.
Come rain, come winter evenings, sit down and enjoy the narrative and sound instruction in this holiday adventure.
And then plan your own!