

INTRODUCTION
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Scotland and Wales) and Northern Ireland (Central Office of Information, 1989); its full name is the United Kingdom (UK) of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term for the group of islands off the northwest coast of Europe.
The Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France are largely self-governing; they are not part of the United Kingdom.
Britain is, in relation to its size, remarkably well-endowed with mineral resources, the type and distribution of which are related to the complex geological and tectonic history of the British Isles and the adjacent continental shelf area.
Non-ferrous metal mining has been an industry of major importance in several areas.
In South-west England tin, copper and other metals have been mined for at least 2000 years from deposits related to Variscan granites; in the Pennine range of central and northern England over a similar period, lead, and lately fluorite and baryte, have been extracted from vein and replacement deposits in Carboniferous sediments; in Central Wales, the Isle of Man and the Southern Uplands of Scotland lead and zinc have been mined from vein deposits in Lower Palaeozoic greywackes and in the Lake District copper, lead and zinc have been recovered from a variety of deposits in Lower Palaeozoic sedimentary and volcanic rocks underlain by Caledonian granites.
The formerly important Jurassic ironstones of central and eastern England, the Carboniferous haematites of the Lake District and South Wales and the ironstones of the Coal Measures have been almost entirely abandoned due to competition from high-grade imported ores and the exhaustion of some deposits.
Crude oil and natural gas have become the dominant mineral commodities by value during the last two decades with the development of the North Sea as a major petroleum province.
Coal mining remains important to the national economy with both deep mined and opencast output.
Major discoveries of Tertiary lignite have recently been made in Northern Ireland.
The production of industrial minerals is dominated by low unit value, but very large tonnage, construction minerals, such as sand, gravel and limestone.
However, Britain is also a major producer of a number of other industrial minerals including barytes, ball clay, china clay, fluorspar, fuller's earth, gypsum, potash, salt and silica sand.
Annual production of minerals is shown in Table 1.
GEOLOGY AND STRUCTURE
The geology of Britain may conveniently be divided into a relatively small number of chronostratigraphic units as shown in Figure 1.
The generalised tectonic framework is shown in Figure 2.
The following summary is based on a large volume of published information, but notable sources include Anderton and others (1979), Hancock (1983), Harris and others (1979) and Windley (1984).
More detailed information is given in the series of Handbooks on the Regional Geology of Great Britain and Northern Ireland published by HMSO for the British Geological Survey.
Precambrian
The oldest rocks are the Precambrian (Archaean) Lewisian high-grade gneisses (2900 Ma) of north-west Scotland.
They include fragmented layered basic and ultrabasic intrusions and also younger Lower Proterozoic (2000 Ma) supracrustal sedimentary and volcanic rocks which host the Gairloch Cu-Zn deposit.
They lie on the eastern margin of the North Atlantic craton and form the North-west Foreland (Figure 2).
They occur mainly west of the Moine Thrust and are unconformably overlain by thick, undeformed Proterozoic (1000 Ma) Torridonian red bed arkoses and siltstones which are almost entirely unmineralised.
The thick, shallow water clastic sediments of the Proterozoic (1250Ma) Moine Supergroup Iying to the east of the Moine Thrust are highly tectonised and metamorphosed to granulite facies in places.
They are almost unmineralised except where they contain tectonic slices of the underlying Lewisian basement.
Another Precambrian block, formed by the Midlands Microcraton of Central England (Figure 2), is almost entirely concealed by younger rocks.
Its boundaries are largely conjectural (Pharoah and others, 1987).
Dalradian
The Moine Supergroup is overlain to the south-east by the more lithologically diverse late Proterozoic to early Palaeozoic Dalradian Supergroup.
This succession contains thick clastic sediments and local basic volcanics in a series of extensional ensialic basins.
It formed on the north side of the expanding lapetus Ocean which opened between the North Atlantic and Eurasian continents in late Precambrian times.
Extension in the early Cambrian led to the eruption of the basic Tayvallich Volcanic Formation in western Scotland.
The major Aberfeldy Ba-Pb-Zn and minor Vidlin Cu-Zn deposits occur in the Dalradian of Central Scotland and the Shetlands respectively.
Accretion of the Precambrian Southern Uplands basement onto the North-west Foreland during the early Ordovician caused extensive tectonism in the Moine and Dalradian successions, the Grampian orogeny, with metamorphism up to amphibolite grade.
The Dalradian and Moine successions form the ‘orthotectonic Caledonides’(Figure 2).
Subduction of the northern Iapetus Ocean floor then switched in Ordovician times from under the Midland Valley to under the Southern Uplands basement and an island arc developed.
The Ballantrae ophiolite sequence was obducted onto the basement margin.
Lower Palaeozoic
Lower Palaeozoic formations in Wales and the Lake District consist of early basic to acid volcanics and volcaniclastic sediments with later thick basinal greywacke turbidites.
The two continental blocks of the North Atlantic and Eurasian cratons were on opposite sides of the Iapetus Ocean, which was gradually closing in a complex way with subduction on both sides.
The Southern Uplands of Scotland, together with the Down-Longford massif in Northern Ireland, formed an accretionary prism on the leading edge of the North Atlantic block.
Extensive volcanism occurred during the Ordovician in the Lake District and Wales (and also in the concealed Lower Palaeozoic rocks to the east of the Midlands Microcraton) as southward subduction of the lapetus Ocean floor continued.
Thin Cambrian quartzites and limestones were deposited on the continental shelf of the North-west Foreland.
Mineralisation occurred in North Wales during the Lower Palaeozoic with the formation of the Coed y Brenin porphyry copper deposit in Cambrian diorite and the Parys Mountain Cu-Pb-Zn volcanogenic massive sulphide deposit in Ordovician volcanic and sedimentary rocks.
Caledonian orogeny
Closure of the Iapetus Ocean was complete by late Silurian to early Devonian times along the line of the Iapetus suture in northern England (Figure 2).
There was further deformation of the Moine and Dalradian rocks on the north side of the Iapetus Suture causing metamorphism up to granulite grade and widespread granitic intrusion.
The south side of the suture, and the Southern Uplands accretionary prism, was less highly tectonised.
The main effect was the development of a pervasive slaty cleavage to form the ‘paratectonic Caledonides’(Figure 2).
Although granites are apparently less common than in the orthotectonic Caledonides a number of concealed granites have been indicated by gravity studies in the last twenty five years.
Some, such as those underlying Weardale and Wensleydale in northern England, have been proved by drilling.
Others, such as those around the Wash in eastern England, remain unproven.
Lower Palaeozoic rocks overlying the Midlands Microcraton were almost undeformed.
The Caledonian orogeny was a period of intense metalliferous mineralisation.
Granite-associated Cu Au, Mo and W mineralisation occurs in Scotland and the Lake District.
Sediment-hosted Pb-Zn vein mineralisation occurs in Central Wales, the Southern Uplands, the Lake District and the Isle of Man.
Cu-Ni sulphides are associated with basic and ultrabasic intrusions in north-east Scotland.
Quartz veins of probable Caledonian age, with economic Au mineralisation, have recently been discovered in the Dalradian of Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Upper Palaeozoic
The Upper Palaeozoic Devonian to Permian successions were mainly deposited on a stable platform and consist predominantly of clastic and carbonate sediments.
Local extensional basins, such as those of Craven and Northumberland, developed in the early Carboniferous.
General continued subsidence led to the deposition of thick deltaic mudstones and sandstones with associated workable coals in the late Carboniferous (Westphalian).
These were followed in Permian times by thick evaporites and desert sandstones.
The Midland Valley of Scotland developed as an internal molasse trough during the early Devonian with thick calc-alkaline lavas and clastic red-bed facies sediments derived from the erosion of the adjacent Caledonian mountains.
It is bounded to the north by the Highland Boundary Fault and to the south by the Southern Uplands Fault.
In South-west England block and basin limestones and shales and spilitic basic volcanics were laid down in an extensional basin developed at the western end of the Rheno-Hercynian zone.
Shallow water clastic sediments were deposited in north Devon, which lay on the northern margin of the basin.
Contemporaneous mineralisation includes uranium in Devonian arkoses and anoxic shales in the lacustrine Orcadian basin in northern Scotland, and salt, gypsum and potash deposits of Upper Permian age in northern England.
Minor synsedimentary Pb-Zn mineralisation occurs in the early Carboniferous of the Craven Basin and around the Devonian/Carboniferous boundary in South-west England.
The Craven Basin mineralisation shows some similarities to the important early Carboniferous Zn-Pb deposits, such as those at Navan in the Republic of Ireland.
Variscan orogeny
The Variscan orogeny from late Devonian to early Permian times was caused by a very complex series of movements and collisions between Europe, Africa and North America.
The main areas affected in Britain were southern England and South Wales (Figure 2).
The orogeny caused deformation and tectonism and culminated in the emplacement of the high heat flow, Cornubian batholith which extends for 230 km from the Scilly Isles to Dartmoor.
The batholith is exposed as a series of large bosses and minor cupolas with which the Sn-Cu-W mineralisation of South-west England is associated.
More gentle folding and faulting occurs to the north of the Variscan front where Dinantian carbonates host Pb-F-Ba mineralisation in the Northern and Southern Pennine orefields, North Wales and the Mendips.
Replacement haematite deposits formed near the contact of Dinantian carbonates and overlying Triassic sandstones in the western Lake District and South Wales.
Post-Palaeozoic — Present
Post-Palaeozoic formations consist mainly of shallow water, marine clastics and limestones with little metalliferous mineralisation apart from Jurassic ironstones.
A large Tertiary basic to acid igneous province in north-west Scotland and Northern Ireland consists of extensive tholeiitic flood basalts and numerous major volcanic centres.
A thick sequence of varied Tertiary sediments, including lignite seams up to 140 m thick and averaging over 40 m in some areas, infill depressions in the basalt surface in Northern Ireland.
Minor deposits of bauxite and laterite were formed during the contemporaneous weathering of basalt lava flows.
The whole country, apart from the extreme south-west, was affected by Quaternary glaciation.
This caused deep erosion in upland areas and has left widespread superficial deposits.
RECENT EXPLORATION AND DISCOVERIES
Mineral exploration of fluctuating intensity has continued in Britain over the last twenty years.
A useful review of some of this work is given in Anon. (1982a) and only a summary is presented here.
A major programme was undertaken by Rio Tinto Finance and Exploration Ltd (RioFinex) between 1965 and 1973 resulting inter alia in the discovery of the Coed y Brenin porphyry copper deposit.
A joint venture with Consolidated Gold Fields Ltd (later joined by Amax Exploration UK Inc) in north-east Scotland identified Cu-Ni mineralisation associated with major Caledonian basic intrusions.
Consolidated Gold Fields Ltd and other companies were also active in South-west England during this period.
The Wheal Jane, Mount Wellington and Pendarves tin mines were brought on stream in the early 1970s.
The Boulby potash mine in North Yorkshire, working Upper Permian Zechstein evaporites at a depth of 1100m, began production in 1974 and is now producing at the rate of 770000t/y  KCl.
The passing of the Mineral Exploration and Investment Grants Act 1972 (under which the Department of Trade and Industry refunded up to 35 per cent of exploration costs for approved programmes) gave further impetus to exploration activity.
Several overseas companies were active at this time.
They included NorandaKerr Ltd (especially in North Wales and north-west and north-east Scotland), Phelps-Dodge Corporation NL (in North Wales and Scotland-especially for porphyry-style targets), Acmin Explorations (UK) Ltd (in the Pennine orefields), Swiss Aluminium Mining UK Ltd and the British Steel Corporation (in the Northern Pennine orefield).
Several underground and opencast fluorspar deposits (with associated baryte and galena) were developed in the Northern Pennine (Weardale mines) and the Southern Pennine (Sallet Hole and Long Rake mines) orefields.
This phase culminated with the discovery of the Aberfeldy baryte deposit in 1976 during the early stages of the Mineral Reconnaissance Programme conducted by the British Geological Survey.
The deposit was subsequently developed by Dresser Industries Inc.
Exploration in Northern Ireland was facilitated by the passage of the Mineral Development Act (Northern Ireland) 1969.
A number of companies extended their interests from Carboniferous rocks in the Republic of Ireland, in which important base metal discoveries had been made, to similar rocks in Northern Ireland, but without success.
RioFinex examined the Ordovician volcanic rocks of County Tyrone for base metals but found only minor intersections of low-grade copper mineralisation.
Exploration activity slowed down during the late 1970s, though encouraging progress was made.
The Gairloch discovery by Consolidated Gold Fields in north-west Scotland was the first significant metalliferous ore deposit to be found in the Lewisian of the North-west Foreland.
Exploratory development at Hemerdon in South-west England by Amax Hemerdon Ltd demonstrated the presence of a major W-Sn deposit which could be worked profitably in favourable conditions.
The continued investigation of the Parys Mountain deposit in Anglesey by Cominco (UK) Ltd clarified the genesis and structure of this complex orebody.
Several fluorite and baryte ventures flourished in the Pennine orefields.
Increased tin and gold metal prices from 1980 onwards encouraged prospecting for these commodities.
In South-west England a number of companies were active.
South West Consolidated Minerals Ltd carried out an intensive programme of drilling in the Callington area and located a ‘sheeted vein zone’ of Sn-W mineralisation near the old Redmoor tin mine.
Billiton Minerals UK Ltd were active both onshore for hardrock and alluvial tin prospects in the St Austell area, and offshore for alluvial deposits associated with buried river channels.
Marine Mining (Cornwall) Ltd carried out trial working of placer tin deposits off the north Cornwall coast.
Geevor Tin Mines Ltd developed decline access to the offshore sections of the mine and investigated several small prospects in Cornwall.
Exploration of the Dalradian of Scotland for both baryte and base metal mineralisation continued at a high level.
The British Geological Survey pursued its investigations along and across the strike of the Middle Dalradian rocks, which hosted the Aberfeldy discovery, through its Mineral Reconnaissance Programme.
During the 1980s BP Minerals International Ltd investigated several areas for gold mineralisation in Scotland and carried out drilling in the Craven Basin in northern England for carbonate-hosted Pb-Zn mineralisation.
In the Northern Pennine Orefield, Minworth Ltd (through Weardale Holdings Ltd) acquired the fluorspar interests of British Steel and Swiss Aluminium.
The Minworth subsidiary, Strontian Minerals Ltd, reopened the old Strontian lead mine in western Scotland to extract baryte from open pit and underground workings.
Minworth also exploited baryte veins by open pit operations in the Nethan Valley of central Scotland.
In the Southern Pennine Orefield, Laporte Industries Ltd continued to work the Sallet Hole fluorite mine and began exploitation of a lower-grade, replacement style of mineralisation in the Bradwell area.
The company is also developing the new Milldam mine at Great Hucklow.
Clogau Gold Mines plc and a private venture at the Gwynffynydd Gold Mine carried out exploration and development work in the Dolgellau area of North Wales.
Clogau ceased exploration due to very low grades and the Gwynffynydd operators were unable to achieve a viable mining rate.
Exploration for, and production of, tin was curtailed by the onset of the tin crisis in 1985.
However, two mines, Wheal Jane and South Crofty, now owned by Carnon Holdings Ltd, have been kept open and are being modernised with assistance from the Department of Trade and Industry.
The Geevor tin mine, near Land's End, also entered a period of restricted production.
The main emphasis in the mid to late 1980s has been on the Dalradian, following the discovery by Ennex International plc of the Cononish and Curraghinalt gold deposits in Scotland and Northern Ireland respectively.
Promising areas for gold include Glen Almond in the southern part of the Scottish Highlands, and west of Omagh in Northern Ireland where the Lack prospect has been intensively drilled by RioFinex.
The Mineral Reconnaissance Programme continued to find significant occurrences of baryte and base metal mineralisation in the Tyndrum and Braemar areas to the south-west and north-east of Aberfeldy.
In 1988 Anglesey Mining plc commenced a 550 m deep exploration shaft to investigate the western end of the Parys Mountain Cu-Zn-Pb-Ag deposit.
A list of the more important discoveries and developments since the mid 1960s is shown below.
They are located on Figure 3.
Aberfeldy — multi-million tonne, stratiform SEDEX (sedimentary exhalative) syngenetic, high-grade baryte deposit in Dalradian metasediments with associated lead and zinc sulphides.
Discovered by the BGS in 1976.
Currently in production for baryte.
Coed y — low-grade, copper porphyry-style Brenin deposit in Cambrian intrusives and sediments.
Discovered in 1968.
Resources have been estimated at about 200 million tonnes at 0.3 per cent Cu.
Currently inactive.
Cononish — gold-bearing quartz-veins in Dalradian metasediments.
Discovered in 1984.
Veins extend over one kilometre strike length.
Drill-indicated reserves of 861000 tonnes at 7.54g/t Au (cut) and 40 g/t Ag have been announced, with some high-grade intersections.
Under active surface and underground exploratory development.
Curraghinalt — gold-bearing quartz veins in Dalradian metasediments in the Sperrin Mountains, Northern Ireland.
Comparable to the Cononish deposit.
Discovered in 1983.
Underground development in progress with production planned for 1990.
Drill-indicated reserves are currently 907 000 tonnes at 10.28 g/t Au.
Gairloch — stratiform, volcanogenic Besshi-style low-grade, Cu-Zn deposit with associated gold values in Lewisian sediments and volcanics.
Discovered in 1978.
Currently inactive.
Hemerdon — low-grade, W-Sn stockwork deposit in Variscan granite.
Published reserves of 42 million tonnes at 0.2 per cent W + Sn.
First major production 1915.
Modern evaluation from 1976.
Currently inactive, but with planning permission for development as a 2.2 million t/y open pit mine.
Huntly and — basic to ultrabasic intrusions of Arthrath Caledonian age intruding pyritic and graphitic Dalradian metasediments.
Low-grade copper and nickel sulphides developed at or near the contacts.
Discovered in the late 1960s.
Complex structure makes drill hole correlation and ore reserve calculation difficult.
Recently under investigation Lack for platinum group element (PGE).
Kilmelford — porphyritic, calc-alkaline granodiorite intrusions of Caledonian age with zones of hydrothermal alteration, brecciation and disseminated sulphides.
Discovered by mining companies in 1971 and drilled by BGS in 1976.
Very low-grade (less than 0.1 per cent Cu) porphyry-style copper mineralisation.
An adjacent area, Lagalochan, has more recently been investigated as a gold prospect.
Intensive drilling has located numerous strongly altered and brecciated zones, some with associated gold and copper values.
Parys — discovered in 1768 and worked in a Mountain series of open pits and underground mines.
Reinterpreted as an Ordovician volcanogenic massive and disseminated sulphide deposit.
Currently under development with drill-indicated reserves of 4.8 million tonnes at 1.5 per cent Cu, 3.0 per cent Pb, 6.0 per cent Zn, 57 g/t Ag and 0.4 g/t Au plus larger resources of lower grade copper mineralisation.
Shaft sinking is in progress.
Redmoor — multi-million tonne low-grade ‘sheeted vein’ Sn-W deposit in Devonian metasediments associated with Variscan granite.
Discovered in 1981.
Currently inactive.
South — large numbers of ENE-WSW high-grade quartz-cassiterite veins in Crofty Variscan granite near the contact with Devonian metasediments and basic volcanics.
Has been worked for over 100 years but currently under redevelopment and extension with a modernised shaft.
Producing tin mine.
Unst — hydrothermal and magmatic PGE in ophiolitic ultrabasic complex.
The PGE are platinum and palladium-enriched.
Associated with an area of old chromite workings.
Investigated by BGS from 1983–86.
Vidlin — small, low-grade, Cu-Zn stratiform sulphide deposit within a zone up to 4 km long and 14 m thick in Dalradian metasediments.
Investigated from 1973 on.
Currently inactive.
Wheal Jane — complex Sn-Cu-Zn-As sulphides at elvan (quartz porphyry) dyke contact with Devonian metasediments.
Developed as a modern mine in 1971 on the site of old workings.
Producing tin mine with co-product zinc and by-product copper and silver.
Lack — complex gold-bearing vein structure up to 20 m wide and 900 m long in Dalradian metasediments.
Currently under investigation by drilling and trenching.
Weighted mean grade over 5.1 m is 7.6g/t Au, 19.9g/t Ag and 0.9 per cent Pb from detailed sampling of a 200 m long trench.
The near-vertical deposit has been drilled to 300 m depth and could be worked in an open pit.
Hazleton, R E, and others.
‘Sampling of a complex gold lode near Omagh, Northern Ireland.’
Presented at Mineral Exploration Programmes ‘89, Madrid, Spain.
(International Mining/MIRO)
THE PUBLIC SECTOR ROLE IN MINERAL EXPLORATION
The British Geological Survey (BGS) is the main Government agency in Great Britain for undertaking work in the earth sciences and is the recognised repository for geoscience data.
The BGS is a component body of the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC).
A major function of the BGS is to prepare, and keep under revision, the geological synthesis of the landmass of Great Britain and the adjacent continental shelf, and to publish the results as maps and reports.
The BGS also carries out the Geochemical Survey Programme  (GSP) and the Mineral Reconnaissance Programme (MRP), both of which provide basic data of value for mineral exploration.
The primary purpose of the GSP is to produce a comprehensive database on the concentration of up to 30 elements in stream sediments (or soil samples in the absence of drainage) collected at an average density of I per km&sup2; throughout Great Britain.
Samples of stream waters and heavy mineral concentrates are also taken at the same sites.
Sampling has been completed over Scotland and northern England and is progressing southwards.
Data are made available in the form of tapes, discs, listings and geochemical atlases as well as on an interactive computer system — GISA (Geochemical Interactive Systems Analysis)— which provides a very flexible and economical method of accessing and interrogating the database of 70 000 samples.
The MRP is aimed principally at providing basic geological, geochemical, geophysical and metallogenic information on potentially prospective areas.
The areas covered include some which have attracted little or no interest in the past, but are considered worthy of investigation because of their geological setting.
For example, the Dalradian succession in Scotland was chosen for attention by the MRP because it included the stratiform ‘pyrite belt’ similar to the area around the economic Stekenjokk Cu-Zn-Pb deposit in Sweden.
Between 1972 and 1984 the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) provided financial assistance to industry for mineral exploration in Great Britain through the Mineral Exploration and Investment Grants Act 1972 (MEG).
The Act required companies to deposit information from prospecting work with the BGS.
The results of over 100 projects are now available on Open File and additional reports are due for release at intervals until 1996.
Further information on the GSP, MRP and MEG is given in Appendix 2.1.
The Geological Survey of Northern Ireland (GSNI) has a function similar to that of the BGS but is funded by the Department of Economic Development (DED).
In Northern Ireland, in contrast to Great Britain, most minerals are vested in the State (Section 7) and the DED is responsible for granting exploration and mining licences.
The GSNI, which holds a large amount of data on open file, advises the Department and assists in administering licences.
The DTI operates the Warren Spring Laboratory (Appendix 2.1) which carries out research and development in the fields of minerals and metals recovery and provides a consultancy service in these areas.
Emphasis is on both the process and environmental sectors.
Mineral and planning legislation which affects mineral exploration is considered in Section 7.
FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR MINERAL EXPLORATION
Britain has potential for the following styles of mineralisation.
These are recognised elsewhere in the world and their geological settings and exploration criteria are well established:
1
Carbonate-hosted mineralisation.
a
Irish-style basinal mineralisation — base metals and baryte.
b
Pennine-style vein and replacement mineralisation — fluorite, base metals and baryte.
Also Mississippi Valley Type (MVT) mineralisation which is very similar in many respects to Pennine-style.
2
Calc-alkaline porphyry-style mineralisation — copper, molybdenum and gold.
3
Stratabound mineralisation — base metals, baryte and gold.
4
Volcanogenic mineralisation — base metals, silver and gold.
5
Ophiolite mineralisation — platinum group elements (PGE), copper, nickel and chromium.
6
Granite — related mineralisation — tin, tungsten and copper.
7
Other settings with potential for mineralisation.
Areas in Britain which are currently considered to have potential for metalliferous mineralisation are shown in Figure 4.
The map is intended to give only a generalised indication of where exploration might best be directed.
A substantial amount of prospecting may have been undertaken in some of the areas, but not necessarily for the deposit styles mentioned above.
Further information can be obtained from relevant MRP reports, MEG projects and other data which are available from, or on open file at, the British Geological Survey or the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland.
Prospective areas include:
5.1 Carbonate-hosted mineralisation
5.1. a Irish-style
The main characteristic of Irish-style, Pb-Zn mineralisation is syn-diagenetic deposition of sulphides in shallow-water carbonate facies, adjacent to major listric faults, at early Dinantian sedimentary basin margins.
Mineralisation is generally zinc dominant and its origin is controversial.
It has features in common with both the Mississippi Valley Type (MVT) and the SEDEX (SEDimentary EXhalative) styles of mineral deposit which have been described by Anderson and Macqueen (1982) and Large (1983) respectively.
Those features in common with the MVT style are largely textural, because of the carbonate host rock, while the features in common with the SEDEX style are largely spatial.
Lydon (1986) considers that mineralising fluids were generated by dewatering of Devonian — early Carboniferous basins.
The fluids reacted with the clastic basin infill at depths of 1–2 km to produce saline, metalliferous brines.
A cover of early Carboniferous shales provided thermal insulation to enable the brines to reach temperatures exceeding 200°C under an enhanced geothermal gradient.
Periodic extension of the basin permitted release of the metal-bearing fluids up listric faults into the unlithified Carboniferous sediments.
Russell (1986) prefers a model in which mineralising fluids were generated by Carboniferous seawater penetrating, and reacting with, the underlying Caledonian basement to increasing depths (up to 10 km) under a normal geothermal gradient during basin extension before being discharged up listric faults.
Zinc and lead are the main base metals dissolved by the hydrothermal fluids as copper is only soluble in quantity above the maximum temperature of 250°C reached by the fluids.
This model also suggests that the hydrothermal   cells should have maximum dimensions of about 40 km in diameter which can be useful in eliminating some areas near major deposits.
A comprehensive review of Irish-style mineralisation is given in Andrew and others (1986).
Areas in Britain considered prospective for Irish-style mineralisation all contain early Carboniferous sediments in extensional, half-graben basins bounded by syn-depositional faults.
The geological settings are generally similar to those of the Irish deposits.
They include the East Midlands (Plant and others, 1988), Craven (Gawthorpe, 1987), Stainmore and Solway basins (Figure 4).
However, the early Carboniferous sediments in the East Midlands and Solway basins are mainly at depths exceeding 1 km except in the Northumberland Trough, east of Solway, where the facies are shallow water deltaic sandstones and carbonates.
These are unlikely to be suitable hosts for the preservation of exhaled sulphides.
The Craven Basin is more heavily tectonised, and carbonate debris-flows and stratabound Zn-Pb mineralisation occur near surface in the Cowark to Bowland area in the north-west part of the basin.
This indicates that suitable depositional and tectonic environments for Irish-style mineralisation could occur at reasonable depths.
A large amount of data, including drill core, are available resulting from MRP and MEG exploration in the area.
Relevant MRP and MEG reports include:
5.1. b Pennine-style
Dunham (1983) considers Pennine-style mineralisation to be a fluoritic subtype of the Mississippi Valley Type.
It generally occurs as fracture-hosted mineralisation in late Dinantian to early Namurian platform carbonates adjacent to Carboniferous shale-dominated basins.
The mineralisation comprises large numbers of long (up to several kilometres), narrow (less than 10m), steeply-dipping oreshoots of limited vertical extent confined to a small number of massive limestone or sandstone beds.
Fluorite and galena are the main ore minerals with subsidiary, but locally important, baryte, calcite, sphalerite, witherite, chalcopyrite and quartz.
Mineralisation probably occurred during early Permian times.
Two recent investigations of the Northern (Hunting Geology and Geophysics, 1983) and Southern Pennine (Plant and Jones, 1989) areas, using combinations of geological, geochemical and geophysical digital datasets have indicated potentially prospective areas outside those where mineralisation is exposed.
A computer generated image of the East Midlands (Plate 1), from Plant and Jones (1989), combines deep geological, geophysical and seismic information.
It shows Namurian/Dinantian half-graben basins (green) bounded by listric faults (white) adjacent to concealed Dinantian shelf carbonates (blue) superimposed on negative stripped gravity anomalies (red).
The Southern Pennine Orefield is also shown.
The gravity anomalies define parts of the major Gainsborough and Widmerpool Basins and also indicate concealed Caledonian granites in the north and south of the area.
A central gravity anomaly, which underlies part of the carbonate shelf and hence is shown as a pink area, could be due to either a granite or a sedimentary basin.
It has not been proved by drilling.
The most prospective areas for Pennine-style mineralisation are in the concealed carbonate shelf adjacent to listric faults such as the area to the north-east of the Gainsborough Basin.
In addition there are numerous MRP and MEG reports which cover most of the Pennine regions and some of the other areas of Dinantian limestone outcrop, such as North Wales and the Mendips.
These include: — 
5.2 Calc-alkaline porphyry-style mineralisation
Minor concentrations of copper, molybdenum, tin, tungsten and uranium are associated with a number of mineralised Caledonian calc-alkaline porphyritic granites in Scotland, Northern England and Wales.
Areas of extensive hydrothermal alteration in high level intrusives of the west and central Scottish granites have been investigated for gold mineralisation especially in, or near, shear zones.
These include Lagalochan, Comrie and Foreburn (Figure 4).
Phelps Dodge Corporation NL, and later Consolidated Gold Fields Ltd, carried out regional exploration, mainly using stream sediment geochemistry with limited follow-up, over most of the Scottish Caledonide granitoids in the 1970s.
No discoveries were reported (MEG 2 and 3).
In none of the bodies investigated so far, apart from that at Coed y Brenin in North Wales, have significant zones of more than 0.3 per cent Cu been identified.
The apparent paucity of copper may result from the emplacement of relatively anhydrous granites into tectonised and anhydrous metasediments, especially in the Dalradian and Moinian sediments of Scotland which were metamorphosed during the Ordovician Grampian orogeny and the later Caledonian event.
The development of large-scale hydrothermal systems was thus inhibited.
Further information is given in Plant and others (1983) and also Plant (1986).
In addition to known mineralised granites, there are several areas which may warrant exploration.
The Lorne plateau, between Loch Awe and Oban in western Scotland, lies to the north-east of Kilmelford where the Lagalochan intrusive complex has been investigated for copper and gold.
It is thought that the complex could have lost 1000 m by erosion and that only the basal sections of the mineralisation are preserved (Harris and others, 1988).
The Lorne plateau is formed of Devonian andesitic lavas and tuffs which are contemporaneous with the Lagalochan intrusion and mineralisation, and unconformably overlie Dalradian schists.
The lavas may conceal the uppermost, epithermal precious metal zone (thought to have been removed at Lagalochan) intact at relatively shallow depth.
This zone is envisaged as similar to that described by Panteleyev (1986) from Canadian epithermal precious metal vein deposits.
They form near surface, in upward branching veins associated with extensional tectonics in subaerial volcanic rocks which are commonly intermediate in composition.
MRP and company investigations around the Foreburn igneous complex, near Ayr in southern Scotland, have shown that alteration, including sericitisation and tourmalinisation, has affected zones within the complex which is composed of diorite, tonalite and feldspar porphyry.
Disseminated and vein sulphides are common with up to 1.4g/t Au especially in shear zones.
The complex is thought to have similarities with some Canadian porphyry copper deposits (MRP 55).
More recent exploration by RioFinex at Foreburn, including drilling, has intersected quartz-tourmaline-sulphide veins and stockworks with significant gold values (Charley and others, 1989).
Quartz veins associated with a small granodiorite intrusion at Glenhead Burn near Loch Doon in south-west Scotland contain up to 1.5 g/t Au over 4.5 m in drill core (MRP 46).
Alteration effects in the Lower Palaeozoic sediments around the intrusion include the development of quartz, magnetite and actinolite.
In the same area, the Black Stockarton Moor high level intrusive complex of Caledonian age contains low-grade copper mineralisation of porphyry copper style (MRP 30).
BP Minerals carried out an intensive investigation for gold in the mid 1980s over granitoid intrusions at Hare Hill, Moorbrock Hill, Stobshiel and Glenhead Burn (Naden and Caulfield, 1989).
Hydrothermal alteration and mineralisation continued for up to 30 Ma after the emplacement of the intrusions at about 400 Ma.
Gold mineralisation is associated with earlier fluids; antimony and base metal sulphides with later fluids.
Diagenetic pyrite in the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of the Southern Uplands provided a sulphur reservoir.
Additional information is given in MEG 257, 259, 260 and 261.
There are a number of similar intrusions in southern Scotland, some of which are mineralised.
MRP investigations around the Cheviot granite in Northumberland have identified numerous zones of hydrothermal alteration and minor mineralisation associated with Lower Devonian andesite lavas and a high level intrusive porphyry complex (MRP 91).
One area has features in common with the epithermal precious-metal style of mineralisation described by Sillitoe (1977).
MRP investigations in the Llandeloy area of south-west Wales have identified an intermediate dioritic intrusive complex of Cambro-Ordovician age with strong hydrothermal alteration.
Very low-grade disseminated copper mineralisation may reflect the eroded deep levels of a copper porphyry system.
The area has potential for the discovery of upper levels of mineralisation where copper grades may be higher (MRP 78).
Relevant reports on Cu-Mo-Au porphyry mineralisation can be found in:
5.3 Sedimentary stratabound mineralisation
The main zone of interest is the Scottish Middle Dalradian (Argyll Group) sequence from Portsoy in the north-east to Islay in the south-west with the Aberfeldy Ba-Pb-Zn deposits in the centre (Smith and others 1984).
There are a number of highly prospective areas for Ba-Pb-Zn mineralisation recorded in the MRP reports listed below.
The mineralisation is of SEDEX type (Large, 1983) with stratabound sulphates, silicates and sulphides occurring in small, third order basins within the Middle Dalradian and especially in the Ben Eagach Schist Formation (Coats and others, 1980).
Lenses of Pb-Zn sulphides with up to 10 per cent Pb +&plus Zn have been found at several localities in the Dalradian, and other areas of barium-enriched sediments also occur (Coats and others, 1984a).
Two horizons of sulphidic quartzite with Zn-Cu-Pb mineralisation occur in the Tyndrum area of western Scotland within the Argyll Group above the Ben Eagach Schist Formation which hosts the Aberfeldy mineralisation.
The upper Ben Challum horizon is up to 20m thick with a strike length of several kilometres.
Channel sampling has proved up to 3 per cent Zn and 0.1 per cent Pb over one metre.
The lower Auchtertyre horizon is about 80 m thick over a strike length of 8 km and contains up to 1.6 per cent Zn and 0.1 per cent Cu over 3 m (MRP 93; Fortey and Smith, 1986).
Mineralisation at the western end of the Ben Challum horizon has recently been attributed to hydrothermal systems associated with the development of basic intrusive rocks at shallow depth forming a possible Besshi-style deposit (Scott and others, 1988).
Mineral reconnaissance by the BGS north-east of Aberfeldy has located a number of geochemical and geophysical anomalies in the Ben Eagach Schist Formation around Glenshee (Pease and others, 1986) where Zn-Pb-Ba mineralisation has been found (MRP 88).
Recent investigations at Loch Kander near Braemar have found bedded baryte up to 5 m thick, with significant base metal values, over a 700 m strike length in the same formation.
Shallow drilling has been carried out (MRP 104).
A detailed helicopter EM survey has been flown over extensive areas of the Middle Dalradian (MEG 253).
Stratabound pyrite mineralisation occurs in the Middle Dalradian Ben Lawers Schist Formation, and its lateral equivalents, over a strike length exceeding 50 km.
Drilling in the Meall Mhor area of Knapdale in western Scotland intersected pyritic quartzite with up to 1 per cent Cu over 2.7m (MRP 15).
Mining companies, including Consolidated Gold Fields Ltd (MEG 4) and Noranda-Kerr (MEG 74 and 115) have also carried out work in the area.
Stratiform Au-As-Sb mineralisation occurs at Glendinning in Lower Palaeozoic greywackes in south-west Scotland (MRP 59).
Interest in the Dalradian in Northern Ireland, already under active exploration for gold-bearing quartz veins has been increased by the unexpected discovery of hydrothermally altered Dalradian metasediments, with associated base metal sulphides, in a borehole drilled by Meekatharra Minerals through Tertiary basalt cover south of Ballymoney.
The basalt was previously estimated to be 2 km thick but the borehole intersected mineralised Dalradian rocks at a depth of 72 m.
A second borehole has produced similar results with 440 m of metasediments containing disseminated sulphides and quartz-sulphide veins.
Legg and others (1985) have published an index and map of mineral localities in the Dalradian of Northern Ireland and part of the Republic of Ireland.
Stratabound Pb-Zn-Ba mineralisation occurs in Upper and Middle Devonian sedimentary and volcanic rocks in south and west Devon.
A 1–2 m thick black shale horizon with about 2 per cent Pb-Zn (but 10 per cent Pb over 4 m of drill core in a fold nose) was found by RioFinex near Launceston (MEG 223).
Minor Pb-Zn-Ag mineralisation was found by South West Consolidated Minerals Ltd at the Devonian — Carboniferous boundary in the Callington area north-west of Plymouth (MEG 212).
The mineralisation is associated with strong alteration of the enclosing sediments and tuffs and could be of volcanogenic origin.
MRP investigations for stratabound mineralisation in the South Hams district south of the Dartmoor Granite proved 10 m of massive pyrite in drill core, with associated high grade baryte float (MRP 79).
The whole Devonian-Lower Carboniferous volcano-sedimentary belt in South-west England has considerable exploration potential for stratiform SEDEX mineralisation of the baryte-base metal type similar to the Meggan or Rammelsberg deposits of equivalent age in the Federal Republic of Germany.
Gold has recently been discovered in the south Devon area (MRP 98).
Exposure is poor and the rocks have been strongly tectonised and deeply weathered.
Geochemical soil traverses and deep overburden drilling have proved useful exploration techniques.
A more speculative exploration area for stratabound mineralisation is the south-eastern margin of the back-arc Lower Palaeozoic Welsh Basin where it abuts the continental margin of the Midlands Microcraton.
Badham (1981) has suggested that the basinal Lower Silurian shales to the west of the carbonate shelf facies could have formed a suitable depositional environment for mineralisation of the SEDEX style.
Bevins (1985) has described hydrothermal alteration in Ordovician lavas in the Builth Wells area.
Bailey (1981) considered that the source of the Ba-Pb-Zn vein mineralisation hosted by Lower Ordovician shales in the Shropshire orefield could have been connate brines from the Welsh Basin.
Exploration by the BGS, including shallow drilling, located stratabound lead mineralisation in highly altered and weathered Ordovician subaerial acid lavas and tuffs in the Builth Wells area (MRP 92).
Submarine environments, likely to provide suitable sites for sulphide deposition and preservation, could occur nearby but would be covered by later sediments.
The Triassic Sherwood Sandstone Group of central England is frequently cemented by baryte.
The baryte is often associated with minor copper mineralisation, as at Alderley Edge in Cheshire, adjacent to faults (Carlon, 1979).
These have provided pathways for fluids generated during diagenesis of the fault-bounded Triassic basins (Holmes and others, 1983).
Some extensive outcrops of sub-horizontal, baryte-cemented sandstone occur and could be easily worked.
However, the grade of baryte is very variable and is usually low.
MEG  208 contains data on baryte exploration, including shallow drilling, in Cheshire.
The Devonian Orcadian basin in northern Scotland contains lenses of stratiform baryte and manganese as at Balfreish, south-east of Inverness.
Relevant MRP and MEG reports include:
5.4 Volcanogenic mineralisation
Base metal vein mineralisation occurs in Lower Palaeozoic (mainly Ordovician) volcanic rocks in the Lake District and Snowdonia.
The Lake District deposits are hosted in the Ordovician Borrowdale Volcanic Group and underlying Skiddaw Group.
They consist of Cu-As-pyrite veins, with minor Bi, Co and Ni, of Lower Devonian age, and Pb-Zn veins of Lower Carboniferous age (Stanley and Vaughan, 1982).
The earlier veins are spatially associated with the underlying granite batholith.
The Carboniferous mineralisation shows no such relationship.
The BGS Geochemical Survey Programme (GSP) has indicated prospective areas for Sn-W mineralisation in several parts of the Lake District.
These are thought to be related to the underlying granite batholith.
Mineralisation in northern Snowdonia occurs mainly as small veins near the contact of the Ordovician Lower Rhyolitic Tuff Formation and the overlying basic Bedded Pyroclastic Formation but extends down to the underlying sediments.
It is related to the development of a resurgent caldera to the south of Snowdon and is considered to be of late stage fumerolic origin as it predates the Caledonian deformation (Reedman and others, 1985).
The mineralisation consists of veins and stockworks of Cu-Pb-Zn sulphides with pyrite and pyrrhotite in quartz.
Earlier quartz-magnetite breccia veins, with up to 0.1 per cent Sn-W, and later calcite-marcasite-sphalerite veins, also occur.
A Kuroko-style massive pyrite deposit at Cae Coch, north-east of Snowdon, may be the distal expression of an as yet undiscovered buried proximal base metal sulphide deposit (Ball and Bland, 1985).
Numerous MEG supported projects have been carried out in this area, especially by Noranda-Kerr, and all data are available on Open File.
However, relatively little detailed exploration, especially drilling, has been carried out in the Lake District or Snowdonia.
The Harlech Dome in southern Snowdonia is well mineralised.
Numerous small gold, copper and lead mines were active in the 19th century.
The Dolgellau ‘gold belt’(Appendix 1) lies on the south and east sides of the dome.
The MRP carried out an airborne magnetic and EM survey of part of the area and followed this up by detailed ground investigations of twenty six separate areas.
The results are given in MRP 29.
Subsequently the area was covered by a regional stream sediment survey with analyses for a number of elements, including arsenic, which often accompanies gold in this area (MRP 74).
Follow-up MRP investigations in the Benglog area of North Wales, near Dolgellau, showed barium enrichment in Ordovician sediments associated with subaerial to submarine bimodal volcanism (MRP 63).
The area has potential for the discovery of base metal sulphides.
MRP exploration in north-west Anglesey, including drilling, has indicated the potential for polymetallic base and precious metal sulphide deposits similar to those at Parys Mountain (MRP 99).
MRP investigations in the Treffgarne area of south-west Wales, an area with no known economic mineralisation, have identified a zone of intense hydrothermal alteration with pyrite mineralisation in the Ordovician Roch Rhyolite Group of acid volcanics, tuffs and volcanic breccias (MRP 86).
Exploration in Middle Devonian volcanic and sedimentary rocks north of Wadebridge in north Cornwall has located up to 1 g/t Au associated with quartz-arsenopyrite veins (MRP 103).
The Middle to Upper Dalradian Tayvallich Formation is a thick (up to 5 km) series of submarine basic tholeiitic lavas and high level intrusions associated with the development of the Dalradian extensional basin in western Scotland (Leake, 1982).
The formation has potential for base and precious metal mineralisation in a number of environments and deposit styles, including the volcanogenic massive sulphide style described in the stratal aquifer model of Lydon (1988).
Other areas with exploration potential in Scotland include Vidlin, in the Dalradian of Shetland, and Gairloch in the Lewisian of north-west Scotland.
Gairloch is now regarded as an early Besshi-style Cu-Zn deposit (Jones and others, 1987).
A very small outcrop of massive sulphide in Dalradian basic volcanic rocks at Garth's Ness on the southern tip of Shetland has been investigated by Grenmore Holdings but no extensions were found (MEG 249).
Areas of lower metamorphic grade Lewisian sediments, similar to those hosting the Gairloch deposit, occur on the north side of Loch Maree and elsewhere in north-west Scotland.
Drainage geochemistry has been attempted over the Torridonian sandstone cover to locate possible leakage of metals from the underlying Lewisian.
There is an extensive area of Ordovician (Caradoc) volcanic rocks in County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, between Omagh and Cookstown.
The volcanic suite includes spilites, andesites and rhyolites with associated black shales, cherts, tuffs and small, high level intrusions of gabbro, diorite and granite (Stillman, 1982).
A review of exploration for base metal mineralisation in the area is given by Leyshon and Cazelet (1976).
More recent exploration has located disseminated gold and base metal mineralisation at Cashel Rock, 12km due south of the Curraghinalt gold deposit (Ennex International plc Annual Report, 1987).
The mineralisation is erratic, but potentially economic grades have been intersected by scout drilling.
Relevant MRP and MEG reports include:
5.5 Ophiolite mineralisation
There are several ophiolite sequences in Britain; Unst in Shetland, Ballantrae in south-west Scotland, Anglesey in North Wales, the Lizard in Cornwall and Tyrone in Northern Ireland.
The Lower Palaeozoic Unst complex has been investigated by the BGS and mining companies for copper-nickel (MEG 136), chromite (MRP 35) and precious metals (MRP 73).
Prichard and Lord (1988) provide additional information on its geological setting.
The complex consists of basic to ultrabasic gabbros, dunites, harzburgites and clinopyroxene cumulates.
The ultrabasic rocks have been extensively affected by several phases of hydrothermal alteration.
Initial surface exploration has shown two distinct types of PGE enrichment.
The first type is a Ru-Ir-Os dominant assemblage typical of that associated with ophiolitic rocks; the second is a Pd-Pt dominant type, with enrichment of Ni, Cu, As, Sb and Te, which has a PGE distribution similar to that in major layered complexes such as the Bushveld and Stillwater.
This second type is thought to have a hydrothermal origin (MRP 73).
The Ordovician Ballantrae complex of spilitic pillow lavas and cherts with gabbro and serpentinite contains some chromite horizons (Stone and others, 1986).
Drilling proved minor intersections of nickeliferous marcasite (MEG 103).
The Lizard complex is composed mainly of serpentinite with gabbro and metamorphosed basic rocks.
The BGS has carried out some drilling (Leake and Styles, 1984) and soil sampling (Smith and Leake, 1984) in this poorly exposed area and some data are available on Open File.
The Polyphant ultrabasic intrusion near Launceston has also been investigated (MRP 32).
The Anglesey complex is rather fragmented (Windley, 1984).
Little mineral exploration has been carried out in the area which is poorly exposed except in coastal sections.
Remnants of ultrabasic-basic layered complexes within an Archaean (Lewisian) high-grade terrain occur in north-west Scotland (Windley, 1982).
No economic mineralisation is known but several drillholes near Scourie cut massive and disseminated pyrite-pyrrhotite lenses (MEG 2).
Relevant MRP and MEG reports include:
5.6 Granite-related mineralisation
The Variscan granite province of South-west England is a major mineralised region and remains an important area for tin exploration.
Detailed data are provided in numerous MRP and MEG reports.
The main targets have been stockworks or sheeted vein systems, such as those at Hemerdon and Redmoor.
At the Hemerdon W-Sn deposit near Plymouth, where sheeted veins occur at the apex of a small granite cusp, ore reserves total 42 million tonnes grading 0.18 per cent WO&sub3; and 0.02 per cent Sn.
Christoffersen and King (1988) describe the evaluation of this deposit, including exploration drilling, metallurgical testwork and ore reserve calculation.
The property is currently under care and maintenance, but planning permission has been granted for mining.
Other prospects include Cligga Head, a greisenised granite on the north Cornwall coast which has been examined by adits and drilling, and Redmoor, where drilling has shown a large, low-grade sheeted vein swarm up to 80 m wide and several hundred metres long.
Recent drilling in an area north of the St Austell Granite has proved several high grade veins and flat lying zones in the killas (MEG 237).
The most comprehensive available data on exploration for tin-tungsten is around the Mulberry open pit near Bodmin; a large low-grade deposit.
Exploration by the BGS and mining companies has shown tin values to extend beyond and below the open pit.
Drilling carried out to prove an underlying granite cusp at shallow (< 500 m) depth was unsuccessful and some of the higher grade intersections of vein mineralisation, up to 11 m at 1 per cent Sn, contained refractory tin silicates (MRP 48; MEG 73 and 198).
Relevant MRP and MEG reports include:
5.7 Other settings with potential for mineral deposits
North-east Scotland
The major Caledonian basic-ultrabasic intrusive complexes of north-east Scotland (Wadsworth, 1982) have been investigated for copper, nickel, titanium and PGE by several mining companies and the BGS.
The most extensive exploration programme was carried out by Exploration Ventures Ltd (a joint venture between Consolidated Gold Fields and Rio Tinto-Zinc).
The project located low-grade (up to 2 per cent) Cu-Ni sulphide mineralisation in norites and gabbros contaminated by pyritic and graphitic Dalradian metasedimentary rocks.
The presence of widespread pyrite and graphite, together with the faulted nature of the mineralisation, gave rise to great problems in interpreting geophysical data and in correlating drill intersections.
There are numerous MEG Open File reports on this work with details of reconnaissance stream sediment geochemistry, soil sampling, rock sampling, geophysics (magnetics and EM), and about 15 km of core drilling.
Some core is still curated by the BGS.
An airborne EM and magnetic survey of the whole area was flown in the early 1970s.
Some of the masses, such as those at Huntly and Belhelvie, are predominantly ultrabasic.
Others such as Insch and Cabrach-Morvern are mainly basic and are enriched in iron, titanium and phosphorus compared to average values for these rocks.
The rocks have been tectonised in a series of north-east trending shear zones as described by Munro (1986).
Noranda-Kerr Ltd found anomalous copper and nickel values in deep overburden samples on the shear zone trend at the eastern end of the Insch intrusion near Old Meldrum (MEG 95).
Anomalous barium and zirconium values occur in syenites associated with the Insch gabbro.
The area still has potential for the discovery of mineralisation but the  complexes are generally of low relief with thick glacial deposits which hamper exploration.
Deep overburden sampling, coupled with detailed magnetometer work, is probably the best exploration technique.
Parts of the Insch and Belhelvie intrusions have been investigated by Aberdeen University using magnetics and shallow bedrock drilling (Ashcroft and Boyd, 1976; Ashcroft and Munro, 1978).
Relevant MEG reports include:
Borralan, north-west Scotland
Major Caledonian alkaline ultrabasic-acid intrusive complexes, with rock types ranging from pyroxenite to syenite, occur around Loch Borralan and Loch Ailsh in north-west Scotland adjacent to the Moine Thrust.
Concentrations of apatite, magnetite, and base metals (Notholt and others, 1985) have aroused interest from time to time.
A base metal exploration programme was abandoned at an early stage leaving a significant IP chargeability anomaly, without accompanying magnetic anomaly, untested (MEG 113).
A second large alkaline complex occurs at Loch Loyal, 40 km to the north-east (Sutherland, 1982).
Central Wales
The Central Wales orefield in Lower Palaeozoic sediments has potential for vein deposits in depth and for stratabound deposits similar to those of the Van ‘flats’.
These were a series of ore bodies which occurred in a 5 m thick sandstone unit and became zinc-rich towards the east.
Some mineralisation remains unworked (Jones, 1922).
The silver content of the ore was also high.
A reconnaissance stream sediment survey has been carried out by the MRP over much of the orefield (MRP 5).
The report is accompanied by a 1:100 000 scale geological map showing the location of the numerous abandoned mines.
There are several papers on the history of individual mines in British Mining, the journal of the Northern Mines Research Society.
Reviews of the mineral potential of selected deposits in the region are given by Hughes (1988) and Hall (1989).
The area is being remapped by the BGS and new 1:50 000 maps will be available for much of the area over the next decade.
Relevant MRP reports include:
Offshore placer deposits
Exploration for placer tin deposits has been carried out in South-west England off the north and south coasts of Cornwall (see under tin in Appendix 1).
RioFinex planned to examine the Mawddach estuary in North Wales in the late 1960s for placer gold derived from the Dolgellau gold deposits.
There are several areas in Scotland with potential for nearshore or offshore deposits.
Chromite and olivine sands, with other heavy minerals, have recently been discovered during MRP investigations off the south-west coast of Rhum (MRP 106).
The large basic masses of north-east Scotland have shed large amounts of magnetite and ilmenite into the North Sea.
Minor placer enrichments have been found in coastal dunes at Rattray Head, near Fraserburgh but the offshore potential is unknown.
Other areas with potential for offshore deposits include Helmsdale in Caithness (gold) and Skye and Mull in western Scotland (magnetite, ilmenite and chromite).
Manganese nodules with over 10 per cent Mn occur in Loch Fyne on the west coast of Scotland.
MINERAL EXPLORATION TECHNIQUES
Britain lies between latitude 50° and 60° N and has a temperate climate.
The terrain is generally subdued but in northern and western regions Palaeozoic and older rocks form elevated areas with peaks up to 1300 m.
Rainfall varies from 500 mm in the south-east to over 2500mm in the west.
Exploration can be undertaken throughout the year in most areas.
However, the higher ground in Scotland and Wales is usually snow covered for several months in winter.
The entire country is served by a dense network of surfaced roads and nowhere, except in some mountainous areas in Scotland, is more than 5 or 10 km from a road.
Most of lowland Britain is intensively cultivated; upland areas tend to be used for sheep farming and/or for game (grouse, deer etc.) as well as for other recreational activities.
Exploration programmes should be planned to take account of shooting and fishing interests.
6.1 Geochemistry
Stream sediments
Drainage patterns are very well developed in the upland areas of northern and western Britain which form the most favourable areas for metalliferous mineral exploration.
Stream sediment geochemistry is therefore an excellent mineral reconnaissance method.
The first major survey was carried out in 1969 (Wolfson, 1978).
This covered England and Wales at a density of 1 sample per 2.5 km&sup2; for 21 elements.
A second survey covered Northern Ireland at a similar density (Applied Geochemistry Research Group, 1973) and revealed an arsenic anomaly over the Sperrin Mountains where the Curraghinalt gold deposit was later found.
The BGS Geochemical Survey Programme (GSP) has been conducting a systematic drainage survey of Great Britain since 1972.
The survey began in the north of Scotland and is progressing southwards.
Sampling is currently being carried out in North Wales.
The sample density is about 1 sample per km&sup2;, using first or second order streams.
The survey uses careful site selection, a large sample volume and standardised analytical techniques to achieve a highly reproducible output (Plant and others, 1984).
Two samples are collected; a — 150 mesh sediment which is analysed for up to 28 elements and a panned concentrate which is examined microscopically and may be analysed for particular elements.
An example of the output is shown in Plate 2 where an image of As, Sb and Bi in stream sediments, which are associated with gold mineralisation, indicates anomalous values over several gold prospects in the Argyll area of western Scotland.
Further information is given in Appendix 2.1.
The areas covered are shown in Figure 8 and data available in Table 3.
More detailed stream sediment surveys are used by the BGS Mineral Reconnaissance Programme (MRP) to define smaller areas worthy of intensive investigation for specific targets.
Extensive use is made of panned concentrates, including mineralogical examination to determine the cause of anomalous concentrations of various elements.
This enables contaminants, such as lead shot, to be directly identified.
It is particularly useful in gold exploration as several unusual mineral grains with various combinations of gold, palladium  and mercury have recently been identified in panned concentrates from Devon and Scotland.
The areas covered are shown in Figure 7, and Table 2 gives the report titles.
There are two major problems with stream sediment geochemistry.
a Glaciation.
Most of Britain was glaciated during the Pleistocene and extensive deposits of boulder clay, lacustrine sediments and fluvioglacial sands and gravels can cause problems in stream sediment sampling.
The stream sediment may not, therefore, reflect local bedrock composition but that of exotic glacial deposits, and care is needed in site selection and data interpretation.
b Contamination.
Much of Britain is densely populated and intensively farmed, and there is a long history of metal mining and movement of minerals and metals.
Metal or organic contamination of streams is common but often erratic.
It may be obvious, as with lead shot from shooting or fishing producing elevated levels of Pb +&plus Sn +&plus Sb, batteries (Pb +&plus Sb) and brass (Cu +&plus Zn) but sometimes it may be more subtle where agricultural chemicals (for example U in phosphates) have been used on a wide scale.
Panned concentrates can often directly identify contamination.
Soil sampling
Most soils are composed of weathered bedrock but glacial or fluvioglacial deposition can be a problem, especially in upland areas.
The Soil Survey of Great Britain publishes maps and memoirs which provide information on soil types and conditions.
They are produced mainly for the agricultural community but also include some geochemical data.
The nickel exploration programme in north-east Scotland was initiated following references to the nickel content of a particular soil type developed over ultrabasic rocks in the Belhelvie area (Glentworth and Muir, 1963).
The same source also mentioned excess molybdenum in soils which was affecting cattle in the area.
Follow-up led to the discovery of a number of molybdenum prospects in the Grampian Region (MEG 17 and MRP 100).
Base-of-overburden samples may be taken where glacial deposits are widespread or there is reason to suspect transport of elements of interest.
The BGS and company prospectors commonly use light overburden drills (Cobra, Wacker or Minuteman) in addition to hand auger sampling.
There are three main problems with soil sampling.
a Glaciation.
As with stream sediment sampling glaciation can form thick exotic deposits which have no relation to bedrock geology, and their contained clays may prevent upward migration of metal ions.
In South-west England a number of strand lines are developed corresponding to different sea levels which fluctuated up to 130 m above present sea level (Camm and Hosking, 1985).
These can commonly carry high levels of resistate minerals including cassiterite.
Anomalies should therefore be checked by panning the soils to see if the resistates are fresh and angular (eluvial) or smooth and rounded (alluvial).
b Peat.
Large areas of upland Britain are covered in thin layers of peat (a very organic-rich soil developed by anaerobic decay and compaction of vegetation) which can selectively take up metals such as cobalt and lead as organic complexes.
It can thus enhance a normal background or depress elements normally present in detrital minerals such as barium in baryte.
Determination of total organic content by ashing may be useful to identify problem areas but the best way to obtain a representative sample is by overburden drilling to bedrock.
c Contamination.
Cultural contamination of soil on a large scale has occurred only over the last 200 years and is generally absent in the more remote areas.
However, it can cause severe problems especially in mining areas where the smelting of copper, lead, arsenic, tin and zinc might have dispersed these elements over the adjacent downwind soils.
Notable areas include Snailbeach in West Shropshire, some Pennine lead mines where smelting was often carried out on an adjacent hill (‘Bole hill’) and South-west England.
Abrahams and Thornton (1987) describe the extent and distribution of contamination in the Camborne-Hayle area of South-west England.
Inefficient recovery practices have left metal-rich waste dumps which have often been levelled or used as roadstone.
Particular care should be given to the shape and nature of any anomalous area.
The MRP reports are a very useful source of information on local or regional problems in the collection and interpretation of geochemical data.
Hydrogeochemical sampling
Natural waters, including surface waters and shallow groundwaters, contain information about mobile weathering products which may be used in a complimentary manner to stream sediment and soil sampling (Edmunds, 1971).
This technique has been used for uranium, copper, fluorine and other relatively soluble elements.
The main advantage of the method is the facility with which rapid and direct measurements can be made using a specific ion electrode (Boyle, 1981).
Disadvantages include the low concentrations of most elements of interest, the care required to avoid contamination and the need to take account of hydrological conditions.
Rapid, sensitive multielement analytical techniques such as ICP-OES now exist which offer new opportunities for the use of natural waters in geochemical prospecting.
Stream or groundwater chemistry varies markedly with flow and especially with pH.
Sampling therefore needs to be related to a single condition such as baseflow or highflow; different suites of elements may be mobilised at different pH conditions and carefully designed sampling programmes can take advantage of these differences.
The GSP has regularly measured uranium, fluorine, specific electrical conductivity and pH.
However, from 1989–90 combined multielement hydrogeochemical surveys for 20 elements using ICP-OES are being mounted in parallel with stream sediment/soil sampling programmes to achieve both mineral exploration and environmental objectives.
More specialised sampling has also been carried out for gold and pathfinder elements (Edmunds, personal communication October 1989).
Soil gas sampling
Soil gas methods offer simple, rapid and direct methods of determining radon, oxygen, carbon dioxide and sulphur compounds (Ball and others, 1985b).
Sulphide ores tend to oxidise in aerobic conditions, consuming oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide.
Radon has been used to detect uranium mineralisation and also to locate faults which may control mineral deposition.
Problems exist in water-logged areas where the soil gas may be affected by the decomposition of organic material.
Biogeochemistry
Various forms of biological material have been sampled for geochemical purposes (Al Ajely and others, 1984).
The most useful samples are probably the leaves and shoots of trees which have root systems extending for several metres into the underlying bedrock.
The collection, preparation, analysis and interpretation of samples requires great care if a standardised, reproducible output is to be achieved (Smith and Ball, 1982).
It is often very difficult to find adequate coverage of one species over the sampling area, except in areas of recent forest monoculture.
6.2 Geophysics
Regional
The Regional Geophysics Research Group (RGRG) of the BGS possesses regional aeromagnetic and gravity coverage of the complete land area of Britain, and also of some offshore areas.
The data are published at the scale of 1:250000 and 1:625000.
Digital data are sold on request, either in raw form, as grids, or as maps or images of specific areas processed to the customer's requirements.
The gravity data coverage averages one station per 2 km&sup2;, varying from denser coverage in lowland Britain, to sparser coverage in highland areas.
The data are reduced using standard procedures to produce Bouguer gravity anomalies to an overall accuracy of 1 m Gal.
The aeromagnetic data are on flight lines typically spaced at 2 km and were collected at a height of 305 m.
The data were originally analogue and have been converted to digital form using 10 nT intercepts along the flight lines.
A new airborne survey is proposed to cover the whole country at a high resolution with high sensitivity magnetometrics and gradiometry, EM and radiometrics.
Other relevant information includes borehole geophysical logs, heat flow determinations and seismic reflection data.
Local
A number of areas have been surveyed with airborne methods as part of the MRP, including various combinations of magnetic, EM, VLF and radiometric methods.
These surveys have been followed up using ground methods such as magnetics, EM, VLF, IP, gravity or seismic refraction as appropriate to investigate specific anomalies.
A number of MRP reports deal specifically with these surveys including MRP 20, 24, 25, 31, 33, 34, 36, 38, 47, 49, 75 and 85.
They cover a variety of environments with targets including veins, stratabound and stockwork mineralisation and alteration haloes.
VLF and EM surveys are of great value in mapping Dalradian rocks, especially around the very resistive baryte horizons such as those at Aberfeldy (MRP 26 and 40).
The application of particular methods can be hampered by cultural effects in a densely populated country like Britain.
In particular, power lines, radio transmitters, wire fences, buried pipes, roads, railways  and metal buildings create electrical or magnetic noise which can interfere with surveys.
However, the MRP reports demonstrate that useful surveys can be carried out under difficult conditions, producing results which can provide a valuable contribution to mineral exploration.
An airborne magnetic survey, which showed anomalies due to the demagnetising effects of mineralising fluids on the Whin Sill dolerite body in northern England, was used to target drilling for vein and disseminated Pb-Zn-Ba mineralisation (Bateson and others, 1984).
A number of techniques were evaluated by Bowker and Hill (1987) in an investigation of geophysical methods over the Gairloch deposit in northern Scotland.
Some MEG projects also made extensive use of geophysical techniques.
The Islay (western Scotland) Pb-Zn (MEG 243) and North Molton (Devon) Cu (MEG 100) projects both included VLF and IP surveys.
The Dalradian (MEG 253) project used a helicopter EM survey to delineate targets in several areas of the Middle Dalradian.
Combined surveys
In the exploration of the Dalradian, megatraverses, which are co-ordinated geological, geochemical and geophysical traverses over several kilometres in length across strike, are used to identify horizons with potential for stratabound mineralisation (Coats and others, 1984b).
6.3 Remote sensing and aerial surveys
Remote sensing (air and spaceborne) techniques have been applied to various areas of Britain.
There is complete coverage of the country by aerial photography, some in colour, at a scale of about 1:7500 though not all scenes are cloud free.
The photographs can be purchased from a number of sources listed in the UK Remote Sensing Directory which is available from the National Remote Sensing Centre (Appendix 2.2.2) and also from the Ordnance Survey.
Analysis is complicated by large and small scale cultural features which can date back several thousand years, even in remote areas.
Satellite and airborne imagery, mainly LANDSAT and LANDSAT TM, but now including SPOT, is widely available for Britain from the National Remote Sensing Centre.
Again there can be problems in obtaining cloud free scenes.
Greenbaum (1987) has evaluated the use of airborne multispectral scanning in North Wales for lithological discrimination.
The wavebands used are similar to those used in the Landsat TM.
Recent publications on the use of remote sensing imagery in mineral exploration in Britain include Moore and Camm (1982) on structural mapping for Sn-W prospecting in South-west England, Hunting Geology and Geophysics (1983) on exploration for fluorite and Pb-Zn in the Pennine orefields and Darch and Barber (1983) on vegetation studies over the Coed y Brenin porphyry copper deposit in North Wales.
MINERAL LEGISLATION
7.1 Mineral rights
England, Wales and Scotland
Non-fuel minerals in Great Britain, with the exception of gold and silver, are mainly in private ownership although a significant proportion is owned by the Crown and by Government departments and agencies.
Uranium and other prescribed minerals relating to the production of atomic energy belong to the mineral rights owner, but may be compulsorily purchased by the Secretary of State for Energy with compensation under powers granted in the Atomic Energy Act 1946.
The right to exploit minerals in the foreshore (beach) and on the seabed within the limits of national jurisdiction is vested in the Crown under the Continental Shelf Act 1964 and, apart from coal, oil and natural gas, these resources are managed by the Crown Estate Commissioners (Appendix 2.2.4).
The only exceptions are the counties of Cornwall and Lancaster, where the foreshore is owned by the respective Duchies, and where grants of the foreshore have been made by the Crown to other parties.
Although mineral rights are generally held by the surface landowner, they may have been retained by a previous landowner when the surface freehold was sold, particularly in areas with a long history of mining such as South-west England.
There is no national register of mineral rights, but the Land Registry may have details of surface ownership and current ownership of mineral rights.
However, in England and Wales this information can be obtained from the Land Registry only with the permission of the landowner.
The registers in Scotland and Northern Ireland are open for public inspection.
The registers in England and Wales will also be open for public inspection from December 1990.
Addresses of the Land Registries of England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are given in Appendix 2.2.1.
To help prospective mineral operators the Cornish Chamber of Mines (Appendix 2.2.3) has set up a voluntary register of known mineral rights ownership in parts of South-west England, but the problems of unknown title remain.
The mineral rights to the noble metals, gold and silver, in most of Britain are owned by the Crown, and a licence for the exploration and development of these metals must be obtained from the Crown Estate Commissioners through the Crown Mineral Agent.
There is no standard application form or licence.
Applications to explore an area should be made to the Crown Mineral Agent accompanied by a map, a proposed work programme and details of the applicant's financial resources and technical ability.
A Crown Estate Permit is required for initial superficial geological reconnaissance.
This usually covers a short period to assist the applicant in defining a work programme.
Active exploration requires a Mines Royal Licence, issued for twelve months extended annually for up to three years dependent on satisfactory progress.
The licence may be converted to a mining lease subject to agreement.
Draft Heads of the Terms for a mining lease are included in the licence.
The term of the lease varies with the size of deposit and proposed production rate but is unlikely to exceed twenty one years initially.
The Crown Estate Commissioners require annual reports which normally remain confidential for four years after termination of the licence.
Crown Estate permits, licences and leases confer no right of entry and the applicant must negotiate surface access separately with the surface rights owners.
Since 1987 the results of prospecting for gold and silver have been passed to the BGS by the Crown Estate Commissioners and will eventually be available for public inspection along with other information from the BGS archives.
The title to gold and silver in the former county of Sutherland in northern Scotland is held by the Duchy of  of Sutherland.
In the Isle of Man title to all minerals, including gold and silver, is vested in the Manx Department of Industry (Appendix 2.2.4) through the Minerals Act 1986.
The Department issues exploration and development licences.
The Mines (Working Facilities and Support) Act 1966, as amended, provides a means by which an operator who is either unable to trace the mineral rights owner, or cannot reach an agreement on reasonable terms with him, can obtain the necessary authority to explore for and work minerals.
The Act can also be used to acquire ancillary rights needed in the national interest to facilitate the working of minerals.
Although the legislation rarely has to be used, its existence is of value to prospective mineral operators as a means of persuading landowners to reach agreement.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Appendix 2.2.4) has produced an informative guide to this Act (Anon, 1983a).
The ownership of oil and gas in Great Britain was vested in the Crown by the Petroleum Production Act 1934.
The Department of Energy grants exploration, appraisal and production licences.
With few exceptions, the rights to coal in Great Britain are vested in the British Coal Corporation by the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act 1946.
The Corporation has exclusive rights to the working of coal, but may issue licences to private operators for the working of coal from small underground mines and from opencast operations.
Northern Ireland
All minerals in Northern Ireland, except gold and silver (already vested in the Crown) and ‘common’ substances including sand and gravel and aggregates, are vested in the Department of Economic Development by the Mineral Development Act (Northern Ireland) 1969.
The Department grants prospecting and mining licences.
Prospecting licences can be for up to 250 km&sup2; for an initial period of two years, renewable for a further two years at the discretion of the Department.
Licensees are required to carry out an agreed scheme of prospecting and to report the results of their work programmes to the Department annually.
This information is kept confidential for up to ten years if the company so wishes, but thereafter is available for public consultation at the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland.
The Department of Economic Development produces an annual report giving details of existing licences.
Exploration for gold and silver requires a licence from the Crown Estate Commissioners, as in Great Britain.
Petroleum in Northern Ireland is vested in the Department of Economic Development by the Petroleum Production Act (Northern Ireland) 1964, and the Department grants licences to explore for, and exploit petroleum.
7.2 Access
Most land is owned by the occupier or farmer who holds the surface rights.
Permission must generally be obtained from the surface owner to gain access to land for prospecting, geological mapping and geochemical and geophysical surveying.
The permission of the mineral rights owner for such activities, is not necessary.
However, such an arrangement confers no rights to exploit minerals if found.
Informal, even oral, arrangements may be acceptable where reconnaissance work is being undertaken, but where more costly exploration work is contemplated the company should seek a written agreement with the mineral owner.
The approach of companies varies, but many prefer to have a flexible legal agreement allowing surface access for prospecting, including overburden drilling and geophysics, with the right of a first refusal to an option over the mineral rights after a specified time.
The property agreement usually involves a small payment to the relevant surface and/or mineral rights owners.
The establishment of local contacts or a local office is a useful step in developing an exploration programme in an area as tracing, and negotiating with, land and mineral rights owners may sometimes be time consuming.
It can be an advantage to seek out owners of major tracts of land and minerals such as the Crown Estate Commissioners, the Duchy of Cornwall, the Church Commissioners, the Forestry Commission, sporting estates, water authorities and, increasingly, pension funds and other financial institutions.
Access to quite large areas can be obtained in this way and negotiations may be held with estate officers used to legal agreements.
In Scotland the most comprehensive and publicly available source of information on estate boundaries is that compiled by Millman (1969, 1970 and 1972).
This covers most of Scotland apart from the Midland Valley and identifies estates by name, with a map showing their boundaries.
Although now rather dated, it remains a useful means of assessing the land ownership situation in most of Scotland.
The services of a land agent experienced in mineral agreements may be advisable if large scale exploration is envisaged.
The Country Landowners Association (Appendix 2.2.4) has published a booklet entitled ‘Minerals’(2nd Edition 1983) which provides guidelines for negotiating prospecting and mining leases from the landowner's point of view.
The Institution of Mining and Metallurgy has published the proceedings of a meeting on ‘The legal aspects of prospecting in the United Kingdom’(Anon, 1983b).
The proceedings include a description of obtaining mineral exploration permission in South-west England and the planning application system.
The British Geological Survey has experience of working in every part of Britain.
Mineral exploration companies should make early contact with the BGS to obtain background information on the geology, mineralisation and previous exploration of any area.
The BGS must be informed in writing, under the Mining Industry Act 1926, of the sinking of boreholes or shafts exceeding 30 m in depth; records of the operation, including drill logs, must be kept, and the BGS must be permitted to inspect the operation and remove representative samples if it so wishes.
7.3 Planning controls on mineral operations
As in other developed countries, Britain is subject to planning controls governing most forms of ‘development’ of land, including mining activities.
The planning framework in England and Wales is provided by the Town and Country Planning Act 1971, as amended by the Town and Country Planning (Minerals) Act 1981.
Day-to-day responsibility for administering the planning system as it relates to minerals rests with the mineral planning authorities (MPAs).
These are mainly the county councils, although there are exceptions in Greater London and the Metropolitan Areas.
In addition, in the Peak District and Lake District National Parks, the Peak Park Joint Planning Board and the Lake District Special Planning Board respectively, act as the MPA.
In Scotland the relevant Act is the Town and Country Planning Act (Scotland) 1972, as amended by the Town  and Country Planning (Minerals) Act 1981.
There is no separate regime for mineral planning.
Proposals for mining activities are dealt with by the authority responsible for all forms of development control.
In Highland, Borders, Dumfries and Galloway Regions and Orkney, Shetland and Western Isles, planning control is exercised by the Regional Council or Island Authority.
Elsewhere it is the responsibility of the District Council, although Regional Councils have reserved powers related to structure planning responsibilities.
In Northern Ireland planning permission is not usually required for normal prospecting activities.
However, the Department of the Environment in Northern Ireland is responsible for planning and is informed when a prospecting licence is issued.
It may require information about the proposed work.
The key feature of the planning system is that most forms of development in Britain require planning permission before development can take place.
Each application is considered on its merits.
Prospective developers should make their planning applications on forms provided by the planning authority.
The application will be considered by a planning committee.
This consists of elected councillors advised by the County Planning Officer and assisted, in minerals cases, by the Minerals Officer.
Developers are strongly advised to discuss their proposals with the Minerals Officer first before making any formal application.
The Minerals Officer will be able to advise developers on their applications and on what supporting information will be required to help the planning committee reach a decision.
The addresses of the County, Region and District planning departments, and the Minerals Officer, are listed in the Geologist's Directory published by the Institution of Geologists (Appendix 2.2.3).
In considering applications for planning permission, planning authorities will take into account the provisions of the development plan.
In Great Britain, the broad framework for the use of land is provided by Structure Plans.
Local mineral plans will build on this framework with more site-specific proposals.
All parts of Great Britain are covered by Structure Plans; a number of Mineral Local Plans are published.
Prospective mineral developers should acquaint themselves with the appropriate development plans.
They set out policies for future mineral development and often contain useful information about past and current mineral working in the area.
They also contain criteria against which mineral development applications will be assessed and describe policies for the restoration and after-use of mineral sites.
Although all mineral working activities come under the control of the Town and Country Planning Acts, certain operations, including most mineral prospecting activities that have little effect on the environment, do not require specific planning permission.
These include drilling exploration boreholes, sinking small test pits and carrying out geophysical and geochemical surveys provided that the operations do not last longer than twenty eight consecutive days, are not in environmentally sensitive areas, such as National Parks, and that the site is restored soon after operations cease.
The operations in this case are defined under The Town and Country Planning General Development Order 1988 (GDO) and planning permission is assumed to have been granted.
If the developer has notified the planning authority in advance then the twenty eight day period is extended to four months.
Mineral developers should discuss their intended exploration activities with the relevant Minerals Officer to determine if their proposals fall within the scope of the GDO.
After the planning committee has considered the planning application they may decide to approve it, refuse it, or approve it subject to certain conditions.
In practice most permissions for mineral development have conditions attached which are designed to control their impact on the environment.
For example, conditions may be imposed which control the hours of working and access arrangements, set noise limits and limit the depth of working.
Other conditions may govern the restoration of the site.
If the application is refused, or the conditions are unacceptable, the applicant has the right of appeal to the Secretary of State for the Environment.
An appeal following refusal of a minerals application usually results in a public inquiry, conducted by a planning inspector, in order that all individuals or organisations with a genuine interest may be given the opportunity of presenting their case.
The inspector has delegated powers to determine the appeal.
However, in certain circumstances, the Secretary of State will make the decision, taking account of the inspector's recommendations.
The Secretary of State also has the right to ‘call in’ planning applications.
In practice, it is established policy that minerals cases will be called in only if they raise issues of regional or national importance.
Before determining a called in case, the Secretary of State will hold a public inquiry in a manner similar to an appeal case.
One recent called in application was that for the Hemerdon tungsten tin open pit deposit on the border of the Dartmoor National Park.
The application was approved, subject to certain conditions.
Applications for mineral working in some environmentally sensitive areas such as National Parks (NP), Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) will be subject to the most rigorous examination.
However, large scale mineral operations for china clay, fluorspar, limestone, potash, roadstone and slate are carried out within National Parks from open pit and underground mines on a basis of national need and local employment.
A considerable amount of mineral exploration has been carried out in Britain in recent years by numerous British based and overseas companies.
The domestic minerals industry and the planning authorities have built up a co-operative atmosphere over the years.
However, companies without any experience of operations in Britain would be well advised to seek professional advice before attempting to carry out work likely to require planning permission.
Further useful information on minerals planning can be found in the Minerals Planning Guidance Notes issued by the Department of the Environment (HMSO 1988-).
These set out Government policy and provide updated information on the 1981 Minerals Act.
APPENDICES
1 Known mineralisation
This section briefly describes the known metalliferous mineral deposits of Britain and provides references for additional reading.
It also includes information on mineral exploration in some areas, especially that derived from the activities of the MRP or MEG projects.
This information tends to be sporadic and incomplete as there is currently no requirement for companies to deposit data from their mineral exploration programmes with any central agency, except in Northern Ireland.
BGS publications on mineralisation in Great Britain are referred to in the text.
Figure 5 shows the location of the most important orefields and individual deposits referred to in the text.
Antimony
Small scale production has been recorded from South-west England on the fringes of the main mining districts, sometimes with gold, especially in the Wadebridge-Port Isaac area of north Cornwall where it is associated with Devonian spilitic pillow lavas (Edwards, 1976).
The MRP has carried out geochemical and geophysical surveys in the area and drilled a number of shallow holes (MRP 103).
Antimony has also been produced in south-west Scotland from the Glendinning mine in Silurian greywackes (MRP 59) and from the Knipe mine near New Cumnock in Caledonian granite (MEG 135 and 257).
It is recorded in analyses for gold from Stronchullin, Strathclyde (Peach and others, 1911) and is associated with lead in a small mine near Conwy, North Wales (Bevins and others, 1988).
Stanley and Vaughan (1982) describe minor occurrences in the Lake District.
Additional information is given in Dewey and others (1920).
Arsenic
An estimated total of 250000 tonnes of arsenious trioxide (As&sub2; O&sub3;) was produced in South-west England in association with copper and iron sulphides (Dunham and others, 1979).
The main producer was the Devon Great Consols mine near Plymouth (Dines, 1956).
The smelting of arsenical ores to give white arsenic (As&sub2; O&sub3;) in the 19th century contaminated large areas downwind of smelters in the region.
Arsenopyrite also occurs in the Lake District (Stanley and Vaughan, 1982).
Additional information is given in Dewey and others (1920).
Barium
Baryte has been produced in several areas of Britain.
The main deposits were:
1
Gasswater and Muirshiels in the Midland Valley of Scotland (Scott, 1967; MRP 67)
2
Settlingstones, a major producer of witherite, in Northumberland (Dunham, 1948)
3
In the Northern and Southern Pennine orefields (Dunham 1948; Dunham and Wilson 1985; Firman and Bagshaw, 1974)
4
In the Shropshire mining field (Dines, 1958).
Gasswater mine produced 0.5 million tonnes of baryte from fault-controlled veins in Devonian — Carboniferous sediments (Scott, 1967).
Muirshiels mine produced 0.3 million tonnes from veins in Lower Carboniferous trachytic and basaltic lavas (MRP 67).
Both mines are associated with a NW-SE swarm of Tertiary dolerite dykes but there appears to be no genetic connection.
The mineralisation is thought to have originated from barium-rich formation waters or remobilisation of sedimentary baryte concentrations in Devonian — Carboniferous sequences (Gallagher and others, 1982).
Vein deposits in Dinantian limestones and sandstones have been exploited in the Northern and Southern Pennine orefields for a total production exceeding 2 million tonnes.
Small scale production is still maintained.
The Shropshire mining field yielded over 0.5 million tonnes of baryte from E-W veins in late Precambrian sediments.
Recent production has centred on the Pennine orefields and on vein deposits at Strontian, Highland Region, and in the Nethan Valley, Strathclyde Region of Scotland.
The recently discovered Aberfeldy stratabound exhalative deposit (Coats and others, 1984b; MRP 26 and 40) in Middle Dalradian sediments is producing from open pit and underground sources.
It has large (several million tonnes) resources of high-grade baryte and is likely to become a major producer.
The mineralisation occurs near the top of the Ben Eagach Schist Formation which includes graphitic schist, mica schist and quartzite with thin limestones.
The mineralised zone is up to 110m thick and extends over 7km strike length.
Bands of pure baryte over 15 m thick occur within the zone surrounded by an envelope of celsian (barium feldspar) and barian muscovite.
Two separate deposits have been identified to the east and west of Ben Eagach.
The Foss deposit, to the west, is in production and the larger Cluniemore deposit to the east is being evaluated (May 1989).
Other promising prospects occur in the Dalradian to the north-east and south-west of Aberfeldy (Section 5.3).
Additional information on baryte deposits in Britain is given in Collins (1972) and Carlon (1975).
Beryllium and bismuth
Beryl has been recorded in micaceous pegmatites of the Moine schists in north-west Scotland (Berridge, 1969).
Minor amounts of bismuth have been recorded from South-west England (Dines 1956; Ball and others, 1982a) and in the Lake District (Stanley and Vaughan, 1982).
Bismuth also occurs in the Rhos-mynach deposit in Anglesey associated with chalcopyrite and minor gold in Silurian shales (Dewey and Eastwood 1925).
Chromium
Chromite has been produced from numerous small open pit workings on Unst in Shetland.
It occurs in bands up to 1 m thick and 75 m long in serpentinised dunite.
About 50000 tonnes were produced up to 1945.
More recent investigations by the BGS using a gravity survey to define drilling targets found no indications of significant near-surface chromite mineralisation (MRP 35).
Chromite has also been recorded at Corrycharmaig in the Grampian Highlands (Harrison, 1985) and in north-east Scotland in small serpentinite bodies.
It also occurs in the Ballantrae ophiolite (Stone and others, 1986) and in layered Tertiary ultrabasic rocks on Rhum off the west coast of Scotland.
Potentially large resources of chromite and olivine sand have been discovered by the MRP on the sea bed to the south of Rhum (MRP 106).
Cobalt
Small amounts of cobalt have been recovered from South-west England in association with Sn-Cu   mineralisation (Dines, 1956).
It has also been reported from the Alderley Edge mines in Cheshire (Carlon, 1979) and in the Lake District (Stanley and Vaughan, 1982).
Copper
Copper mineralisation occurs in many areas of Britain.
The two most important districts are:
South-west England
This area was the world's main source of copper in the first half of the 19th century.
The mineralisation occurs in veins spatially associated with Variscan granites.
The main copper mineralisation generally occurred above the tin bearing parts of the veins.
Further information is included in the section on tin mineralisation and a comprehensive account is given in Dines (1956).
Anglesey
The Parys Mountain Cu-Pb-Zn deposit has recently been reinterpreted as Ordovician volcanogenic mineralisation of Kuroko-style (Pointon and Ixer, 1980).
Massive bedded sulphides and disseminated ‘feeder’ veins and stockwork mineralisation occur over a zone 2km long and up to 500m wide.
Cumulative historic production exceeded 130000 tonnes of copper metal.
The property is currently under active exploration by Anglesey Mining plc who are sinking a 550 m deep exploration shaft at the western (Morfa Ddu) end of the deposit to investigate drill-indicated reserves of 4.8 million tonnes at 1.5 per cent Cu, 3.0 per cent Pb, 6.0 per cent Zn, 57 g/t Ag and 0.4g/t Au.
Additional resources of over 30 million tonnes grading 0.76 per cent Cu have been indicated by earlier exploration to the north-east of the shaft site.
Similar polymetallic mineralisation is indicated by MRP investigations in north-west Anglesey (MRP 99).
Other deposits and areas, worked for copper, include the following:
Coed y Brenin and Clasdir
Porphyry-style deposit in Cambrian intrusive and sedimentary rocks.
Discovered by RioFinex in 1968 (Rice and Sharp, 1976) it has resources of about 200 million tonnes at 0.3 per cent Cu.
Shepherd and Allen (1985) provide additional information on its genesis from fluid inclusion studies.
The Glasdir deposit is about 2km south of Coed y Brenin.
It is a mineralised breccia pipe in Cambrian sediments consisting of angular fragments veined and cemented by chalcopyrite, pyrite and quartz (Allen and Easterbrook, 1978; MRP 29).
It may have formed at the same time as Coed y Brenin.
Total production was about 75 000 tonnes at 1.5 per cent Cu and minor Au.
Dalradian pyrite belt
Stratabound pyrite mineralisation occurs in thicknesses up to 200m over a strike length exceeding 50 km.
The mineralisation occurs within the Middle Dalradian Ben Lawers Schist Formation just above the Ben Eagach Schist Formation.
Minor Cu-Ni mineralisation has been worked in vein and stratiform deposits (MRP 8 and 15).
Gairloch
Gairloch is a Besshi-type volcanogenic stratiform Cu-Zn deposit in Lower Proterozoic Lewisian metasedimentary and basic volcanic rocks (Jones and others, 1987).
It was discovered by Consolidated Gold Fields Ltd in 1978 and has been intensively drilled, but is currently subeconomic.
A number of adjacent similar prospects have been investigated without success.
Kilmelford
The Kilmelford area contains porphyrystyle mineralisation in Caledonian granodiorite.
The mineralisation was discovered by Phelps Dodge Corporation and Noranda-Kerr Ltd in 1971 and investigated by the BGS in 1976 (MRP 9).
No resource figures have been published but the mineralisation in the BGS holes is very low grade (0.03 per cent Cu).
BP Minerals International Ltd has completed an evaluation of the Kilmelford area as a gold target-see under gold.
Lake District
Chalcopyrite, with quartz, pyrite, arsenopyrite and some magnetite and Co-Ni-As sulphides, has been worked in the Coniston area.
The mineralisation occurs in breccia veins in the Ordovician Borrowdale Volcanic Group, especially in rhyolites (Firman, 1978).
Snowdonia
Minor Cu-Pb-Zn volcanogenic vein and stockwork deposits occur within the Snowdon caldera (Reedman and others 1985).
They are interpreted as filling volcano-tectonic faults but may also have been feeders to Kuroko-style massive sulphide deposits, though these are likely to have been removed by erosion.
A Kuroko-style massive pyrite deposit at Cae Coch, north-east of Snowdon, may be the distal expression of an as yet undiscovered buried proximal base metal sulphide deposit (Ball and Bland, 1985).
Vidlin
The Vidlin mineralisation is a stratabound volcanogenic massive sulphide Cu-Zn deposit in Lower Dalradian metavolcanic rocks.
It was investigated by the BGS (MRP 4) and a mining company.
No resource figure has been published but the estimated grade is 0.7 per cent Cu and 0.5 pcr cent Zn (Smith and others, 1984).
Further information on copper deposits and occurrences in areas other than South-west England and Scotland can be found in Dewey and Eastwood (1925).
Fluorite
Economic fluorite mineralisation is restricted to the Dinantian and early Namurian limestone areas of Britain where it is associated with Pb-Ba-Zn mineralisation.
The two main producing areas have been:
Northern Pennine Orefield
The most important areas are around Weardale in the Alston area (Dunham, 1948; revised edition in preparation) and around Greenhow in the Askrigg area (Dunham and Wilson, 1985).
Underground mines are still in operation in Weardale.
Fluorite occurs in oreshoots within major veins up to 20km long and 10m wide, and also in stratabound replacement orebodies (flats) adjacent to veins as well as numerous minor veins (Greenwood and Smith, 1977).
The Alston area shows pronounced zonation of some of the ore minerals.
Fluorite dominates the inner zone with calcite and then baryte towards the margins of the mineralised area.
This zonation is coincident with the subcrop of the concealed high heat production Caledonian Weardale granite.
The Pennine mineralisation is considered by Dunham (1983) to be a fluoritic subtype of the Mississippi Valley Type ore deposit.
Southern Pennine Orefield
The F-Ba-Pb mineralisation occurs in major E-W veins (rakes) and stratabound replacement deposits (flats) together with some cave fill deposits (pipes).
The richest mineralisation is concentrated in the uppermost Dinantian limestones beneath Namurian shales on the east side of the Dinantian outcrop (Ford, 1976).
Current production from both open pit and underground operations is principally confined  to the north-eastern part of the orefield between Eyam and Bradwell.
Substantial (in excess of several hundred thousand tonnes) replacement orebodies have recently been found in the Bradwell area, adjacent to major veins (Butcher and Hedges, 1987).
They have been formed by the hydrothermal stoping of limestone causing collapse breccias which were subsequently replaced by fluorite.
They show similarities to MVT deposits in the USA as described by Briskey and others (1986).
There is potential for further discoveries.
There are also several small tributers feeding a central processing plant near Stoney Middleton.
A major new underground mine (Milldam) is under development at Great Hucklow within the Peak District National Park.
Smith (1988) reviews the planning history of this deposit.
Fluorite also occurs in some of the South-west England Sn-Cu veins, as a cement in Permo-Triassic sandstones near Elgin, Grampian (Peacock and others, 1968) and in veins marginal to the Cairngorm granite.
Gold
Several areas of Britain have produced minor amounts of gold (Figure 6).
The most important have been the Dolgellau area of North Wales, where auriferous quartz veins in Cambrian shales have yielded a total of about 4 tonnes of gold, and the Pumpsaint area of Central Wales where auriferous quartz veins cut pyritic Silurian shales.
Alluvial gold has also been worked in Helmsdale in northern Scotland.
Gold has commonly been panned from many streams in the Southern Uplands of Scotland.
Further historical information can be found in Collins (1975).
North Wales
The Dolgellau Gold Belt occurs within Middle and Upper Cambrian sediments with numerous intrusions of ‘greenstone’(basic to intermediate volcanic rocks) on the southern and eastern flanks of the Harlech Dome.
The gold is associated with massive SW-NE trending quartz veins up to several metres wide and several kilometres long.
The distribution of gold is very sporadic.
At Clogau St. David's mine it occurs in small, rich, steeply-dipping shoots associated with pyrite and pyrrhotite together with galena and bismuth tellurides.
The veins are often auriferous where they cut graphitic shales but not where the host rocks consist of non-graphitic arenites.
Grades have been poorly recorded but averaged over 30g/t Au in 1900 with very selective mining.
Gold shoots generally occur at the intersections of side lodes, where greenstone and shale form the wall rocks and at braided structures with enclosed lenses of shale.
The Clogau St. David's and Gwynffynydd mines have recently been further evaluated and some development has been pursued but both are now on care and maintenance.
Grades from bulk samples of the Clogau St. David's evaluation range up to 7.9g/t Au (Bottrell and others, 1988).
Additional information about the Clogau St David's evaluation can be found in the Prospectus of Clogau Gold Mines plc delivered to the Registrar of Companies in 1984.
Central Wales
The Ogofau mine near Pumpsaint produced gold from quartz veins cutting pyritic Silurian shales.
The shales are folded in an anticline and cleaved with development of cross cutting and saddle reef quartz veins.
Gold has been remobilised into some of the quartz veins and into fractures in pyrite and arsenopyrite.
Grades were around 7 g/t Au during the last period of working in 1938 but recovery was poor.
Considerable research has been carried out since 1973 by the Department of Geology at Cardiff University.
Dalradian quartz veins
Gold bearing, discordant, steeply dipping quartz veins with minor sulphides occur within Middle Dalradian rocks in the Sperrin mountains of Northern Ireland (Clifford, 1986) and near Tyndrum in the Central Region of Scotland.
Their age is unknown but at Tyndrum they appear to be related to a late Caledonian extensional phase, with plutonic activity, associated with the main E-W Tyndrum fault (Pattrick and others, 1988).
They are earlier than the main NE-SW lead vein at Tyndrum which may be Carboniferous in age.
Not all the quartz veins are auriferous and the Tyndrum Main Vein, previously worked for lead and zinc, does not carry significant gold.
Individual veins are up to 100 m long and 2–3 m wide within zones up to one kilometre long and 100m wide.
Gold is distributed throughout mineralised quartz veins, not just in sporadic shoots.
Two deposits, Curraghinalt in Northern Ireland (Earls and others, 1989) and Cononish in Scotland (Parker and others, 1989), are under active development to establish ore reserves.
Geological ore reserves are reported to be 907 000 t at 10.3 g/t Au (cut) for Curraghinalt and 861000 t at 7.54g/t (cut) for Cononish.
Production is planned for both deposits by 1990.
Exploration is continuing in the area and RioFinex has announced the discovery of similar mineralisation at the Lack prospect west of Omagh.
Base metal exploration in the Tyndrum area, including the Eas Annie lead mine, adjacent to Cononish, is described in MRP 50.
Gold was also reported from minor quartz veins, with pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena, at Stronchullin in Strathclyde.
Two 10 tonne samples contained 45 and 37g/t Au together with silver, arsenic and antimony (Peach and others, 1911).
These analyses have not been confirmed by modern methods.
Caledonian granite intrusions
Several Caledonian granite-granodiorite intrusions within Dalradian metasediments contain gold associated with sulphide-bearing fault and breccia zones with values up to I O g/t Au.
Host rocks are commonly strongly hydrothermally altered.
They include Kilmelford (MRP 9), the neighbouring Lagalochan intrusion (Harris and others, 1988 and MEG 263) in western Scotland and Comrie in central Scotland (MEG 226).
Further information is given in Section 5.2.
Plate 2 shows an image generated from the GSP database which combines As, Sb and Bi (pathfinders for gold mineralisation).
Lagalochan, Tyndrum, Comrie and Glen Almond occur within strongly anomalous areas.
There is a similarly mineralised intrusion in Lower Palaeozoic greywackes at Foreburn in the Southern Uplands adjacent to the Southern Uplands Fault (MRP 55).
The Knipe and Moorbrock Hill intrusions host north-south structures with quartz-antimony-arsenic mineralisation and some gold in earlier quartz veins (MEG 135, 257, 259, 260 and 261).
Minor Au-Ag-Te mineralisation occurs in the Ratagain alkaline igneous complex in north-west Scotland (Alderton, 188).
The complex is intruded into Lewisian and Moinian metasediments and the mineralisation occurs as quartz-fluorite-calcite-sulphide veins.
Southern Uplands
Gold is associated with Lower Palaeozoic greywackes and shales at several localities in the Southern Uplands (MRP 28).
At Glendinning mine stratabound sulphide (arsenopyrite) horizons host minor gold while cross-cutting, quartz-antimony base metal sulphide veins are non-auriferous (MRP 59).
At Glenhead and Moorbrock Hill, adjacent to the Loch Doon granodiorite (MRP 48; MEG 261), and in the   Leadhills area, quartz veins and disseminated arsenopyrite zones are auriferous (MEG 230 and 260).
RioFinex examined Glengonnar Water, near Leadhills, for alluvial minerals, including gold (MEG 127).
Rhynie, Grampian
Anomalous levels of gold (up to I g/t Au), with Ag, As and Sb, occur in a silicified fault zone near Rhynie, Grampian,(Rice and Trewin, 1988) on the western margin of the Rhynie Devonian sandstone outlier.
The zone is associated with conglomerates and chert (the ‘Rhynie chert’) which are interpreted as hydrothermal eruption breccias and volcanic sinter.
Tayside Region
Alluvial gold has been recorded in several streams in an area of Dalradian metasediments to the south of Loch Tay and from small base metal workings in the vicinity (Heddle, 1901).
These showings may be related to granite intrusions such as those at Comrie and Tomnadashan (Fortey, 1980) or quartz veins such as those at Corrie Buie where small inclusions of electrum occur in galena (Pattrick, 1984).
Company exploration at Invergeldie, west of Comrie, located small outcrops of massive arsenopyrite up to 0.75 m thick at the contact of epidiorite sills and Dalradian metasediments (MEG 248).
The arsenopyrite contained up to 19 g/t Au.
However, drilling showed the sulphide was not extensive.
Gold exploration is continuing in this area.
Central England
Gold has been recorded in late Precambrian diorites in Charnwood Forest near Leicester, on the north-eastern margin of the Midlands Microcraton.
Faulting has produced a wide, mylonite-bearing shatter zone with large quartz lenses at Bardon Hill.
A later ladder-vein system, with albite, quartz and chlorite, contains dolomite, haematite and rare gold (King, 1968).
A small gossan of cavernous quartz with limonite and traces of gold was found at Bardon Hill in 1950 (King, 1967).
The diorites are extensively quarried for crushed stone production.
Devon
Dendritic gold occurs in calcite veins in Devonian limestones at Hope's Nose, near Torquay in south Devon.
Exploration by the BGS has found numerous gold anomalies in drainage and overburden samples from Lower Devonian sediments and intrusives around Kingsbridge, 20 km south-west of Torquay (MRP 98).
Some bedrock mineralisation has been found.
The gold in both areas is notably palladium-rich.
Lead and antimony vein mineralisation, with silver-rich galena and reported gold values, has been worked in the Wadebridge area of north Devon (Dines, 1956).
The veins are in Devonian slates and volcanics.
MRP investigations, including drilling, have found gold values up to I g/t Au (MRP 103).
Investigations in the Sourton Tors area of north Dartmoor, over the Dinantian Meldon Chert Formation, located a zone of sulphide veins with pyrite and pyrrhotite but without significant base metal mineralisation (Beer and Fenning, 1976).
Two sulphide concentrates from drill core contained 5 and 40 g/t Au.
A gold and silver bearing pegmatite dyke has been reported from the Dartmoor Granite, on Wind Tor south of Widecombe (Brammall, 1926).
Analyses showed up to 14g/t Au and 23g/t Ag.
Placer gold
In addition to the deposits in the Helmsdale and Southern Uplands areas mentioned above, placer gold has been recovered as a by-product of alluvial tin mining in South-west England.
No significant onshore placers are currently known but some offshore areas have been investigated such as the Mawddach estuary, near Dolgellau in North Wales, which was considered a prospect by RioFinex during the late 1960s.
Lead and Zinc
Lead and zinc mineralisation occurs in many areas of Britain.
The main types of deposit are:
Dinantian carbonate-hosted deposits
Mineralisation generally occurs in veins and replacement deposits, similar to those described under fluorite, which commonly accompanies the sulphide mineralisation in many of the orefields.
The main producing areas have been the Northern (Dunham, 1948 and Dunham and Wilson, 1985) and Southern (Ford, 1976) Pennine orefields, North Wales (Earp, 1958) and the Mendips (Green, 1958; Ford, 1976).
They were mainly worked for lead and the Pennine orefields were later worked for baryte and fluorite.
Zinc minerals occur but were often discarded or not recorded.
The silver content of the galena is generally low but ranges from 10g/t in the Southern Pennines up to 550 g/t in North Wales.
Mineralisation is thought to have commenced in early Permian times and extended through to the Triassic or early Jurassic in some areas.
The source of the mineralising fluids is generally thought to be Carboniferous shale basins adjacent to the carbonate plat-forms which host the mineralisation.
Fluid movement occurred during the Variscan orogeny aided by seismic pumping from the overpressured basins along listric faults (Plant and others, 1988).
Minor Pb-F mineralisation occurs in Dinantian carbonates intersected by oil exploration boreholes in eastern England (Ineson and Ford, 1982) indicating the possible presence of concealed mineralisation to the east of the orefield.
No veins are currently worked for lead and zinc alone but minor amounts of lead and zinc are produced as a by-product of fluorite and baryte mining.
Stratabound, very low grade lead and zinc mineralisation occurs in basal Dinantian limestones on the northern margin of the Northumberland basin (MRP 17, Gallagher and others, 1986).
Lower Palaeozoic greywacke and volcanic-hosted deposits
The main producing areas have been Central Wales, north-west Wales (Llanwrst), the Lake District, the Isle of Man (Lamplugh, 1903) and the Southern Uplands of Scotland (Leadhills).
One of the largest lead mines in Britain, the Greenside mine in the Lake District (Gough, 1965), produced over 200 000 tonnes of lead concentrates before closure in 1962.
Mineralisation shows a spatial association with underlying granites in the Lake District and the Isle of Man, and with volcanics in North Wales, but in Central Wales and most of the Southern Uplands there is no indication of magmatic involvement.
Phillips (1986) has described how metamorphic fluids could have given rise to the mineralisation in Central Wales.
A thorough review of the Central Wales mineralisation is given by Jones (1922) with more recent mineralogical and textural information by Raybould (1974).
The galena in the Lower Palaeozoic deposits generally contains more silver than that in the carbonate-hosted mineralisation and the associated gangue minerals are generally quartz and/or calcite.
Stratabound Dalradian deposits
Sphalerite and galena occur in stratabound lenses in the Middle Dalradian Ben Eagach Schist Formation at Aberfeldy in the Tayside Region of Scotland (MRP 40 and Coats and  others, 1980).
The highest reported grades are 8.5 per cent Zn and 3.6 per cent Pb over 4.3 m true width.
There are a number of other occurrences of stratabound lead and zinc sulphides in Middle Dalradian metasediments (MRP 88, 93 and 104; Coats and others, 1984a).
Other deposits
Zinc is produced as a co-product of tin production at Wheal Jane mine in Cornwall.
Lithium
South-west England granites have a high lithium content, mainly contained in lithium-bearing micas.
In particular, parts of the St Austell Granite form a large, but low-grade, lithium resource containing micas with up to 2.5 per cent of lithium metal (Hawkes and others, 1987).
Manganese
Manganese has been produced in two areas in North Wales.
An extensive 40cm thick bed of syn-diagenetic origin has been worked in Cambrian pelites around the Harlech Dome (Bennett, 1987).
Deposits of probable volcanic-exhalative origin occur in Ordovician mudstones and dolerites at Rhiw in the Lleyn Peninsula.
The MRP has recently investigated this area using magnetic surveys and drilling; only minor mineralisation was found (MRP 102).
Total production from North Wales is about 135000t (Rhiw) and 44000t (Harlech).
There are numerous minor localities in Scotland.
The largest is the Lecht deposit, near Tomintoul in Grampian.
It is a manganiferous ironstone breccia in Dalradian metasediments and has been interpreted as a gossan overlying stratiform sulphides.
However, it is now considered to be an ironstone derived from the weathering of an exhalative, spessartine-bearing protore (Nicholson, 1987).
Manganese nodules with over 10 per cent Mn occur in Loch Fyne on the west coast of Scotland but resources are probably small.
Additional information on manganese localities in Britain is given in Woodland (1956).
Molybdenum
Molybdenum has not been worked commercially in Britain.
Numerous minor occurrences are known, generally associated with Caledonian acid magmatism; MRP 3, 9, 43, 76 and 100 describe some Scottish localities.
They include the Lairg, Kilmelford, Ballachulish, Glen Etive and Inverurie areas.
Company exploration data are on open file in MEG 3 and 17.
Molybdenum also occurs in the Shap Granite in the Lake District (Firman, 1978) and in South-west England (Dines, 1956).
Nickel
Minor amounts of nickel have been produced from a small magmatic Cu-Ni deposit at Talnotry, south-west Scotland (MRP 10; Stanley and others, 1987) and near Loch Fyne from stratabound Fe-Cu-Ni sulphides in Dalradian metasedimentary and volcanic rocks especially in the ‘pyrite belt’.
Several companies have examined these areas without success (MEG 2, 4, 115 and 123).
A major exploration programme was carried out between 1965 and 1973 by Exploration Ventures Ltd (RioFinex and Consolidated Gold Fields) and subsequently with Amax over the large basic-ultrabasic intrusions of Grampian Region in north-east Scotland The initial exploratory work is described by Rice (1975).
Cu-Ni sulphide mineralisation was discovered near Huntly (Littlemill zone) and Ellon (Arthrath-Dudwick zone) in Caledonian norites contaminated by pyritic and graphitic Dalradian sediments.
The relatively low grade (up to 2 per cent Cu + Ni) and difficulty of correlating drill intersections caused the project to be abandoned.
There are numerous data in the MEG Open File projects (Section 5.7).
Exploration has also been carried out on the ophiolite complexes of the Lizard, Ballantrae and Shetland where minor PGE enrichment has been discovered.
Drilling at Ballantrae by Selection Trust Ltd found disseminated and massive nickeliferous marcasite over widths of a few metres (MEG 103).
Niobium (Columbium) and Tantalum
These metals have not been produced in Britain.
Minor amounts of columbite have been recorded in the Cairngorm granite in Grampian, Scotland (MRP 96) and in a pegmatite on South Harris in the Hebrides (Berridge, 1969).
Platinum Croup Elements (PGE)
PGE have been found in the Shetland ophiolite complex on Unst (MRP 73; Prichard and Lord, 1988) and in the basic intrusions of north-east Scotland.
Exploration is continuing (Chapter 5.5).
Rare Earth Elements (REE)
These have not been produced in Britain.
The Loch Borralan alkaline igneous complex in north-west Scotland contains apatite-rich pyroxenites with elevated contents of REE (Notholt and others, 1985).
Panned concentrates from some stream sediments in Central Wales contain more than I per cent total REE in the form of recrystallised detrital monazite nodules (Read and others, 1987).
Silver
More than 400 tonnes of silver has been produced in the Northern Pennine Orefield from argentiferous galena containing 150 g/t Ag (Dunham, 1948).
The Central Wales orefield, where the galena contained over 200 g/t Ag, has produced over 100 tonnes (Jones, 1922).
Small amounts of native silver were produced from veins cutting Devonian volcanics and Dinantian sediments in Central Scotland at Alva and Hilderstone respectively; these areas have been investigated by the BGS (MRP 53 and 68).
Argentiferous galena was also worked in Devonian sediments at Combe Martin on the north Devon coast (MRP 90) and in the South-west England mining field from veins emplaced at lower temperature than, and often crosscutting, the earlier Sn-Cu veins.
Silver mineralisation, with associated galena, was worked in a small mine on Sark in the Channel Islands (Ixer and Stanley, 1983).
Further information on silver in Britain is given in Ridgway (1983).
Strontium
Strontium was first discovered at the type locality, Strontian, in western Scotland in strontianite associated with baryte.
It is commercially extracted by open pit in the form of celestite nodules from the basal Triassic Mercia Mudstone Formation near Bristol (Nickless and others, 1976).
Further information on celestite in Britain is given in Thomas (1973).
Tin
Tin production is confined to South-west England.
Over 2.5 million tonnes of tin-in-concentrates has been produced from veins associated with Variscan granites  which intrude Devonian metasediments-locally known as ‘killas’.
Copper, zinc, arsenic and tungsten are associated with tin in quartz-tourmaline veins.
There are several different styles of mineralisation including skarns, pegmatites, greisen veins, replacement deposits in calc-silicates, vein swarms, stockworks and pipes as well as the most important and ubiquitous fissure vein deposits.
A comprehensive account of this classic mining region is given in Dines (1956).
Later references include Dunham and others (1979) and Anon. (1982b).
A recent description is given by Embrey and Symes (1987).
The region is still a major producer of tin.
The main operating mines are South Crofty, which works a fissure vein swarm, and Wheal Jane/Mount Wellington, which works an unusual deposit of cassiterite in very fine-grained sulphides, with sphalerite and minor chalcopyrite.
The deposit occurs at the sheared contact of a shallow dipping felsite dyke (‘elvan’) and killas (Devonian metasediments).
There are still major prospects in the area which are discussed in Chapter 5.
Further examples of prospective areas can be found in Slater (1974).
There is still controversy as to the ultimate origin of the tin and tungsten but Beer and Ball (1986) have shown that they are probably not derived from the sediments surrounding the granites.
A number of papers relevant to mineralisation in the area can be found in Evans (1982) and Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (1985).
Tin placers have been worked in many areas in South-west England.
Some are associated with fossil strand lines at various levels up to 130 m above present sea level caused by subsidence during Pliocene times and sub-sequent uplift (Dunlop and Meyer, 1973).
The area was not glaciated, but periglacial effects, combined with recent weathering and erosion, have formed tin placer deposits in many valleys.
The geomorphic setting and history of the development of the stanniferous placers of South-west England is discussed by Camm and Hosking (1985) who also describe the styles and mineralogy of the primary tin mineralisation of the area.
Most of the placers are worked out; the most prospective areas are offshore.
Plans to dredge the top metre of sediment off the north Cornwall coast have been put forward by Marine Mining; exploration drilling for deeper placer deposits in buried river channels has been carried out in Mount's Bay and St Austell Bay.
Examples of onshore alluvial exploration projects can be found in MEG 182 and 211.
An offshore spectrometric survey was carried out over the seaward extension of Geevor mine to detect additional mineralised lodes and to map the granite/killas contact (MEG 264).
Small amounts of cassiterite occur in thin magnetite bands in the Carn Chuinneag igneous complex in northern Scotland (Gallagher and others, 1971).
Anomalous levels of tin and tungsten (up to 1000 ppm) occur in thin quartz-magnetite veins in North Wales (Reedman and others, 1985).
Titanium
No titanium minerals have been produced in Britain.
Potential hardrock sources, associated with basic igneous rocks, do not have sufficiently high concentrations to be of commercial interest at present.
The main areas where titanium levels, mainly in ilmenite or titanomagnetite, exceed normal levels in basic rocks are:
North-east Scotland
The large Caledonian basic intrusions of Insch, Cabrach and Boganclough are iron and titanium enriched and contain up to 5 per cent TiO&sub2;, mainly in ilmenite.
No primary layered concentrations of Fe-Ti oxides have been found although silicate layering is present in the ultrabasic parts of some of the intrusions.
The area has been affected by deep Tertiary weathering and substantial amounts of ilmenite have entered the secondary environment, especially through fluvioglacial erosion.
The effects of this can be seen on the image of TiO&sub2; in stream sediments collected by the GSP from the Moray-Buchan area (Plate 3) where enhanced titanium values extend to the east of the basic intrusions.
Heavy minerals, chiefly ilmenite and magnetite, are widely distributed in sands and gravels of the Grampian region especially in the Don Valley.
Thin heavy mineral bands with ilmenite occur in coastal dune sands near Rattray Head, between Peterhead and Fraserburgh.
Carrock Fell, Lake District
This small Caledonian gabbroic intrusion contains ilmenite- and titanomagnetite-enriched zones in part of an east-west trending complex close to the contact with an earlier acid granophyre body.
Ilmenite and magnetite can form up to 20 per cent of the rock and chromite has also been recorded (Eastwood and others, 1968).
Other areas
Minor amounts of rutile have been recorded from beach sands in Northumberland (Gallagher, 1974).
Glacial tills and residual soils in parts of the Lizard peninsula in Cornwall contain elevated levels of TiO&sub2;, as ilmenite, over thicknesses of several metres (Leake, personal communication May 1989).
Tungsten
Small amounts of tungsten have been produced in South-west England from early, high temperature quartz-tourmaline and quartz-feldspar veins.
The four main producers were South Crofty, East Pool/Agar (wolframite with tin and copper), Hemerdon (wolframite with minor cassiterite) and Castle an Dinas ((wolframite)(MRP 83)).
Major unworked low-grade stockwork deposits occur at Hemerdon (Section 5.6), which represents the largest resource of tungsten in Britain, and at Cligga Head on the north Cornwall coast.
The origin of the tungsten mineralisation is discussed by Beer and Ball (1987).
The Carrock Fell mine in Cumbria has been in intermittent, small-scale production since 1901.
It lies on the northern margin of the Skiddaw Granite in a greisen zone with veins of quartz carrying wolframite, scheelite and sulphides (MRP 7, 33 and 60; Ball and others, 1985a).
The last recorded head grade was 1.29 per cent WO&sub3;(Slater, 1973).
The mine is now abandoned.
Wolframite and scheelite also occur in trace quantities associated with molybdenite mineralisation around a small Caledonian granite near Inverurie in north-east Scotland (MRP 100).
Uranium
Uranium occurrences are widespread in Britain.
The two main areas are South-west England and Scotland.
In South-west England lower temperature pitchblende-hydrocarbon-sulphide mineralisation occurs within the main higher temperature Sn-Cu veins and in cross-courses associated with Pb-Zn-Ba mineralisation.
Ball and others (1982b) give a comprehensive summary of the deposits.
In Scotland the most important uranium mineralisation occurs in low-grade, uraniferous, phosphatic and carbonaceous horizons in the Middle Devonian Orcadian lacustrine basin of the Orkneys and  Caithness (Michie and Cooper, 1979), in Devonian arkosic breccias marginal to the Caledonian Helmsdale granite on the east coast of Caithness and in veins marginal to the Caledonian Criffel granodiorite at Dalbeattie in southern Scotland.
There are numerous other minor occurrences.
Comprehensive summaries of uranium and other mineralisation in Scotland are given by Gallagher and others (1971) and Michie and Gallagher (1979).
The Helmsdale area was drilled on a 130 m square grid with 41 percussion holes to depths of 80 m (MEG 82).
The maximum value found was 850 g/t U within a 15 m intersection.
U-Pb mineralisation occurs in a fault breccia in Devonian sediments at Mill of Cairston near Stromness on Orkney.
The fault has been drilled by the BGS and a mining company consortium in 1971–72.
Maximum values of 0.1 per cent U and 5.5 per cent Pb were found (MEG 125).
Vanadium
Minor amounts of vanadium were produced from the Alderley Edge copper mine in Cheshire where the element occurs in vanadinite (Carlon, 1979).
Pyroxenites within the Loch Borralan igneous complex in north-west Scotland contain 10 per cent magnetite with up to 0.5 per cent V&sub2; O&sub5;(Notholt and others, 1985).
Titaniferous magnetites from the Insch gabbro, one of a series of major basic intrusions in north-east Scotland, contain up to 1.7 per cent V&sub2; O&sub5;.
Ilmenites from the same rock contain up to I per cent V&sub2; O&sub5;.
However, the oxide mineral content of the rocks is generally low, at 5–10 per cent.
Permian mudstones in south Devon contain radioactive vanadiferous nodules with up to 14 per cent V&sub2; O&sub5;.
Mineralisation within the nodules consists of uranium, vanadium and iron oxides with base metal sulphides.
The results of a cored drilling programme are given in MRP 89.
2 SOURCES OF INFORMATION
2.1 British Geological Survey
The major source of information to the prospector is British Geological Survey (BGS).
The BGS is responsible for the geological mapping of Great Britain at 1:10000 scale.
It is also responsible for curating large amounts of geological information including samples, cores, records and maps.
It maintains a central library which has over 500000 volumes and pamphlets, 180000 maps and receives over 3000 journals.
It carries out specialist functions for Government departments and private companies, such as geochemical and geophysical investigations, as well as mineral resource evaluation and environmental geology studies.
The functions of the BGS of most interest to the prospector are:
Geological mapping
Detailed geological mapping has been a primary function of the BGS since its foundation in 1835.
The geological maps of Great Britain all use an Ordnance Survey topographic base.
There is a constant programme of revision and remapping.
The BGS publishes a ‘Catalogue of Printed Maps’ which lists the availability of maps down to 1:25 000 scale.
Maps at larger scale (1:10 000 or 6 inches to the mile) can usually be obtained but some may be copies of old, unpublished manuscript maps which date from the last century.
Descriptive memoirs exist for many of the maps and these can be a fruitful source of information on mineral occurrences.
The Gairloch discovery outcrop was noted in the 1907 Geological Survey Memoir of the area as ‘a copper-bearing limestone’(Peach and others, 1907).
Follow-up of this reference in 1978 led directly to the identification of a Cu-Zn-Au deposit (Jones and others, 1987).
A series of Special Reports on the Mineral Resources of Great Britain was published by the Geological Survey from 1915 to 1925.
They cover most of the metallic and related minerals and, although dated, do contain much useful information.
Some of them, for example Jones (1922) and Dewey and Eastwood (1925), are referred to in this Guide.
Mineral Reconnaissance Programme
The MRP is funded by the Department of Trade and Industry to provide baseline geological, geochemical, geophysical and metallogenic information on potentially     prospective areas in Great Britain.
The work can be at various levels from initial reconnaissance to diamond drilling but is not intended to go beyond the discovery stage of a mineral deposit.
Although it is generally aimed at specific styles of mineralisation a wide range of elements are determined and a variety of techniques used.
The purpose of the programme is to investigate environments favourable to metal deposition with a view to obtaining information conducive to exploration by private sector groups.
The results are published in a series of over 100 reports.
The project areas are shown in Figure 7 and Table 2 gives the report titles and main methods used.
Many unpublished reports on mineral exploration, especially for uranium, of Geological Sciences (1984).
Geochemical Survey Programme
The Geochemical Survey Programme (GSP)— the Regional Geochemical Reconnaissance Programme (RGRP)— is funded by the Department of Trade and Industry to undertake the systematic geochemical sampling of Great Britain.
The work started in northern Scotland and has progressed southwards as far as North Wales.
The programme employs stream sediment sampling at a density of one sample per km&sup2; with analysis for up to 30 elements.
Data are presented as atlases and are also available as computerised output which can be requested in various ways, e.g. by area, element or groups of elements or specified ranges for an element.
The atlases also contain maps showing geology and metalliferous mineral occurrences.
Interactive, multicomponent digital image processing of the entire database can also be carried out using the Geochemical Interactive Systems Analysis (GISA) facility at the National Remote Sensing Centre (Appendix 2.2).
This provides a very flexible and economical method of accessing and interrogating the database of some 70000 samples.
The geochemical characteristics of specific formations can be quickly established and searches carried out for geochemical patterns associated with various styles of mineralisation.
Plate 4 shows the distribution of uranium in stream sediments in northern Scotland.
The Caledonian Cairngorm (centre-east) and Helmsdale Granites (west coast of the Moray Firth) can be easily recognised.
Plate 5 is an image of Ni values from the Lake District.
These define the outcrop of the Ordovician Skiddaw Group sediments.
Figure 8 shows the coverage of the GSP and Table 3 lists the published atlases and other available data.
Mineral Intelligence Programme
The Mineral Intelligence Programme is largely funded by the Department of Trade and Industry to provide it with information and authoritative advice on economic minerals and many aspects of the minerals industry.
The Programme is focussed on world mineral resources, production, trade and use.
It seeks to bridge the gap between the scientific and technical aspects of their occurrence and extraction and their socio-economic impact, both in Britain and worldwide.
The work is supported by an extensive database on world mineral production, availability and trade.
The Programme publishes two statistical annuals, ‘World Mineral Statistics’ and the ‘United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook’.
It also maintains a database on the extractive industry in Britain and publishes ‘The Directory of Mines and Quarries’(see under Publications in Section 2.2.2).
National Geosciences Data Centre
The National Geoscience Data Centre (NGDC) is based at Keyworth and Edinburgh and contains a wide variety of information including borehole cores, cuttings, records, fossils, rock samples, thin sections and paper records.
All this material is available for public inspection, subject to confidentiality restrictions.
Regional offices of the BGS contain additional material relating to their area.
Mining Company Exploration Data
Mining companies are not required to deposit the results of exploration in Great Britain with a Government agency so records of prospecting work are very incomplete.
Some landowners may have the results of past exploration programmes but there is no central register for this information.
However, from 1972 to 1984 the Department of Trade and Industry gave grants under the Mineral Exploration and Investment Grants Act 1972 for mineral exploration for the ores of non-ferrous metals, fluorspar, barium minerals and potash, provided the results were deposited with the British Geological Survey.
The results of over 100 projects have now been put on Open File and are available for public inspection at the National Geoscience Data Centre and relevant regional offices of the BGS.
Other reports are due for release at intervals up to 1996.
Figure 9 and Table 4 give the location of Open File areas, project names and metals sought.
In Northern Ireland, all mining company exploration data are deposited annually with the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland.
All such data remain confidential, if requested, for a period of five years, renewable on application for a further five years.
Details of all non-confidential data can be obtained from the GSNI.