

News
Last-minute rush lifts Christmas sales
At the end of a gloomy, recession-blighted year, booksellers at last had cause for optimism after a last-minute rush by Christmas shoppers boosted sales.
Not even a relentless IRA bombing campaign in the major English cities could dampen spirits, and most booksellers reported that December sales were significantly up on last year.
High street spirits were further lifted by large crowds of post-Christmas shoppers in search of sales bargains, though this is not widely thought to herald the end of the recession.
However, there was something feverish, even desperate, in the manner in which shoppers crowded into shops in the last days before Christmas.
‘We were frantically busy,’ said Lois Brown, manager of Waterstones in Royal Avenue, Belfast, ‘and what we noticed was the rise in the number of people that were making purchases with credit cards.
It was as if they had left it as late as possible to take maximum advantage of credit.
We have been open five years, and this was our best Christmas yet.
Christmas lights attract the shoppers in Neal Street, Covent Garden
An ebullient John Lauder of Austicks in Leeds said: ‘It was complete pandemonium.
The town was jammed with traffic, the shop was packed: there was some serious buying going on.
The rush took me completely by surprise, and I think what contributed to it was that a lot of industry had closed down early, schools were closed, and many people had taken extended holiday.
It was hectic, but I was not complaining.’
The rush in central London reached fever pitch even though shoppers had to endure constant disruption as a consequence of the IRA's campaign.
On Wednesday 16th December, Oxford Street was closed for four hours following two bomb explosions, one of which had been planted in a toilet in John Lewis department store.
It was estimated that the disruption cost retailers around £5m in lost sales.
Three days later — the last Saturday before Christmas — Regent Street and stretches of the Charing Cross Road had to be evacuated for nearly two hours following bomb scares, and Hatchards and Dillons in Piccadilly were also forced to shut for up to four hours on Saturday.
Then, on Tuesday 22nd, a blast a Hampstead tube station disrupted late shopping, and a security alert temporarily closed a branch of Books Etc in the City of London.
Paul Baggaley, manager of Waterstones in Charing Cross Road, said the IRA campaign had, not surprisingly, had a markedly negative effect on trade.
‘Constant security alerts and bomb scares do unsettle people.
Crucial pre-Christmas Saturday trade was ruined by the scare in Charing Cross Road: people just stayed away.
But we opened on Sunday and did quite well, and then came the late rush, which was extraordinary: tills were ringing frantically.
It was just what we needed.’
That assessment was shared by John Monk, deputy managing director of London chain Books Etc.
‘After a slow start to the month trade really began to improve in the run-up to Christmas.
But IRA activity damaged sales.
The closure of our shop in Oxford Street cost us around £8,000, for which you can't ever really budget.’
Retailers were pinning their hopes on a strong Christmas after recent figures published by the Central Statistical Office showed that the seasonally-adjusted volume of retail sales fell by 0.1% in November, reversing three continuous months of growth.
Following the publication of the figures James May, director general of the British Retail Consortium, said: ‘While retailers are cautiously optimistic for a reasonable Christmas, any significant improvement in sales is not expected till well into next year.’
However, if booksellers' experience is anything to go by, the desired improvement in sales came earlier than expected.
 Jaspar Calotier , deputy managing director of Hammicks Bookshops, with 30 branches including sites in Sheffield, Durham, London and Stockport, said: ‘We were very impressed by the performance of most of our branches.
A number of them were about 10% up on last year, and several were as much as 20% up.
This was all very encouraging and bodes well for 1993.
In Oxford, David Cordery, manager of Blackwells in Broad Street, said that sales were up by nearly 7% on December last year.
‘The month began quietly, but things really began to move from about the 10th onwards, and in terms of takings we recorded a couple of record days.
In particular, we opened on Sunday 13th and had an extraordinary day, with no resulting loss of sales on other days.’
However, David Flatman of Flatmans in Edinburgh sounded a note of caution.
‘I don't always believe people when they say that Christmas trade has been good.
Reports I read in the national press suggest that retail sales are not improving, and that has certainly been borne out by our experience in Scotland over the last few weeks.
In fact, as Christmas has been disappointing here I can't really foresee this year being much better than 1992.’
A note on the design and typeface
This issue of 1st January 1993 sees The Bookseller appear in a new design and format, and with new typefaces.
The changes are intended to improve the paper in appearance and usefulness.
We hope they meet with the approval of readers and users.
The typefaces in our new design are those on this page: a classic cut of Baskerville for the main body of text, and Franklin Gothic for headlines (in most parts of the paper).
Baskerville is a traditional book face, crafted by John Baskerville in the 18th century, and intended to reflect the core of what we are all about: books.
Franklin is a sans serif face created by Morris Benton in the early 20th century — younger and more assertive, though still elegant, and embodying the other core concern of our business — selling.
Together they represent that peculiar interface between writing and commerce, a mixture reflected in our masthead, and a visual combination that runs throughout our pages.
The format has changed too, to A4-and-a-bit-on-the-side, a shape which we believe embraces the benefits to designers of a larger canvas and the advantages to advertisers of a more common standard, while avoiding the visual straitjacket that the verticality of A4 so often imposes.
The design has been created by Kenneth Carroll, who has had extensive experience in the worlds both of books and of newspapers — his clients have included Penguin (where he designed the King Penguin and reference lists), Collins/Fontana, Heinemann and Pan, and he was also responsible for the most recent redesign of the Observer in 1989 and, when a partner of Carroll, Dempsey & Thirkell, co-designed the Independent .
Observant readers will also notice a new look to the columnists who grace the back end of our editorial pages.
This has been achieved with the help of Bill Sanderson in the case of Quentin Oates and Horace Bent, and Ian Pollock in the case of William Boot.
Bill Sanderson was in 1972 encouraged by the then art editor of New Society , Charlie Ridell, to experiment with scraper-board to cope with the poor letterpress reproduction that was not uncommon at the time.
Regular work for New Society and the Times launched him as a freelance editorial illustrator, and he has an impressive list of clients — in the '80s he drew all the covers for Penguin's new editions of Anthony Burgess' work, and his work has appeared in the Independent on Sunday, Observer, Radio Times, New Scientist , American Esquire and — among other things — in numerous advertisements and promotions for whisky in the UK, Ireland and the US.
Ian Pollock's clients have included the Royal Shakespeare Company, Pentagram Design, Penguin, Pan,Rolling Stone , Dry Blackthorn Cider, Saatchi & Saatchi,New Scientist and Esquire .
His curriculum vitae notes that his work ‘keenly combines his observation and experiences of the world around him with a sharp and often cruel sense of humour’.
It adds that, although he lives in Macclesfield, he still makes a weekly trip to his flat in North London ‘to keep in touch with the seamier side of life which often inspires his work’— a habit which has qualified him uniquely to illustrate Mr Boot's Unauthorised Returns.
Publishers count the cost of new VAT regime
The cost of adapting their computer systems to handle new VAT requirements has proved to be an exceedingly expensive undertaking for the UK book business.
The new European Community Vat regime, introduced as part of the single market legislation, will generally cost UK companies £100m, according to a report published by Customs & Excise in December.
The report estimated that the cost to business of adapting information and computer systems, and providing more detailed trade statistics, will be nearly £50m.
Following the abolition of systematic and routine transaction-based border controls in Europe on 1st January, the job of monitoring VAT payments and trade, and collecting intra-community trade statistics, has fallen to the companies themselves.
Alan Smith, commercial director of Vista Computer Systems, said: ‘The new VAT legislation has had a profound effect on computer systems used by publishers.
We have been working closely with over 20 publishers on a number of major projects to ensure that computer systems are functional from 1st January, and able to collect the required information, such as a customer's VAT number and a two character country code.’
OUP distribution director Neil Killip said the new VAT regime had complicated an already difficult situation.
‘OUP has spent considerably more than £100,000 adapting its computer system to cope with the new requirements.
Our major problem was that the authorities were late in finalising the small print.
We knew that VAT was going to be an issue, but because everything was so vague we found it impossible to draw up detailed plans in advance, which meant that at the last minute we had to commit unbudgeted and unplanned resources to enable us to be ready for January.’
A recent survey conducted by the accountancy firm Arthur Anderson showed that four out of 10 companies in the Community were unprepared for the new VAT regime.
The survey said that fewer than 40% of companies had collected the VAT numbers from fewer than half of their customers.
Rob Newmarch, projects director of Vista, was not surprised by the findings.
‘Some countries have not even got the new legislation on the statute books.
Thus, even though the 12 member states are following the same rules, they are doing so at a different pace, which further complicates an already complex situation.’
Another huge rise in publishers' title output
Despite the recession and the slump in consumer spending, UK publishers' output rose by a startling 16.44% in 1992.
The most recent Whitaker statistics show that 78,835 new titles and new editions were published last year compared with 67,704 in 1991.
The total number of books published in the UK has been rising relentlessly for over 10 years, but 1993 should herald a change in strategy from major publishers: Random House, HarperCollins and Reed Consumer Books are among companies to have announced that they are substantially reducing the number of titles that they will be publishing in 1993.
Gail Rebuck, chief executive of Random House, said that the group would be publishing around 25% fewer titles in 1993.
‘We can't ignore the fact that there has been an overproduction of titles, and this is a lesson everyone is having to take on board,’ she said.
Margery Fisher
Margery Fisher, publisher of Growing Point for over 20 years, died on Christmas Eve.
The funeral will be held at Ashton Parish Church, Northants, at 1.45 p.m. on Monday 4th January.
An obituary will follow.
Getting into the Christmas mood: the Oxford Bach Choir performing for late night shoppers at Blackwells Music shop in Broad Street
Sunday trading — subsidiarity rules OK
The European Court of Justice has ruled that the 1950 Shops Act does not infringe the Treaty of Rome by restricting free trade, and is therefore legal.
The decision means that national legislation in this matter prevails and that Sunday trading continues to be illegal, save for certain goods, in England and Wales.
Current legislation is not likely to pertain much longer, however.
In the words of Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke, ‘There is no body of opinion that finds the existing law wholly satisfactory.’
The British government was only waiting for the ECJ to rule (and its decision was not unexpected) before reforming the Shops Act.
The only real question now is what form reform will take.
In late November Mr Clarke outlined three options that Parliament would be invited to consider in a free vote: total deregulation (as in Scotland); deregulation for small shops and partial deregulation for larger shops (as proposed by the Shopping Hours Reform Council); and exemption from the general prohibition on trading for certain classes of shop — recreation, emergencies, social gatherings and travel (proposed by the Keep Sunday Special Campaign).
A bill outlining these options and providing protection for existing shop workers is expected relatively quickly.
Meanwhile, pressure groups are variously encouraging retailers to open on a Sunday or urging local authorities to prosecute the law breakers, and labour MP Ray Powell's Private Member's Bill (supported by the Keep Sunday Special Campaign) is due for its second reading on 22nd January.
The Booksellers Association, which is not taking a view on this issue because of the differing interests of its membership, says it is nevertheless watching developments closely, and is recommending that booksellers lobby their MPs according to their trading preferences.
Macmillan copyright claims
Macmillan has won copyright infringement claims against Thomas Reed Publications Ltd and its distributor, Barnacle Marine Ltd.
Mr Justice Mummery held in the High Court last week that Thomas Reed had copied chartlets from The Macmillan and Silk Cut Nautical Almanac and used them in Reed's Nautical Almanac European 1993 .
Mr Justice Mummery ordered an immediate injunction, the effect of which is to prevent further sales of Reed's Nautical Almanac European 1993 .
Thomas Reed and Barnacle marine have said that they will appeal against the decision, but the judge refused them a stay of the injunction pending the hearing of the appeal.
Reed was also ordered to pay Macmillan's legal costs, and an inquiry into the amount of damages suffered by Macmillan will take place at a later date.
Nicholas Byam Shaw, chairman, commented: ‘Macmillan will always take whatever action is possible within the law to defend copyrights.
This judgement was a necessary and quick judicial response to an unlawful attempt by one publisher to take someone else's copyright for his own gain.
The relatively short life cycle of an annual publication of this sort makes early action by both copyright holder and the law essential.’
University library to charge?
London University Library may be forced to charge students and academics up to £90 per person a year unless its funding is maintained from the university's biggest colleges when they get more control over their budgets this year.
Professor Stewart Sutherland, vice-chancellor of the university, said that funding for the library was needed either from schools, colleges or institutes within the university or from the higher education funding council for England.
COMPANY NEWS CHEAPSIDE
Chairman's death raises new questions of friction at Time Warner
Steven J Ross, chairman and joint c.e.o.
of the world's largest media group, Time Warner, died on 20th December at the age of 65 after a battle with cancer which had forced him increasingly to withdraw from the business over the past year.
It was Steven Ross who negotiated the $14bn deal in 1989 resulting in the merger of the film and music empire Warner Communications with the publishing giant Time Inc.
The group's main book publishing interests are Time-Life Books, Warner Books, Little, Brown, and the Book of the Month Club.
Speculation about clashes among Time Warner's top management spread quickly after an announcement the day after Mr Ross' death that the board was being reconstituted and reduced from 21 members to 15.
There will instead be an increase in the number of outside directors.
Gerald Levin, who was joint c.e.o.
with Mr Ross and is expected to succeed him as chairman, stressed that the board changes come after a review process started last September.
Mr Levin, the former chief strategist of Time Inc, was a principal architect of the 1989 merger.
Questions about possible friction between the disparate corporate cultures of Time and Warner have been current ever since the merger.
The new board changes appear to favour the Time side of the group.
The company is expected to show encouraging profits in 1992 (publishing should yield $330m, compared to $264m in 1991), but is still burdened with a staggering $9bn debt as a legacy of the merger.
Last year the Japanese companies Toshiba and Itoh acquired a 12.5% stake in Time Warner for $1bn.
Mr Levin has said that he will seek to reduce debt by selling off $3bn of non-strategic assets.
Pavilion set up own sales force
Pavilion is investing £250,000 in setting up its own sales force, which will go into operation in April.
The team will consist of five people headed by a new sales manager, now in the process of being appointed, and the company hopes it will boost turnover (currently £5.2m) by £1m.
Pavilion has hitherto used Bloomsbury for sales representation and DMS-Media Services for distribution.
‘We have been very happy with Bloomsbury but when you are paying commission, the more sales you do, the more commission you pay,’ said managing director Colin Webb.
Pavilion will also switch distribution to Bookpoint.
‘We put the contract out to tender and were overwhelmingly impressed by Bookpoint,’ Mr Webb said.
Pentos worries hit share price
Pentos shares had dropped to 61p on the Monday before Christmas, having slipped 5.5p to 65.5p the previous week.
At their high point in 1992, they stood at 143p.
By lunchtime on the 29th they had climbed back to 69p.
The City is apparently concerned by reports that Christmas trade has not been good, and by the longer term implications of the group's reverse premium practices.
In 1991 Pentos made pretax profits of £15.2m.
Some analysts now believe profits may be closer to £12m in 1992.
A sporting life in books
Roddy Bloomfield, publishing director of Stanley Paul, will leave Random House in mid-March after 25 years at the forefront of sports publishing.
He plans to write and will consult for Stanley Paul; senior editor Marion Paull, who has worked with Mr Bloomfield for 20 years, will continue to manage the list, which Mr Bloomfield expects in these recessionary times to become ‘more focused, particularly on its current strengths, the major sports — golf, cricket, rugby, football, horses, pets’.
Mr Bloomfield is something of a legend in sports publishing.
A ‘serious ‘cricketer and rugby player himself (now a keen tennis player and golfer), he started his career at sponsored book company Newman Neame.
At Stanley Paul he published most of the big names in sport and across a broad range, in particular Gareth Edwards’ autobiography, which sold 84,000 in hardback;Practical Golf by John Jacobs (100.000 sold);Vet Notes for Horse Owners , first published in 1883 (1m copies); Laddie Lucas' biography of his brother-in-law RAF ace Douglas Bader; Naomi James; and Michael Parkinson's biography of George Best.
Mr Bloomfield proved he could also publish outside his area with Gavin Young's Slow Boats to China .
And there was one of last Christmas' bestsellers: ‘I was watching television about two years ago when I saw this ad.
Next day I decided, if the old gentleman couldn't find this book, we'd give him one.
And we did.
Fly Fishing by J R Hartley.
It sold 100,000 copies and is still selling, 1,400 last week.’
Working at Christmas — an open and shut case
Britain's businesses took a longer Christmas break than their European competitors this year, with millions of workers taking a two week holiday.
A spokesman for the Confederation of British Industry said, ‘Firms find it uneconomic to open up and shut down and open up again.’
But fears that the long holiday would lead to a marked slump in production figures for December and January were expressed by City analysts who believe the mass closedown could result in a production loss worth £5bn.
A straw poll by The Bookseller last week revealed that Octopus, Bloomsbury and Macmillan were among publishers who closed for Christmas but reopened before New Year, and that publishers taking a 10 day break — closing on Christmas Eve and reopening on 4th January — included HarperCollins, Transworld, OUP, CUP, Orion and Dorling Kindersley.
NEWS
Mats for the homeless
Readers of The Bookseller have already raised over £1,250 to provide sleeping mats for homeless people in London.
Peter Roberts of Kuperard, who launched the charity scheme last year, says this is enough to purchase 350 mats (against the 90 he was able to distribute last year), and he is planning to hand them out in the second week of January.
The mats are water-proof, and provide insulation at temperatures even as low as -20°.
Distribution was timed for January ‘because Christmas is over then, people are back on the streets, and the coldest time of the year is starting’.
Donations will still be welcome up to 5th January.
‘Any donation is welcome, however small,’ Mr Roberts says.
Cheques made out to ‘Mats for the Homeless’, should be sent to him  .
Peter Roberts, raising funds from the trade to help London ‘s homeless
Ann Hoare
John Parke writes It was a sad day when the news came some two years ago that Ann Hoare was suffering from cancer and that she had taken early retirement from her post as assistant manager of Exeter University Bookshop, where she had been on the staff since it opened.
Her visitors in the Exeter nursing home where she died on 7th December saw all the qualities which made her such a servant of the trade continue unabated to the end — the common sense and humour, the courage, and the huge interest in others.
In acting in (for a time professionally) and in directing plays, in running a successful guest house in Devon, and above all her contribution to the book trade, she was unfailingly energetic, thorough and conscientious.
Ann became a Catholic as an adult and entered the book trade working at a Catholic bookshop in Exeter.
She put in some years of hard work as hon secretary of the BA ‘s South Western Branch, and acted as its training officer, finally becoming chairman from 1979 until her retirement.
She brought a natural authority, charm and style to the office, particularly to the branch ‘s annual dinner.
The inspiration she gave to her staff and her friends continues now that she is gone.
NVQ banking
The Publishing Qualifications Board is offering National Vocational Qualifications assessment centres the opportunity to purchase ‘banks’ of NVQ units which can be distributed to employees as appropriate.
This is in response to a need expressed by some publishing houses and employees that the total NVQ can be onerous to achieve.
NVQ centres will be able to buy a minimum of any five units from an occupational NVQ, for example Book Editing, and to distribute these among two, three or four employees/candidates.
The PQB is calling the initiative ‘unit banking’, and hopes that it will encourage more publishers to become registered as centres.
The unit banks will cost between £225 and £300.
Information on the scheme is available from Rosie Thom, PQB administrator .
Well Worth Reading
Well Worth Reading, the fiction promotion scheme for libraries, has developed two new promotions.
‘Child's Eye View’ features 30 contemporary novels which explore the light and dark sides of childhood.
The promotion is sponsored by Holt Jackson, and among the chosen authors are Mary Wesley, Margaret Atwood and Chaim Potok.
‘City Limits’ features a series of modern novels set in cities by a selection of writers including Jeanette Winterson, Philip Kerr and Mordecai Richler.
The co-ordinator of the scheme, Miranda McKearney, said: ‘We have found that libraries are keen to use Well Worth Reading because it offers designed and printed promotional material conceived by fellow librarians.
We offer only two lists each year, so we urge library authorities not to miss the chance to buy into these promotions.’
Details can be had from   
£20,000 for NVQ assessments
Publishers employing 25 people or fewer in Camden, Hammersmith, Fulham, Kensington, Chelsea and Westminster could receive funding towards the costs of assessment for employees wishing to gain National Vocational Qualifications.
Funding of £20,000 has been provided by the Central London Training and Enterprise Council, and will be administered by Book House Training Centre.
Details of the Assessment Grant Scheme are available from  
Editing for Europe
The Society of Freelance Editors and Proofreaders has published an edited transcript of its ‘Business in Europe’ seminar held at the London International Book Fair last March.
The Promotion of Books and Reading in the European Community costs £5 including post and packaging, and can be ordered direct from  .
Raising a glass to each other on their retirement from John Murray last month after a combined total of 88 years representing the company, many of them spent on the road, were left, John Harbour, who joined the company in 1944, and Ron Church, with just over 40 years of service under his belt.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
1993 — Europe's numbers nightmare
Single market year — 1993 — may turn out to be a worrisome one for both stockbreeders and the book trade in the European Community, for reasons that are not entirely unrelated.
If the EC Commission goes ahead with a planned registration scheme, the agricultural community is going to be involved in a massive numbering operation — the introduction of a sort of International Standard Cow Number.
The 9 million farms of the EC will have to tattoo or ear tag an estimated total of 84 million cattle, 101 million sheep and 14 million goats with new registration numbers.
New VAT regime
Numbers — in this case VAT registration numbers — are certain to be a major preoccupation for the book trades of Europe this year as they attempt to cope with the transitional VAT regime which will apply from today, 1st January 1993, to 1st January 1997.
Crucially, companies will need to know the VAT number of customers in other EC member states in order to zero rate sales.
Among the 50 or so booksellers and publishers attending a seminar on the new Single Market rules organised by the Börsenverein in Frankfurt in December the mood was described as ‘agitated and despairing’.
Many left the sessions aware that they faced even greater problems over administration and documentation than they feared.
Something of the extent of what the new obligations laid on companies to record their own VAT information and to compile trading records entail is illustrated by a circular sent out by the Boekhandels Groep Nederland on behalf of its 12 Dutch bookshops: ‘Regulations concerning intra-EC trade are to change.
For that reason we ask you herewith to supply your VAT registration number.
To enable us to complete new statistical reports, please provide the following details on invoices sent to us: 8 digit taric/commodity code of goods; weight of goods in kilos; terms of delivery; mode of transport.’
Thousands of accounts
A recurring word used by booksellers in the UK contacted by The Bookseller to characterise the new system was ‘nightmare’.
Larger export booksellers may have hundreds or thousands of customer accounts throughout the Community, many of them quite small.
Mark Wait at Heffers in Cambridge commented, ‘The work involved in collecting statistics can be quite out of proportion to the level of business being done.
The rules are really designed for shippers of industrial goods or components.’
Booksellers may also get entangled in the complexities of the new ‘distance selling’ provisions if they are supplying private individuals or small institutions not registered for VAT.
For instance, UK booksellers selling by mail to Denmark and exceeding an annual Ecu35,000 (£25,000) threshold of business have to have a VAT registration in Denmark and to charge the 25% Danish rate of VAT on all sales to unregistered customers.
Progress on the collection of registration numbers appears to be patchy.
Booksellers in particular have had to undertake very large mailing operations, and many have achieved no more than 30% response rate so far.
For the UK business scene at large, about 38% of companies have collected the VAT numbers of fewer than half their customers, according to a survey,VAT and 1993: Is Europe Really Ready?, compiled by accountants Arthur Andersen.
The Royal Dutch Publishers Association has expressed concern about the inadequacy of the steps taken to ensure the validity of VAT numbers quoted to publishers or booksellers.
The bureau in the Netherlands responsible for validation is not yet functioning effectively, the association says.
In the UK, HM Customs & Excise has said that a validation service will be available only for ‘suspect numbers and not for routine checks’.
Those attending the Börsenverein's Frankfurt seminar gave many examples of numbers received which were not compatible with country codes.
Silver lining
But there is a bright side.
If the new VAT rules have brought vexations in their wake, it should not be forgotten that they have been introduced because frontier controls are abolished from today.
If officialdom plays the game, the great benefit should be an end to those long delays in customs which appear often to be caused by nothing more than the whimsy of officials.
Quicker movement of books in transit in the EC should be assured.
Above the launch of an International Standard Cow Numbering system?
BOOKSHOP NEWS
Bomb damage insurance ‘will apply to bookshops’
The Booksellers Association has confirmed that its members' insurance scheme does cover booksellers for bomb damage of up to £100,000 in each relevant section of the policy, subject to a maximum claim of £600,000.
The BA's membership executive Kevin Ramage said: ‘In all but the most extreme cases, the BA policy will cover most types of bomb damage.
There has been a lot of anxiety about the issue since the major blast in the City of London in April, but we are happy to confirm that booksellers who are members of the BA scheme are covered.
Over 300 BA members are now also members of the scheme, and this is good news for them.’
The Association of British Insurers recommended last month that its members should introduce a clause in all new policies specifically excluding terrorist damage.
The cost of underwriting claims, such as the massive bomb in April which caused over £800m worth of damage to the Baltic Exchange and the headquarters of the Commercial Union in the City of London, had proved too great.
However, the government has now bowed to pressure and announced that it would act as ‘insurer of last resort’ for terrorist bomb damage on the British mainland.
Michael Heseltine, the Trade and Industry Secretary, said the decision had been taken because it had become ‘virtually impossible’ for UK insurers to obtain reinsurance protection against ‘terrorism-related claims’.
Details of the arrangement between the government and insurers are still to be finalised.
Further details about the Booksellers Association's insurance scheme can be had from Charlotte Bib or Simon Sadler at    
Taking Salisbury by storm: General Sir Peter De La Billière sold over 700 copies of his study of the Gulf War,Storm Command (HarperCollins, £18), at the Ottakars branch in the city just before Christmas.
Sir Peter was scheduled to sign for one hour, but gave way to popular demand and stayed for three.
A festive reunion for Harrods and Waterstones
The season of goodwill has prevailed, and Waterstones is to continue to run the bookshop at Harrods in Knightsbridge after all.
In November Waterstones had declared that it had terminated the concession, giving six months' notice.
This has now been withdrawn.
The decision to continue follows what a joint press release from the two companies describes as ‘fruitful talks’ between the store and the bookseller.
The press release also pronounced Christmas trading to be ‘excellent’, and said that both Waterstones and Harrods were now committed to a long and successful relationship.
The Times Diary suggested recently that parent company W H Smith's reluctance to write off shopfitting costs estimated at £500,000 might have had a bearing on the newfound amity between the companies.
Tim Waterstone declined to expound on the decision, beyond saying that Waterstones had withdrawn from the concession for commercial reasons and was now re-entering it for commercial reasons.
‘We have renegotiated the contract, and we are happy now to move forward.’
Katz to Hatchards
Dillons has named the new general manager of Hatchards in Piccadilly.
Roger Katz, 48, currently manager of Dillons' handsome new store in Kingston, will take up the management of the 14,000 sq ft Piccadilly store on 5th January.
He is described by Dillons chief executive Frank Brazier as ‘one of the most energetic managers and always hungry for sales’.
Mr Katz has been with Dillons for nearly three years — at Hatfield and Kingston — before which he was export divisional manager of Aaronson Bros furniture business.
The Hatchards job became vacant with the departure of Gill Cook for the Virgin Group, announced in early December.
Dillons has moved quickly to appoint her successor in order to resolve uncertainty and quell rumours, but an announcement of a new manager at Kingston is not likely until later in January.
Centenary celebration
The Book Room, which claims to be Birmingham's oldest bookshop, celebrates its centenary in 1993.
The business, a specialist children's educational and Christian bookseller, library and school supplier, will produce a special centenary brochure to be distributed to over 1,000 schools and 500 churches.
It will also be given to delegates at the Federation of Children's Book Groups conference, at which the Book Room will run a bookshop.
Publishers or  other interested companies wishing to advertise in the brochure should contact    
TRADE NOTES
Moves
The following have been appointed members of the Library and Information Services Council for three years:Keith Crawshaw , director of Libraries and Information Services, Sheffield City Council;Peter Cox , assistant director (Leisure and Libraries), City of Westminster;Duncan Turner , managing director, James Askew Ltd.
The University of Sterling has reappointed Dr Ian McGowan director of the centre for publishing studies.
The centre's phone numbers are 
Edinburgh University Press has appointed Jonathan Price commissioning editor for its academic list.
Polly Freeman , previously at Constable, has been appointed Pan Macmillan's press officer to work on the Pan and Sidgwick lists.
She reports to Philippa McEwan, publicity director.
Peter Kilborn , production director of the trade division of Reed Consumer Books, has left the company and can be reached at  
Representatives
Headline's Irish representative,Carl Hubbard , hopes to return to work in January following a car accident in May.
Initially he will work for Carr O'Connell Book Marketing, the freelance team which has been carrying the Headline list since his accident, with the aim of returning to Headline full-time in April.
Simon & Schuster UK represents all S&S consumer books in Europe, including Pocket US.
With the launch of Pocket UK,Peter Bowron has been appointed European territory manager in the export sales department, looking after Scandinavia and southern Europe, including Israel;Angie Tainsh has been promoted to export marketing manager and will continue to represent the lists in France, Switzerland and Belgium; and Michael Geoghegan has been retained as a freelance covering Germany for S&S and Austria for S&S and Pocket.
Helicon Publishing has appointed Heinemann Educational, to represent its titles in secondary schools from January.
Heinemann will sell Helicon titles to schools on a net basis.
Trade sales continue to be handled by the Random House sales force, and trade orders for Helicon should continue to go to Tiptree Book Services.
David & Charles has appointed Gill Angell export agent for Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Switzerland, Scandinavia, Finland and Iceland from January.
Ms Angell operates from .
She carries David & Charles, Reader's Digest and Joshua Morris.
Smith Gryphon has appointed Boxtree,, to represent its list in Britain.
Rep Force Ireland,, represents Smith Gryphon in Ireland.
Warehousing and distribution continue through Tiptree.
Gerard Connolly , Bartholomew representative for the City of London, east, north and south London, has been made redundant.
He can be contacted at  .
Ragged Bears has appointed Geoff Cornish sales representative.
Initially, he is responsible for sales manager John Smith's areas, London, East Anglia, Cambridge and the northern Home Counties, while Mr Smith is on sick leave.
From January, In Print Publishing, previously represented by Drake Marketing Services, has a new team of representatives:Geoffrey Smith — London  Malcolm Thomson — south east  Bernard Kennedy — south west and south Wales  Stephen Mourton — Midlands  Ian Turner north east and Cambridge  Don Thompson — north west and north Wales  Clive Malins — Scotland  Clark-McNeish — Europe .
Trade orders should go to   .
Distribution
Bertram Books will offer its free-phone order line on  all year.
It is available from 9 a.m. to 12 noon with same day despatch of orders.
Bertram's normal order line,, continues to operate, offering a 4.30 p.m. order deadline for same day despatch of all orders.
Order for and enquiries about the Central Law Training manuals for the Law Society's final examinations and the legal executives examinations should go to Central Law Publishing ,.
Standard trade discount is 20%, except by prior arrangement.
Written authorisation from the publisher is required for returns, which should then be sent to the warehouse address on the authorisation.
Cranfield Press , the publishing arm of the Cranfield Institute of Technology, now handles its own distribution.
Orders should go to   & tel .
Gollancz Services' warehouse is closed for stocktaking until 4th January.
Customers can continue to send orders for despatch after 4th January.
Terms
Copies of CAMRA'S Good Beer Guide 1992 should be returned to Tiptree Book Services for credit before 31st January.
Requests for returns permission should go to Verulam Publishing.
Payment for purchases from James Clarke (Lutterworth Press.
Chelsea House, Acorn Editions, Patrick Hardy Books) can now be made by credit card, with a small surcharge.
Details may be had from  .
New Clarion Press now offers the following standard trading terms to bookshops: 25 per cent discount on single copies, 35 per cent discount on multiple copies; £1.25 small order charge on orders under £25 (except dues).
Orders should go to   .
From January PC Publishing will place a £1 surcharge on single copy orders.
The surcharge will not be applied to representatives' orders or dues supplied as part of a previous large order.
Ragged Bears' terms of trade have changed: orders for less than £5 retail value receive no discount; orders between £5 and £29.99 retail value receive 255 discount; orders for £30 or more retail value receive 35% discount.
Corrections
David Kent , home sales director of Little, Brown, has joined the company's new board, not the company as stated in Trade Notes of The Bookseller of 18th/25th December.
Firestorm Publications' phone number is , and not as printed in Trade Notes of 18th/25th December.
LIBF Preview
The 19th February issue of The Bookseller will be a special issue previewing the London International Book Fair, to be held at Olympia from 21st to 23rd March.
The issue will include an official programme of events, and a financial and statistical analysis of the UK book market.
There will also be a preview of events on exhibitors' stands.
Publishers and other exhibitors are invited to submit information on special promotions and offers, authors visits and book or product launches, that will take place at the LIBF.
Information should be sent to The Bookseller and marked for the attention of Jason Cowley, to arrive no later than Wednesday 3rd February.
Remainders
The Bookseller is publishing a special feature on remainders in its issue of 5th March.
It will highlight a where-to-find directory of remainder merchants, their ranges and specialities.
Companies should send their relevant information to David Russell at The Bookseller , by 29th January.
A new Patten for education?
A new Education Bill is at present before the House of Commons.
John Davies, director of the Educational Publishers Council of the Publishers Association, examines the likely effects that government policies will have on education and academic publishing
Mr John Patten has been very busy in his first months as Secretary of State for Education.
His White Paper on the future of British schools,Choice and Diversity , was published in July.
A parallel White Paper on higher education has also appeared.
The Education Bill has been drafted and is making its controversial progress through Parliament.
Educational and academic publishers have been no less busy.
A meeting on book provision in schools has been held with Baroness Blatch, Minister of State.
A series of parliamentary questions has been asked about the funding of books in education.
A debate has taken place in the House of Lords.
An early day motion has been tabled on the funding of acquisitions in university libraries.
The thrust of government policy will be to make educational institutions more competitive in their search for pupils and students.
Funding will follow numbers.
In turn, publishers are becoming more competitive in their approaches to the market.
There is less willingness to share information on trade policies and practices.
There is more direct selling, particularly in the schools sector.
Booksellers increasingly have to promote their consolidated services to publishers.
Where these are offering high standards of service and promotional benefits, they have a good chance of success.
Direct supply by publishers can ease margins, but can also be  very costly if undertaken on a large scale.
Large portions of the Education Bill are given over to procedures for the creation and financing of grant maintained schools, a cornerstone of government policy.
The establishment of these schools outside the local authority system is a matter of heated political debate.
At present 342 schools have taken this course, but the Department of Education has reported a sevenfold increase in parental ballots since the equivalent period last year.
If the ‘opting out’ provisions are financially advantageous to schools, a substantial move in this direction seems likely.
The trigger effect of a few schools opting out could lead to an avalanche of applications.
The government will also shortly publish a survey of spending in 100 grant maintained schools.
This is expected to show that appropriate parts of the monies passed to the schools from local authorities have been spent on books.
Despite reservations held in many quarters about the GMS policy, an increase in the number of grant maintained schools could benefit the book trade.
Funding agency for schools
Grant maintained schools will receive their financial allocations via a new Funding Agency for Schools, but this will be a mainly mechanical process.
More important will be the role of the new School Curriculum and Assessment Authority, which will replace the present National Curriculum and Schools Examinations and Assessment Councils.
The Educational Publishers Council has already formed a productive relationship with these councils, and hopes to continue this with their successor body.
The chief headache for publishers to date has been perpetual change in syllabuses, which can seriously affect or disrupt the publishing process.
Also important is the new Office of Standards in Education (OFSTED), which subsumes most of the activities of the former Her Majesty's Inspectorate.
Through this office around 6,000 schools will be inspected each year.
It is highly probable that book provision and use will be a significant component in such inspections.
The government's accent on the removal of surplus places and on open admissions policy makes it likely, however, that the total number of schools will decline.
Special education needs
Provision for children with special educational needs is becoming a major problem, leading to overspending in a considerable proportion of local authority education budgets.
This is mirrored in the huge crowds that were drawn to the special exhibition of books staged by the Educational Publishers Council in London this autumn.
Publishers will be wise to emphasise the contribution that good levels of book provision can make to limiting the need for special help for school children at a later stage.
A section of the Education Bill prevents school library services from offering their facilities to grant maintained schools after a two year period.
This is a worrying development for publishers, and there is little evidence in the book trade of the establishment of another source from which such a service might otherwise be obtained.
Government policies linked to higher  educational standards and better reading attainments should be the base for representation on higher levels of book funding in schools.
The government is not averse to pump priming book provision and has done this three times in the last six years, for the introduction of the GCSE examination, for acquisitions in university libraries and, most recently, for books for the National Curriculum.
The sums granted for this last purpose in 1993–94 will not be as closely earmarked as was the £15m specifically designated for books in 1991–92 and 1992–93.
Close monitoring
Books will be one of four components nominated in a grant of £85m.
It remains to be seen whether such an arrangement will be beneficial to book provision or not, but the government has promised to monitor very closely the spending of these monies in schools and the associated reports on the implementation of the curriculum.
However, the government is adverse to earmarking sums for books in perpetuity, as its whole policy centres on decision making at school level.
As far as resources are concerned, an additional £523m has been announced by the government for expenditure on education in 1993–94, an increase of 6%.
Much of this may not find its way into local authority budgets, as a dramatic increase in students in further education of 222,000 (25%) is signalled over the next three years.
Funding will obviously not increase pro rata, but the influx of such a large number of students will clearly mean a demand for more books.
Further education is therefore a market for publishers to target, and the Publishers Association will be holding a series of seminars for its members on this sector of education throughout 1993.
From April 1993, all colleges of further education, tertiary and sixth form colleges will be removed from local authority control.
Finance for books, previously received for students aged 16 to 18 from the local authority, is likely to become a less frequent feature of the scene, and its absence will have a particular impact in those areas that have adopted a system of wholly tertiary colleges.
A similar scene is unfolding in higher education.
One by one, polytechnics are becoming universities and the binary divide has disappeared, although the disparities in funding remain and the former polytechnics are very much the poor relations in terms of library acquisitions funding.
Student numbers are escalating in this sector too, and the country is moving from a selective system of further and higher education in the direction of mass expectation of such benefits.
The current levels of expenditure per student cannot be maintained, and academic institutions are being forced to find other routes to cope with the demand.
New styles
Course are being broken down into modules and a variety of new teaching and learning styles have to be employed.
These involve much more open and distance learning and the creation by photocopying and electrocopying, of ‘customised’ packs of materials for students.
Universities are trying to educate as cheaply as possible, but in doing so can frequently produce collections of study aids that infringe and compete unfairly with publishers' original texts.
In this context, the current round of negotiations between the universities and the Copyright Licensing Agency on the copying of copyright works is crucial.
Publishers must ensure that universities do not become vast, cheap rate republishing businesses.
Changes in the academic year are also envisaged, with extra students being accommodated in a series of semesters.
The new pressures that the situation will place on libraries has already been recognised by the Higher Education Funding Council, which has set up a review committee on libraries.
Library acquisitions in higher education are already seriously underfunded, and ways must be found to enable them to deal with these new pressures.
Competition between institutions will also be apparent in this sector as universities strive to attract more students and more funds.
There will be a marked departure from the old concept of a university covering all academic disciplines towards selectivity and specialisation in particular subjects, both in terms of teaching and research.
This is bound to have an effect on publishers' conceptions of the market.
The desire of academics for publication will, however.
continue unabated, fuelled by the fact that assessment of their performance and career prospects will be closely linked to their ability to be published in recognised journals.
Turmoil evolving
Turmoil is a word that comes to mind when one looks at the evolving British education system.
Publishers and booksellers will have to pick their way through a landscape made strange and problematic by change.
The main priority will always be to find some route to additional funding for books.
The government will remain reluctant to direct money to this cause.
It prefers to publish Charters laying the onus for provision of services on others.
This is a cause dear to the Prime Minister's heart.
The International Publishers Association may have given us a pointer in the right direction with the publication this year of its Charter for the Reader .
We have Parents' Charters, Patients' Charters, Passengers' Charters.
Why not also a Charter for the Reader, covering expected book provision in schools, public libraries, colleges and universities?
There is surely no more important right in society than the right to read.
Turmoil is the word that comes to mind when one looks at the evolving British education system.
Publishers and booksellers will have to pick their way through a landscape made strange and problematic by change.
We have Parents' Charters, Patients' Charters, Passengers' Charters.
Why not also a Charter for the Reader, covering expected book provision in schools, public libraries, colleges and universities?
Paperback preview 1993 Sarah Broadbent looks at this year's most promising titles — the giants, the high-flyers, the major titles and the ones to watch, the literary titles, fiction and non-fiction.
Despite the depressed economy she still finds little real evidence of publishers pruning their lists and, as a consequence, there are ‘too many major titles to be able to do justice to them all’
With the depressed economy and appalling trade figures (improved a little, one hopes, by a healthy Christmas), I was expecting doom and gloom as I did my recent rounds of the publishing houses.
There were indeed some who shook their heads and moaned, but on the whole buoyancy, bullishness and general enthusiasm hit me from all sides.
It made me forget for a moment how low sales figures so often are nowadays, as there are some exciting campaigns planned, some clever gimmicks, some expensive promotions and, more important, some wonderful books.
But although I found it impossible not to be moved by the vibes and hype of enthusiastic publicity people and charming sales teams, there is no getting away from the fact that it is going to be a very tough year, with too many major titles to be able to do justice to them all; and I don't see any real evidence of anyone pruning their lists.
Indeed, we have two new publishing houses to welcome into the mass market area, Pocket and Orion.
We don't really need either of them but I must say that, despite the professionalism and expertise they both possess, judging from the contents rather than the covers we need Pocket less than we need Orion.
Some of Orion's new unknown authors are quite exceptional, and with the amalgamation with Chapmans, whose paperback list will start to reappear as Orion from September, it does not need to buy as much padding for the sake of publishing as Pocket might.
Both will have B format quality lists, Touchstone for Pocket and Phoenix for Orion.
But the most exciting, important and, in the long run, sensible thing to happen in the paperback business this year is the amalgamation of Fontana and Grafton in August, to become HarperCollins Paperbacks.
In 1994 we can expect a ‘superlead’, well promoted and planned, every month of the year.
At one stroke they will become the biggest mass-market paperback publishers after Penguin.
So watch out Transworld and Pan, who are the two who are on either side of HarperCollins in my sales league this year.
I have been accused of favouring Transworld in the past, so I feel I must defend myself and say that it is not that I love Transworld so much as that I admire success.
Indeed, at the time of writing it has seven  out of the 15 titles on The Bookseller 's bestsellers list.
However, this year there is no Jilly Cooper or Frederick Forsyth.
Other lists suffer too, for there is no Barbara Taylor Bradford, no Wilbur Smith (excepting in C format), no Jeffrey Archer and no Jackie Collins.
But there are new Giants, perhaps the most surprising of them being Joanna Trollope.
The ‘average’ reader seems to be reading ‘up’.
The quality B format area is flourishing, especially among the intelligent reads for women.
The other expanding areas are courtroom dramas and serial killer thrillers, with the long sagas slipping a bit, perhaps because there are too many.
So, because of the fierce competition, a number of houses are looking at gimmicks to try to bring their new authors to the fore.
The C format for ‘unknowns’ has not really caught on, and flaps have given the impression of ‘up-market’reads and often limit sales although attracting reviews.
So new slants are being tried, and I have never known a year with so many titles getting the multicover treatment in one form or another.
Warner in particular is interesting in producing two B formats with dust jackets.
It's different, and I hope it works.
Last year I took a special interest in Arrow, believing it to be the major threat to Transworld.
I was wrong: it has not yet fulfilled its promise.
Certainly it has produced some wonderful books and backed some new authors (John Grisham springs to mind, of course).
But as it grows it will look deep into its hardback licences, and I fear some ugly clawback scenes arising as they did with Mandarin.
But business is business…
So to my league table and, as I said, Transworld is top with 12 Giants, HarperCollins follows with 10, then Pan with 8.
Beneath them we have Arrow with 4, Hodder and Mandarin with 3 each, Headline, Orion, Pocket and Penguin with 2 each, and Warner with one.
I must support Penguin and Warner here.
Penguin's strength is of course in its enormous bookshop area, and it is very strong in my High-flyer league.
Warner, meanwhile, having lost a number of authors (as Futura and Sphere) after Maxwell's death, is doing a splendid job rebuilding.
So to the major sellers of 1993.
Not all leads are mentioned.
I have been selective and, in an attempt to draw out one or two for special note, I have a ‘Ones to Watch’ section of interesting titles.
Some of the listed newcomers may not sell as well as the established names mentioned beneath them, but they are there very often because publishers are promoting them heavily, and I have tried to pick the best of these.
I have mentioned only a few established C format titles, no reprints of television or film tie-ins, and no annuals.
But I have included some literary and non-fiction works of note, even though their sales may not be vast.
I have covered the whole year, but because January is in your shops, February already subscribed, March imminent and April only recently covered in my monthly column (11th December), I have not been as detailed with these four months as I have with the rest of the year.
The other sparse areas are Christmas titles and December, where a number of publishers have not finalised their lists.
There will inevitably be some changes, some leads swapping about, some instant titles as yet unknown, but in the main, after my quick skim over the first four months, I have attempted to give you an overall picture of what will undoubtedly be a very busy year.
January
The now-expected Colin Forbes, with Cross of Fire (Pan), is there to start the year with.
Michael Dobbs' To Play the King (Fontana) follows on from his House of Cards , only with no television yet.
High-flyers
Mary Jane Staples On Mother Brown's Doorstep (Corgi) Heart-warming Cockney saga stuff.
Lena Kennedy Kate of Clyve Shore (Warner) Three novellas.
Ones to watch
Too numerous to list here, since they are the seven titles chosen for W H Smith's First Novel promotion, about which I an extremely keen.
They also include a couple of originals that were not part of the promotion, plus Jane Barry's Casting (Corgi) for a light fun read, and Liane Jones' The Dreamstone (Mandarin) for a glorious time-travel romance.
Major sellers
Erin Pizzy Morningstar (Fontana)
Belva Plain Treasures (Coronet)
Tim Sebastian Exit Berlin (Bantam)
David Martin Bring Me Children (Headline)
Jean Plaidy The Pleasure of Love (Fontana)
Ben Bova Mars , which heads a revamping of N.E.L.
Crime is well represented with two television tie-ins, Nicholas Rhea's Heartbeat: Constable Across the Moors (Headline) and Lisa Cody's Head Case (Arrow)— she has a pilot in January before a 10-part series beginning in April.
There is also a new 87th Precinct, Ed McBain's Kiss (Mandarin).
Literary fiction has D M Thomas' Flying in to Love (Sceptre) and Beryl Bainbridge with The Birthday Boys (Penguin).
February
February is Pocket Books' launch month and, although not the biggest Giant of the Month, it kicks off with the new Virginia Andrews ™,Dawn .
Sadly I have found very little else to get excited about in Pocket's first year's titles (except another Virginia Andrews ™ in September).
February also has an original unknown which I am (and so is Corgi) hyping high, since it is a nice idea: the story of the Gold Blend couple in Susannah James' Love over Gold (Corgi).
It also has Mary Wesley's A Dubious Legacy (Black Swan); and Fontana has Susan Howatch's Mystical Paths .
High-flyer
Half of the Booker winner (the other half comes in July): Barry Unsworth Sacred Hunger (Penguin).
Ones to watch
These contain some of my very favourite books this year:
Robert James Waller Love in Black and White (Mandarin) A soaring love story that pulls at the heart-strings.
Guy Burt After the Hole (Black Swan) A riveting début novel with a devastating ending.
Diane Pearson Voices of Summer (Corgi) A delightful tale of ‘love the second time around’.
Major sellers
Beryl Kingston War Baby (Warner) A '70s tale with World War II undertones.
Marius Gabriel The Original Sin (Arrow) Passionate big read that has had the big hype.
Eddie Shah The Lucy Ghosts (Corgi) With the reunification of Germany as its backdrop.
Ann Victoria Roberts Liam's Story (Pan) Beautiful packaging for the follow-up to Louisa Elliot .
David Eddings Domes of Fire (Grafton) In C format.
The A comes in July.
Greg Bear Anvil of Stars Major sf.
Literary fiction is led by Graham Swift's Ever After (Picador).
Nicholson Baker's telephone sex comes in a massive edition in Vox (Penguin); and there is Keith Waterhouse's Unsweet Charity (Sceptre).
In non-fiction the wonderful Nick Danziger is back with Danziger's Adventures (Flamingo); Desert Orchid's biography is told by Richard Burridge in The Grey Horse (Signet); and Brian Blessed climbs The Turquoise mountain (Pocket).
March
No problems here: Catherine Cookson's The House of Women (Corgi) is her first of two this year; Clive Cussler is back with his improbable Dirk Pitt in Sahara (Grafton); and Alexander Ripley's Scarlett (Pan) comes into A format and straight into the Giants section: all are great.
High-flyers
Kingsley Amis The Russian Girl (Penguin) A good one for the bookshops.
Pat Booth Miami (Arrow) Good glitz.
Terry Brookes The Elf Queen of Shannara (Legend) New to Legend, and just wonderful.
Frank Delaney The Sins of the Mothers (Grafton) Will, I think, do well for he is popular, will get lots of exposure, and can, of course, write.
Ones to watch
Robert McCammon Boy's Life (Penguin) Part murder mystery, part youngster's imaginative view of life, and all brilliant.
Olivia Goldsmith The First Wives Club (Mandarin) Slick American modern-manners tale of revenge, but its clever cover helps raise it above the rest.
Major sellers
Elizabeth Adler Fortune Is a Woman (Coronet) Excellent track record, good strong saga material.
Alexander Kent Beyond the Reef (Pan) His 20th Bolitho novel and the first for two years.
Josephine Cox Don't Cry Alone (Headline) Good dramatic historical romance.
Eileen Goudge Such Devoted Sisters (Signet) Author of Garden of Lies (which did well) with a big glitzy read.
David Lindsey Body of Truth (Warner) Guatemalan setting for the new one from the author of Mercy .
Jack Curtis Conjure Me (Corgi) Strong violent stuff.
Michael Slade Cutthroat (NEL) Interesting mix of contemporary serial killer thriller and historical mystery.
Maria Barrett Elle (Warner original) A glitzy first novel about a power struggle, and I have a hunch it is going to work.
Literary fiction has a Booker shortlist title, Patrick McCabe's The Butcher Boy (Picador); Michael Carson with another Benson tale,Yanking Up the Yoyo (Black Swan); Jim Crace's Arcadia (Picador); Alice Thomas Ellis' Pillars of Gold (Penguin); and a favourite of mine, Pete Dexter with Brotherly Love (Flamingo).
There are also some short stories from Ben Okri,Incidents at the Shrine (Vintage).
Non-fiction includes two important and controversial works: Susan Faludi's Backlash: The Undeclared War against Women (Vintage) and Neil Lyndon's No More Sex War (Mandarin).
April
Robert Ludlum's The Road to Omaha (Grafton) is an out-of-the-norm one and he will be in the UK to promote; and Ruth Rendell's Kissing the Gunner's Daughter (Arrow) has just been on television and is wonderful.
High-flyers
The first four should perhaps have been Giants, although the number of good female reads is a bit too heavy in April.
Rosie Thomas All My Sins Remembered (Penguin)
Susan Sallis Daughters of the Moon (Corgi)
Barbara Erskine Child of the Phoenix (Fontana)
Judith Michaels Sleeping Beauty (Warner)
Dr D G Hessayon The Rock and Water Garden Expert (pbi) Will probably be a Giant too.
Dean R Koontz The Door to December (Headline) An old Leigh Nichols one.
William Horwood Duncton Rising (Fontana) No 2 in the Book of the Stone.
No 3 comes in October.
Terry Pratchett The Carpet People (Corgi) His first of two for children in the year, but actually his first of four new titles.
P D James The Children of Men (Faber) The C format.
The A format is not due until 1994.
Ones to watch
Anita Burgh Advances
(Pan) Because it is such fun.
Carl Hiaasen Native Tongue (Pan) Because he is brilliant.
Charles Higson King of the Ants (Penguin) Because it is tough and nasty, and heads up a brilliant first novel promotion from Penguin and the Observer called Beginnings.
Major sellers
April is a particularly heavy month, so I've been ultra-selective here.
Cynthia Victor Relative Sins (Bantam) Follows connected people through different lives until the dramatic reunion.
Trudi Pacter Living Doll (Grafton) Very much the Jackie Collins market and she is growing with each new book.
Lucianne Goldberg Madame Cleo's Girls (Signet) In it two different-coloured covers, this is a glitzy high-prostitution tale which is getting lots of hype.
Vera Cowie A Double Life (Mandarin) Much the same as the above only with one cover.
Ellis Peters The Holy Thief (Headline) C format; the A come in December.
Katie Flynn A Liverpool Lass (Mandarin) A pseudonym, and she could well be successful; buyers are enthusiastic, especially about the cover.
The next volume come in October.
Grant Naylor Primal Soup (Penguin) Red Dwarf scripts.
Literary fiction has Jay McInerney's Brightness Falls (Penguin); Howard Jacobson's The Very Model of a Man (Penguin); Doris Lessing's London Observed (Flamingo); Iain Banks' The Crow Road (Abacus); Christopher Hope's Serenity House (Picador); and Andrew Davies' B Monkey (Minerva).
It is also Abacus' 21st Birthday month.
Non-fiction is heavy too, with serious works from Brian Keenan,An Evil Cradling (Vintage), and Simon Weston's Going Back (Signet)— to the Falklands, that is — contrasting with the flippancy of Cynthia Heimel's Get Your Tongue Out of My Mouth, I'm Kissing You Goodbye (Macmillan).
May
The Giants include three authors who usually produce two books a year.
So this is the first each from Danielle Steel,Jewels (Corgi), and Stephen King,Gerald's Game (NEL).
Terry Pratchett's new Discworld,Small Gods (Corgi), is one of four titles from him this year (two of the others are children's).
Jack Higgins leaves Pan with The Eye of the Storm (Signet); and Craig Thomas' A Hooded Crow (Fontana) is the one that has recently been C formatted.
It is a shame in many ways that Robert Harris' Fatherland (Arrow) has such stiff competition in the same area, for judging by the hardcover success I, along with Arrow, have stuck my neck out and made it a Giant.
Rosemary Conley's Shape Up for Summer (Arrow) will be mega too.
It is her first one not published in January, and the first to deal specifically with the bikini in mind.
High-flyers
Danielle Thomas Children of Darkness (Pan)
This is a gutsy South African first novel, a romantic adventure, with the next one in hardback coming at the same time, and she will be in the UK promoting.
What makes this one a bit special is that she is Wilbur Smith's glamorous wife and the media are certain to love her.
Bernard Cornwell Sharpe's Devil (Fontana)
Sadly this is the last Sharpe, but he is in for major exposure as he comes on to television.
Three backlist titles tie in with the television and are reissued in April.
LaVyrle Spencer Bygones (Grafton)
Grafton is out to challenge Danielle Steel with this writer.
There is an author tour, a big spend, and lots more books to come.
This is her fifth major title from Grafton now, and if you like a good cry then I recommend it.
Leslie Thomas Arrivals and Departures (Mandarin)
His second for Mandarin; it centres on a village by Heathrow and all the interconnecting relationships at which he is so good.
Emma Blair The Water Meadows (Bantam)
Scarlet Ribbons was shortlisted for the Romantic Novel award, which brought to the fore the identity of this author (Iain Blair) and certainly raised his profile.
Ones to watch
Lindsey Davis The Iron Hand of Mars (Arrow)
Featuring the ancient Roman sleuth Falco, who is beginning to catch on.
The new hardback comes as a cheapy (£9.99) and I am sure we have a major author for the future here.
Kit Craig Gone (Headline)
Headline is ultra-keen on this psychological thriller, and to draw it out above the rest it is giving its atmospheric black and white cover four different shout lines in four different colours.
Quite effective, but more importantly the book is good too, a mesmerising children-in-peril tale with escalating fear.
Michael Weaver Impulse (Warner)
For much the same market, and although I have not had time to finish it, so far it is very powerful.
A mindless act of violence sets off a chilling, psychologically tense tale.
It is well written and interestingly, Warner is publishing it as an original B format and its gimmick to bring it above the rest is to give it a dust jacket.
This makes it appear up-market, which it is not, but the jacket copy makes that clear.
Also interesting is that an A format will follow in the normal way.
It is doing the same with another original in October.
Andrew Harman The Sorcerer's Appendix (Arrow)
A number of publishers are seeking a Terry Pratchett-like author.
Arrow assures me it has him here.
It has signed a three-book contract and is so bullish that I've included it in Ones to Watch even though I have not even had one chapter.
Now there's faith!
But I wonder indeed if Mr Harman has got that something special.
We'll see.
Major sellers
Marge Piercy Body of Glass (Penguin)
An intelligent read, a saga with a futuristic cyberpunk tale interwoven with Jewish history and mythology.
Not to my taste, but she has a big following.
Sarah Harrison Foreign Parts (Warner)
Part 3 of her fun tales featuring the author Harriet Blair.
In this she is holidaying in France with her family.
Great fun, and so is the Jilly Cooper lookalike cover.
Tess Stimson Hard News (Mandarin original)
Funny, sexy, strong pacy first novel of the life of a television station, coming as an A format ‘summer read’ original.
It is getting a big push and I think it could well work.
She was an ITN reporter for four years, has lots of contacts, and will be promoting.
John Sandford Silent Prey (Grafton)
I have enjoyed this ‘thinking person's’ serial killer tale very much.
He needs to leap into the next league.
Ted Allbeury Show Me a Hero (Coronet)
Moves over to Coronet with a thriller based on a true story.
Then on to Raymond E Feist and Janny Wurts' Mistress of the Empire (Grafton), closing the ‘Empire’ series; Dorothy Dunnett's Scales of Gold (Penguin), Vol 4 in ‘The House of Niccolò’series; the second part of Roy Hattersley's trilogy,In That Quiet Earth (Pan); Daniel Easterman's next thriller, set in Egypt,Name of the Beast (HarperCollins); Robin Cook back with Blindsight (Pan).
Pocket Book's big summer read is from a promotable young actress, Lucinda Edmonds, with Lovers and Players ; Marsha Hunt doesn't quite give us another Joy in her new one,Free (Penguin), but her fans won't know that until they've bought it.
Which brings me on to the major bookshop sellers, led by two strong titles:
Peter Ackroyd English Music (Penguin)
Toni Morrison Jazz (Picador)
Adam Thorpe Ulverton (Minerva)
His much praised history of a village through different voices, different times and very different writing styles.
Michèle Roberts Daughters of the House (Virago)
Her Booker shortlisted title.
Paul  Mica Rotten Times (Black Swan)
This man is good news.
I haven't read it but I most certainly will.
Shena Mackay Dunedin (Penguin)
On lots of the ‘celebs’ favourites’Christmas lists.
She needs to break through and this could be the one to do it for her.
Non-fiction now, and with the hardback of John McCarthy and Jill Morrell's story coming in April, the Beirut hostage horror will be to the fore again.
Con Coughlin Hostage (Warner)
A comprehensive overview which will be an important title.
Alan Bullock Hitler and Stalin (Fontana)
Was extensively and well reviewed, but at £25 was out of reach of many potential buyers.
So this should make a good paperback, one hopes at under £10.
On a lighter note come Bryan Forbes' autobiography,A Divided Life (Mandarin); Mark Goodier, a Radio 1 DJ, with a collection of ‘amazing true stories from the world of rock ‘n roll’,Unbelievable (Grafton), which he will promote on air; and a delightful sequel to The Tao of Pooh , Benjamin Hoff's The Te of Piglet (Mandarin).
The major promotion is the beginning of the reappearance of the complete works of Trollope, all 53 titles coming out throughout the year from Penguin.
June
Shirley Conran's Crimson (Penguin), Gerald Seymour's The Journeyman Tailor (Fontana), Charlotte Bingham's Stardust (Bantam) and Lynda La Plante's Entwined (Pan) lead the field.
This is the first year I've put Lynda into the Giants, but her recent exposure has been terrific and I'm sure will do wonders for this twins tale spotted with sex and violence with Auschwitz roots.
High-flyers
Before I list the mass-market high flyers, three titles which will have the majority of their sales through the bookshops:
Jung Chang Wild Swans (Flamingo)
The extraordinary three-generational personal history of a Chinese family that won the 1992 NCR award.
Great.
John Mortimer Dunster (Penguin)
Brilliant, another of his astute looks at the British establishment.
Ian McEwan Black Dogs (Picador)
His Booker shortlisted title.
Ruth Hamilton Spinning Jenny (Corgi)
Right from the start her north country sagas have come as original paperbacks.
Her sales have grown with each title; this is the first to have had a hardback.
Jonathan Kellerman Devil's Waltz (Warner)
Another Alex Delaware thriller, with a new one in hardcover at the same time.
Robert Goddard Hand in Glove (Corgi)
Into the Blue won the first ever W H Smith thumping good read award, so maybe at last this compelling writer will get the recognition he so deserves.
I long to see him become a Giant.
Perhaps next year.
John Grisham The Pelican Brief (Arrow)
This man was Goddard's closest rival in the Smith's award.
The film of The Firm comes in September, and maybe next year he too will be a Giant.
Ones to watch
Derek Van Arman Just Killing Time (Coronet)
Extraordinarily powerful and detailed American serial killer first novel that lingers in the mind long after it's finished.
Nora Roberts Honest Illusions (Signet)
I think these romantic sagas have something a little special.
Her Divine Evil dwelt on witchcraft, this one dwells on magic and magicians.
I have a hunch about her — she is definitely someone to watch for the future.
Anne Johnson et al Sexual Behaviour in Britain (Penguin)
The most important and extensive survey on our sexual behaviour since Kinsey, and this one is British.
The preliminary findings, particularly the HIV section, were published in Nature magazine at the beginning of December and became headline-grabbing material in the nationals.
This paperback    original is the first publication, with Blackwell Scientific doing a more technical statistical analysis at the same time.
Major sellers
Ivana Trump For Love Alone (Arrow)
I haven't looked at it but the hype on the author will continue through to the paperback.
Susan Lewis Obsession (Mandarin)
The blue/red package on her books has really worked.
This is more of the same.
Hilary Norman Fascination (Coronet)
More well-plotted drama from the Shattered Stars lady.
Frankie McGowan Ellie (Fontana original)
HarperCollins' big original glitz offering for the summer.
She was editor of New Woman , is well connected, and is doing the PR circuit with a big spend behind her, but I haven't seen anything to judge it by.
Eric Lustbader Black Blade (Grafton)
I like the new cover treatment of these, and his sales remain steady.
James Michener Mexico (Mandarin)
‘500 turbulent years’ in another epic.
Eileen Townsend Child of Fire (Grafton)
Rural Yorkshire straddling World War II with violence and thwarted love.
Elizabeth Walker with Day Dreams (Headline) and June Flaum Singer with Brilliant Divorces (Corgi) are worth supporting, although both their sales have been slipping recently.
Judith Gould's Forever (Warner) is included for established glitz; and 19th-century Sussex is the setting for a new series by Sarah Shears with Sisters (Bantam).
literary titles in June are very strong, for besides the two in High-flyers there are the following, listed in no particular order:
Edna O'Brien Time and Tide (Penguin)
Her first novel for four years.
Garrison Keillor Radio Romance (Faber)
His first novel.
It was read and did well in hard cover.
Fay Weldon Life force (Flamingo)
An old flame disrupts the lives of four female friends.
She is much better suited to this B format, and coronet is reissuing its titles in B during this year.
Melvyn Bragg Crystal Rooms (Sceptre)
A contemporary London setting for his new one.
Then there is Sebastian Faulks with A Fool's Alphabet (Vintage); and, with the growing popularity of the B format intelligent woman's read, do note Angela Huth's charming tale Invitation to the Married Life (Abacus).
Black Swan (past master of this genre) has an offering it is very excited about, Kathleen Rowntree's Between Friends , but it is not a patch on its Wesley, Trollope and Sutherland ladies — a shame.
Non-fiction now, and again some very strong sellers in addition to Wild Swans .
Paul Theroux The Happy Isles of Oceania (Penguin)
A trip to 51 Pacific Islands, classic stuff, brilliant.
John Peters and John Nichol Tornado Down (Signet)
The two RAF boys' horrifying Gulf War ordeal.
They will be promoting.
Then comes Anthony Clare's interviews from his Radio 4 series,In the Psychiatrist's Chair (Mandarin); and an important new science title from the Blind Watchmaker man, Daniel Dennett , with Consciousness Explained (Penguin).
June is also Virago's 20th birthday month.
July
Sidney Sheldon's The Stars Shine Down (Fontana) is back on The Other Side of Midnight Form.
Maeve Binchy's The Copper Beech (Orion) is a collection of linking stories which read as a whole; it is also the launch title for Orion entering the mass market area.
Joanna Trollope, with The Men and the Girls (Black Swan), is new to my Giants section but she is already there a year earlier than I thought she would be, which is wonderful.
James Herbert's Portent (NEL) is his ecology novel; and David Eddings' Domes of Fire (Grafton) is the start of a new series, the Book of the Tamuli.
High-flyers
Michael Ondaatje The English Patient (Picador)
The other half of the Booker winner.
Mary Higgins Clark All around the Town (Arrow)
I don't think it was just the change of publisher that did so much for this author, but her works have become more powerful.
This one is first class.
Reay Tannahill In Still and Stormy Waters (Penguin)
Late 19th century setting, and two women vie for a man and a Scottish castle.
Patricia D Cornwell All That Remains (Warner)
Her success is just wonderful and, although this is not as good as Body of Evidence , the next, which comes in hardback, is better.
A definite Giant of the future.
Elizabeth Elgin I'll Bring You Buttercups (Grafton original)
Author of All the Sweet Promises turns to the first World War.
Elizabeth Gage Taboo (Corgi)
She has not repeated the success of her first,A Glimpse of Stocking , but her sales are still healthy.
Iris Gower The Oyster Catchers (Corgi)
Second in the Cordwainer series.
Martina Cole The Ladykillers (Headline)
Dangerous Lady was oversold but the result was good.
This is more London gangland stuff.
I like her.
Frances Edmonds Samson and Delilah (Pan)
Her first novel, but she is already so popular with the media that they will lap her up.
It is a fun glitzy read, and I hope Pan gives it a decent jacket.
One to watch
Hilary Mantel A Place of Greater Safety (Penguin)
Beneath the Trollope this will be the serious read of the summer.
It is her ‘bottom drawer’ novel written before Eight Months on Ghazzah Street and Fludd , a big passionate French Revolution story which won the Sunday Express prize.
Great.
Donna Tartt The Secret History (Penguin)
A tale of corrupt youth and psychological suspense that has already been hyped.
The author is 28, film options have already been sold, Penguin is pushing it, and all in all it's terrific, a sophisticated literary novel that could straddle the markets.
Major sellers
Noah Gordon Shaman (Warner)
Author of Physician takes his Cole family generations later into the 1800s and a turbulent America.
Teresa Crane Strange are the Ways (Fontana)
A big Russian saga.
Audrey Howard All the Dear Faces (Coronet)
First World War from the viewpoint of a large Irish family in Liverpool.
Elizabeth Murphy A Nest of Singing Birds (Headline)
Liverpool saga.
She has done extremely well in the wholesale trade.
Philip Boast London's Daughter (Headline)
The third in his London trilogy, which sells better than his others.
John Abbott Scimitar (Mandarin)
Written pseudonymously by an old pro, and there is talk of basing a promotion on guessing who he is, which could be fun.
He is highly prolific, and this, his first foray into the assassin/thriller area could well outsell his other books.
John Gardner Death is Forever (Coronet)
007 again.
Literary fiction has Thomas Keneally's Woman of the Inner Sea (Sceptre); Nigel William's They Came from SW19 (Faber); and my favourite, Alice Hoffman, moving across from Pan into Picador for her ninth novel,Turtle moon , which is quite lovely.
Non-fiction is led by
Michael Caine What's It All About?
(Arrow)
Highly entertaining as well as informative.
Nicholas Davies The Unknown Maxwell (Pan)
Concentrating more on the man than his business, and full of horror stories.
General Sir Peter de la Billière Storm Command (Fontana)
These sorts of books have such an excellent hardback sale which is not always carried through to the same extent with the paperback.
August
Penny Vincenzi's Wicked Pleasures (Orion), a cut above the norm in this glitzy genre, is to have two covers, the gold gloss of the C format plus one with a white background.
Martin Cruz Smith's Red Square (HarperCollins) stars Renko again; it is also the first ‘superlead’ of the new amalgamated Fontana/Grafton lists, the second one being Clive Barker's The Thief of Always (HarperCollins), which is a slight work by his standards, illustrated by him and designed, I felt, for children.
The hardback was a cheapy £9.99 one.
Then there is Michael Korda doing his interpretation of the Monroe/Kennedy legend in The Immortals (Pan).
High-flyers
Philippa Gregory The Wine Woman (Penguin)
Thumping good read set around the dissolution of the monasteries.
It is to have both a mass market cover and an up-market one.
I've seen neither.
With this last push Penguin is building her up for HarperCollins to take over, for she is on the move.
Campbell Armstrong Concert of Ghosts (Coronet)
His sales have dipped a bit since Jig , and all the Grafton reissues have rather confused people, but this is new and first-class.
Michael Crichton Rising Sun (Arrow)
International corruption, Japanese business manipulation and a murder mystery all in one.
He has come back with a bang, and the film of Jurassic Park opens in July, which will obviously help his sales.
Ones to watch
Guy Bellamy The Comedy Hotel (Penguin)
I am a fan and I cannot understand why he doesn't sell in the David Lodge league, for he well worth recommending.
Seth Margolis The Other Mother (Headline)
What would the year be like without one major hyped novel from Headline?
Last year it was Dangerous Lady , this year it's this.
Sadly, I haven't finished it; I have it in typescript and I hope a lot of editing will take place, but the plot is great.
It is a tug-of-war tale with a black three-year-old boy in the middle, his adopted white middle-class family on one side and his illiterate natural mother on the other.
All very heart-pulling.
Major sellers
Erich Segal Acts of Faith (Arrow)
Big tale of illicit love and cultural differences.
I don't think he will ever do another Love Story , but having accepted that his gutsy sagas are OK.
Dean Koontz The Funhouse (Headline)
Originally published as a film tie-in under the pseudonym of Owen West.
Bernard Cornwell Scoundrel (Penguin)
A thriller with a cargo of gold seemingly attracting all the thugs.
Dale Brown Night of the Hawk (HarperCollins)
This is actually the sequel to Flight of the Old Dog in which the hero Luger is resurrected.
Evelyn Anthony The Doll's House (Corgi)
A classic case of a change of publisher doing wonders for the author.
A good thriller, and Corgi is giving it a major campaign.
Robert Jordan The Shadow Rising (Warner)
Warner lost Terry Brooks but it has found someone who may well outsell him.
Watch this man, he is major fantasy.
Dave Cash All Night Long (Mandarin original)
I hyped his Rating Game ; it was oversold and the returns were high, which is always a shame since one forgets the actual sales figures, which weren't bad.
Anyway, he has changed publisher, is still coming as an original paperback, is still writing about the radio, and I'm still hyping him, since I think things will work for him eventually.
Lis Leigh Envy (Bantam)
Another person on book number two, only the returns for Greed weren't as high, and it did well.
This is more of the same, only in the world of opera.
Literary fiction may not be big in numbers but it will be big in promotions in preparation for two birthdays — 10 years for Black Swan in September, 12 for Picador in October.
Besides the obvious flag-flying and general razzmatazz, each has an original publication to mark the occasion:
The Black Swan Literary Quiz Book which may have the Sunday Times names somewhere in the tittle too
The Picador 21st Birthday Book which could be very good indeed since it has asked 21 of its top authors to write an original personal memoir on an important year.
As a book of essays it could be important too.
Alasdair Gray Poor Things (Penguin)
He had moved to Penguin before he won the Guardian and the Whitbread fiction prizes, which is great for it and indeed for him.
Anita Brookner Fraud (Penguin)
With another pathetic lady waking up to her lot.
Lesley Glaister Digging to Australia (Minerva)
I think this work deserves noting, watching and recommending.
This is her third novel; her first,Honour Thy Father , won a Somerset Maugham and a Betty Trask award.
Terence Blacker The Fame Hotel (Black Swan)
Sadly I have not read this but I am such a fan of the author and he is so well connected that he gets reviews everywhere, and I just wanted to slip it in.
September
The Giants are easy to spot.
Douglas Adams' Mostly Harmless (Pan) is right back to Hitchhiker standard; Len Deighton, with City of Gold (Arrow), is back on form too; Sue Townsend's The Queen and I (Mandarin) is just brilliant; and the New Virginia Andrews ™,Secrets of the Morning (Pocket), is the second of the trademarked lot.
High-flyers
The high-flyers are easy to pick too, starting with the same title that led them in July last year, and for that matter back all the way to its expected original paperback appearance in April 1989!
Stephen Hawking A Brief History of Time (Bantam)
This time I think I believe Transworld.
It will be B format at £5.99 on 23rd September, and the main reason I believe it is that it has a new hardback (Big Hole and Baby Universes ) simultaneously.
Terry Pratchett Only You Can Save Mankind (Corgi)
Breaking right away from both the Discworld and the Truckers lot with a computer game-based fantasy designed basically for children.
Not the one to challenge Douglas Adams with.
Wilbur Smith River God (Macmillan)
The C format, otherwise it would obviously be a giant (the hardback comes in March).
Mary Jane Staples The Trap (Corgi original)
The second this year from the author of warm-hearted Cockney tales.
She is certainly growing.
Ones to watch
Peter James Prophecy (Signet)
Not mega yet, but I am such a fan I'm pushing him high.
Don't pigeon-hole him as horror, he writes thrillers with paranormal undertones and is going from strength to strength.
This one is about numerology, and I hope Signet gets the cover right, because he is just brilliant.
Andrew Klavan The Animal Hour (HarperCollins)
Don't Say a Word was an extremely gripping mindless violent tale which was one of W H Smith's Thumping Good read titles.
This has more of the same.
Stephen Gallagher Nightmare, with Angel (NEL)
He has been writing for some time, starting with horror, and has more recently turned to the psychological thriller.
This one involves a man-and-child hunt; it is earthy, raw and quite special.
Major sellers
Janet Dailey Tangled Vines (Warner)
Since she started her contemporary romances she has really leapt forward.
Josephine Cox Jessica's Girl (Headline)
She's often likened to Cookson, and deservedly so.
Deirdre Purcell That Childhood Country (Pan)
Having swept through the shops with A Place of Stones , this Irish writer is now a book a year person, and here gives us another tale about twins, only this time about boys.
Lin Haire-Sargeant Heathcliff (Arrow)
A bit of oversell occurred with the hardback at £9.99, but it turned out alright, and I do think this is very much a paperback title.
Miss Read Celebrations at Thrush Green (Penguin)
No problem; her market is well proven.
Ed McBain Mary, Mary (Mandarin)
This is the last for Mandarin as he is off to Hodder.
Often a change of publisher does   wonders for an author, but it seems to make little difference to this man's sales.
Sue Grafton I is for Innocent (Pan)
Her sales are growing well and she will be in the UK to promote.
LaVyrle Spencer Forgiving (HarperCollins)
The one in May, Byegones , is the one to watch.
This is an old one, historical, but new to the UK.
Julian May Blood Trillium (HarperCollins)
Sequel to Black Trillium , only with a solo author.
It is a C format in April.
Shaun Hutson Heathen (Warner)
Moving away from the mainly blood and guts stuff, this is a more involved horror thriller which should help expand his market.
Literary fiction now, and
Jeanette Winterson Written on the Body (Vintage)
 leads the field.
Terry McMillan Waiting to Exhale (Black Swan)
Transworld is really buzzing about this writer, who came to the UK for the hardcover and was truly magnificent.
All that energy for comparatively few sales, but she will get them for the paperback as she is very much the rising star of Black American fiction.
Gore Vidal Live from Golgotha (Abacus)
he has now gone back to Little, Brown lock, stock and backlist, and LB is mighty pleased.
This, of course, is the new one.
Margaret Atwood Good Bones (Virago)
‘A cornucopia of good things’, i.e. more short pieces.
Non-fiction, and the top lot again were easy to pick:
Antonia Fraser The Six Wives of Henry VIII (Mandarin)
Despite its hardcover success there is bound to be a lot of mileage for the paperback.
Gerald Durrell The Aye-Aye and I (HarperCollins)
Subtitled ‘A rescue expedition in Madagascar’.
It has been 14 years since we had an expedition book from him.
Norman Schwarzkopf It Doesn't Take a Hero (Bantam)
It is a thumping big read, but at £17.99 in hardcover it is obviously going to be good as a £4.99 paperback.
P J O'Rourke Give War a Chance (Pan)
More satirical political essays.
Helene Hanff Letter from New York (Warner)
Taken from her monthly BBC Radio ‘Woman's Hour’ series and culminating as she flies over for the opening night of ‘84 Charing Cross Road’.
On now to Barry Humphries' autobiography,More Please (Penguin); Carol (second wife of Walter) Matthau's memoirs Among the Porcupines (Orion); Ranulph Fiennes' search for the city of Ubar (the Koranic version of Sodom and Gomorrah),Atlantis of the Sands (Penguin): A N Wilson's Jesus (Flamingo), coming at the same time as Barbara Thiering's Jesus the Man (Corgi), as they also did in hardcover; and Miranda Seymour's much-praised life of Ottoline Morrell (Sceptre), £25 in hardcover and so welcome as a £7 or £8 paperback.
On the popular front is Mireille Johnston's Complete French Cookery Course, Part 2 (BBC), which accompanies the second television series.
October
I am told that Reed will regenerate the hype on Madonna's Sex (Mandarin) for a mass-market edition.
I'm not sure whether to believe this or not, but if it comes, I'm told that ‘everything concerning this publication will be kept under wraps like last time’.
However, I am sure of the next Giants: Catherine Cookson's The Maltese Angel (Corgi) is her second this year; and ace vet James Herriot's Every Living Thing (Pan) is his first for 10 years.
Seems extraordinary, but judging from the hardback sales, his fan club is as big as ever.
High-flyers
Anne Rice The Tale of the Body Thief (Penguin)
The fourth volume in the Vampire Chronicles, which has the wonderful Lestat yearning to be reborn a mortal in an entirely contemporary tale which is just brilliant.
I should perhaps have made it a giant.
William Horwood Duncton Stone (HarperCollins)
The final volume of his mole tales.
I am told he is turning to wolves for the next.
Maureen Lipman When's it Coming Out?
(Warner)
The recent Robson book, just right for next Christmas.
I love her.
Stephen Fry Paperweight (Mandarin)
Articles and ‘itemries’ from magazines, newspapers and radio.
It won't be as big as The Liar but it will be a good read at Christmas.
Susan Hill The Mist in the Mirror (Mandarin)
This will be wonderful in the bookshops as she has returned to the ghost story, and although it is reputed not to be as good as The Woman in Black , its sales are going to be.
E V Thompson Blue Dress Girl (Headline)
Headline is enjoying this lovely writer, but it is his Cornish sagas we are waiting for, which I am told will make up the next book.
This is a one-off about 19th-century China.
Literary fiction next, and a good time for it in Booker month, and the next few are all potential high flyers.
Alice Walker Possessing the Secret of Joy (Vintage)
Which expands on the Tashi character from The Color Purple in her tale of female circumcision, of which there has been much coverage.
Rose Tremain Sacred Country (Sceptre)
Her mixed-gender work.
Paul Auster Leviathan (Faber)
A life examined after his friend kills himself.
Malcolm Bradbury Dr Criminale (Penguin)
Mixed reviews but the sales will be good.
Then an important acquisition for Minerva in Günter Grass' The Call of the Toad ; and Lisa St Aubin de Terán has a new one in Nocturne (Penguin).
Ones to watch
This section is personal to me and contains titles I want to recommend, but in October I am forced to put into it a book I absolutely detest.
I do not like the graphic novel, and for a new work from a successful author to come only in this form seems to me a shame.
It is:
James Herbert The City (Pan)
Book 4 of The Rats and a very important publication.
If it were straight narrative it would be a Giant, but as a graphic novel its market is greatly reduced.
Illustrated by Ian Miller, it will, however, be the biggest graphic novel of the year even though most of his fans, like me, will find it impossible to read.
William Diehl Primal Fear (Mandarin)
Dubbed, as many are these days, as a cross between Silence of the Lambs and Presumed Innocent , this is actually just that.
There are a lot of courtroom drama books and serial killer tales about, but this one is special.
Major sellers
William Gill Fortune's Child (HarperCollins)
Sugar and Spice was extraordinarily successful, and this should sell on the back of that.
I haven't read it
Philip Margolin Gone But Not Forgotten Warner)
This is Warner's second B format original and will have the same treatment as Impulse (May), namely a dust jacket and later an A format.
Both titles will have the artwork on the dust jacket repeated on the cover, so that they can be treated as ordinary paperbacks as preferred.
As with Impulse , this too is a gripping American psychological thriller, but I haven't seen a cover yet.
I hope it works as I admire any attempt to bring a book more awareness.
Possibly one to watch.
Katherine Neville A Calculated Risk (Headline)
Remember The Eight ?
This is her second book, slimmer but by no means slighter; complex computer stuff that she turns into a fun thriller.
There is a new John Trenhaile,The Tiger of Desire (HarperCollins); David Gemmell has Waylander II (Legend);Inadmissible  Evidence (Headline) is another courtroom drama from the author of Reasonable Doubt , Philip Friedman; the writing duo of Laura Gilmour Bennett give us their last one together in Distant Echoes (Penguin); Hodder is keen on a gentle tale about organic horticulture in Rosemary Enright's The Walled Garden (Coronet); Pan is building Graham Hurley, who has a Gulf War thriller in The Devil's Breath ; and Orion is keen on Edmund McCoy (a pseudonym for an established thriller writer) with Blood of the Fathers , which is to have a three-part television series, and A J Quinnell's The Perfect Kill , a Chapmans title which was originally scheduled for March.
But Orion is probably keener on the non-fiction side, with:
Angela Bowie Backstage Passes (Orion)
‘Life on the wild side with David Bowie’, which is hardbacked this January and has a major serialisation deal with the Sunday Mirror .
Could be very big indeed.
Dirk Bogarde Great Meadow (Penguin)
A charming slice of his childhood expanded.
Martyn Lewis Dogs in the News (Warner)
His companion volume to Cats .
Richard Cohen (ed)Happy Families (Mandarin)
The comic and charming collection of new families for the old card game that has been created by our top cartoonists and satirists.
Nice one.
Nigel Lawson The View from No 11 (Corgi)
The massive memoir recently published at £20, so a paperback edition will be most welcomed.
Glenys Kinnock Radical Women (Virago)
Her interviews with a cross-section of women and bound to get a lot of press.
Next are Chris Bonington and Robin Knox-Johnston with their lovely Sea, Ice and Rock (Coronet); Jean P Sasson's shocking account of a Saudi Sultana in Princess (Bantam); Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin's new popular science work Origins Reconsidered (Abacus); and, to tie in with an autumn television series, a Faber original,The Hypnotic World of Paul McKenna .
November
November sees a slim Stephen King, very out of the usual, in Dolores Claiborne (NEL)— it's a hardback in February.
Julie Burchill turns to thriller writing with No Exit (Mandarin); I am told the sex is there but nowhere near as over the top as in Ambition , but I haven't read it.
The Terry Pratchett is his second Discworld this year,Lords and Ladies (Corgi); the Colin Dexter is of course an Inspector Morse,The Way Through the Woods (Pan)— it is a C format in April; and Elvi
Major sellers
Jonathan Gash Paid and Loving Eyes (Arrow)
Another Lovejoy.
Denise Robertson The Beloved People (Signet)
The first in a trilogy, with a large cast and high emotions, a between-the-wars read from the ‘This Morning’ agony aunt.
Tessa Barclay A Hidden Beauty (Headline)
Which covers world events in international settings within her family drama.
James Follet Savant (Mandarin)
He now has his Christian name well and truly on the cover of his thriller (Ken complained).
Molly Cochran and Warren Murphy have produced a much-praised Arthurian fantasy in The Forever King (Millenium, Orion's SF and fantasy list); and from Arrow comes a monumental novel of war in Beirut by Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci,Inshallah .
Well, that's a very full year.
It just remains for me to wish you a prosperous and happy one.
BOOKNEWS
Length and longevity Vikram Seth's A Suitable Boy is the most heralded novel of the spring.
At 700,000 words, it is also the longest work of fiction of this or any other season.
He explains why to the Bookseller
At one point in Vikram Seth's novel in verse The Golden Gate (Faber, 1986), the author interrupts the narrative to tell us that his idea for the book had not been well received when he had mentioned it to a publisher:
‘Dear fellow,
What's your next work?’
‘A novel…’
‘Great!
We hope that you, dear Mr Seth —‘
‘…
In verse,’ I added.
He turned
yellow.
‘How marvellously quaint,’ he said,
And subsequently cut me dead.
As readers were to discover,The Golden Gate turned out to be a beguiling work, an accessible and witty story of modern Californians.
But now Seth (the name rhymes with ‘gate’ and ‘great’) has come up with another offputting concept.
A Suitable Boy (£20,1897 58020 7), with which Orion launches its Phoenix House list on 25th March, has, like The Golden Gate , chapters divided into sections: 1.1, 1.2 and so on.
In the case of the former novel, the sections were 14-line stanzas based on the verse form used by Pushkin in Eugene Onegin ; at 300 pages,The Golden Gate was a fast read.
The new book is in prose, and the sections are on average four pages in length; there are 19 chapters, each with up to 30 sections.
They add up to 1,364 pages.
Consisting of about 700,000 words,A Suitable Boy is the longest work of fiction published in English this century.
On the all time fiction list, possibly only Samuel Richardson's Clarissa beats it.
The £250,000 question — for that was the size of Phoenix House's advance — is whether reviewers'superlatives will match the publisher's hype (‘Bold comparisons invite the reviewer's rebuke, but…’) to make these apparently intimidating statistics seem at worst challenging, at best irrelevant.
Speaking on an indistinct telephone line from Delhi, Seth admits that he had been worried that A Suitable Boy had grown too big to handle.
‘I'd spent two years at Stanford University Press, so I knew something about price ceilings.’
His agent, Giles Gordon of Sheil Land, had reacted to the sight of the manuscript with alarm, but was won around by reading it: ‘He said that perhaps it should be cut a bit, but that we should aim to keep it to the same kind of scale.’
Then came the task of presenting the novel  to publishers.
‘The manuscript was single-spaced and double-sided.
No publisher thinks of looking at something like that normally, but I didn't want it to seem too daunting.
The alternative was to give it to them in 50 crates.’
He need not have worried.
Although Phoenix House, looking for a star for its first list, was clearly ahead of its rivals, most of the nine houses which bid for A Suitable Boy put in six-figure offers.
In the US, the novel went to HarperCollins for a reported $600,000.
Seth had not set out to break word-count records.
As the author of two volumes of poetry in addition to The Golden Gate ), he is used to skimming off excess verbiage.
‘I think compression is a great virtue.
I was horrified when I found the book expanding and expanding.’
A Suitable Boy had been planned as part of a larger whole, a four or five-volume sequence opening in India in the period immediately following Independence and Partition and ending in the present day, when the heroine whose husband was sought in volume one had become a grandmother.
Seth had imagined that volume one would be the most straightforward.
‘I had thought that the 1950s was a fairly stagnant, dull time which I could use as a sort of launch pad for the more interesting periods of post-Independence history.
The British had left, there was no war going on, there was no emergency.
But it turned out to be fascinating.’
The book opens, ‘You too will marry a boy I choose,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra firmly to her younger daughter.’
Around the simple plot of the search for Lata's husband, Seth unfolds the story of four families, the Mehras, Kapoors, Chatterjis and Khans, and through them reveals a panorama of modern India.
‘The more I followed one character's life, the more I was led into those of several other characters,’ he says.
‘Take Mrs Rupa Mehra's family: you're led immediately through Lata and her brother Arun into the commercial world of Calcutta, which is quite different from the traditional Indian World.
Similarly, through Lata's sister's marriage to Pran you're led into the world of politics and the subject of land reform, which sounded dull to me at first but became much more interesting as I got into it.’
There is also the subject, of urgent contemporary relevance, of religious rivalry.
One cause of conflict in the plot is the presence of a Mosque on a Hindu holy site.
Without being didactic or overly metaphorical, Seth has related his heroine Lata's development to that of her country.
‘It's partly the fact that she is young and doesn't have a completely formed personality that makes her interesting.
The choices she faces are the choices that India itself was making at the time.’
So the novel, the action of which lasts about two years, grew.
‘I could have said, enough's enough, I'm going to force a closure.
But the subject was too enticing.’
He is working in an expansive form: the field of panoramic realism which, since the 19th century, has largely been left to writers of commercial fiction.
Phoenix House's publicity is comparing Seth to the masters of that tradition.
He is more reticent.
‘The books I most admire in the European tradition are,’ he says, ‘19th century novels by the great Russian writers and by English writers like Jane Austen and George Eliot.
But these are people I like reading; it doesn't go further than that.
I wasn't making a conscious attempt to write an Indian War and Peace at all.’
Nor is he writing an Indian Comédie humaine .
‘Once I realised that this novel was going to be a kind of mammoth, I decided to forgo writing the series.
It's taken me so long to write about just two years.
The books would have taken up too much of my life.’
Chatto reviewer's survey
Chatto has been researching the amount of space given by newspapers to its paperback originals, which it introduced last year.
‘Among the daily papers,’ the company says, ‘the best performers were: the Telegraph out in front, with the Independent and Mail in joint second place.
The Guardian, Times and Evening Standard have been half-hearted in their approach to paperback originals; and the lowest scores were notched up by Today and the Financial Times .
‘Among the Sunday papers, the best scores were the Independent on Sunday and the Sunday Times .
The Observer scored an average mark, and the worst performers were the Sunday Telegraph and the Mail on Sunday .
‘The best scores from weekly magazines came from City Limits and New  Stateman  & Society ; the Literary Review scored well; the TLS and London Review of Books were disappointing, and the worst scores of all came in from the Spectator and Time Out .
Among the glossies,Vogue and Options both scored well.’
Chatto says that all of its originals sold at least twice as many copies as they would have done in hardback.
The most successful, Susan Faludi's Backlash , achieved a much bigger multiple, selling 40,000 copies.
The company's originals for the spring include fiction by Marina Warner, John Fuller and Michael Ignatieff, as well as 25 year old American Dale Peck's first novel, called Fucking Martin .
Thera frescos revealed
Pictured right is a saffron-gatherer whose image, painted on to a wall in Thera (now Santorini) in the first century BC, was preserved under ash even as the volcano which produced it was destroying civilisation on the island.
It features in The Wall-Paintings of Thera (£39, 960 220 274 2), published by the Thera Foundation on 11th January.
In an introduction to the book, Peter Warren, professor of Ancient History and Classical Archaeology at Bristol University, describes the excavation of the paintings as ranking in significance ‘alongside Schliemann's opening of the Shaft Graves of Mycenae in 1876 and Evan's uncovering of the palace of Knossos with its collections of inscribed tablets in 1900’.
Yet, although the excavations began in 1967 and about half of the paintings have been on exhibition in the National Archaeological Museum in Athens since the early 1970s, the other half have been neither exhibited nor published.
Some of these are at a museum in Santorini which, the book says, is ‘considered unsuitable for visitors’.
The Wall-Paintings of Thera provides a first opportunity to see all the excavated frescos.
The colourful and graceful paintings depict scenes of everyday life in Thera, with fishermen, sailors, boxers, priestesses and warriors among the cast, as well as a broad variety of animals and plants.
They are superbly reproduced on glossy paper.
Proceeds from sales of the book will go towards the Thera Foundation's work to complete the excavation.
Thirty-four of the total of 40 buildings that were discovered remain to be explored.
The book has already featured in a double page spread in the Independent on Sunday , and given the importance and enduring fascination of the subject, further coverage is expected.
The Thera Foundation is at  .
Representation to the book trade is by Clyde Hunter at Colophon .
In brief Exiled Nigerian poet Olu Oguibe has been awarded the All Africa Okigbo Prize for Literature for his collection A Gathering Fear (Kraft Books).
The prize was instituted in 1987 by Nobel Prize winner Wole Soyinka.
BOOK NEWS LIT ED'S CHOICE
Your Grail is in the post John Walsh
About-to-be-ex-Lit-Ed, actually, come early January (I'm off to the Independent Magazine , which, although it's the most literary colour supplement in town, does not and will not run book reviews); but while there is a breath of bookish discernment left in my body, I suggest the following thoughts about the spring lists.
1)Novels:British fiction will be hard put to compete with the Americans, and with the dead, for space in the fictional stratosphere.
No home-grown novel will eclipse John Updike's Memoirs of the Ford Administration (Hamish Hamilton, March, £15.99, 0 241 13386 6) for review space, interviews and circumambient chitchat.
Despite its alarmingly boring title, it has nothing to say at all about the Ford Administration: it starts off in the wholly recognisable Updike Couples-land of middle-aged infidelity in New England academia, before broadening into reflections on the way sexual liberation became virtually mandatory in the hot years of the late 1970s (the Ford years).
Its narrator's confessional outpourings are given an ironic descant by his obsession with James Buchanan, the 15th President of the US.
Brownie points will be scored by any reviewers who can claim to be familiar with Updike's earlier work on the same man, in Buchanan Dying (1974), provided they remember that it was, of course, a play.
Scarcely will the shouting about Updike have died away before we'll be getting Operation Shylock (Cape, April, £15.99, 0 224 03009 4) by Philip Roth.
The Cape people excitably promise ‘a spy story, a political thriller, a meditation on identity and a confession’, but it's a racing cert that it will be Roth nagging away at his Jewishness, his Roth-ness, his menagerie of doppelgangers, turning solipsism into style.
When it come to excitement-value, neither of the Top Yanks holds a candle to Finn's Hotel (Viking, June, £12.99, 0 670 85067 5), the ‘lost novel’ by James Joyce, allegedly completed some time between the writing of Ulysses and Finnegan's Wake .
Will it resemble an out-take from Dubliners ?
A cancelled chapter of Ulysses ?
Given that Finn's Hotel is where the author's adored Nora Barnacle was working at the time they met, will it be a love story?
I await the first sighting of this crucial volume with the awed anticipation of a Crusader waiting for the Holy Grail to arrive through the post.
2)Killers:A good spring for armchair ghouls.
Our morbid fascination with serial killers goes into necrophiliac overdrive with the publication of The Shrine of Jeffrey Dahmer (Hodder, February, £14.99, 0 340 57482 8) by Brian Masters.
Already I've heard aghast whispers about the details of the Milwaukee cannibal: ‘Do you know,’ they hiss in your ear, ‘he cut out one chap's bicep, fried it on a griddle and ate it for his breakfast?’
The Yuk Factor sustains through Robert Cullen's The Killer Department (Orion, April, £15.99, 1 85797 070 5), about that demented bald Russian in a cage, the one who murdered 50-odd people and ate them, and nearer home we can enjoy Murder on Ward Four (Chatto, May, £9,99, 0 7011 4813 6), Nick Davies' investigation into the nurse of impeccable credentials who allegedly killed eight children before she was discovered.
3)Sex:Amateur sexologists will have a good time too.
Anyone who watched the drubbing poor Neil Lyndon received for his attack on extreme feminism,No More Sex War , and has a taste for more of the same will relish Not Guilty: In Defence of the Modern Man (Weidenfeld, February, £8.99, 0 297 81216 5), in which David Thomas reveals the fruits of his researches into how The Guys have been Really Hurting because of their treatment at the hands of women lately.
Mr Thomas is a witty writer, and I'm sure his data-gathering has been impeccable, but somehow I just know the water around him is going to be thick with dorsal fins in February.
Sally Cline's Women, Celibacy and Passion (Deutsch, March, £15.99, 0 233 98804 1) will reawaken the debate about sexual abstinence last seen in Liz Hodgkinson's Sex Is Not Compulsory : Ms Cline identifies a new breed of passionate non-performers, ‘women who believe that celibacy offers them the independence, the creative time and energy for their own growth and work which conventional sexuality has not allowed them’.
But the most fun this spring is probably in the pages of Sex and the British (Michael Joseph, February, £18.99, 0 7181 3141 X), Paul Ferris' sardonic trawl through the 20th century noting the changes in the mores of courtship, sexual activity, eroticism in art, censorship, homosexuality laws, contraception and all the paraphernalia of sexual imagery.
There have been umpteen books on the subject before, but Ferris brings such sly humour, such a floodgate of poignant details, and such a tone of innocent surprise to the proceedings, that it all reads as much more than a round-up of the usual phenomena.
John Walsh becomes editor of the INDEPENDENT MAGAZINE on 4th January.
BENT'S NOTES
Feeling foxy for a change
Carmen Callil and Julie Burchill are not the only celebrities to have been approached by the Sunday Times with an offer to take over the £60,000-a-year literary editorship of the paper from John Walsh.
So, I gather, has Salman Rushdie, whose lack of freedom of movement might, one would have thought, have made it somewhat difficult for him to carry out such a duty.
But the Sunday Times seems to be looking for a figurehead for the post, with real work being done in the back room, by the likes of Harry Ritchie, Walsh's deputy, who in the view of many in the book business would make an excellent lit ed for the paper.
Rushdie has anyway turned down the offer, since, as he says ‘it's my job to produce the stuff, not to review it’.
There was high drama at Book House on 18th December, when the ringing of fire alarms forced Book Trust and Book House Training Centre staff to evacuate the building.
Two fire appliances arrived in double quick time and the chief fire officer soon detected the cause of the incident: deep in the bowels of Book House, the potatoes had burned dry.
Roger Jones of Ex Libris, publisher and bookseller in Bradford on Avon, draws my attention to a reference to the bookshop in Miles Kington's newly published The Jazz Anthology (HarperCollins, £17.50).
‘At my local bookshop, called Ex Libris, in the Shambles at Bradford on Avon,’ Kington writes, ‘the man who looks after it once confided to me that his favourite browsing book when no customers were around was Desert Island Lists , which contained the records and books and luxuries chosen by everyone who had been on the programme in the Roy Plomley era.
Leafing through it I discovered that he was right; it was endlessly fascinating.
So much so that I bought his only copy of it, and earned his cordial loathing.
Now when I go in there his eyes narrow.
Recently he told me he had found another book to browse in, but he wasn't going to tell me what it was, not for any price…’
The bookseller in question, by the way, is Roger Jones' assistant Jim Wolland, with whom one can but sympathise.
Good books for browsing are so hard to come by nowadays.
The GUARDIAN last Saturday had an interesting bit of copy about clubs in the Premier football division being prepared to consider a ban on transfers of players between the clubs for virtually the whole of the soccer season.
In this they would follow the hugely popular and successful Italian Serie A league, where transfers are limited to the summer break between seasons and a short five-day ‘window’ in November.
I mention this only because book publishing has, at least in the matter of advances to authors, followed the lead of professional football.
If it did so in respect of limiting transfers as well, it might see an author contracted to stay with her or his publisher for, say, a minimum of three books.
That would probably do little to bring so-called advances on royalties back to a more sensible level, but it might give the publisher some added stability, and therefore a greater incentive to put sustained effort into an author's career.
From My Man on the Road
By the end of the week before Christmas, we reps were no longer biting our nails quite so hard.
There had been doubts about which would break first, Christmas or booksellers' spirits.
Happily it was the former.
Several factors came into play to make this possible.
There was the credit factor, for delaying bills into January or even February.
The weather was a little more forgiving.
The BBC kept up with demand for Pole to Pole .
The Madonna book brought in lots of customers, though Books Etc managers looked a little nervous about the ploy of cornering the market on a firm sale title.
Although bombs and bomb scares disrupted shopping, they threatened anywhere, not just central London.
And the bonhomie factor helped as well, with groups of tipsy customers — and reps — about.
Alas, I missed the annual Foyles knees-up for reps this year.
I was interested in how many of us went back to carrying car stock.
Practically every Century Hutchinson rep in London had a van full of books, while the Faber reps had to share one van between several territories.
So did the Viking Penguin reps, and it was a stricken van, too, as one of the reps had scraped off the rear bumper.
The booksellers were reluctant, even by 14th December, to have any stock that involved opening boxes, but they seemed to enjoy watching us lug books about for once, and happily gave us top-up orders.
By a week before Christmas, I was beginning to see my way across the spare bedroom at home, or the stockroom as my other half styles it, and light at the end of the tunnel.
Dear Bent
Your selection of wayward notices (27th November) reminded me of one I saw in my hotel in Frankfurt — not so much a case of bad translation, as a question of logic.
The end of an in-case-of-fire notice stated: ‘If you see smoke or flames under your door, do not open.
Go to the window and wave.
Do not panic’— this on the 46th floor.
I was also reminded that on the same floor I woke up one morning to find the sun shining through the curtains, it being the only day of the entire Frankfurt Book Fair that my room was not below cloud level.
Being on the 46th floor, I threw the curtains wide open to enjoy this unusual event, took a shower and casually sauntered back into my room stark naked — only to see a man outside my window!
The nativity story (same issue of The Bookseller ) also rang bells.
I had heard the story before, along with another one reputedly originating from the same school.
A little girl playing the part of Mary was asked by the teacher to imagine how Mary would be feeling in the stables.
The little girl replied that Mary would be feeling very poorly because of the bump on her head.
The teacher asked, ‘Why do you think she had a bump on her head?’
‘Because,’ replied the little girl, ‘you said that when the innkeeper opened the door the light fell on Mary.’
Yours sincerely 
Dear Bent
Has anyone else noticed a benefit of the wondrous new VAT regulations?
Major publishers will exceed the distance selling threshold for most other EC countries so they will have to charge VAT on sales to individuals in those countries at the rate applicable in those countries.
But small British booksellers will be able to sell with VAT at the British rate (i.e. zero).
It will be a case of ‘Buy cheaper from your bookseller’.
What a pleasant change.
Yours sincerely 
Don't ask me what my new fox is meant to represent: I have no more idea than I imagine you have.
But I feel it could grow on me, and I like it.
It's by Bill Sanderson, the famous illustrator, so I ought to feel chuffed as well.
And I do.
& name :
UNAUTHORISED RETURNS
Raising Cain for Knicker Aid
I've been asked by an inflight magazine, of all things, for 1,000 words on the state of publishing.
Feeling that anything I had to say on the subject would drive passengers to reach for the inflight discomfort receptacle, I asked my spellchecker to do it instead.
I'm pleased with the results; behind the whimsical gaiety is a good deal of poetic truth.
‘The Eighties were a period of great change in British publishing.
Once proud, independent houses were swept up (some swept away) in a rising tide of conglomeratisation.
So, for instance within Random House (under Gaily Rebuff) we find Jonah Cape, once run by Tom Marcher, now by David Godwit and Gearing Camel; Chatty and Winds, then as now run by Caiman Calix; Hutches; Barrier & Jerkins; Bolder Head; etc, etc.
‘At Viking Penguin (under Peer Maker and his trusty sidekick Tremor Glove) we find Hagfish Hailstone (once run by Christened Sincipita-Stevedore, who left to start his own firm), now run by Anger Franklin, and Michel Joey.
At Reed International (once the fief of Pail Hamlet) we find, under the benign guidance of Richer Chagrin, the noble imprints of Seeker and Warble, William Headman, and Methane.
Victor Goblin and Alien & Unwind have been swallowed up.
Mark Barmy-King and Patrial Jargon-Smith go their merry way at Transform, owned by the German conglomerate Betels.
‘However, there are still some dogged independents.
Tom Rodent still presides over Anger Detach; Nice Newton and Lib Caller are at Blooms; Joan Mural, as ever, is at John Mural, publisher of Lord Byroads.
Felicity Ruination runs Mamillary; Iamb Chairman runs Pan, where the pioneering Picador list is edited by Peer Straps.
Hodder & Stanchion carries on under the Attender brothers, Michel and Phalli.
And there are always the agents, Edam Victor, Gilds Gorgon, Erect Heath, Debouch Ropers, Michel Siphons, Cardamom King, to provide stability in a changing world.
As the Editor of The Bookkeeper , Loris Balm, said this week…’
Just one question:who the hell is Erect Heath?
It takes a big man to allow a homeless person into his underpants, so I make no apology for returning to the otherwise distressing subject of Jonathan Lloyd's nether garments.
He faxes me, not to own up to being Clark Kent, but to draw attention to the fact that he is giving his surplus Y-fronts to Mary Loudon (author of Nuns Unveiled , Chatto it says here) for onward transmission to the homeless.
Apparently they're up to here in woolies, but nobody ever remembers that homeless men need underpants too.
Jonathan asks me to say that Mary wants these items delivered to her at , anonymously, if necessary — I'm sure those members of the trade still in possession of their underpants after the Christmas festivities can be relied upon to do the decent thing, and not abuse this rare privilege.
I shall certainly be supporting what I suppose we'll have to call Knicker Aid by riffling through my scanties drawer, though I trust the recipient of these exquisite items will have the initials WB.
The man Oates is sailing very close to the wind, if you ask me.
He is prepared to forgive Patricia Hodge's platitudinous children's book reviews on the grounds that she is very beautiful.
Not only is this ungallant to Susan Hill, with whom La Hodge is being compared and contrasted, it sets a dangerous precedent.
What about bad writers who are ugly?
Former cabinet ministers, for example?
What's their excuse?
No, if Oates wants to make lumbering passes at beautiful actresses that's his affair, so to speak, but he should leave their prose out of it.
I thought Patricia Hodge's prose was as beautiful as she is, by the way.
I always plough through the endless wastes of ‘Publications of the Week’ and wonder if they really meant ‘Publications of the Month’.
The legendary American publisher Bill Targ got it right: ‘The trouble with the publishing business is that too many people who have half a mind to write a book do so.’
If I were a publisher, or even, God forbid, an agent, I might put that on my letterhead.
I've had support from as far away as Boston, Massachusetts (nowhere else, actually), for the retention of old Sir Wynkyn at the head of this column, but now that I have met the new fellow, commissioned at vast expense (as the Editor has been at pains to point out), I feel he's quite me.
William ‘jaws’ Boot bites yer leg.
Happy New Year…