

1920
Chapter One
Fifteen months had passed since the end of the Great War, and now the docks and wharves of London were filling up with produce and commodities of all kinds.
Along London's fast-flowing River Thames freighters and trampers were steaming in on every tide, and the jetties and berths echoed all day long with the sounds of wheeling cranes, dockers' shouts and curses, and the chugging of busy tugs.
The dirty, oily waters of the river were lifeblood to the capital, and the steady throb of activity along its shores was as the living heart of London.
Cotton Lane in dockland Bermondsey was one of the many small cobbled streets which served the wharves, and it differed very little from other riverside throughways.
It smelt of clay mud, petrol fumes and horsedung, and it was narrow and grimy.
It had got its name from the bales of jute which were once landed at its high wharves.
A few low hovels that had once been homes to river people were now derelict, and an empty building which was once a sailmaker's and then a barge-builder's premises now stood empty after its last owner, a steam-traction engineer, foundered in the changing times.
The cobbled lane boasted a pub, the Bargee, which the rivermen used, but it saw very few customers once the wharf gates clanged shut.
Cotton Lane had a corner shop which was a favourite  eating-place of the rivermen and horse and motor drivers.
The premises had recently been painted in a garish olive green and over the shopfront large gilt lettering announced it as ‘Bradley's Dining Rooms’.
All day long the murky weather had held over the River Thames and as night closed in the February fog swirled out into the narrow cobbled lanes and backstreets of Bermondsey.
It was more than an hour since the last of the horsecarts had clattered through Cotton Lane and now the fog was thickening.
The sound of heavy boots in the street below faded and Carrie Bradley stretched out her stockinged feet towards the coke fire and yawned.
It had been a hard day.
The Danish butter freighter was in dock, and along the river wall laden barges were moored and waiting for daylight.
For the next week or two there would be work enough for the rivermen, and they would shoulder their way into the dining rooms during the coming days for mugs of steaming tea and coffee, thick bacon sandwiches and thick slices of new bread liberally coated with dripping.
It was how it had been for the past two weeks and the young woman tried to ignore her protesting muscles and her aching back as she stared into the hearth and watched the tiny flames flickering in and out of the carefully banked-up grate.
Down in the shuttered shop below Fred Bradley finished scrubbing the cutting-board and stood it on its end against the wall to dry.
It was the last of his nightly chores and he looked around once more to make certain that he had not forgotten anything before going up to the room where his young wife was resting.
Fred was in his mid-forties, a heavily built man with thick, dark hair that was streaked with grey above his ears.
His wide-spaced eyes were dark and brooding, but there was a softness in them which mirrored his nature and which his wife Carrie found to be comforting and  reassuring.
It was his soft eyes that had put her at ease the first time she met him, when she timidly knocked at his door just a few years ago, the evening when Fred employed a helper and found his future wife.
Carrie eased her position in the cushioned chair and stretched again.
She could hear Fred's footsteps on the stairs and knew that her short reverie was over.
There was the evening meal to prepare and Rachel to wash, feed and settle down for the night.
Fred would offer to cook the meal and even wash the baby but Carrie always declined with a smile and a determined shake of her head.
Her husband would have spent the whole day cooking for the steady stream of customers in the small, steamy back kitchen below and she felt that he needed a break.
At first she had let him wash their three-month-old child but Fred's face had become red and perspiration stood out on his forehead as he held the mite as though she were made of china.
His large, gnarled hands had very gently stroked the soft flannel over the protesting muddle of arms and legs on his towelled lap, and when he held one leg by the ankle and it slipped from his grasp as the baby kicked, his sudden exclamation of horror had started a loud wail and reduced Carrie to a fit of laughter at her husband's awkwardness.
After that particular evening he had often volunteered to try again with the bathing, if halfheartedly, but seemed happy to be refused, though he was more confident about cooking the evening meal.
Fred's smile was brief as he entered the small sitting-room above the street on that February evening, and he turned and entered the back room where the baby lay in her cot.
Carrie could hear his cooing to the child and the answering wail of discomfort and her face became serious for a moment or two.
Normally her husband would make himself comfortable beside the fire, sometimes holding their child in his arms, and  make small talk as she peeled the potatoes and washed the greens, but tonight Carrie knew it would be different.
He had seen Tommy Allen sitting in the dining rooms that morning and noticed the young man exchange a few words with her before he left.
It was all so innocent but Fred's face had darkened and he had become quiet as he went about his work, the occasional grunt of irritation replacing the tuneless whistling and humming that usually emanated from the kitchen.
But she had made Fred aware of her involvement with Tommy Allen from the start.
It was a long time ago now.
He had been her lover, her first love, and now he was married.
It was the first time for a long while that Tommy had come into the dining rooms for his morning break and Carrie had spotted him from the window as he pulled up outside and climbed down wearily from his horsecart.
She had been more than a little taken aback by his unexpected appearance in the area and also somewhat intrigued, though she had heard from one of the carmen who frequented the cafe that the young man had recently married.
Fred came into the room and picked up the evening paper then settled himself in his usual chair.
‘Rachel needs changing,’ he said tersely.
Carrie had already gathered up the baby's toiletries in her arms and she left the room without answering him.
She felt suddenly irritable as she bent over the cot and lifted the child to her breast.
Fred was a lovely man, he was warm and tender towards her, and she knew that he loved her dearly, but he had become very possessive since Rachel was born.
She had never given him any reason to feel suspicious, and she certainly never encouraged any impropriety with the carmen and dockers who came regularly into the dining rooms.
There was the usual bawdy banter, of course, and it had been that way ever since she first put on her white  apron and began serving behind the counter.
Carrie remembered those early days clearly, how Fred had praised her cheerfulness and efficiency, and had been quick to point out that the upturn in trade was largely due to her.
She had soon seen the potential of his drab and neglected establishment, and now they were married the business was doing very well.
It was largely due to her that Fred had been able to secure the leasehold of the cafe and build up trade by extending the seating arrangement and brightening up the fare on offer.
Even when the docks and wharves were quiet the local carmen often made detours so they could eat at Bradley's Dining Rooms.
Carrie remembered with a smile how Fred had reacted when she suggested renovating the back store room and putting a few tables in there.
He had been apprehensive but had gone along with her idea all the same and now the small room was a regular haunt of the local foremen and managers, as well as a meeting-place for the trade union officials who held impromptu meetings over mugs of steaming hot tea and bacon sandwiches.
Carrie sighed to herself as she threw the soiled towelling napkin in an enamel bucket at her feet and placed the dean and folded napkin under the baby's bottom.
The tiny child's pale blue eyes stared up at her appealingly and she could not help feeling guilty.
She had married Fred Bradley without being in love with the kind and considerate man who was employing her.
She had entered into the union for her own reasons and she had taken her marriage vows with no thoughts other than to be a dutiful wife to him and to give him the happiness he deserved.
From the beginning she had never tried to pretend that she was in love, although she was very fond of him, and Fred had told her he was happy that she cared enough for him to become his wife.
He had hoped that in time she would have his  children and one day she might come to love him.
Carrie cooed softly as she fixed the large safety pin to the napkin and wrapped the child in a small flannelette sheet, tucking the edges under her chin as she cuddled the soft, sweet-smelling bundle to her.
Fred was a good husband to her and the difference in their ages did not matter to Carrie.
Her mother had pointed out to her that being married to an older man had its advantages.
She had said there was less chance of being burdened down with a large brood and less risk of losing the husband to another woman.
Her father, himself ten years older than her mother, seemed more concerned about his daughter marrying a man who was seventeen years older than her, and had felt that she was entering into the marriage largely because of the misfortune that had afflicted her family.
He was right of course, Carrie thought, and as she nestled the child to her and placed the teat of the bottle against the child's searching mouth she bit on her lip and tried to suppress the anger which welled up inside her.
In the warm and cosy sitting-room Fred Bradley put down the evening paper and stared moodily into the bright fire.
He had begun to feel that Carrie was really growing to love him, and having borne him his first child the future had seemed so promising, but now today he had been reminded that everything he had hoped and prayed for could so easily crumble into dust.
Perhaps he was making too much of it.
Tommy Allen was married now and it was not unnatural that he should have a conversation with Carrie, but the nagging feeling would not go away.
Fred knew that his young wife and Tommy were once lovers and Carrie had been very upset when they parted.
Perhaps she still yearned for him, he thought with a pang of anxiety.
Maybe she wished it was still the young man who  shared her bed instead of a man who-was almost old enough to be her father.
Maybe the young man was unhappy in his marriage and had made his feelings known to her.
Maybe he and Carrie had discussed her marriage and she had told him things, secret things that were intimate to the marriage bed.
They might have joked about his shortcomings as a husband and lover, he thought with anger and frustration building up inside him.
True, he had struggled at first to satisfy his beautiful young bride; he had been too long a bachelor and too set in his ways.
He had worked in his father's cafe on the riverside almost from leaving school and was never allowed to make his own way in life.
He had never been allowed to mix properly with women and his few lady friends were discouraged by his mother and not made welcome in the Bradley home.
Only after his ageing parents had died and he was left to manage the dining rooms did he begin to look around for a wife, and Fred smiled bitterly at the memory.
He had been pathetically shy and awkward, and one particularly painful experience had sent him back to his lonely flat with the firm belief that he would die a bachelor.
The woman had taunted him for his lack of passion and forthrightness and she had walked off with one of the young dockers.
If she had given him time he would have been able to show her passion, he knew, but it was hard for him to relax and act confidently after years of being cowed in a stern loveless household.
Carrie had changed his life and he would somehow make her love him.
He would also fight tooth and nail to keep her from the likes of Tommy Allen.
The hot cinder falling from the grate jerked Fred from his thoughts and he licked his fingers and quickly tossed it back on to the fire.
Carrie walked into the room and sat down heavily in  her chair.
‘I've put the veg on an' the chops are doin' nicely,’ she announced flatly, waiting for the inevitable question.
Fred merely nodded and picked up the paper, pretending to be engrossed in an article, and Carrie afforded herself a sly grin.
Fred was no reader and he struggled with words.
His look of deep contemplation only served to irritate her until she could bear the silence no longer.
‘Tommy Allen was tellin' me 'is wife's pregnant,’ she began.
‘Oh?’
Fred said offhandedly.
‘Yeah.
She's upset it's 'appened so soon,’ Carrie went on.
‘Tommy's over the moon.
'E said 'e wants loads o' babies.
Mind you, it's all right fer 'im, 'e ain't got ter 'ave 'em.’
Fred closed the paper deliberately and put it down by his feet.
‘I wonder what brought 'im inter the cafe.
I ain't seen anyfing of 'im fer months,’ he said archly.
‘Well, if 'e was in the area it's a foregone conclusion 'e'd pop in.
We're the best meal place round 'ere, an' after all 'e used ter call in all the time when 'e 'ad that ovver job,’ Carrie reminded him.
‘Long as it's not you 'e's interested in,’ Fred said shortly.
Carrie got up with a deep sigh.
‘Yer not startin' that again, are yer, Fred?’ she said wearily.
‘I've told yer lots o' times me an' Tommy finished long ago.
Yer know that well enough.
I've got me 'ands full wiv servin' an' lookin' after Rachel — that's besides runnin' the 'ome.
I've got no time ter gallivant about.‘
‘That's all yer want, is it, the time?’
Fred said crossly.
Carrie gave him a blinding look and stormed out of the room.
It was useless to argue with him while he was in that mood, she told herself.
Best to ignore him and let him come around in his own time.
He would soon  realise he had been acting stupidly and feel sorry for his bad temper.
Better though that he simmered for a while, Carrie thought as she stirred the greens and tested the potatoes with a fork.
The baby had been very demanding lately, and after trying to divide herself between the shop and the child she felt drained of energy.
The thought of her husband fumbling around in bed and urgently attempting to rouse her left her feeling suddenly depressed.
It had nothing to do with Tommy's visit that morning, she tried to convince herself.
She had got over their love affair before she agreed to marry Fred, although the young man's sudden appearance had stirred a few very pleasant memories for her.
The baby was crying and Carrie sighed resignedly as she quickly replaced the lid of the potato pot and hurried into the back room.
Down in the dark and foggy street a figure stood waiting beneath a lighted gas lamp.
The young, broad-shouldered man had the collar of his tattered grey overcoat pulled up around his ears and his cap was drawn down over his forehead.
He tightened the red scarf around his neck and blew on his hands, stamping his cold feet on the hard wet cobblestones.
The man's pale blue eyes peered into the fog and his ears strained to catch the sound of approaching footsteps.
He had waited for over ten minutes and decided that he would give his friend another five minutes before making off home.
It had been a hard day and the river could be a severe taskmaster at times.
He had moored three laden barges in position midstream and is the tide turned and the fog swept upriver he had finally managed to bring the last of them into its berth below Chamber's Wharf.
It had been a long, tiring business and his hands were sore and chafed from the ropes.
He should have  arranged to meet his friend Billy in the pub instead of in the cold street by the river, but Billy had insisted.
Danny Tanner took out his silver pocket watch and looked at it, an expression of annoyance on his wide, handsome face.
Just then he heard footsteps approaching and a figure loomed out of the fog in front of him.
The young man walked with a shuffle, his shoulders hunched and his hands stuffed deeply into his coat pockets.
‘Sorry, mate,’ he said in a husky voice, his grinning face belying his sincerity.
‘I got 'eld up wiv one o' the geezers in the Kings Arms.
'E give me an ear'ole bashin' an' I 'ad ter listen, didn't I?
The poor ole bleeder's one of us. 'E got a Blighty ticket early on an' 'e ain't bin right since.
Talks a lot o' nonsense at times, but what can yer do?’
Danny Tanner shook his head in resignation.
He knew Billy Sullivan was never going to change.
Always the soft touch, and always so unreliable.
He put his arm around his friend's shoulder and grinned widely as they started off.
‘I was about ter give up on yer.
I knew we should 'ave met in the pub,’ he said lightly.
Billy Sullivan stopped in his tracks and turned suddenly to face his friend, his face serious.
‘Look, pal, I wanted us ter meet 'ere.
I've got somefing ter show yer,’ he said, a note of excitement in his gruff voice.
With a grand gesture of his arm, he announced, ‘Take a look at that.’
‘What the bloody 'ell are yer talkin' about?’
Danny replied, looking at what Billy was pointing to.
‘All I can see is a bloody empty yard wiv a shed in it.
What's so excitin' about lookin' at a poxy empty yard on a night that's fair set ter freeze the cobblers orf a brass monkey?’
Billy hunched his shoulders and did a quick shuffle.
‘Wasn't I the best prospect Bermondsey 'ad for a long time before I got me wound?’ he asked.
‘Wasn't I the only bloke who could 'ave give ole Palmer a run fer 'is money?
I would 'ave took that title, Danny,’ he said passionately, his voice almost breaking with a note of despair.
Danny nodded and slipped his arm around Billy's hunched shoulders once more.
‘I know yer could, mate, but what's that got ter do wiv what we're lookin' at right now?’
Billy pulled away from his friend's arm and made towards the empty yard.
‘I made a few enquiries an' it's up fer rent,’ he called back.
‘It's ideal.’
‘Ideal fer what, fer Gawdsake?’
Danny asked, feeling perplexed.
Billy Sullivan suddenly shaped up to his friend, his clenched fists pawing at the air and his shoulders moving from side to side.
‘A gym, that's what,’ he said triumphantly.
‘A bleedin' gymnasium wiv a ring an' a punch bag, an' lockers, an' a washin' place, an'…’
‘'Ang on a minute,’ Danny said quickly.
‘Where yer gonna get the money fer all this?
If yer ever get the chance o' rentin' the place that is?
It'll take a small fortune ter build a gym on this bleedin' dump.‘
There was a wide grin on Billy's ring-scarred face.
‘Look 'ere, Mister Know-all,’ he said in a confident voice, ‘I've bin doin' a lot o' finkin' an' I've put meself about.
Yer know that our ole boxin' Club's gone down the drain since those new geezers took over.
They ain't got a bleedin' idea between the lot of 'em.
The young lads at the club ain't very 'appy, an' accordin' ter my information they're all willin' ter lend us an 'and ter knock up a timber buildin'.
Farvver Murphy at the church 'as promised us some paint, an' whitewash fer the ceilin's, an' one o' the lads knows where 'e can get all the timber we need, no questions asked o' course.
All we need is the ready money ter lay down ter secure the site an' the weekly rent.
Jus’ fink of it, mate, me an' you givin' the lads a few lessons an' organisin' a few tournaments.
We could make the place pay.
It could be a bleedin' goldmine.’
Danny looked into the blazing grey eyes of his friend and felt a sudden urge to throw his arms around him.
He had idolised the ex-boxer since they were young children together in Page Street.
He had watched Billy Sullivan box at the club tournaments and progress to the professional ranks.
He had truly been a contender for the middleweight title until the severe chest wound he sustained during the heavy fighting in France had cut short his promising career.
Billy had come home a physical wreck and it was only when Danny himself took up boxing seriously that his friend regained some of his self-esteem by helping and instructing him.
Billy had certainly been making some enquiries but he had been misinformed, Danny thought.
His best friend was due for a bad let-down, and it was he who would have to spell it out for him.
‘Now look, mate, I fink it's a great idea, but yer gotta face facts,’ he said kindly.
‘The place ain't fer rent.
This ole plot, those two derelict 'ouses next ter me sister's dinin' rooms an' that yard's up fer sale.
Carrie told me.
She said 'er an' Fred only jus' got in wiv their bid before that bastard Galloway bought the land fer 'is business.
They scotched 'is little caper an' what was left was too small fer a cartage business so 'e pulled out.
I was dead pleased when she told me but yer see, pal, yer'll 'ave ter 'ave anuvver fink.
The idea's a good one but yer can't 'ave that place, that's fer sure.’
All the time Danny was talking Billy's wide grin stayed fixed on his face.
When his friend drew breath, Billy chuckled.
‘It jus' shows yer, yer don't know everyfink, do yer?’ he said quietly.
‘I know it's foggy, but can  yer see a ‘For Sale’ notice on the gaff?
O' course yer can't.
They took it down, that's why.
That site was up for sale but there was no takers.
Farvver Murphy told my muvver so only the ovver day.
'E gets ter know all the business round this area.
It's all ter do wiv plans ter extend the wharves.
Anyway, nuffink's gonna 'appen fer a long while yet so the owners are lettin' the place out fer rent.
I can see it now,’ he went on, his eyes opening wide.
‘Billy Sullivan's Gym.
They'll all come 'ere, Danny.
Everybody'll know about Billy Sullivan's Gym, you jus' wait.’
Danny felt a wave of admiration for his friend and affectionately put an arm around his shoulders.
‘C'mon, mate, let's go an' 'ave a pint at the Waterman's Inn.
They've got a nice coke fire in the public bar.’
The two young men walked away from the flickering gas lamp in Cotton Lane, their heavy boots echoing on the wet cobbles.
Chapter Two
Carrie stood behind the counter of the dining rooms with her fair hair pulled up at the back of her head and held in place with a pair of large bone combs.
She brushed aside a wisp of hair which had slipped down over her face and smiled placatingly at the florid-faced docker leaning forward over the tea-stained counter.
‘Two o' toasted drippin'?
Yeah, I've put yer order in, Joe.
Give us a chance.
Fred's run orf 'is feet back there,’ she appealed to him.
‘Well, tell 'im ter get a move on, luv.
I ain't got all day, yer know,’ the docker protested.
‘We're goin'  barmy at the wharf.
Yer know what it's like when we're on bonus.’
 Carrie smiled and patted his huge gnarled hand.
‘Sit down, Joe, I'll bring it to yer in a minute,’ she replied.
‘Oi, Carrie, where's my ovver mug o' tea?’ another docker called out impatiently.
‘Jus’ comin'.’
‘What's that ole man o' yours doin' back there?
Kippin', is 'e?’
‘Gis anuvver drippin' slice, will yer, luv.’
‘Fancy a night at the flicks, Carrie, luv?’ another voice called out.
And so it went on.
The glass-fronted doors of the dining rooms were constantly opening and shutting and letting in draughts of cold morning air with the busy  comings and goings of workers and their loud, raucous banter.
The large plate-glass window of the riverside cafe was steamed up and trickles of condensation ran down the yellow-painted walls.
The linoleum flooring was muddied and the wooden bench-tables were stained with slops of food and drops of spilt tea and coffee.
A steady stream of steam-laden air gushed out from the kitchen and Carrie frequently ran the back of her hand across her hot forehead as she struggled to cope with the customers' demands.
It was always the same when trade was booming at the local wharves, and as the convoys of horsecarts and lorries lined up along Cotton Lane so the cafe became even fuller.
Carrie had managed to cope with the twofold demands of the business and motherhood by employing a young woman to look after Rachel during the busy days.
Annie McCafferty was a very reliable person who had been recommended to Carrie by the local midwife.
She was a shy, retiring girl who had been brought up in a convent school after being abandoned as a baby.
A tramp had found her freezing and near to death on the doorstep of a gin palace near the Elephant and Castle and he had carried her to the local Catholic church.
There was a crudely written note attached to the child giving her name and saying that the mother was an unmarried Irish girl who had been in service and was going back to Ireland.
Annie was nursed back to full health by the kind nuns who adopted her and they were able to give her a good education.
When the time came for Annie to leave the convent school she was recommended for training in child welfare.
Now twenty-eight, one year younger than Carrie Bradley, the young Irish lady was still single and had no urgent desire to wed, although her pale beauty could turn many a young man's head.
She was demure and dark-haired with deep blue eyes, and her full lips were constantly set  firmly, giving the impression of sternness, although she was far from  stern when dealing with her charges.
She had been denied the company of males during her early life and now found it difficult to talk to members of the opposite sex.
She feared the roughness and the roguishness of men and was happy in her work.
Annie led a quiet, uneventful life, living in rooms near the Southwark Park.
The building, which was owned by the church, was made up of a dozen self-contained flats rented out to respectable young women who had gone through the children's home and school of St Mary's Convent in Bermondsey.
Annie spent her weekends reading, going to church and having tea with other young women in like circumstances.
She rarely went out alone, preferring to take her strolls in the company of one or two of her friends.
The other women often talked about young men they knew, and one of them had been taking a young man back to her flat during the evenings.
Such a practice was frowned on by the church, and instructions were given to the warden of the building that if any young woman allowed a man to stay overnight then she was to be reported to the Mother Superior.
All the young women knew the consequences.
Should they digress they would be asked to find other accommodation forthwith.
Annie felt worried for the young woman who was flaunting the rules and regulations and taking such a risk.
She had seen the young man leaving Mary Kelly's rooms and slipping out of the building by the back way on more than one occasion.
Other girls had seen him leaving too and Annie felt that it was only a matter of time before her friend was found out.
The young Irish nurse was happy too to be employed by the Bradleys, for the baby's mother was kind and considerate and her husband posed no threat.
Fred Bradley stayed very much in the background and his  soft, kind eyes helped to put her at ease.
Annie came in at seven-thirty every weekday morning, bathed and fed the child and, weather permitting, took her for an outing in the large black perambulator.
She left every day at two o'clock, after the morning rush was over and once the last of the hot midday meals had been served.
It was then that Carrie took over, dividing her time between caring for her baby and attending to her customers.
She had complete confidence in the young nurse, although she found it very difficult to penetrate her reserve.
Carrie's only problem was the other woman who worked in the dining rooms.
Bessie Chandler helped Fred in the kitchen, and when business demanded or when Carrie went upstairs to tend Rachel she came out of the kitchen to help behind the counter.
Bessie was a fiery character, a large plump woman with a shock of ginger hair, freckles and green eyes.
She was talkative and forthright in her opinions, which she gave freely and often without the qualification for doing so.
Bessie's opinions on how babies should be cared for were given freely to Carrie and duly ignored by the young mother, who was aware that Bessie had never had children of her own.
Annie McCafferty, however, with her training in caring for children, viewed the Bradleys' large and vociferous helper as an ignorant, interfering busybody.
It was Friday morning, cold and clear after the night rain, and Annie brought Rachel down the stairs and settled her in the pram which was kept in the passageway beside the kitchen.
Bessie was busy rolling out pastry for the meat pies and she looked up at the young nurse.
‘Yer not intendin' ter take the baby out in this weavver, are yer?’ she asked in an indignant tone of voice.
‘It's bleedin' freezin' out there.’
Annie's lips puckered in irritation.
‘It's cold, but as long as the baby's well wrapped up it'll do no harm.
In  fact, the air will do her good,’ she said stiffly.
‘Do 'er good?’
Bessie snorted.
‘Give 'er pneumonia more like it.’
Annie disregarded the remark and as she walked out of the side door pushing the baby carriage Bessie turned to her employer.
‘I shouldn't let that young woman take too much on 'erself, Fred, if I was you,’ she said quickly.
‘Them sort ain't got 'alf the sense they was born wiv.’
Fred was busy cutting meat into small cubes and he ignored his helper's comment.
‘I remember what 'appened ter Mrs Orchard's firstborn,’ Bessie began.
‘Baby girl it was.
She went cross-eyed.
My next-door neighbour Elsie Dobson told me Clara Orchard took the baby out in the fog and the child got a terrible cough.
Whoopin' cough it turned out ter be.
Nasty that complaint can be, let me tell yer.
Anyway it turned the baby's eyes.
The child never got better.
Yer can still see the poor cow walkin' about wiv both 'er eyes pointin' inwards.
She's got two kids of 'er own now an' they're both cross-eyed.
No, I tell yer, Fred, yer gotta be so careful where kids are concerned.’
Fred nodded, rolling his eyes in irritation.
‘Yes, Bessie,’ he growled.
‘I was only sayin' ter my ole man last night, this 'ere fog's a killer,’ the large woman went on.
‘That Mr what's-'is-name who used ter come round 'ere wiv the cockles on Sundays put 'is bad chest down ter the fog.
Mind you though, I fink it was the pipe what did it.
Never out of 'is mouth that pipe.’
‘'Ave you ever thought of smokin' a pipe?’
Fred asked suddenly, wincing at his own audacity.
Bessie chuckled and waved her hand at him in a dismissing gesture.
‘Gawd luv us, no.
Mind yer though, there's a lot what do,’ she went on, missing the sarcasm in Fred's remark.
‘Mrs Dingle always 'ad a clay pipe  stuck in 'er gob.
She used ter sit in the Kings Arms on the comer o' Page Street shellin' 'er peas in the summer an' puffin' away at that clay pipe of 'ers.
She used ter wear a cap stuck on the back of 'er 'ead an' a docker's scarf.
Gawd knows what become of 'er.
I ain't seen 'er about fer ages.
P'raps she's snuffed it.’
Fred cut into the pieces of meat with a vengeance, fighting the urge to shake the chattering Bessie Chandler by the scruff of her neck until she snuffed it.
‘P'raps she 'as,’ he replied quietly.
Bessie was not finished.
‘Like I was sayin' earlier,’ she prattled on, ‘yer gotta be so careful wiv kids.’
Fred had had enough.
He put down the carving knife on the chopping block and wiped his hands on the end of his apron.
‘Leave the rollin' out, Bessie.
I'll do that.
Give Carrie an 'and, will yer?’ he almost implored her.
Bessie nodded, glad for the chance of making her views known to the young mother, and she quickly flounced off out of the kitchen.
Fred sighed to himself as he looked at the rest of the meat lying on the chopping block and at the pile of dough still to be rolled out.
She'll have to go, he told himself, fearful for his sanity while at the mercy of Bessie's constant chatter.
He picked up the sharp knife once more with a frown and growled at the meat as he diced it, imagining that it was Bessie he was carving up.
On Friday evenings Carrie was in the habit of visiting her parents in Bacon Buildings.
First she bathed Rachel and gave her a feed before settling her down, then she washed and changed, combing out her long fair hair and setting it on top of her head again.
Fred watched his young wife go through her weekly ritual thinking how beautiful she looked.
Her body had soon regained its youthful shape and he marvelled how trim she looked.
Her breasts had become larger since  Rachel was born and the tops of her arms too, he thought.
Carrie's bright blue eyes mirrored her good health and she hummed happily to herself as she brushed down her best coat.
She was glad to get away from the shop for a short while and she felt confident about leaving the baby in Fred's charge.
Normally Rachel slept for a few hours after the feed and Carrie had made sure her husband knew what to do should the baby wake up before she got home.
Once ready she turned to Fred and he raised his hands quickly in front of him.
‘It's all right, I know what ter do if she wakes up,’ he reminded her.
‘Pick 'er up an' bring up 'er wind.
Check that the pin ain't stickin' in 'er, an' if she don't stop cryin' walk up an' down wiv 'er till she do.’
Carrie kissed her husband lightly on the cheek and made for the stairs.
She turned and was about to say something when Fred held up his hands once more.
‘I know, get Rachel's next feed ready,’ he said quickly.
Carrie smiled at him and hurried down the stairs.
As she stepped out into the dark night she thought of the gloomy squalor of Bacon Buildings and the smile left her face.
Her parents, William and Nellie Tanner, had been forced out of the terraced house in Page Street, the home they had brought the family up in, when her father's employer George Galloway, who owned the house, decided he was going to make changes.
Galloway had now installed a motor mechanic there whom he had hired to look after his new motor vehicles.
Carrie's parents and their youngest son Danny had been forced to find alternative accommodation and they ended up in one of the most dilapidated tenement blocks in Bermondsey.
Carrie knew how hard it had been for her father, who had spent almost thirty-seven years as a horsekeeper for Galloway, to look for other employment.
He had found a job as watchman at the council depot but it had caused him to become morose and  ailing.
His fortunes had changed, however, when a man who had befriended her father, Joe Maitland, took him on to manage his warehouse in Dockhead.
Carrie was very pleased to see the change in her father now that he had settled into his new job, but she still fretted over her parents, and she had not forgotten her vow that one day she would have enough money to buy them a decent house to live in.
The night was clear and the sky full of stars as she walked from the comer shop in Cotton Lane along River Street, then turned left into Bacon Street.
The dark tenement block loomed up on her left and through the broken windows she could see the reflection of the naked gas jets that burned on each landing.
There were four block entrances and Carrie entered the far one, climbing the rickety wooden stairs to the third floor.
Each landing had four flats, two on each side of the landing.
The front doors were almost bare of paint and shadows cast by the gas flame took on weird shapes.
Carrie shuddered as she walked along the landing to one of the rear front doors.
The sour smell from the communal rubbish bins in the alley below drifted up through a broken window and Carrie grimaced as she knocked on the door.
A wind was getting up.
It rattled the window frames as Nellie and her daughter sat talking.
Despite the difference in their ages, the two women were strikingly alike, with small smooth-skinned faces and high cheekbones.
At fifty Nellie Tanner was still slim and attractive.
Her blue eyes were a shade or two deeper than those of her daughter, but her fair hair was exactly the same shade as Carrie's.
Life had been-kind to her and there were few lines on her face, except in the corners of her eyes and around her swanlike neck just beneath the chin.
She looked serious though as she confided in her  daughter: ‘I dunno, Carrie.
I was pleased as punch when yer farvver came 'ome an' told me Joe Maitland 'ad offered 'im that job.
Now I'm not so sure.
It ain't what 'e's bin used to, but then nor was that watchman's job wiv the council.
Yer farvver's never bin one ter talk much about 'is work but 'e clams up whenever I ask 'im what 'e's bin doin'. 'E gets very tired too lately.
After 'e 'as 'is tea 'e falls asleep in that chair an' 'e's like that till it's time for bed.
'E's never bin the same since the stables.
'E really loved those 'orses.
I get all 'eavy in 'ere when I fink 'ow that ole goat Galloway treated 'im after a lifetime of work fer 'im,’ Nellie said, putting her clenched fist up to her chest.
‘George Galloway ‘urt us all, Mum, but yer gotta try an' put 'im out o' yer mind,’ Carrie replied, reaching out and squeezing her mother's hand in hers.
‘Yer won't 'ave ter stay in this dump fer ever.
One day I'll 'ave enough money ter get yer both a nice place ter live.
Danny as well if 'e's still livin' wiv yer.’
Nellie laughed.
‘Gawd knows when yer bruvver's gonna get married.
I fink 'e jus' loves 'em an' leaves 'em.
Still I'm pleased 'e's got that lighterman's job.
I was worried 'e was gonna take up boxin' after doin' it in the army.
That's all Danny talked about when 'e first come 'ome from France.
Mind you though, that Billy Sullivan 'ad a lot ter do wiv it.
Yer bruvver worshipped 'im.’
‘They still go drinkin' tergevver, don't they, Mum?’
Carrie asked.
‘They was out tergevver the ovver night,’ Nellie replied, nodding.
‘Danny met 'im when 'e finished work.
'E come 'ome 'ere drunk as a kite.
All I could get out of 'im was this gymnasium Billy was interested in.
Danny said Billy Sullivan wants 'im ter 'elp out there.
I do 'ope 'e ain't finkin' o' chuckin' that job in.
It was 'ard enough gettin' it in the first place.
It's a good job  too.
I know it's 'ard and awkward hours, but at least it's regular money comin' in.’
Carrie was eager to tell her mother how business was picking up at the dining rooms but she was interrupted by footsteps on the stairs outside and a key being inserted in the lock.
‘There's the two of 'em now.
I warned 'em you was comin' round ternight an' not ter be late,’ Nellie said.
William Tanner walked into the flat with Danny following behind him and both men bent over in turn to kiss Carrie on the cheek.
William looked frail beside his youngest son although both were the same height.
Danny was heavier by at least two stone, and his upright stance made him appear the taller of the two.
‘'Ow's my little granddaughter doin'?’
William asked, a slight slur in his voice.
‘She's fine,’ Carrie answered with a smile.
‘She's sleepin' well an' she's put on two pounds.’
Nellie looked peevishly at her husband and Danny in turn.
‘I told yer not ter be late,’ she said quickly.
‘We got waylaid in the Kings Arms, Muvver,’ Danny said smiling.
‘Billy was in there wiv 'is family.
'E's dead set on gettin' this gym goin'.’
‘I don't know where 'e's gonna get the money from,’ Nellie snorted.
‘Billy Sullivan ain't done a day's work since 'e got out o' the army.
'E's worryin' the life out of 'is muvver.
Sadie was tellin' me 'e's bin 'angin' around wiv a bad crowd from Rovver'ithe.’
‘The Tunnel Mob,’ Danny explained matter-of-factly.
‘They're a bunch o' nuffinks.
There ain't one of 'em could punch their way out of a paper bag.’
William was filling his pipe thoughtfully.
‘The police come in the yard terday,’ he said suddenly.
‘They wanted ter 'ave a word wiv Joe.
They was wiv 'im in the office fer over an hour.
Joe looked worried when they left.
'E told me they was askin' after somebody 'e used  ter know.
I don't fink it was that though.‘
‘Oh,’ Nellie said, glancing quickly at Carrie as if to signal that her father was being secretive about his work again.
‘I fink there's bin some dodgy business goin' on wiv the stuff 'e's bin 'andlin' if yer ask me,’ William went on.
‘You won't get involved in it, will yer?’
Nellie asked in a worried tone of voice.
William laughed.
‘I'm just employed as a yard foreman.
I jus' stow the stuff, I don't buy it.’
Danny's eyelids were drooping as he sat in front of the warm fire and Nellie gave him a blinding look.
‘Yer not gonna fall off ter sleep while yer sister's visitin' us, are yer?’ she reproached him.
Danny sat up straight in his chair and grinned at Carrie.
‘I 'ad a bad day,’ he said.
‘There's a lot o' trade comin' in an' the tide was runnin' fast.
The barges don't dock themselves, yer know.’
‘Yer ain't finkin' o' chuckin' it fer that 'are-brained scheme o' Billy's, are yer, Danny?’ his mother asked.
‘Course I ain't,’ he replied irritably.
‘Billy's never gonna raise the money ter open a gym.
Yer know Billy, it's all pie in the sky wiv 'im.’
Nellie was not convinced.
‘I dunno so much,’ she persisted.
‘'E might be finkin' o' gettin' the money by knockin' around wiv that Rovver'ithe mob.’
‘Tunnel Mob,’ Danny corrected her.
‘All right, Mister Know-all,’ Nellie scolded.
‘I bet they're up ter no good, whatever they call themselves.
Sadie was tellin' me that bloke they ‘ung last year fer killin' that shopkeeper over in Stepney used ter be one o' the crowd 'er Billy's gettin' wiv.’
‘She's got nuffink ter worry about,’ Danny said, rolling his eyes in Carrie's direction.
‘Billy wouldn't touch a fing what didn't belong to 'im.
Trouble wiv Billy is, 'e  don't see no wrong in anybody.
All 'e wants ter do is open up a gym club fer the local lads.
Yer know 'ow 'e loves boxin'.
If it wasn't fer that bullet wound 'e got, Billy would be defendin' the championship by now.’
‘Well, the boy's better orf out o' the boxin' business,’ Nellie went on.
‘An’ I'm glad you've seen better sense, Danny.
Look at poor ole Solly Green who sells the papers at the top o' Page Street.
They took 'im away last week.
'E collapsed as 'e come out the Kings Arms an' they rushed 'im away ter the 'ospital. 'E's in a bad way so Maisie Dingle told me.
It's all those punches ter the 'ead 'e's 'ad in 'is time.
'E was boxin' fer years.’
William sighed as he reached for the matches to relight his pipe.
‘Solly was pissed.
'E was drinkin' pints o' porter,’ he informed Nellie.
‘'E was all right this evenin' when I bought the paper off 'im.’
Carrie laughed at her mother's pained expression.
‘C'mon, Mum,’ she said, ‘I'll 'elp yer do the cheese sandwiches.
Then I'll 'ave ter be goin', in case Rachel wakes up early.’
William waited until the two women had left the room then he turned to his son.
‘Is Carrie all right?’ he asked.
‘Yeah, I fink so.
Why d'yer ask, Dad?’
‘She looks a bit pale, an' she seems a bit quiet,’ William remarked.
‘I s'pose it's the shop,’ Danny answered.
‘It mus’ be a lot fer 'er, what wiv the baby ter care for as well.
Yer know what Carrie's like.
She ain't one ter complain.’
‘I'm wonderin' if 'er an' Fred are all right tergevver,’ William went on.
‘There's a lot o' difference in their ages, an' Fred don't seem the sort o' bloke who'd be a cheerful soul ter be wiv.
P'raps she's findin' it a bit melancholy bein' wiv 'im?’
Danny laughed at his father's misgivings.
‘She's 'appy enough,’ he reassured him.
‘Fred's a diamond, an' 'e finks the world of 'er.
As fer the difference in ages, take you an' Muvver.
You're quite a bit older than 'er.
It ain't made no difference ter you two, 'as it?’
‘Of course it ain't,’ William said quickly.
‘But me an' yer muvver always used ter be goin' out when we were younger, even if it was only up the Kings Arms on Saturday nights.
Our Carrie an' 'im never seem ter go anywhere.
It's bound ter get a bit miserable fer both of 'em, all work an' no play.’
‘I wouldn't worry too much about Carrie, Dad,’ Danny assured him.
‘She's done wonders wiv that cafe.
They're buildin' up the trade an' Carrie's got plans.
She was tellin' me the ovver day she wants Fred ter try an' get that empty 'ouse next door ter make the place bigger.
They need the room.
The place is packed out as it is.’
‘That's what I was just on about,’ William said with a sigh.
‘She don't stop all day.
She can't keep goin' on like that fer ever.
Yer muvver's worried about 'er as well as me.’
Danny yawned and stretched out his feet towards the fire.
‘Well, I'm orf ter bed soon as I've seen Carrie 'ome.
I've gotta be up at five in the mornin',’ he said, knowing it was useless to discuss it any further.
Carrie came into the room carrying a plate of cheese sandwiches followed by Nellie who was holding the large enamel teapot in both hands.
‘C'mon, rouse yerselves, supper's up,’ she grinned.
The late meal was eaten in comparative silence, and then as the clock on the mantelshelf struck ten o'clock Carrie slipped on her coat.
‘Yer don't 'ave ter see me 'ome, Bruv,’ she said smiling.
‘I'm a big gel now.’
Danny waved away her protest.
‘There's some funny characters roamin' the streets at this time o' night,’ he remarked.
‘It won't take long — that's if yer don't stand around 'ere chattin' any more.’
They walked down the dark, creaking stairs to the empty street, and as they turned left and walked towards Cotton Lane Carrie slipped her arm through her brother's, glad of his comforting presence despite her protests.
It was a misty night and she could hear the sound of the water lapping against the pilings as they reached the riverside lane.
There was no moon showing and the gas lamp opposite the dining rooms flickered and cast frightening shadows down the cobbled lane.
‘You sure yer all right, Carrie?’ her brother asked with concern.
She nodded with a smile.
‘I jus' need a good night's sleep,’ she replied.
‘It's bin a very busy week.
Go on, off yer go, I'm all right now.’
Danny planted a kiss on her cheek and waited until she opened the front door before turning on his heel and walking off.
Carrie hurried up the stairs to the sound of Rachel's loud bawling, and with a sigh of resignation she slipped quickly out of her coat and took the baby from a very flustered father.
Chapter Three
Nellie Tanner left the grimy Bacon Buildings on Saturday morning and walked along to Page Street carrying an empty shopping basket.
It was quicker to go direct to Jamaica Road and along through the railway arch to Bermondsey Market, but Nellie made the detour purposely.
She had spent many years of her adult life in Page Street and most of her old friends still lived there in the row of terraced houses.
As she walked briskly along the turning in the cold morning air Nellie spotted Aggie Temple busily whitening her front doorstep and she smiled to herself.
Aggie was a spotlessly clean woman who prided herself on her housekeeping.
Her modest home sparkled, and her doorstep was the whitest in the street.
Even when the lorries coming out of Galloway's yard at the angle of the street splashed mud across the pavement and their exhaust fumes glazed the windows with an oily film Aggie persevered.
Her husband Harold was a lamplighter and when he came home from work he was obliged to take off his boots in the passage and place them on a sheet of newspaper before entering the inner sanctum.
Aggie had mice, Nellie recalled, but the woman could not bear the thought of getting a good mouser.
‘Cats make the place smell an' they tear yer 'ome ter pieces,’ Aggie had told her.
‘Get some mousetraps then,’ Nellie advised her.
‘Oh, no!
I couldn't stand seein' the poor fings in those traps,’ Aggie groaned.
‘Well, it's eivver mousetraps or a good mouser,’ Nellie had said.
Aggie got the mousetraps, and the only thing they caught was her Harold's big toe one night when he was hurrying down to the lavatory in the backyard.
Aggie still would not contemplate getting a mouser and when Harold raised the roof about the lethal traps she threw them out and blocked up the holes in the flooring and the wooden skirting-boards with old newspapers soaked in lavender water.
Far from dissuading the rodents, the smell of lavender positively encouraged them and they soon ate through the paper plugs.
Aggie had then sought the services of a good ratcatcher.
‘I can put down some poison, missus,’ he told her.
‘It's gonna smell though.’
Aggie shook her head.
‘Oh, no!
I can't stand bad smells.’
‘Well, get yerself a good mouser,’ he advised her.
‘No fear.
I couldn't stand a smelly cat tearin' me 'ome ter pieces,’ she told him.
‘Well, there's not much I can do then,’ replied the exasperated ratcatcher.
Aggie was at her wits' end.
‘What can I do?’ she had implored Nellie.
‘They sell some good stuff at Goodrich's,’ Nellie informed her.
‘It's s'posed ter be odourless.’
Aggie went along to Goodrich's, the local ironmonger.
‘It ain't exactly odourless,’ the helpful Mr Goodrich told her.
‘But it ain't a bad smell really.
More like turpentine, but it's really effective.
I put some down in my place an' I ain't seen any signs of mice since,’ he said encouragingly.
Aggie bought a packet of Ransome's Rodent Ridder  from the shopkeeper and was soon back to complain.
‘It smelled the place out an' I 'ad ter chuck it away,’ she moaned.
‘Well, I suggest yer get yerself a good mouser,’ Mr Goodrich told her in no uncertain manner.
‘Oh, no!
I couldn't stand me 'ome gettin' tore ter pieces, an' they're so smelly,’ she moaned.
Mr Goodrich laughed.
‘Listen, missus.
If yer take pride in yer 'ome I'd suggest yer get a mouser.
If they're neutered they don't smell.
Good cats keep the 'ome free from rodents an' they make good pets.
If yer train 'em right they do their business in a tray in the yard, an' they don't take much ter keep.’
Aggie went away thinking about what she had been told and she confided in Nellie Tanner once more.
‘I've decided ter get a mouser.
It's gotta be neutered though,’ she insisted.
Nellie had no idea where her friend Aggie could obtain a neutered tomcat but she had made enquiries.
The memory of the outcome brought a smile to her face on that Saturday morning as she walked down towards the crouching figure of Aggie.
She had asked William about getting Aggie a cat but he had no idea where a tomcat could be found on the quick and he shook his head.
‘I'll ask George the roadsweeper,’ was all he could suggest.
Two days later William had a piece of good news for Nellie.
‘I 'ad a word wiv George about that cat,’ he told her.
‘D'yer remember ole Broom'ead Smith the totter?’
Nellie nodded.
‘I ain't seen 'im about fer years.
'E was always up an' down the street.’
‘Accordin' ter George, ole Broom'ead is back in circulation,’ William went on.
‘'E went ter live wiv 'is daughter an' 'er ‘usband somewhere in Kent.
Anyway, Broom'ead caused so many problems there that 'is  daughter's ‘usband told 'er that eivver 'er farvver went or 'e would.
So Broom'ead clouts 'im an' packs 'is bags.
'E's livin' somewhere orf the Tower Bridge Road an' 'e's got 'imself anuvver 'orse-an'-cart.’
‘What's that got ter do wiv Aggie's mouser?’
Nellie asked him impatiently.
‘Well, George said Broom'ead's got a litter o' kittens in the stable where 'e keeps 'is 'orse an' 'e said Aggie can 'ave one of 'em fer two bob.’
Nellie's face had brightened up.
‘Good.
I'll tell Aggie right away,’ she said.
Two days later a horse-and-cart pulled up in Page Street and an elderly man with a shock of ginger hair sticking out from both sides of his battered trilby stepped down and knocked at Aggie's front door.
‘I've come about the kitten,’ he announced.
‘Are yer Mr Broom'ead Smith?’ she asked.
‘I'm Bill Smith,’ the totter replied sharply.
‘I don't use that monicker, if yer get me meanin'.
I've got yer moggie in a box on the cart.
Shall I bring it in?’
Aggie looked horrified as she caught sight of the horse dung on his hobnailed boots.
‘There's no need fer that,’ she told him.
‘I'll come an' get it.’
‘Please yerself, missus,’ Broomhead replied curtly.
‘Keep the fing in the front room near yer fire.
I've jus' took it away from its muvver so it'll need the warmth.’
Aggie accompanied the gangling totter to his cart and when she peered into the cardboard box and saw the kitten she shook her head sadly.
‘Poor little mite.
It don't look very lively.
Is it all right?’ she asked him.
‘Course it's all right.
I wouldn't be sellin' it ter yer if it wasn't,’ Broomhead said sharply.
‘Give it a month or two an' it'll catch all yer mice.
Its muvver is a good mouser.’
Aggie paid Broomhead the florin and took the kitten into her spotless home.
That night the little creature  did not stop crying and its pitiful little squeak tore at Aggie's heartstrings.
She took the kitten in its little cardboard box to the bedroom and was constantly getting up all night, peering at the tiny bundle of black fur.
Harold was becoming more and more irritable with his wife's bouncing in and out of bed and he declared that if the mice saw the kitten they might well decide to make a meal of it.
Aggie persevered with the kitten and when it was time to get it neutered she went along to the local vet, who informed her that the tomcat was in fact a ‘she’.
Aggie was mortified.
She could not stand the thought of having a she-cat which would one day give birth to a large litter in her nice clean home and she did not wait to find out whether or not she-cats could be neutered.
Aggie finally found the cat a good home and from that day onwards she had kept up a running battle with her mice, reverting to paper plugs soaked in vinegar, which seemed to be reasonably effective.
Nellie Tanner had reached Aggie's front door and she stood over the dumpy, dark-haired woman.
‘'Ow's 'Arold, Aggie?’ she asked.
‘I 'eard 'e was orf work wiv 'is back.’
‘It's a lot better now fanks, Nell.
'E's goin' back Monday,’ Aggie told her.
‘I've bin rubbin' 'im wiv that liniment ole Doctor Kelly give me, an' I made 'im wear a sheet o' brown paper under 'is vest.
‘Ow's your Will keepin'?’
'E's not so bad,’ Nellie replied.
‘Mind you, 'e's not bin the same since 'e left the yard.
I fink 'e still misses those 'orses.’
Aggie got up from her knees and grunted as she placed her hand in the small of her back.
‘I still expect ter see 'im come walkin' out o' that yard,’ she said, nodding to the Galloway stables on the bend of the street.
‘It used ter be nice when there was only 'orses in  that yard.
'E's got four lorries in there now an' I did 'ear 'e was lookin' fer anuvver place.
Sooner the better, if yer ask me.’
Nellie nodded her agreement.
‘I was glad 'e didn't get that site where our Carrie's got 'er cafe,’ she remarked.
‘'Ow is young Carrie?’
Aggie asked.
‘I ain't seen much of 'er lately.
I was surprised at 'er marryin' Fred Bradley.
I always reckoned 'er an' young Billy Sullivan was goin' ter get tergevver.
I was only sayin' ter my 'Arold the ovver day, I ain't seen nuffink o' Carrie Tanner lately.
I always remember 'er walkin' up the turnin' wiv 'er 'ead 'eld up.
Such a pretty fing too.
‘Ow's 'er Rachel doin'?’
‘She's lovely,’ Nellie told her.
‘Gettin' on very well.
Carrie's got a nurse ter look after the baby while she works be'ind the counter.
Very nice young woman.
Irish she is.
I've met 'er a couple o' times.’
The conversation was interrupted by the appearance of Florrie Axford, a tall, lean woman in her early fifties.
Florrie was affectionately known as ‘Hairpin' Axford through her use of a large hairpin which she had removed from her hair on more than one occasion to ‘make a point’, as she herself described it.
‘Still at it, Aggie,’ she said smiling and winking saucily at Nellie.
‘Somebody's gotta do it, ain't they?’
Aggie replied with a pained expression on her wide face.
‘What wiv them lorries up an' down the turnin'.
I reckon it should be stopped.
One o' these days there's gonna be a bad accident, mark my words.’
Florrie nodded and puckered her lips.
‘I told that miserable bloke who looks after the lorries the same fing meself,’ she told her friends.
‘Mind yer, it's like talkin' ter the brick wall, talkin' ter that silly git.
‘Is ole woman's as bad.
A right miserable pair they are.
Always arguin' the toss.
I could 'ear 'em both the ovver night when I walked past their winder.
I could 'ear 'er voice goin' on about somefink or the ovver.
She's got a right gate on 'er.
Ugly as sin she is too.’
‘Well, she can't 'elp 'er looks,’ Aggie remarked.
‘No, but she could 'ide,’ Florrie laughed.
Nellie pulled up the collar of her coat against the wind.
‘Well, I'd better be off.
I've got me shoppin' ter do before Will gets 'ome,’ she said.
‘'E finishes at twelve on Saturdays.’
‘I'm goin' up the market, I'll walk along wiv yer,’ Florrie said, straightening the wide lapel of her shabby coat.
The two women bade Aggie goodbye and walked back quickly along the street, turning the corner by Galloway's yard towards Jamaica Road.
They nodded to Maggie Jones and Ida Bromsgrove who were chatting together on the doorstep, and to Grace Crossley, the landlady of the Kings Arms which stood on the corner of Page Street.
Grace was standing at the door of her pub chatting to Maudie Mycroft.
‘I wonder what's goin' on there?’
Florrie asked, always keen to keep herself informed about local goings-on.
‘I dunno, but Maudie looks a bit worried,’ Nellie replied.
‘She's gettin' worse,’ Florrie said contemptuously.
‘It's that new vicar at the church, I'm sure.
Yer know 'ow nervous she is.
Well, since you've bin away from the street she's bin terrible.
Last week she was out on 'er doorstep threatenin' ter chuck a pail o' water over a couple o' Galloway's carmen.
They were only 'avin' a chin-wag outside 'er winder an' yer know 'ow they blaspheme.
Anyway, they walked orf all sheepish when she started ravin' at 'em, an' then she goes marchin' in the yard would yer believe ter see ole Galloway. 'E  wasn't there by all accounts but 'is son Frank was.
Well, Maudie 'ands 'im a pile o' leaflets she got from the church an' tells 'im ter 'and 'em out ter the carmen.
Now yer know what a cowson that Frank is. 'E told 'er ter piss orf out of it in no uncertain terms an' Maudie told 'im she was gonna send 'er ole man round ter sort 'im out.
I felt sorry fer 'er Ernie. 'E come 'ome that night wiv a few drinks inside 'im an' 'im an' Maudie got at it.
She come over ter me cryin' 'er eyes out.
She said she told Ernie what she told Frank Galloway an' Ernie said 'e wasn't goin' ter get involved, an' she should send the vicar round ter sort Galloway out.
What's more, 'e told 'er if she didn't stop 'er silly carryin's on, 'e was gonna leave 'er.’
‘P'raps 'e 'as,’ Nellie suggested.
‘Maybe that's what she was talkin' ter Grace Crossley about.’
Florrie shook her head vigorously.
'Ernie ain't left 'er.
The poor sod was only sayin' that ter make 'er act a bit sensible.
'E idolises 'er, despite what the silly mare's doin'.
I blame it all on 'im at the church.
'E sounds a right dopey git if yer ask me.
I thought the last vicar was a bit dopey, but this one's a sight worse.
They should stick ter what they do best, like christenin's, weddin's an' burials, and the Sunday services.
When they start runnin' those muvvers' meetin's they put a lot o' nonsense in people's 'eads.
I only ever went ter one muvvers' meetin' an' that was years ago.
I remember it well.’
The two women were waiting to cross the busy Jamaica Road, and once they had scurried across between the trams Florrie continued her tale.
‘It was near Christmas.
‘Ninety-eight or ‘ninety-nine it would be.
Anyway, my ole man 'ad pissed orf an' I was a bit short o' money.
I only went 'cos somebody told me they was 'andin' out food parcels.
Well, I sat through the service, tryin' not ter fall asleep, an' then  the tea an' biscuits came round.
I got a right ear'ole bashin' from two o' the ole dears an' then they give out the parcels.
I got a jar o' gherkins, a woolly 'at an' a pair o' bedsocks.
White ones they was s'posed ter be but they'd bin boiled wiv the colours I should fink.
Gawd knows who they come orf of.
I give 'em ter ole Granny Pridey who used ter live next door ter me.
She was glad of 'em.
Come ter fink of it, she 'ad the woolly 'at as well.
I kept the gherkins though.
I 'ad 'em wiv a bit o' cheese on Christmas night.’
Nellie was chuckling at the story.
‘Yer done right, Florrie,’ she remarked.
‘Some'ow I can't see you in a woolly 'at an' bedsocks.’
‘Well, I used ter wear a cotton nightdress when that Joe Maitland lodged wiv me,’ she said smiling.
‘I reckoned it might tempt 'im, but no such luck.
Now 'e's moved out I'm back ter me flannelette.’
They had reached Bermondsey Market and they walked slowly along the line of stalls.
Barrows were piled high with fruit and vegetables, and as they passed the fish stall they saw the fishmonger gutting an eel.
A little way along there was a young man standing between two stalls with a tray suspended by a strap around his neck.
The tray contained buttons, collar studs and various other bits and pieces.
The vendor wore campaign medal ribbons and a black patch over one eye, and there was a card pinned to the tray which said, ‘Wounded on the Somme’.
The two women stopped and each bought a packet of sewing needles and a pair of collar studs.
‘Gawd knows who I'm gonna give these to,’ Florrie chuckled.
‘Keep 'em 'andy, Flo.
Yer might get anuvver young lodger soon,’ Nellie joked.
The women's kind gesture did not go unthanked.
‘Thank yer very kindly, ladies, an' may the Lord  bless yer,’ the young man said in a reverent voice.
Charlie Harris was a shrewd street-seller whose appearance and demeanour tugged at the heartstrings of the compassionate.
Charlie had never been wounded on the Somme.
He had lost his eye when he was a young child, and the nearest he ever got to France was a trip to Brighton.
The medal ribbons were borrowed from his elder brother, who really had been wounded on the Somme.
Billy Sullivan had decided that he was going to own his own gymnasium one day and the idea grew in his mind until it became an obsession.
He was always talking about it and it caused much worry to his mother Sadie and her husband Daniel.
‘I'm sure 'e's goin' out of 'is mind about that gym, Dan,’ Sadie fretted.
‘We lost two sons in the war an' we're gonna lose 'im if we're not careful.
They'll put 'im away, I know they will.’
Daniel put his arm around his large wife and patted her back gently.
‘'E'll be all right, luv.
Billy knows what 'e's doin',’ he said encouragingly.
‘Besides, it's givin' 'im somefink ter fink about.
Surely it's better than the way 'e's bin since 'e got back from France?
When I fink of all that time 'e jus' sat at the front door wiv 'is 'ead in 'is 'ands, I shudder.
At least 'e's gettin' out an' about now.’
‘That's just what I'm worried about,’ Sadie told him.
‘Billy's runnin' around wiv a nasty crowd of 'ippidy'oys. 'E'll be gettin' 'imself inter trouble wiv the police if 'e's not careful.’
Daniel patted his wife again and tried to reassure her, although he was worried himself about Billy's wellbeing.
Had he been present at the gathering in the public bar of the Queen Anne pub near the Rotherhithe Tunnel he would have been worried even more.
Billy sat in a far corner of the little pub with Chopper Harris, Frankie Albright and Freddie the Nark, and Freddie was trying hard to sound convincing as he put his plan over to his friends.
Billy listened to Freddie the Nark with a growing sense of unease.
He had led an exciting life in boxing circles before he went away to the war and he did not consider himself to lack nerve, but the plan the little shifty-eyed character was setting out made Billy want to get up and leave right away.
He stayed, however, and as he looked around at the faces of Frankie and Chopper he worried.
Frankie was rubbing his hands together and Chopper merely nodded now and then with a silly expression on his face.
Billy picked up his pint of ale and took a large draught.
It was how he would have expected Frankie to react.
Frankie Albright was  nineteen and just young enough to have missed the war; he had tried to sign up when he was sixteen, only to be informed upon by his mother, who had followed him down to the recruiting office.
Frankie's wrath knew no bounds and after sub-jecting his weeping mother to a tirade of the most vile obscenities he was thrown out of the office by a disgusted recruiting sergeant.
Frankie had left home and was now living in lodgings in a little backstreet near the pub they were sitting in.
Frankie followed the boxing scene with much interest and it was through boxing that Billy had become involved with the volatile character in the first place.
Chopper Harris, on the other hand, was a dullard who had a big heart where his friends were concerned, and it was he who often stood cups of tea or a pint for his friends.
Billy had gone to school with Chopper and knew his background very well.
He got his name from an incident when he was a lad.
One Saturday night his father came home from the pub the worse for drink and as usual he picked on Chopper's mother.
The young lad  had also been battered unmercifully many a time and on that particular night he had decided he would put an end to the violence by teaching his drunken father a lesson he would never forget.
The young lad took out the large chopper his father used to cleave wood for the fire and chased the bully out of the house and down the street.
His mother followed screaming at the boy to stop, but he was too incensed to hear her.
At last the father fell down on to the pavement completely exhausted and convinced he was going to meet his maker there and then.
The raging young lad raised the chopper above his head and brought it down with tremendous force.
Sparks flew up from the pavement only a fraction of an inch from his father's head.
He raised the chopper again, but his mother threw herself upon their tormentor screaming for help.
Fortunately some of the neighbours intervened, and it was they who invented the sobriquet.
Freddie the Nark had finished setting out his plan and he leaned back in his chair, raising his glass to his lips with a smirk of satisfaction.
He could see that Chopper and Frankie were sold on the idea.
He noticed, however, that Billy Sullivan was not so smitten with the plan.
‘Why d'yer fink we should knock the ole boy around before we tie 'im up?’
Billy asked.
Freddie leaned forward.
‘Look at it this way, Billy,’ he said in a condescending tone of voice.
‘If by any chance the police pull us in on suspicion they've got ter 'ave an identification parade, an' if the old watchman recognises any of us we're done for, unless 'e's too frightened ter pick us out, an' 'e will be if 'e knows we're capable o' smackin' 'im around a bit.
Anuvver fing is that if we do 'im over 'e won't 'ave the strength ter struggle free too soon after we've gone.
It'll give us  more time ter get the load stashed.
We'll need a couple of hours at least.’
‘What about the load?’
Billy queried.
‘Are yer sure it's what that geezer said it was?’
Freddie grabbed at his glass and took a quick swig of ale then put it down with a bang on the wooden table.
‘Joe Wallace 'as worked at Clark's Wharf fer years.
'E knows more about that place than the guv'nor 'imself,’ he asserted.
‘What's more, Joe Wallace was so pissed that night 'e didn't 'ave an inklin' who 'e was talkin' to or what pub 'e was in for that matter, so there's no come-back from 'im at least.
One fing yer can be sure of — drunk or sober, Joe knows what's lyin' in that ware'ouse.
Like I said, 'e told me an' Tony McCarthy that there's no end o' silk on the ground floor an' upstairs there's cases o' real ivory ornaments.
Them alone are werf a small fortune.
‘Now let's go over it once more,’ he went on in an encouraging voice.
‘Tony's all right about drivin' the lorry as long as we load the stuff ourselves.
Two of us should manage the bales an' the ovver two can carry down the crates of ornaments.
They're only small crates.
We should be able ter manage one each.
Tony's gonna bring up the lorry at six o'clock sharp on Saturday night.
We've gotta be ready fer 'im.
When 'e's backed the lorry in the yard we close the gates like I said.
Tony gives us till quarter ter seven then 'e'll come back and drive it out o' the yard.
I'll be in the front ter show 'im the way an' it should take us about twenty minutes ter Wappin'.
There'll be no trouble the ovver end.
They'll be waitin' fer us an' once the load's orf the motor Tony can take it back on 'is own.
As I said before, we can stop over the ovver side o' the water fer a celebration drink.
I know a few good boozers over there as it 'appens.
The only fing we've gotta decide is, who's gonna come wiv me on Sunday evenin' fer the pay out.
We can't all go traipsin' over ter see Johnnie Buckram.’
Billy Sullivan was silent for a while, his mind racing.
With his share he would be able to get the gymnasium he so badly wanted.
The only thing which bothered him was the old night watchman.
Supposing something went wrong, he thought anxiously.
Supposing one of them got carried away and hit the old boy too hard.
No, there had to be no violence to the watchman.
He would make that clear, or else he would have no part in the raid.
As he stared down at his half-empty glass Billy became aware of Freddie watching him closely and he looked up at the schemer suddenly, fixing him with a cold stare.
Freddie the Nark was a shrewd character, he thought, and from what he knew of the man Billy realised that he must tread very carefully.
Freddie lived by his wits and he was involved with many shady characters.
He had found the fence and he had planned the raid very well.
He had a vicious side to his nature and it apparently meant nothing to him that an old man was going to be roughed up during the raid.
Freddie was indeed a shrewd character and he knew that Billy Sullivan was hedging.
He was known as the Nark by the local people who placed their bets in Albion Street.
Freddie stood on the corner of the turning as lookout for Tommy Green the street bookmaker.
He knew the local C.I.D.
and it was said he could sniff a copper out a mile away.
Freddie the Nark also had the reputation of being a womaniser.
His long-suffering wife Elsie knew that her man had a mistress tucked away somewhere.
What she did not know was that Freddie had two children by his other woman.
Elsie kept quiet about his affair and swallowed her pride, however.
With six children to feed she felt  unable to challenge him about his mistress lest he walked out on her for good.
Billy had made up his mind.
He leaned forward, his elbows resting on the table.
‘Right, Freddie.
I'll go along with the business on one condition,’ he said quietly.
‘What's that?’
Freddie asked.
‘We leave the old boy alone.
We can throw a sack over 'is 'ead an' warn 'im ter be quiet or else.
That should be enough.’
Freddie was quiet for a few moments, then to Billy's surprise he nodded.
‘Right.
We'll do it your way.
But I'm warnin' yer, Billy,’ he said with menace.
‘If that ole watchman gives us any bovver I'll do 'im meself.
Is that understood?’
Billy nodded.
‘That suits me,’ he said.
‘Now let's get a drink in.
I'm gonna drink ter Billy Sullivan's gymnasium.’
Chapter Four
Carrie leaned back in her chair and rubbed the tips of her fingers across her forehead as she stared down at the mass of papers on the kitchen table.
There were unpaid bills, receipts and invoices, all spread around the large dog-eared ledger that Fred had used for the past-few years.
‘It's a complete mess,’ she groaned aloud.
Fred Bradley was sitting by the kitchen range polishing his best boots and he looked up at her suddenly.
‘I've bin usin' that book fer years,’ he said defensively.
'Everyfing's in there.’
Carrie shook her head in exasperation.
Some of the entries were illegible and others were written across the ruled lines and ran into each other, and they were all in scrawly handwriting, which she found very difficult to decipher.
‘Yer should total these, Fred, an' keep yer accounts tidy,’ she admonished him.
‘We've got ter see 'ow we're doin', 'ow much we're spendin', an' set it against the takin's.’
Fred put down the boot he was polishing and got up from his chair.
‘It's all there,’ he said, sighing irritably.
‘Look, I'll show yer.
It's dead simple.’
Carrie folded her arms and stared up at him as he thumbed through the ledger and took out a grease-stained sheet of paper.
‘There it is.
There's nuffink  difficult about it,’ he said with a show of impatience, pointing to the two columns of figures with the blacking brush.
‘Yer can't 'ave it simpler than that, can yer?’
‘Well, I would 'ave thought so,’ Carrie answered shortly.
‘What does John Percival say when 'e does yer books?’
Fred shrugged his wide shoulders.
‘I jus' take everyfing to 'im an' give 'im all those sheets wiv me totals on, an' 'e works it all out.
'E's never complained.‘
Carrie had seen the accountant's bill for the previous year's work and she knew why he never complained.
‘Well, it's not businesslike ter do it that way, Fred,’ she protested.
‘We should be able ter look at these books an' see at a glance 'ow we're doin'.’
‘But I know 'ow we're doin.
We're doin' very good,’ Fred replied, sitting down in the chair facing his young wife.
‘The place is full most o' the time, an' since the trade's picked up at the docks there's more carmen comin' in all times o' the day while they're waitin' in the rank.
You should know that, you're servin' 'em.’
Carrie bit back a sharp reply and instead she leaned forward across the littered table.
‘Look, Fred.
I asked yer ter let me do these books 'cos I wanted ter sort out the bills an' see where we can make savin's.
I fink yer buyin' wrong,’ she said quietly.
‘What d'yer mean, buyin' wrong?’
Fred asked quickly.
‘I've got me regular suppliers an' they always come on time.
Ole Bert Moseley's 'ere on the dot at nine o'clock every Monday mornin' wiv me stuff, an' Albert Buller comes round every Thursday mornin' ter take me order.
I've bin dealin' wiv Johnson's fer years now, an' so was me parents when they 'ad the shop.’
‘Well, I reckon we should look at the prices,’ Carrie persisted.
‘Now we're increasin' the order we should get better quotes.
We could get bulk sugar instead o' those silly packs yer bin orderin', an' we should fink o'  buyin' tea by the chest.
We've bin runnin' out more than once lately.
If yer remember, yer 'ad ter send Bessie out fer a couple o' pound last Friday ter tide us over till Monday.’
Fred looked crestfallen.
‘Maybe you should talk ter Albert Buller when 'e calls next time,’ he suggested.
‘An’ what about these books?
Are yer gonna let me take 'em over?’
Carrie asked firmly.
Her husband nodded meekly.
‘If yer want to.
I bin pretty 'ard put to it in that kitchen lately,’ he said, passing his hand through his thick greying hair.
Carrie got up and walked around the table, feeling suddenly sorry for her aggressive attitude towards him.
She laid her hands on the top of his shoulders and kneaded the base of his neck with her thumbs.
Fred dropped his head and groaned.
‘Gawd, that feels good,’ he murmured in a low voice.
After a pause he added, ‘D'yer fink yer can get a discount from Johnson's?’
Carrie walked around to face him and gestured towards the mess of papers.
‘I've bin totallin' up the bills fer the past month,’ she told him.
‘If we could get some discounts an' look at what we're buyin' I fink we could do even better than we're doin' now.
There's ovver suppliers who deliver locally.
If Johnson's don't give us any satisfaction then we'll take our trade elsewhere.
That's business, Fred.’
He looked at her with a smile on his wide, open face.
‘D'yer know, Carrie, yer've really changed from the little miss who knocked on my front door that evenin'.
Yer was pretty as a picture an' I said ter meself straight away, ‘Fred’, I ses, ‘this 'ere little lady is gonna be good fer yer business.’
Little did I know she was gonna be me wife an' 'ave me children.’
‘Whoa!
‘Old on a minute, Fred Bradley.
Children did yer say?’
Carrie exclaimed.
‘I've got one baby ter  look after as well as an ‘usband an' the business.
That'll do me very well fer the time bein', thanks!’
Fred leaned out and grabbed Carrie around the waist, pulling her to him.
She placed her hands against his chest to resist, a serious look appearing on her face.
‘We've got no time ter mess about, Fred,’ she said quickly.
‘I've got Rachel ter wash and settle, an' then I've gotta sort those papers out.’
‘The papers can keep,’ he replied, his hands tightening around her waist.
‘Rachel's quiet.
Let's go inter the bedroom.’
‘No, Fred,’ she demurred, trying to remain calm.
‘It's bin a while now, gel,’ he said, his voice urgent.
‘I've bin missin' yer.
All work an' no play ain't good fer anybody.’
She was pushing against his chest but Fred rose to his feet and, moving sideways, suddenly bent down and swept her up in his strong arms.
Carrie sighed in resignation as he carried her out on to the small landing and leaned his shoulder against the bedroom door.
She could smell the sweat on his body and feel his excited breathing.
She closed her eyes and prepared to submit.
It was better that way she told herself.
Better than enduring his fumbling during the night in the vain hope of satisfaction when the need was strong in her.
The bedroom felt cold and as Fred sank to the bed with her still in his arms Carrie closed her eyes and tried not to let herself focus on the small round damp patch on the ceiling above the foot of the bed.
That patch had slowly become an image of despair and frustration over many occasions since she had first shared his bed.
Fred was a kind, considerate man, uncomplicated and loving in his way, but she regretted that he had never been able really to arouse her fully and take her to the height of passion.
Even when the need in her grew strong in the dead of night and she lay dose to his  slack body, caressing him and urging him, he was never able to fulfil the need in her.
Carrie's eyes opened reluctantly as he fumbled with her buttoned dress and she saw the small round damp spot on the ceiling.
He was removing his thick leather belt with one hand and struggling with one of her buttons.
She finished undoing it for him and slipped out of the dress, and as she let him raise her petticoat her eyes strayed again to the patch on the ceiling.
Fred's face was flushed a deep red and his breath came fast as he slipped down his trousers and pressed himself on top of her body.
He was much heavier than her and Carrie felt breathless as his full weight bore down on her.
She bit on her bottom lip as he moved into her roughly, his breath coming faster and changing to a pant.
The damp mark above her seemed to take shape.
It was like a smiling, mocking face, laughing at her useless attempts to raise her own passion.
Fred's trousers were still around his ankles and his movement was hurting her, but by the time she had managed to free one of her legs from beneath him he had finished.
He lay prone on top of her for a few moments then he rolled to one side, panting loudly, his breath slowly returning to normal.
‘Was it nice?’ he said, his dark eyes close to hers.
‘Yes, Fred,’ she lied.
She had tried to imagine Tommy Allen coming into the bedroom and taking Fred's place, but it had made no difference.
Just thinking of the dark young man with Romany looks who had taken her virginity, and for a short time had loved her so passionately, did not serve her well enough.
She felt frustrated and alone, and a tear glistened in her eye as she lay there on her back with Fred's limp arm lying heavily across her breasts.
She had only herself to blame, she knew.
After all, it was a marriage of convenience for her.
It had been a way of escaping from the poverty into which her family had sunk, and she  knew that by working hard for long, tiring hours and helping Fred turn the mediocre business into one that was thriving and profitable she would one day be able to help her parents and her brother too.
Why should she feel guilty of deceiving her devoted husband, she asked herself, if it was only in her thoughts?
The Saturday afternoon was drawing in now and Carrie looked out through the partly drawn curtains at the dark, rolling clouds.
Rain was threatening and there was a distant roll of thunder.
She moved slightly to one side and slipped from under Fred's arm.
He grunted and turned over, snoring noisily.
Rachel had been quiet but now Carrie could hear her stirring, the growing sounds of protest coming through the open door.
It was wrong for her to become obsessed with Fred's inadequacy in the bedroom, Carrie told herself.
If she was not careful all that she was working for, all that she had planned and schemed for, would be lost forever.
Bill Smith took off his battered trilby and scratched his fuzzy ginger hair as he sat on his cart and urged the horse forward.
The animal took no notice and clopped on at a steady plodding pace through the narrow turning.
It had been pulling the small cart through backstreets for years now and seemed to know instinctively that it would probably be required to stop at any moment, so there was no point in hurrying.
Broomhead Smith, as the totter was known, thought otherwise.
He had been sitting on the cart since early morning and all he had to show for scouring the streets was an old tin bath that he had found on some wasteground, a couple of sacks of rags and one or two pieces of old iron.
There was also a badly scratched veneered cabinet which had once housed a gramophone.
It was the only piece of junk that Broomhead was optimistic  about.
The scratches could be filled in with wood-filler and stained to match, and then the veneer cleaned with wire wool and vinegar, he decided.
One or two applications of French polish would do the trick.
It might even give him a nice profit on his outlay, which was nothing to worry about.
Broomhead had tied the cabinet to the rave of the cart, lest it fall over and become more scratched if by any faint chance the horse decided to show some signs of life.
The totter need not have worried.
The animal was struggling with a loose shoe and was in no mood to break into a trot.
Broomhead Smith had other things on his mind besides the horse.
He had been accosted only recently by an irate Aggie Temple when he drove his cart into Page Street, and now he had to steer clear of the little turning until he could fulfil his promise to get the woman a genuine tomcat mouser which had been doctored.
The trouble was, the transport yard in Page Street was a good place to pick up bits and pieces of worthwhile scrap.
Old horse brasses, damaged wagon wheels and various other items had very often found their way on to the back of his cart in the past without cost.
Broomhead had at first considered giving the woman a salutation from his vast treasury of filthy language when she approached him, but he realised that it might damage his rather good reputation.
As he prided himself on his fair and honest trading, and the high standards which he always maintained except in extenuating circumstances, the ginger-haired totter had decided he should do the right thing by her.
Broomhead shifted his position on the cart and urged his horse on once more to no effect.
They had just turned into Bacon Street when he heard a loud voice calling to him and pulled sharply on the reins.
The tired horse stopped dead in its tracks and turned its head around to give him a baleful stare.
Broomhead looked  up in the direction of the shouting and saw a woman leaning out of a window on the top floor of Bacon Buildings.
‘Yer'll 'ave ter come down, missus,’ he called out to her, ‘I can't climb those stairs wiv me bad leg.’
The window was slammed down and Broomhead waited, taking the opportunity of rolling himself a cigarette.
Soon a large woman emerged from the block and walked smartly up to his cart.
‘'Ere, I've got one o' them there gramophone fings,’ she said, looking up at him and slipping her hands into the armholes of her stained flowery apron.
‘That's nice,’ Broomhead said in his usual sarcastic manner.
‘There's nuffink nice about it,’ the buxom woman told him.
‘My ole man come 'ome pissed last night an' said 'e wanted ter listen ter a bit o' music.’
‘I only wanna sleep when I come 'ome pissed,’ Broomhead informed her.
‘Well, you ain't my ole man,’ the woman reminded him.
‘Anyway, what 'appened was, 'e puts this record on the fing an' winds up the 'andle, an' guess what?’
‘Go on, missus, surprise me,’ the totter said unenthusiastically.
‘Well, there was this almighty bang an' the bleedin' fing stopped dead right in the middle o' the music.
Luvverly song it was an' all.
It was fair bringin' tears ter me eyes,’ the woman went on.
‘Look, missus, I don't wanna be rude, but what the bleedin' 'ell 'as this all gotta do wiv me?’
Broomhead asked with a deep sigh.
‘My ole man got upset an' 'e told me ter get rid o' the bloody fing before 'e got 'ome from work ternight. 'E works on the trams, yer see,’ the woman explained.
‘I can't buy busted gramophones, lady,’ the totter  said, drawing on his cigarette.
‘'Specially when they go orf bang.
When that sort o' fing 'appens it's the spring, yer see.
Bloody powerful springs they are as well.
I knew one bloke who overwound one o' those gramophones an' the fing busted.
Terrible it was.’
‘What 'appened?’ the large woman asked, her eyes bulging.
‘Well, the 'andle spun round an' sent 'im flyin' up ter the ceilin'.
Poor bleeder split 'is 'ead wide open,’ Broomhead told her.
‘Like a bleedin' patchwork quilt 'e was, by the time they finished stitchin' 'im up.’
‘Oh my Gawd!’
‘I don't fink the Lord 'imself could do anyfing about busted springs, lady.
There's nuffink at all yer can do when the spring goes,’ Broomhead said, grinning evilly.
The buxom woman's face dropped noticeably.
‘Well, I'm in fer a right 'idin' if I ain't got that bleedin' contraption out o' the 'ouse by the time my Joshua comes 'ome, ‘specially if 'e's bin on the turps again.
What am I gonna do?’
‘Why don't yer chuck it down in the dustbin?’ he suggested.
‘I would if I could,’ she said, ‘but it's so bleedin' 'eavy.
It mus’ go 'alf a bleedin' ‘undredweight.’
Broomhead's artfulness was working like a treat, and for good effect he rubbed his leg.
‘Well, if this war wound stands up ter walkin' up those stairs I might be able ter get it down ter the dustbin for yer,’ he said with a grimace.
‘Mind yer, I'm not promisin' anyfink, yer understand.’
‘Would yer try?’ she implored him.
‘I'd be ever so grateful.’
‘Would yer now?’
The desperate woman's eyes sparkled and she  looked up at the  crafty totter with new interest.
‘Well, I could make it werf yer while,’ she said fluttering her eyelashes at him.
Broomhead heard warning bells starting to ring in his head.
It was bad enough having to make a detour around Page Street without.
some irate husband from Bacon Buildings being out to cut his throat.
‘I'm a married man, missus,’ he lied.
‘I don't mess around wiv ovver women.
It's jus' not werf it.’
‘Please yerself then,’ the woman replied, looking disappointed.
‘Tell yer what I'm prepared ter do,’ the totter said as he scratched his ear.
‘Give us a couple o' bob an' I'll come up the stairs an' carry the bloody fing dawn, even if it kills me in the process.
After all, we can't 'ave a nice lady like you takin' a good 'idin' from that ‘usband o' yours, now can we?’
The woman's face brightened up considerably and she gave him a sweet smile.
‘I'll get on back up the stairs then an' put the kettle on.
I s'pose yer'd like a cuppa fer yer troubles?’ she prompted.
‘Number 64 it is, on the top floor.’
‘Don't remind me what floor it is, lady,’ Broomhead said quickly, jumping down and reaching for his horse's nosebag which was strapped beneath the seat.
One hour later, after he had been refreshed and had listened patiently to his grateful client's sad story about the awful life she was leading at the hands of a brutal husband, Broomhead was on his way.
The gramophone was sitting next to the cabinet, and the totter thought they paired up admirably.
He urged his horse on home, and for the first time that day it responded by breaking into a trot for a few yards, until it decided that it was more comfortable to walk.
Billy Sullivan felt worried as he waited by the  Rotherhithe Tunnel entrance for his confederates.
It was nearly five-thirty and still they had not arrived.
Billy cursed his lack of sense in agreeing to take part in the robbery.
It was too late to-back out now, he realised.
He would have to keep an eagle eye out for Freddie though.
He was quite likely to forget the agreement they had made about the night watchman and, given the slightest excuse, batter the old boy.
The large clock over the pawnbroker's in Albion Street was showing the half hour when Billy spotted the trio alighting from a tram.
They hurried across to him.
Freddie looked agitated.
‘There was a bloody 'old-up at Surrey Docks Station,’ he moaned.
‘A poxy tram broke down.’
The four set off along Brunel Road, following the tunnel wall until they passed the Labour Exchange then they veered left and picked up the road which ran alongside the river.
It was quiet on that Saturday night, with all the wharves bolted and barred.
Freddie the Nark led the way with Chopper walking beside him, and Billy followed behind with Frankie who was humming tunelessly.
It was five-forty when they reached Clark's Wharf.
Freddie turned to the others.
‘Now let me do the talkin',’ he hissed, 'an' when we get in, follow the plan jus' like we agreed.
Don't ferget now, we gotta 'ave the gates ready fer when Tony brings the lorry up at six sharp.’
Jack Price dosed the office door behind him, sat down heavily in the large swivel chair and watched the tin kettle popping rings.
of steam.
The Saturday shift always seemed to drag on endlessly for the elderly night watchman and he envied people who did not have to work at the weekends.
Beggars can't be choosers though, he thought philosophically as he got up, removed the boiling kettle from the gas ring and emptied it into a small china teapot.
Being a night watchman had its compensations, he had to admit.
There was no foreman to watch over him and he could please himself when he made his walk around the yard.
He knew too that his job was important.
Many of the wharves were just padlocked with no one to guard them but Clark's Wharf was different.
In the building and the big yard beside it there were cases of very expensive items.
The manager had explained to him when he was taken on that the insurance people insisted the wharf was guarded at all times before they would agree to give cover.
Jack's only complaint was that the pittance he was paid hardly reflected the responsibility placed upon him.
Jack Price had never married, and he lived with his ageing sister who was also unmarried.
He was sixty-four now, but as a young man he had been in the army and seen action on the North-West Frontier.
He had been in many tight spots during his life, and guarding a warehouse did not trouble him unduly.
He had worked for various firms doing all sorts of jobs, for he was nothing if not adaptable, and recently, just as he was approaching retirement, the firm he worked for in Deptford had become bankrupt.
Jack had been worried.
Who would employ a sixty-four-year-old man when there were thousands of young men struggling to find work?
The ex-serviceman need not have worried.
His employer gave him a glowing reference and spoke about him to a friend by the name of Sir Algernon Clark, a fellow businessman who was having problems with insurance brokers over the size of the premium for insuring his wharf and its most valuable contents.
Employing a night watchman was the solution to his problem, and so without delay Jack was sent to see the wharf manager, who felt that the sprightly-looking man  who had served on the Khyber Pass would suit admirably.
Jack sipped his tea while he read a dog-eared wild west novel.
It was a good way of passing the time, he thought.
There was a long night ahead of him, and he would not be relieved until eight o'clock the following morning when Ben Thompson arrived.
Ben too was an active man in his sixties and had served in the police force for years, rising to the rank of sergeant.
The trouble with Ben was, he still thought he was in the police force and was constantly leaving scribbled messages about procedures for patrolling the yard and checking the padlocks and bolts.
Bloody old fool.
Who does he think he is, anyway?
Jack thought to himself as he poured yet another cup of tea and took it back to his comfortable swivel chair.
It's a good job Peggie's not here, he told himself as he sipped the tea.
She was always on about the amount of tea he drank.
Poor old Peg.
Shame she never married.
She had never got over that chap who left her in the lurch all those years ago.
Nevertheless she had been a good, kind sister and looked after him very well.
She was breaking up now, though, Jack reflected sadly.
Never mind, he'd buy her a nice bunch of flowers from that stall outside the infirmary on his way home.
She'd like that.
A loud knocking on the wicket-gate made Jack start and he muttered to himself as he left the office and walked across the cobbled yard.
Chapter Five
The Kings Arms was a small, homely pub.
It stood on the corner of Page Street at the Jamaica Road end, and was the favourite haunt of folk from the surrounding backstreets.
The landlord Alec Crossley kept an orderly house and his buxom blonde wife Grace was always jolly and invariably found time to listen to the troubles of her customers, even when she was hard put to it behind the counter.
On Saturday evening it was busy as usual, but when Sadie Sullivan walked in the public bar on the arm of her diminutive husband Daniel, Grace soon found herself listening to her troubles.
‘That bleeder ain't bin in 'ere, 'as 'e?’
Sadie asked.
Grace shook her head.
‘No, luv.
I ain't seen nuffink of 'im.
Anyfing wrong?’
Sadie leant on the counter and looked furtively right and left before putting a hand up to her mouth and whispering, ‘I fink 'e's up ter no good.’
Grace smiled reassuringly.
‘Billy's a good boy, Sadie.
'E wouldn't do anyfing wrong.’
‘I would 'ave agreed wiv yer at one time,’ Sadie replied.
‘Since 'e's bin in wiv that crowd from the Tunnel, though, 'e's a changed boy.
Me an' Daniel's worried sick about 'im, ain't we, Dan?’
Daniel nodded dutifully and sipped his pint, wishing  that Sadie would refrain from airing their private business to all and sundry.
‘'E went out at four o'clock an' 'e was all nervy.
'E told me 'e might be late an' not ter wait up,’ Sadie went on.
‘'E knows very well I can't sleep till 'e's in.
It's that bloody gymnasium.
Since Billy's 'ad that gym on 'is mind 'e's bin like a cat on 'ot bricks.
'E said 'e needs a lot o' money ter get it started an' that's what's worryin' me. 'E could be up to anyfink.’
Grace had seen the irritated look on Alec's face and she patted Sadie's hand.
‘Don't worry, luv, Billy's all right, mark my words,’ she said quickly as she moved away to resume serving.
When William and Nellie Tanner walked into the public bar Sadie found another ready listener, and Daniel breathed a sigh of relief.
Now he had the opportunity to stand at the counter with one of his mates and talk about other things.
‘It's a good job, an' the money's not bad,’ William was saying in answer to Daniel's enquiry.
‘Trouble is, I miss workin' wiv those 'orses.
I 'ad a long stint wiv Galloway an' I was gutted when I got the push an' we 'ad ter get out o' the 'ouse.
Nellie was 'eart-broken.
She misses that little 'ouse of ours.
That bloody gaff we're livin' in now is gettin' 'er down.
Bacon Buildin's should 'ave bin pulled down years ago, if yer ask me.’
Daniel nodded.
‘We brought our tribe up in that 'ouse of ours an' I wouldn't change it fer no ovver place,’ he declared.
‘It's got a lot o' memories too.
After our two boys was killed I wanted ter move out but Sadie wouldn't 'ear of it.
She was right.
I wouldn't move now.‘
William knew just how Daniel felt.
It had been the same for him and Nellie when James, their eldest son, was killed in France.
It was bad enough losing one son, but to lose two must have been almost unbearable.
He  sipped his pint and thought about his other two boys.
Danny the youngest had settled down in his job as a lighterman and seemed to be popular with the local girls.
Charles had been wounded in the fighting but had recovered and signed on as a regular at the end of the war.
He was now in India, and judging by his last letter he appeared to be enjoying life out there.
Charles had always been the quiet one, William recalled.
He had always had his head stuck in a book and never allowed anyone to get him flustered.
It was losing that young lass of his that made him sign on, William knew full well.
‘'Ave yer 'eard from young Charlie lately?’
Daniel asked suddenly, as though reading his old friend's thoughts.
‘We got a letter from 'im only the ovver day,’ William replied.
‘'E seems fine.
Nellie worries over 'im though.
It broke 'er 'eart when 'e told 'er 'e was orf ter India.’
Daniel nodded sympathetically.
‘Mind you though, it was prob'ly the best fing, when yer come ter sum it all up,’ he remarked.
‘It was a terrible fing losin' that young lass the way 'e did.’
‘Poor Charlie never could understand 'ow it come ter 'appen,?
William said quietly, staring down at his pint.
‘I'll never ferget that night when we got the news she'd bin drowned.’
Daniel slapped down a florin on the counter and caught the landlord's eye.
‘C'mon, Will, let's 'ave anuvver pint an' try ter cheer up.
Sadie's bin givin' me the bloody ‘ump the way she's bin goin' on about our Billy.
She's sure 'e's gonna end up in prison the way fings are goin'.
It's that crowd 'e's runnin' aroun’ wiv.
Mind you, they're a nasty bunch, from what I can make out of it.’
The three young men stood a few yards apart from their confederate in the quiet empty street by the river and waited.
The sound of Freddie the Nark banging on the small iron gate reverberated along the silent turning and Billy Sullivan winced.
Freddie was confident that the watchman would open up.
He and Tony McCarthy had plied their unwitting accomplice with drinks that night in the pub and they had gleaned that Clark's Wharf was guarded by a conscientious old-timer who was living with his frail and ailing sister.
It had been enough to set Freddie's agile mind working, and he grinned expectantly to himself as he heard the watchman's voice.
‘Who's there?
What d'yer want?’
‘C.I.D.
Paradise Street police station,’ Freddie called out in his most cultured voice, putting his face up to the closed wicket-gate.
‘Mr Price?’
‘That's me,’ Jack answered.
‘I need to come in, Mr Price.
It's urgent,’ Freddie told him.
The watchman had been schooled in security and he had been told not to open the door under any circumstances.
Should there be any emergency he was to phone Dockhead police station, or they would phone him if they had reason to call.
‘I ain't 'ad a call from the station,’ Jack called out suspiciously.
‘Where's yer warrant card?
Slide it under the door an' let's 'ave a look at it.’
Freddie gritted his teeth in agitation.
The old boy was being difficult, he cursed silently.
‘Look, Mr Price, I had no time to collect my warrant card.
We were called out to Ship Street an hour ago.
It's your sister Peggie.’
‘What's 'appened to 'er?’
Jack asked fearfully.
Freddie rubbed his hands together and made a sign to his waiting friends.
This would do it, he thought.
‘I'm afraid she's had an accident,’ he went on.
‘One of the neighbours called us.
They said they heard a scream and the sound of breaking glass.
When we got there she was lying in the front room.
She's in the Rotherhithe Infirmary, Mr Price.
I'm afraid she's been badly cut.
She wants to see you.
We've got a police car waiting.
One of our men will take over until we get you back here.
Hurry, Mr Price, it's urgent.’
The watchman stepped back from the wicket-gate.
‘All right, I'll get me coat.
You wait there,’ he called out.
Freddy nodded reassuringly to his friends.
After a short time had passed he began to tap his foot on the kerb impatiently.
It had gone very quiet.
As he waited the young man began to feel the tension knotting his stomach.
It was the feeling he got while watching out for the bookies when the police were in the area.
‘C'mon, Mr Price.
Hurry,’ he called out loudly.
There was no answer, and suddenly all Freddie's experience, all his intuition told him to leave, but fast.
Panic seized him and with a sudden curse he turned away from the wicket-gate of Clark's Wharf and gestured at the others to get away.
He broke into a trot and the three surprised young men did likewise, aware that something must have gone wrong.
Freddie felt his fear growing and he was running now through the quiet riverside lane.
He did not stop until he was back in Brunel Road, where the warren of local backstreets seemed to offer safety.
Frankie and Chopper were on Freddie's heels, but Billy had not been able to keep up with them.
His chest felt as if it was going to burst and he felt sick and dizzy as he settled down to a steady plod.
Whatever had gone wrong was not important to him now.
He felt suddenly light, as though the burden of the last few days had suddenly lifted from his shoulders.
When he finally  turned into Brunel Road and stopped to catch his breath the others were nowhere to be seen.
Billy pulled up the collar of his coat and rammed his hands deep into his trouser pockets, feeling suddenly cold as he plodded on.
It was when he finally reached the end of the turning by the Rotherhithe.Tunnel entrance that he saw the three standing together across the street.
The pawnbroker's clock showed five minutes to the hour and Billy suddenly remembered that Tony McCarthy was due and his friends must be waiting for him.
As he hurried across the street Freddie spotted him.
‘Where d'yer get to?’ he asked irritably.
Billy looked at him derisively.
‘What're you up to then?’ he countered.
‘It's gone wrong,’ Freddie replied.
‘'E was phonin' the police, that's what 'e was doin'.
That's why I said ter scarper.’
Chopper suddenly pulled on Freddie's arm.
‘There 'e is!’ he said excitedly, pointing.
Billy stifled the urge to laugh out loud.
Tony McCarthy was driving a solid-tyred Leyland lorry that had the words ‘Salvation Army’ emblazoned along its canvas sides and on a board fixed above the cab.
Tony had seen the four standing dejectedly on the street corner and he put his foot on the brake pedal, bringing the vehicle to a shuddering halt.
‘What's the matter?’ he said as he jumped down from the cab.
‘The ole bastard twigged it.
'E left me roastin' outside the gates while 'e went an' phoned the police,’ Freddie moaned.
‘'Ow d'yer know?’
Tony asked, suspecting that Freddie had lost his nerve at the last minute.
‘I could tell,’ the Nark replied.
‘I get that feelin' in me guts when it's dodgy.
It's the same when I'm narkin' out.
I can always tell.’
Tony scratched his head and a sour grin appeared on his handsome face.
‘'Ow we gonna get our money back?
I've already 'ad ter fork out fer the lorry.
Fifty shillin's it cost me,’ he growled.
‘I 'ad ter spin the geezer a tale that I was usin' it ter move a poor family out o' the buildin's where I live.’
‘Yer ain't gotta take it back yet.
Let's go fer a ride,’ Chopper butted in, his large flat face breaking out into a smile.
‘We could go up ter ‘Ampstead.
I 'eard it's lively up there on Saturday nights,’ Frankie said quickly.
‘'Ampstead's bleedin' miles away.
It'll take too long,’ Tony replied, shaking his head.
‘It'll 'ave ter be somewhere nearer.’
‘I know, let's go over the water ter Poplar.
That ain't far from 'ere,’ Chopper said helpfully.
‘It's only the ovver side o' the tunnel.’
‘What's so bleedin' good about Poplar?’
Freddie chimed in.
‘It'll be a ride, an' we can come back over Tower Bridge,’ Chopper suggested.
‘C'mon then, let's get goin'.
I don't feel safe 'angin' around 'ere,’ Freddie said, climbing into the cab.
‘Where we gonna sit?’
Chopper asked.
‘You lot can sit on the back,’ Freddie said grumpily.
Billy felt a sudden anger towards the shifty-eyed character.
‘Move over, I'm gettin' in there alongside you,’ he said sharply.
‘I ain't climbin' up the back.’
The lorry set off with Chopper Harris and Frankie Albright sitting on the floor of the lorry, their arms resting on the top of the tailboard.
Tony was humming to himself as he drove along but Freddie sat silent, sulking over the raid that never was.
Billy felt the wind rushing into the cab as the lorry trundled through the tunnel and he felt relieved.
It was all so ridiculous, he thought, allowing himself to get involved with these  motley characters.
It was the chance to get some big money on the quick which had swayed him.
The chance to buy the land for the gymnasium had disappeared for the time being, but it was not the end, he told himself.
He would raise the money somehow.
The lorry had not long come out of the tunnel when Tony suddenly clicked his tongue and applied the footbrake.
A uniformed policeman had stepped out from the kerb up ahead and was waving them into a side road.
‘They're on to us,’ he groaned, wondering whether he should put his foot down on the accelerator instead.
Billy felt his heart sink but Freddie remained calm.
‘It's all right.
Leave the talkin' ter me,’ he said as Tony turned left and stopped the vehicle by the kerb.
'Evenin', lads,’ the constable said affably.
‘There's a water main burst down by Lime'ouse Church so yer'd be better goin' via Cable Street.
I saw the emblem on the front o' the lorry as yer drove up an' I guessed where yer was goin'.’
‘That's more than we 'ave,’ Freddie mumbled under his breath.
‘Strikes me there's a lot o' good bein' done at them meetin's,’ the policeman said cheerfully.
‘Don't mind a drink meself, but I was never one ter get drunk.
Moderation is what I say.
That's the trouble, yer see.
Too many people can't 'old their drink an' they can't say no.
It's the likes o' them should be at those meetin's, an' if your people manages ter convert just a couple o' drunkards each time then they've done a good job.
I see a lot of it, as yer would imagine.’
The three young men sat in the cab totally confused by what he was saying, but Freddie smiled benignly at him nevertheless.
‘You're perfectly right, constable.
I think strong drink is damnation.
I think it's worse than  fornication in the eyes of the Lord,’ he declared, nudging Billy with his elbow.
‘Me too,’ Billy said quickly.
Chopper Harris had peered around the vehicle, and his mouth fell open as he saw the officer talking to his friends.
‘We've bin nabbed!’ he gasped out to Frankie.
‘It's a bluebottle!’
Frankie Albright put his finger up to his mouth and motioned Chopper to get down.
The two slipped quietly over the tailboard and marched off smartly along the Commercial Road, not daring to run in case they attracted the policeman's attention.
‘By the way, lads, I'm makin' fer Cable Street.
I'd be grateful fer a lift ter the site if yer don't mind,’ the constable asked.
Billy made to get out of the cab but the policeman held up his hand.
‘Stay there, son.
I'll stand on the runnin'-board,’ he said.
The lorry pulled away from the kerbside with Tony the driver looking helplessly at his two friends.
‘Where we s'pose ter be goin'?’ he asked in a whisper.
‘It mus’ be some sort o' meetin',’Freddie mumbled in reply.
‘I fink 'e finks we've got the equipment.’
Billy was too close to the policeman to make any suggestion, though he was at a loss anyway, but Freddie suddenly remembered something he had read in a newspaper about the temperance revivals in the East End of London.
‘'E finks we've come ter put the tent up!’ he hissed.
‘Oh, fer Chrissake,’ Tony gasped.
‘What we gonna do?’
‘'Ow the bloody 'ell do I know?’
Freddie growled.
‘Bluff it out, I s'pose.’
The policeman was hanging on to the door and obviously enjoying the ride.
‘If yer turn right 'ere then turn  first left yer'll come out right by the site,’ he shouted helpfully.
Tony did as he was told and finally saw the large area of waste ground ahead.
A lorry similar to theirs was parked by the roadside and on the site there was feverish activity.
A large marquee was being erected and everywhere men seemed to be pulling and heaving on large ropes.
‘I thought you lot 'ad the tent,’ the policeman said with a puzzled look on his face.
‘No, officer.
We've been sent to sort out the finer details,’ Freddie said with a flash of inspiration.
‘Oh?
An’ what might that be?’he asked.
‘There's lots o' seats to set up and they want a nice big pulpit built,’ the Nark continued, beginning to enjoy himself despite the possible danger to their freedom.
‘I'd say yer got yer work cut out,’ the officer remarked.
‘There's anuvver two in the back,’ Freddie said smiling.
As the policeman stepped down and walked to the rear of the lorry Billy turned to Freddie and shook his head slowly.
‘Yer shouldn't 'ave mentioned those ovver two,’ he grated.
‘If that rozzer sees Chopper 'e's gonna twig somefing's up.
Chopper looks more like 'e's on the run from Dartmoor than a bloody Salvation Army bloke.’
The policeman returned to the front of the vehicle.
‘There's no one in the back,’ he said.
‘There's nuffink in the back.
I thought yer said yer was bringin' the seats.
Yer did say that, didn't yer?’
Freddie laughed.
‘No, officer.
I said we was sent to set up the seating and the pulpit.’
‘But yer said there was two more of yer in the back,’ the policeman persisted.
‘No, I said at the back.
I meant in the ovver lorry.
It's following up.
That's a bigger vehicle and it's full-o' benches and suchlike,’ he said, a note of desperation beginning to creep into his voice.
The police officer gave the young man a strange look and Billy cut in quickly.
‘We'd better give the lads an 'and,’ he said, nudging Freddie.
‘Well, thanks for all your help, officer,’ the Nark said, following Billy and Tony on to the waste ground.
The tent riggers looked surprised and mystified as three strangers started to lend their muscle to the ropes.
Freddie groaned as he saw the policeman coming over to him.
‘I'll walk up to the main road.
Your mates might be stuck in that traffic 'old-up at Lime'ouse,’ he said to Freddie.
‘I'm much obliged,’ the would-be warehouse-breaker replied, shaking the policeman by the hand.
‘We'd like to get finished soon as possible.’
The policeman nodded.
‘I 'ope so too.
We're guardin' this tent all night an' it looks like rain.
I'd much sooner guard it from the inside,’ he grinned.
Freddie smiled and began pulling on the rope.
‘Oi!
What yer doin'?’ one of the riggers shouted at him.
‘If yer pull on that one the 'ole bloody lot'll come down.’
Freddie glanced fearfully in the policeman's direction but he was already walking smartly along the narrow street.
‘C'mon, you two.
Let's be orf,’ he hissed.
‘Oi!
Give us an 'and wiv this rope,’ the foreman rigger called out to them.
‘Poke yer poxy rope!
I 'ope the 'ole bloody lot falls down,’ Freddie snarled at him.
Soon the lorry was rolling once more.
Freddie the Nark sat back in the cab, feeling very pleased with  himself for the way he had handled such a tricky situation.
Both Billy and Tony had praised his coolness, and they were puzzling over the fate of their confederates.
‘They might 'ave fell out when we pulled up,’ Tony volunteered.
‘Nah.
They jumped out more like,’ Freddie laughed.
‘They must 'ave seen the rozzer.’
‘Nice bloke, wasn't 'e?’
Billy remarked, grinning broadly.
‘Chopper an' Frankie's got a long walk 'ome,’ Tony said.
‘Not if I know Chopper. 'E'll most prob'ly get a cab an' then do anuvver runner,’ Freddie laughed.
The three lapsed into silence until the lorry was rumbling over Tower Bridge, then Freddie slipped his hand into his coat pocket and took out a handful of silver.
‘'Ere, Tony.
There's the dosh fer yer pal.
Yer'll all 'ave ter 'ave a whip round ter pay yer share.
I can't stand the lot.’
Billy nodded.
‘I wonder if that ole boy did phone the police,’ he said.
‘Yer can bet yer life 'e did,’ Freddie said positively.
‘I could feel it in me water.
I can smell trouble o' that sort a mile orf.’
Freddie was right.
Jack Price had hurried to the phone and informed Dockhead police station that there was an attempted robbery in progress at the Clark Wharf.
Freddie the Nark's impersonation of a police officer had sounded convincing to him, until he said that Peggie had fallen at her home.
She had, but it had happened the previous afternoon, and Jack had gone with her to Rotherhithe Infirmary where she had been admitted with a broken hip.
Chapter Six
In the early months of 1920 the little dining rooms in Cotton Lane prospered.
The docks were experiencing a boom in trade and all day long a steady stream of customers came and went.
Carrie and Fred worked hard all day, aided by the vociferous Bessie Chandler, whose tales about the trials and tribulations of her friends in the buildings where she lived became painful ongoing sagas.
Fred suffered the most, for Bessie worked at his elbow most of the day.
She was very efficient though, and as she went on endlessly about her neighbours she seemed to race through her chores with increasing speed.
The pastry took a terrible pounding at times, and Bessie kneaded the dough with a vengeance as she talked of Kate Kerrigan, one of her sworn enemies.
Fred would listen patiently until he could stand no more and then depart to the small back yard, where he sat on an upturned tea-chest and vowed that one day he would forget how efficient his kitchen hand was and just do away with her.
Carrie worked unceasingly behind the counter, rushing off upstairs often during the afternoons to tend to Rachel once Annie McCafferty had left.
At such times Fred Bradley got some respite from Bessie's ever-wagging tongue.
His assistant took over behind the counter and proceeded to inflict the continuing stories of her friends and enemies in the buildings on the  dockers and carmen.
They took little notice of her, though; the rough, bawdy crowd were more interested in the fortunes of their local football teams, Millwall and West Ham.
When Carrie was serving she often became involved in their conversations at the counter.
The young woman made a point of following the respective teams’ results and their positions in the league tables and she held her own in the sporting discussions and arguments.
Bessie knew nothing about football, and her constant harping on one subject caused her to become somewhat of an object of ridicule.
The buxom, ginger-haired woman also had a shady past, and it did little to help the poor woman's image when it was resurrected by two regular carmen.
Sharkey Morris and Soapy Symonds had both worked at the Galloway transport firm in Page Street for a number of years.
Both had left after arguments with the firm's owner and they now worked for Tommy Hatcher in Long Lane.
They liked and respected Carrie's father, who had been their foreman at Galloway's, and it was Sharkey who had told Carrie about Fred wanting a serving-girl for the cafe.
He had promised William Tanner he would keep his eye on his daughter and make sure that she was treated right and that none of the customers took advantage of her.
Soapy Symonds also minded Carrie's welfare as far as he could, and both men were favourites of the pretty young girl who had now become the joint owner of Bradley's Dining Rooms.
Sharkey and Soapy were both in their fifties.
Sharkey was tall and gangling with broad shoulders and a wicked sense of humour, while Soapy was smaller in stature, stooping and with hawklike features.
They often came into the dining rooms together and one day they were trying not to listen as Bessie was going on at length about her friend Elsie Dobson.
‘'Ark at Bessie Bubbles goin' orf again,’ Soapy groaned to Sharkey.
‘Who?’ one of the carmen sitting with the two asked.
‘Bessie Bubbles.
That's what she was known as when she was on the game,’ Soapy informed him.
‘Bessie on the game?
I don't believe it,’ the carman said incredulously.
‘'S right.
She was a Lisle Street whore,’ Soapy said unkindly.
‘She was found out by a couple o' the local lads who went over Charin' Cross fer a good time.
It's a long story but it's true, sure as I sit 'ere.
She used ter wear a blond curly wig.
All the street found out eventually.
Mind you, there's a lot do it an' never get found out.
Poor ole Bessie come unstuck.’
‘What about 'er ole man?
Didn't 'e ever find out?’ the carman asked.
‘She's always on about 'im.’
‘As far as I know 'e was 'avin' it orf wiv one o' the young gels where 'e worked.
They're both as bad as each ovver if yer ask me,’ Soapy remarked, biting into his dripping toast.
The enlightened carman managed to resist addressing Bessie by her nickname, but the story was soon common knowledge and she became known as ‘Bubbles’ to all and sundry behind her back.
The dining rooms were beginning to show a better turnover and the books started to look much more tidy and well kept, thanks to Carrie's efficiency and enterprise.
She had gone to the library and borrowed all the books she could find on accountancy, bookkeeping and running a business.
A lot of the information was above her head but she had persevered until she learnt how to keep a good set of accounts.
Her hard work and determination set her in good stead for the confrontation she had had with the Johnson representative, Albert Buller.
He was delivered of an ultimatum and he accepted it with a smile and good grace, although  he went away cursing the interference and audacity of Fred's young wife.
There was now a discount for orders on a rising scale, and on certain commodities where discounts were not forthcoming Carrie immediately took action by switching her custom elsewhere.
The Bradley business now had the benefit of more than one representative calling regularly and Carrie played them off one against the other.
Fred often winced when he witnessed his wife's impudence and guile, but he realised she was right.
The profits grew and the bank manager began to smile at Carrie whenever she paid in the weekly takings.
There was a cloud on the horizon, however, which worried the Bradleys.
Russia and Poland were at war and the Polish army were making gains.
The Labour movement supported the Bolsheviks in their struggle and when the freighter Jolly George berthed in the London Docks the dockers refused to load a munitions cargo that was destined for Poland.
The trade union movement was gathering strength and there was talk of a full dock strike.
‘It's likely ter paralyse the country,’ Don Jacobs, a dockers' leader, told Carrie.
‘If the docks stop, the rest o' the movement's gonna come out in support, yer can take that fer gospel,’ he said with severity.
Carrie was in two minds about the situation as she discussed it with Fred one evening in the little sitting-room above the shop.
‘I've seen 'ow me own dad was treated by Galloway,’ she was saying.
‘Me dad was a loyal, conscientious worker an' 'e 'ad no union ter back 'im up.
If there'd 'ave bin a union at Galloway's 'e might still be there.’
Fred nodded in agreement, a worried frown showing on his face.
‘Trouble is, it's businesses like ours that are gonna suffer,’ Carrie went on.
‘The men won't come in 'ere if  they're on strike, ‘specially if it goes on fer any length of time.
Will a strike do any good though?
The government could always bring in the troops ter load the ships.’
‘I dunno 'ow we're gonna pay off the bank if there is a strike,’ Fred said with concern in his voice.
‘We still owe quite a lot on that money we borrered fer the free'old.’
‘I dunno what we'll do,’ Carrie replied, feeling that all her hard work and shrewdness in helping to build up the business was going to count for nothing should the threatened strike take place.
‘P'raps we shouldn't encourage those dockers’ and carmen's union men ter use that back room fer their meetin's,’Fred suggested despondently.
Carrie shook her head decisively.
‘If we did that the men would turn on us.
We might just as well shut up shop.
Besides, I fink they do a good job.
It's not only money they argue about.
It's the men's welfare an' their rights.
Yer know that yerself.’
Fred had to agree, and he smiled at the passion in his pretty young wife's voice.
She herself had campaigned for women's rights with the suffragette movement when she was in her teens and he had listened to her tales of the marches and the abuse the women suffered at the hands of many people.
‘I s'pose it's all a question o' roots,’ he said quietly.
‘None of us can sit on the fence.
It's eivver the workers or the bosses.
Point is, where do I stand?
I've bin a worker an' now I'm a boss yer might say.
I employ Bessie an' I run a business.‘
‘We run the business,’ Carrie reminded him with a severe look.
‘Anyway, we'll jus' 'ave ter see.
P'raps it'll all blow over.‘
‘I 'ope ter Gawd it does,’ Fred said with passion.
The cool and rainy spring gave way to warm summer days and still the threatened General Strike had not taken place.
Things looked more hopeful now that the Poles were in full retreat and an end to the war was in sight.
The government had not intervened in the dockers' ban, and although they supported the Poles against the Bolsheviks they were aware of the general feelings amongst the working classes, which were expressed vociferously at workers' meetings throughout the country.
‘No More War’ was crudely scrawled in white paint on the brick wall of a wharf in Cotton Lane, and further along the narrow riverside turning the message ‘Hands off Soviet Russia’appeared overnight.
Many local folk who earned their living on or from the river were still worried about what would happen in the end, but one man busy in his small yard behind the bustling Tower Bridge Road market did not give international events a second thought.
Broomhead Smith had managed to get Aggie Temple a tabby tomcat which was the best mouser in the Borough, so he told her.
The cat's owner was leaving the area and could not keep the animal, and she wanted it to have a nice home.
In fact the woman was fed up with the smell that the tomcat caused about the place and was glad to be shot of it.
What was more, there had been a growing number of mice in her house of late and she put it down to the age of the animal.
Broomhead did not see fit to let Aggie know this and hoped that a change of abode might revitalise the tomcat's flagging performance.
At the moment the crafty totter had other, more profitable things to think about and he whistled to himself as he gave the cabinet yet another coat of wax.
The scratches had been hidden and it now shone like new.
It had been in his possession for quite a while and Broomhead felt it was about time he sold the thing.
He had  originally intended to polish up the wood and sell it for five shillings, but when he was fortunate enough to obtain the gramophone he realised he should repair the machine and install it in the cabinet.
He could then expect to get around four pounds ten shillings.
When he dismantled the gramophone, however, he saw that the spring had become dislodged from its mounting and needed a new clip.
For ages he had been meaning to call in at a place down by the Elephant and Castle where they sold gramophone parts, but it was not until this morning that he had finally got around to it.
Now he had managed to install the clip he was not at all sure whether he had done the job correctly.
At least the handle turned, and to his surprise the turntable revolved, if rather slowly, when he moved the lever.
He tried out a badly scratched recording of Dame Nellie Melba singing an operatic aria from Pagliacci which he had found tucked away between a box of rusting tools and a sack of potatoes in the corner of his shed.
The recording sounded terrible to his untrained ears, but the horse seemed to enjoy it.
It had stopped munching away in its stall, pricked up its ears and jerked its head up and down at the powerful voice of the world-famous soprano.
Broomhead shook his head in resigned disbelief and set about installing the gramophone in its housing.
It was a bit small for the wooden supports at the top of the cabinet but the totter got around that problem by nailing a couple of slats of wood on to the supports to act as a base.
It did not look very neat, he had to admit, but unless the prospective buyer looked down into the cabinet the bodgery would not be discovered.
 Brookhead Smith loaded the cabinet with the gramophone inside it on to the back of his cart, then he looked around the shed to see if there were any more records lying about.
He could not find any and he  realised that it would be the voice of Dame Melba which rang out in the backstreets as he advertised the fact that he had a gramophone for sale.
That horn doesn't look too good though, he thought, scratching his head and glaring at the disinterested horse, which had stepped back on it while it was lying with the rest of the dismantled bits on the floor of the shed.
Broomhead had managed partly to knock out the large dent in the horn but he had taken off a fair amount of paint in the process.
‘Well, what do they expect for four an' 'alf quid?’ he asked the nag.
One hour later the sonorous tones of Dame Melba's singing resonated through a little backstreet near the river.
A few windows were flung open, and two little lads pelted Broomhead with rotten apples before they were chased off.
An old gent stopped in his tracks and raised his face to the sky, listening intently as he leaned on his walking stick.
‘I reco'nise that voice.
Who is it?’ he asked.
‘It's Dame Melba.
She used ter sing at the Star in Abbey Street,’ Broomhead informed him.
‘Wasn't that the one who sung ‘Some o' These Days’?’ the old man asked.
‘Nah.
That's Sophie Tucker's song,’ Broomhead said knowledgeably.
‘Well, she sounds like Sophie Tucker.’
‘Well, she ain't,’ Broomhead told him sharply.
‘I know who it is,’ the old man said chuckling.
‘She's the one who sings that there ‘Darktown Strutters' Ball’.’
‘Nah it ain't!
That's Sophie Tucker's song as well,’ the by now thoroughly irritated totter informed him.
‘Are yer figurin' on sellin' that there contraption then?’ the ancient character asked.
‘Nah.
I play the poxy fing ter stop me 'orse fallin' asleep,’ Broomhead growled at him.
‘Bloody fing looks ready fer the knackers’ yard.
A good feed wouldn't do it any 'arm,’ the old man growled back.
‘Look, mate.
Ain't yet got any 'ome ter go to?’ the totter asked.
‘I've got a livin' ter make.’
‘I'm sure that's the young woman who sings ‘Some o' These Days’.
If it ain't it's the spittin' image of 'er,’ the old man persisted.
Broomhead had had enough, realising that the old gent was quite content to stay there all day nattering.
He picked up the reins in a temper and slapped them hard across the horse's back.
Surprised at being disturbed so roughly the nag jerked forward suddenly, the jolt snapped the rickety bodged-up slatting and the gramophone fell into the bottom of the cabinet.
There was a loud clang and Broomhead cursed vehemently, pulling on the reins.
The horse was totally confused by now and it eased forward in the shafts not knowing what to do next, until Broomhead reminded it with a few well-chosen obscenities.
‘The poxy spring,’ he said to himself.
The old man had set off too and as he caught up with the cart he looked up at the fuming totter.
‘Yer didn't go far.
Wassa matter then?’ he asked innocently.
‘It's the spring.’
‘What yer say?’
‘I said the spring's gone.’
The old man nodded.
‘Yeah.
Still, I like the summer better.
Always did.
A drop o' sun makes yer feel better in yerself.
I can't stan' the winter.
Winter's no good fer the ole folk.
Gets ter yer bones it does.
That's when the likes of us drop orf, yer know.
It's yer pneumonia what does it.’
Broomhead had been staring ahead scowling and suddenly he turned to face the old man.
‘Look, dad.
Why don't yer piss orf 'ome?’ he growled.
‘They'll be  sendin' a search party out fer yer in a minute.’
‘Gertcha!
Yer saucy young pup!
Why don't yer piss orf out of our street?
Go on, 'oppit!’ the old gent croaked, aiming at Broomhead with his stick and only managing to hit the side of the cart.
The horse got the message.and set off once more at a lively gait.
This time the aggravated totter did not try to stop it.
Instead he sat slumped down in his seat and let the animal have its head, wishing he had thrown the gramophone in the dustbin in the first place.
The docks remained busy throughout the long hot summer months, but as winter drew in there was more trouble brewing as the miners went on strike for better pay.
Don Jacobs the dockers' leader spoke of his fears to Carrie one quiet afternoon in the back room of the cafe after his meeting was over.
‘I don't wanna frighten yer, gel, but I feel there's a general slump in the makin',’ he said resignedly.
‘Yer've only gotta read between the lines in the newspapers.
World trade is fallin' an' there's a lot of unemployment about.
They reckon it's up to a million now.’
Carrie leaned on the table and looked closely at the middle-aged man sitting facing her.
He was well read and intelligent, she knew, he was respected by his men, and from what she had gathered he was a natural leader who always dealt firmly but fairly with the employers to get the best deal he could.
He had a few enemies amongst the more militant dockers but he had many loyal friends too, and many had told Carrie that they would follow him without question.
As she looked into his concerned eyes Carrie saw something else.
Don Jacobs looked frightened.
‘But why should it be?’ she asked.
Don ran his finger along a crack in the table and shook his head slowly.
‘I dunno.
The whole of Europe's  in a turmoil, politically speakin'.
There was a lot of expectations o' trade across the continent after the war finished.
It's not come about to any large degree an' there's bin a lot o' firms that invested in what's turned out ter be a pipe dream.
A lot o' the businesses went bankrupt an' it's made a difference ter the amount of unemployed people around the country.
‘Course they're not the only reasons, but those fings 'ave got a lot ter do wiv it.
It's times like these when my job is made very difficult.
I'm pledged ter get the best fer me men, an' the bosses jus' keep remindin' me about the number out o' collar.
I don't need remindin', Carrie.
I'm no fool.’
She gave him a warm smile.
‘I know yer not by what yer men say.
I only 'ope it don't come to a General Strike, Don.
D'yer fink it will?’
He shrugged his broad shoulders.
‘Well, if it does the first out'll be the dockers and railwaymen.
They'll support the miners.
Then the transport workers are bound ter foller their lead.
The whole country could go ter the wall.
Gawd almighty, I 'ope it never comes ter that.
We all 'ope that, don't we?’
Carrie got up to bring the union man some more tea and when she returned with two filled mugs she sat down heavily.
‘D'yer know, Don,’ she said, ‘me an' Fred 'ave worked really 'ard ter get this place on its feet.
Fred was a bit reluctant ter make changes, but 'e agreed.
I want it ter work fer 'is sake as well as mine.’
‘Well, yer certainly made changes, gel,’ Don assured her.
‘'Avin' this place fer our meetin's is a boon.
It's much better than standin' out on the cobbles like we used ter do.
Fred's all right about it, ain't 'e?’
Carrie smiled.
‘Fred lets me make the decisions, an' it was my idea ter sort this back room out.’
‘Are you an' Fred all right?’
Don asked suddenly.
Carrie was taken by surprise at his question and her  first instinct was to give him a sharp reply, but she nodded instead, catching the look of concern in Don's deep brown eyes.
‘Fred's a very nice man,’ she said quietly.
‘'E loves Rachel an' 'e'd give me the top brick off the chimney if I asked 'im, but 'e's a worrier.
Sometimes I wonder if I'm doin' the right fing by 'im when I suggest we do this or that.
I want us ter prosper fer a number o' reasons, Don,’ she said with conviction.
‘I want it fer me an' Fred, I want it fer Rachel, an' I want it fer me mum an' dad.
I wanna get enough be'ind me so I can look after 'em all.
Am I bein' greedy?’
The union man laughed and touched her arm fondly.
‘Yer not bein' greedy, luv,’ he replied smiling.
‘Yer doin' it fer all the best reasons.
Nobody's gonna give yer anyfing.
Yer gotta work fer what yer get.
I found that out soon enough.
I started out bein' apprenticed ter this firm o' lightermen, jus' like your Danny.
I soon found out 'ow dangerous an' uncertain the job was.
We used ter fight over work, an' there's still a scramble at times, let me tell yer.
Fings are changin' now though, an? it's not come about by the kindness o' the employers.
Mind yer there's good an' bad bosses, but it's the solidarity of the workers what's ringin' the changes.
It's like what's 'appenin' over in Russia.
Workers are risin' against the poverty and 'ardship.
They wanna eat square meals an' they wanna 'ave some quality in their lives.
They wanna be looked after when they're sick an' 'ave proper education fer their kids.
That ain't so bad, is it?’
Carrie was taken by the obvious sincerity of the man and she could only nod.
‘Jus’ look at what's goin' on wiv the miners,’Don went on.
‘They're not only fightin' fer better wages.
They want better safety standards an' better facilities at the pit'ead.
They 'ave ter walk back 'ome black as the coal they've bin diggin' out.
They often work sprawled  out on their bellies an' they never know if they're gonna see the light o' day again when they step in that pit cage.
At least our blokes work in the-open air, though that's prob'ly the only good fing about the work.
It's 'ard an' often dangerous, an' everyfing depends on the river.
Ole Farvver Thames can be a treacherous ole bleeder at times.
Yer can never take 'im fer granted.
Sometimes the tides run fast an' sometimes a man gets the feelin' 'e can swim across from shore ter shore with ease when it's runnin' slow.
There's dangerous eddies that pull yer under.
It's a muddy, filfy river, but it's the lifeblood of London.
It always 'as bin, from the early times.’
Carrie had been listening intently, enthralled and hanging on to the union man's every word, but she suddenly caught sight of Fred standing at the counter.
He was looking in her direction, apparently ignoring Bessie who was chatting away to him, and there was a look in his eye which Carrie found disconcerting.
Her husband's jealous nature made it difficult for her to talk to any of the customers for very long without him questioning her, and it was becoming worse lately.
She got up with a sigh.
‘I mus’ go, Don,’she said.
‘I've gotta start clearin' up fer the day.’
That evening, when Rachel was tucked up in bed sleeping, the moment came when Fred could contain his suspicions no longer, as Carrie had expected.
‘I don't mind yer talkin' ter the customers, Carrie, but yer was sittin' wiv that Don Jacobs fer ages,’ he said to her, a resentful look on his flushed face.
‘Bessie was 'avin' ter do the servin' an' yer know I don't like 'er be'ind the counter more than need be.
She's a chatterbox an' it gets on the customers’ nerves.
I don't wanna lose me trade because of 'er.’
‘Well, if that's the way yer feel about Bessie why don't yer sack 'er, or at least 'ave a stiff word wiv 'er?’
Carrie replied with spirit.
‘Don's a good bloke an' 'e brings a lot o' trade in 'ere.
'E was jus' tellin' me about the unions, an' 'ow they're all worried about a General Strike.
An' as fer Bessie doin' all the servin', there was only a couple o' carmen in the place.
I don't fink she was bein' 'ard pressed.’
Fred fidgeted in his chair.
‘There's bin times when I was tempted, let me tell yer,’ he said.
‘The fing is, Bessie's a very good worker, despite the length of 'er tongue.
I'd be lucky ter get anybody that could match 'er in the kitchen.
I jus' don't want 'er servin' more than need be, that's all.’
‘Well, I 'ave ter keep an eye on Rachel when she's 'avin' 'er afternoon nap,’ Carrie said sharply.
‘I can't be be'ind that counter all the time.
If that's what yer want yer'd better ask Annie if she'd consider workin' all day instead o' jus' the mornin's.’
Fred puffed.
‘Look, I know yer can't be servin' all the time, but I was a bit narked the way yer was sittin' wiv that Don Jacobs.
I didn't know what the two of yer was talkin' about, did I?’ he growled.
‘I've told yer what Don was talkin' about.
There was nuffin' in it,’ Carrie retorted.
‘What about that Tommy Allen? 'E's bin comin' in quite a lot lately,’ Fred remarked, looking surly.
‘'E always seems to 'ave a lot ter say fer 'imself.‘
Carrie felt her anger growing.
‘I've told yer plenty of times, me an' Tommy finished a long time ago.
'E only talks about everyday fings.
If yer want me to ignore  everybody who comes in, jus' say so,’ she flared at him.
‘I'll tell yer this though.
It's no bad fing ter listen ter the customers.
It's just as important as the quality o' the food an' drinks we sell.
Those carmen are sittin' outside the wharves fer hours on end at times, an' they like ter come in fer a mug o' tea an' a chat.
Spendin' a bit o'  time listenin' an' bein' pleasant is good fer trade.
Yer said that yerself.’
Fred nodded.
‘I'm jus' worried yer might be wishin' it was Tommy Allen yer married instead o' me,’ he said quietly.
Carrie looked into Fred's eyes and her anger disappeared.
She got up from her chair and went over to him.
‘Look, Fred.
I wasn't pushed inter this marriage,’ she said softly.
‘I went in wiv me eyes open.
I'm quite 'appy, an' I ain't wishin' I was married ter anybody else, so get that stupid thought out o' yer 'ead fer a start.’
Fred reached up and took her hand from his shoulder, squeezing it gently in his.
‘I remember that day when yer agreed ter marry me,’ he said.
‘Yer told me yer liked me a lot, although yer didn't love me.
I didn't ask yer why yer suddenly agreed if yer didn't feel love fer me, I didn't 'ave to.
I felt it was security yer wanted.
That an' the chance ter 'elp me build up the business so yer could get some money be'ind yer.
Yer was worried about yer parents an' yer farvver gettin' put orf at Galloways.
I knew the pressure yer was under at the time, I'm not stupid, yer know.
I am jealous about yer though.’
He looked into her deep blue eyes.
‘I love yer very much an' I've bin 'opin' an' prayin' that one day yer'd realise that yer've fallen in love wiv me.’
Carrie smiled at him and pulled his head to her chest as she stood over him.
‘What is love, Fred?’ she said.
‘If it means bein' wiv somebody fer the rest of yer life, bein' wiv 'em all of the day an' night, 'avin' their children an' carin' fer 'em, then I've fallen in love wiv yer.
But then, I was ready ter do all o' those fings the day I said I'd marry yer.
P'raps yer puttin' too much importance ter the word love.
Maybe we all do.’
Fred could feel the softness as he rested his head against his young wife's breast, and he could hear her steady heartbeats.
‘Maybe we do,’ he said.
Chapter Seven
The new year started cold and bleak and many of the wharves in Bermondsey and Rotherhithe were standing half empty as trade slumped.
The rivermen were finding it hard; the scramble for work was becoming more and more intense as family debts grew and many valued and treasured items found their way into the local pawnshops.
The Bradleys' riverside establishment was still nearly always filled with customers during the day but the takings dropped.
Where once dockers and carmen had gone in for breakfast or a midday meal they now sat around drinking mugs of tea and eating slices of toast and dripping.
Men who had been unsuccessful in the search for a day's work drifted into the dining rooms to pass the time away and many sat there on the bench seats, grateful for the warmth and a friendly chat.
Carrie and Fred Bradley had come to accept that a drop in their weekly takings was inevitable and there was never any pressure put on the men to leave once they had finished their morning tea or coffee.
Most of them looked cold and miserable, and they were the men who had bought meals there when they could afford to do so, men who had helped build up the business.
Carrie felt sad when she saw the worried looks on their faces as they sat talking quietly, their hands cupped around mugs of steaming hot tea.
As the cold winter gave way to early spring more shipping sailed up the Thames, bringing some extra work for the struggling rivermen, but there was still much unemployment in the riverside borough.
The Bradleys talked about whether or not they could afford to keep the services of Annie McCafferty, and they decided to do so, at least for the time being.
Rachel was now in her second year, toddling about and growing sturdy of limb, and she had become very attached to her nurse.
Annie herself had grown very fond of the child.
Whenever the day was dry and not too cold she would take Rachel into nearby Southwark Park.
As the days became warmer they would go to the pond to feed the ducks and then along to the terraced rose gardens before making their way to the nearby swings and roundabouts in the small enclosed area.
It was in the rose gardens that Annie McCafferty met the young ex-boxer one fine, crisp morning when the buds were appearing and trees were coming into leaf.
Annie was sitting beside Rachel's pram, talking and laughing with the child, when she noticed the young man walking slowly along the paved path.
He had his hands thrust into his coat pockets and his shoulders were hunched.
He looked deep in thought as he approached but the thing which intrigued Annie most was the way his mouth moved.
He seemed to be talking to himself, and as he drew level he glanced suddenly in her direction.
Annie was not used to looking at young men, nor in the habit of attracting their attention deliberately, but on this occasion she met his gaze.
He seemed to be troubled but his face suddenly relaxed into a smile and she smiled back.
He walked up to the pram and looked down at the young child.
‘'Ello, young Rachel.
Yer lookin' bonny terday,’ he said lightly.
Annie's face had flushed up and her natural reticence  caused her to look away from Billy's gaze as he glanced up at her.
‘You mus’ be Annie,’he said in a friendly tone.
‘Yes, that's right,’ she replied quickly.
‘I'm Billy Sullivan.
I'm Danny's best pal.
I s'pose 'e's told yer about me,’ he said smiling.
‘You mean Mrs Bradley's brother?’ she asked him.
‘That's right.
I used ter be in the boxin' game,’ Billy told her, still smiling.
‘No, I don't recall him mentioning you,’ Annie replied rather stiffly.
‘I don't know Mrs Bradley's brother very well.
I've only met him once.’
The young man sat down beside her and started to pull faces at young Rachel.
‘She's a ringer fer 'er muvver,’ he remarked.
‘I've known Carrie Bradley fer years.
We grew up in the same turnin', yer see.
Me an' Carrie walked out tergevver once.
As a matter o' fact we sat on this very seat, an' if I remember rightly, I stole a kiss.
Carrie wasn't very pleased, I might tell yer.
She reckoned I was bein' a bit forward.
There was no 'arm in it though.’
‘I'm sure there wasn't,’ Annie said, still avoiding his direct gaze.
‘I was doin' boxin', yer see,’ he explained.
‘That was before the war.
The war changed everyfing.
Nuffink's ever gonna be the same again, that's fer sure.’
‘You don't box now then?’
Annie asked, looking briefly into his eyes and reminding herself that she must not prolong the conversation.
‘I got wounded in France.
It was a chest wound an' I can't do much now wivout gettin' out o' breath,’ he told her.
‘Still, I s'pose I was lucky.
At least I can walk an' see.
A lot o' young men wasn't so fortunate.
Fousands didn't come back.
I lost two bruvvers.’
Annie experienced a sudden feeling of pity for the young man.
He seemed perfectly at ease as he faced  her on the garden bench, and his wide blue eyes reflected a certain acceptance.
Rachel appeared to like him too, she thought, smiling to herself.
The child was chuckling as Billy made faces at her and when he looked away Rachel's little face seemed to beg his attention.
‘I'm sorry,’ Annie said quietly.
He shrugged his broad shoulders and gave her a warm smile.
‘Carrie's bruvver Danny was a good boxer,’ he went on amiably. ‘'E used ter box in the army.
I taught 'im 'ow ter box at the club.
That's the one in Dock'ead.
It's closed now though.
It's a bloody shame.’
Annie had been brought up and educated within the walls of a convent and she had never become familiar with the more colourful words that people used.
The young man noticed her reaction and pulled a face.
‘I'm sorry, I shouldn't 'ave swore, but it is a shame, none the more fer that,’ he asserted.
Annie let a smile touch her lips and she passed off her embarrassment by wiping Rachel's mouth with a spotless white handkerchief which she took from her coat pocket.
‘It's all right.
I suppose I shouldn't be so sensitive,’ she said dismissively.
‘All the people round 'ere use words like that,’ Billy told her with a grin.
‘Yer wanna 'ear the gels in the turnin' where I live.
They can outdo the men wiv such talk.
Still, there's no 'arm in it really.
My own muvver swears worse than me farvver when she gets upset, an' 'e's a docker.
Yer should 'ear 'er when me farvver comes 'ome pissed — sorry, I mean drunk,’ he corrected himself.
Annie laughed aloud as she saw the look on Billy's face.
‘Where do you live?’ she asked, feeling a little less nervous about talking with the young man.
‘Page Street.
It's near where Carrie lives,’ he told her.
‘I know Page Street.
That's where the stables are,’ she replied.
‘That's right.
Galloway's yard.
Carrie's ole man used ter work there.
The Tanners lived next door ter the stables till Will Tanner got the sack.
They 'ad ter move out then,’ Billy informed her in his easy manner.
‘They live in Bacon Buildin's now.
Right bloody slum that is.’
Annie laughed once more as Billy put a hand up to his lips in mock horror and then her face suddenly flushed as she realised he was appraising her.
For a second or two his eyes seemed to be searching her as he glanced at her dark, tightly fixed hair, her face, her shoulders and her long neck.
Annie suddenly felt uncomfortable beneath his gaze.
She had never before been in the company of a man, let alone a young, attractive man.
He was attractive, she had to admit.
His deep blue eyes were expressive, his dark hair was wavy, and his finely shaped mouth and square jaw were pleasing to her eyes.
He had an innocent manner about him too, and he had made her feel at ease despite her natural reserve.
Now though she was feeling nervous, unsure of herself, and she could feel herself beginning to tremble slightly.
Rachel was getting bored now that Billy had used up all his funny faces.
She fidgeted in the pram, straining against the reins which held her secure.
It was an excuse for Annie to take her leave.
‘I must get back, Rachel's getting hungry,’ she said quickly.
Billy got up from the bench and slipped his hands into his coat pockets once more.
‘Oh, well, I'd better be orf too.
I'm goin' fer an interview,’ he said with a grimace.
Annie took off the brake and started to push the  pram along the paved path, feeling decidedly uncomfortable as Billy walked beside her.
She felt her face beginning to get hot as two women passed by and gave the two of them a casual glance.
'Er, what job are you going for?’ she asked Billy in a voice she hardly recognised.
‘Oh, it's only a job at the sawmills,’ he replied.
‘I gotta get some work.
I've got plans, yer see.’
Annie was hoping he would go in the opposite direction when they got to the end of the path leading from the rose gardens but to her dismay he moved into step beside her.
‘My ole lady threatened ter chuck me out if I didn't look fer a job,’ he said suddenly.
‘She's good as gold is my ole mum, but now me farvver's gone on short-time she's feelin' the pinch.
Mind yer, I don't s'pose fer one minute I'll get the job.
They won't take me on once they know I've got a disability.’
‘But you're entitled to a job, aren't you?’
Annie said with a frown.
‘The way I understand it firms are obliged to take on disabled men from the war.‘
Billy laughed bitterly.
‘Don't yer believe it,’ he said.
‘I know loads o' blokes who can't get work through their war wounds.
They told us it was gonna be a land fit fer 'eroes when we got back from France, but they soon changed their tune.
It's always the same story when yer go fer a job.
‘Sorry mate, we're full up.’
Or: ‘Yer won't be able ter manage the job, pal.’
What the bloody 'ell do they want us ter do — sell shoelaces an' collar studs in the gutter?’
Annie hardly noticed him swear.
She turned to look at him as they reached the park gates.
‘Have you tried for many jobs?’ she asked.
Billy gave her a sheepish grin.
‘Well, ter tell yer the trufe this is me first interview,’ he told her.
‘I didn't 'ave the guts ter go fer a job before, yer see.
I 'eard  enough tales from me mates.
It was always the same story so I said ter meself, ‘Billy,’ I said, ‘yer wastin' yer time even bovverin' ter fink about it.
Yer might as well go an' jump in the river.’
Mind yer, I-never would,’ he added with a grin.
‘But that's awful,’ Annie said with feeling.
‘What have you been doing since you got out of the army?’
‘Sittin' around mostly,’ he replied.
‘I used ter sit at me front door when the weavver was good, an' when it was cold I used ter lay in bed till dinner-time.
There was no use in gettin' up, I thought ter meself.
Anyway, I'm goin' fer a job now, but I tell yer, Annie, if they turn me down that's me lot.
I won't try again.’
The young woman felt her stomach flutter as he said her name.
It sounded very strange to hear him call her by her Christian name.
It was the first time as far as she could remember that any male person had done so since she left the convent school, where the visiting priest would call all the girls by their first names.
Mr Bradley called her miss, and even the local doctor called her Miss McCafferty whenever he had reason to talk to her about her charges.
Billy had been the first man to call her Annie and she felt strangely pleased.
They were out in the street and making their way back to Cotton Lane, and Billy had obviously decided to walk beside her as far as possible.
Annie felt suddenly daring.
‘Have you got a young lady friend?
I mean, are you walking out steady with anyone?’ she asked him.
Billy shook his head.
‘Nah.
I ain't tried very much,’ he said, giving her a shy grin.
‘Yer need money ter ask a young lady out.
I prob'ly will though.
If I get this job, that is.’
They had reached the corner of Bacon Street.
‘Well, it's bin nice talkin' ter yer, Annie,’ he said, giving her a warm smile.
‘Wish me luck.’
‘I certainly will,’ she said, returning his smile.
He walked off, shuffling along with his hands tucked deep in his coat pockets and his shoulders hunched and swaying as he moved.
Annie stood watching him for a few moments.
It had been a very unexpected meeting, she thought, and it had made her feel strangely elated.
It was the first time she had allowed herself to get into conversation with any man, and it was not the frightening experience she had thought it would be.
Billy Sullivan was very polite and proper, if a blasphemer, but he had used the wicked words with passion, unable to express just what he felt in any other way.
He knew her name too.
Danny Tanner must have told him about her.
What had he said? she wondered.
Had the two friends discussed her in the way men probably did when they looked at a young woman who passed them in the street?
She had noticed men leering at her and whispering to each other with dirty grins on their faces.
No, there was nothing lecherous in Billy's conversation.
He had been very proper and courteous to her.
There was just that brief moment when his eyes seemed to appraise her.
But that was the way of men.
It was what she had been told by the sisters at the convent.
Well, if she ever met Billy Sullivan on the street again she would feel less inhibited about talking with him, as long as he remained proper, she told herself with a smile.
Rachel was crying now and Annie spoke a few comforting words to her as she set off pushing the pram along the shabby street.
In the little turning that ran off Bacon Street Florrie Axford, Aggie Temple and Maisie Dougall were standing together with Nellie Tanner and Sadie Sullivan at Aggie's front door.
The Saturday afternoon was fine, with soft clouds drifting in a blue sky.
The sun had  moved behind the rooftops and it cast shadows halfway up the little houses on the opposite side of the turning.
Florrie dipped down into her apron pocket and pulled out her tiny silver snuffbox.
‘I ain't bin a-pictures fer ages now,’ she said.
‘Last time I went ter the pictures it was up the Grand picture 'ouse in Grange Road.
I went wiv ole Mrs Watson who lived next door ter me.
Yer remember ole Mrs Watson.
She moved away years ago.
The Keystone Cops it was, or was it Buster Keaton?
I can't remember fer certain.
Anyway, I know I walked out 'alfway through the film.’
‘Wasn't it any good then, Flo?’
Maisie asked.
‘Nah, it wasn't the show, it was 'er.
Fair gave me the ‘ump she did.
Goin' on about the seats all the time she was.
Mind yer, we only went in the cheapest seats.
‘Ave yer ever bin up the Grand?’
Everyone shook their heads with the exception of Aggie.
‘My 'Arold took me up there once,’ she said.
‘We went in the best seats.
They was plush ones.
Nice an' comfy too.
If I remember rightly the cheap seats were wooden ones wiv backrests.
I told my 'Arold I wasn't goin' in no wooden seats.
Mind yer, 'e likes ter give me the best, does my 'Arold.’
Florrie caught Nellie's eye and pulled a face.
‘My first ole man said that ter me once.
All I ever got from 'im was the back of 'is 'and.’
Sadie Sullivan folded her arms and leaned back against the doorjamb.
‘Well, I'd never let a man knock me about,’ she said with passion.
‘If my Daniel lifted a finger ter me I'd open 'im.
Mind yer, 'e ain't that sort.
Soft as butter 'e is.
In fact it's me what 'as ter keep my crowd in order.
D'yer know that Billy o' mine don't take a blind bit o' notice when Daniel talks to 'im, but 'e soon listens ter me.
I'd give 'im the back o' me 'and big as 'e is, an' 'e knows it.
It's the same wiv the twins.
They know 'ow far ter go.
Pat's a bit lippy at times but I don't get no sauce out o' Terry.
'E's always bin the quiet one.
Young Shaun's takin' after Billy though.
'E seems ter be runnin' round wiv a right rough crowd.
Joe tried ter put 'im wise an' it nearly come ter blows.
I dunno, the older they get the more trouble they seem ter be.
Sometimes I wish they was all youngsters again, at least yer could put 'em ter bed an' know where they all were.’
Nellie nodded.
‘Your Shaun's got big lately, Sadie,’ she remarked.
‘'Ow old is 'e now?’
‘Shaun's twenty, the twins are twenty-one this year, an' Joe's just turned twenty-two.
Michael would 'ave bin twenty-four an' John twenty-five,’ Sadie told her, suddenly taking out a handkerchief from her apron pocket and dabbing at her eyes.
‘My James would 'ave bin twenty-eight this year,’ Nellie said sadly.
Florrie took a pinch of snuff and looked up at the sky, waiting for the inevitable sneeze, and Aggie stepped back a pace.
She could not abide snuff-taking and was always going on about Florrie Axford's nasty habits.
The women of Page Street were very close friends, however, and even Aggie's fastidiousness tended to be overlooked by the rest of the women.
She was nearly seventy and still very sprightly for her age.
Her hair was grey and well cared for and her apron was invariably spotless.
Aggie's husband was five years younger than her and about to retire that year.
He had lit and extinguished the lamps of Bermondsey for over thirty years, and now, she confided to her friends in vexation, he was going to be under her feet.
Florrie told her in no uncertain terms that she would have to get used to it.
‘Yer lucky, Aggie.
At least 'e's a good-un.
Yer just 'ave ter ease up on yer tidyin' up, or yer'll drive 'im right roun’ the twist.
There's nuffink  worse than watchin' people workin' around yer.’
Aggie snorted.
‘Well, I'll still 'ave ter keep me place clean.
It's bad enough wiv that bleedin' cat old Broom'ead the totter got me.
It stinks the place out at times, an' I told 'im too.
Mind yer, all I got was a load o' lip.
Bloody ole goat 'e is.
If my 'Arold 'ad 'eard 'im goin' on 'e would 'ave put 'is lights out.’
Maisie Dougall had been listening to her friends going on and she thought it was about time she made a contribution.
Maisie was a plump woman in her fifties who always wore her dark hair in a bun at the back of her head.
‘I saw Broom'ead goin' in the Galloway yard the ovver day,’ she told the gathering.
‘'E came out loaded up wiv old iron.
I fink they've got rid o' that chaff-cutter.
I've not 'eard it goin' lately.’
Nellie looked along the turning to the Galloway firm's gates, a hard look in her eye as the bitter memories locked up inside her stirred once more.
She thought of the time George Galloway had come to her home while her husband was off work with badly bruised ribs and told them that he was giving William a week's notice.
It had been a bitter pill to swallow, and she had made her feelings plain to the man her husband had been friends with since his childhood.
The two men had been Bermondsey waifs together, living on their wits and sleeping beneath the damp, infested arches in the dirt and rubbish.
Galloway had made his way in life and was now a successful businessman.
He owned half the houses in Page Street as well as his flourishing transport concern.
William had been his yard foreman, caring for the horses as well as being in charge of the carmen, and yet all the years of friendship and good service had in the end counted for nothing.
Nellie had grown to detest the very mention of Galloway and she turned to her friends in disgust.
‘I'd like ter see the 'ole bloody place pulled down.
Galloway's give our family  enough 'eartaches,’ she said bitterly
Florrie had been very friendly with Nellie for many years and she nodded sympathetically.
‘Don't I know it,’ she said quickly.
‘I tell yer what though, Nell.
That young Galloway ain't no better than 'is ole man.
I reckon 'e's turnin' out worse.
Yer wanna 'ear the carmen who work there go on about 'im.
There was two of 'em chattin' away outside my winder the ovver day.
I could 'ear everyfing they was sayin'.
The names they was callin' that Frank Galloway.
Apparently 'e's took over there fer good.
Yer don't see much o' the ole man these days.’
‘I saw ole George Galloway drivin in the yard in that pony-an'-trap of 'is the ovver day,’ Aggie said.
‘Whippin' that poor 'orse 'e was.
'E looked really fat an' bloated.
Mind yer, I fink it's the booze.
'E always liked the drink.‘
‘Pity 'e don't spend a bit more on these 'ouses,’ Florrie remarked acidly.
‘My place is lettin' in water again.
It's comin' in from the roof.
All those roofs want doin'.
I've told the rent collector, if there's nuffink done I'm gonna stop payin' me rent.’
‘Fat lot o' good that'll do yer,’ Nellie said.
‘If yer miss payin' 'e'll do the same as 'e did wiv us.
Yer'll be out on the street.’
‘Well, we'll see about that,’ Florrie replied with spirit.
‘I'm goin' down the Town ‘All an' 'ave a word wiv that medical bloke.
They say 'e's all right ter talk to.
I'll make that ole goat do the repairs, you see if I don't.’
The discussion was interrupted by the arrival of Maudie Mycroft.
She was looking decidedly worried as she put down her shopping bag.
‘My Ernie's joined the Communist Party,’ she announced gravely.
‘Oh my Gawd!’
Florrie exclaimed, rolling her eyes in  feigned terror.
‘We'll all end up bein' murdered in our beds, I'm sure we will.’
‘It's no laughin' matter,’ Maudie rebuked her.
‘I'm worried out o' me life.
I said to 'im, ‘Whatever made yer do it, Ernie?’
An' 'e said, ‘All workers 'ave got ter rise up against the bosses an' seize the means o' production, an' that day's not far orf.’
I'm worried sick.
I mean ter say, Ernie's not bin very interested in those sort o' fings in the past.
D'yer know, I 'ad ter nag at 'im ter cast 'is vote before now.
It's those men at the docks.
There's a lot o' Bolsheviks workin' there, yer know.’
‘What the bleedin' 'ell's Bolsheviks?’
Maisie asked, scratching the side of her head.
‘It's them troublemakers from Russia,’ Florrie told her.
‘They're out ter overfrow the Government.’
With a wry smile she added, ‘They'll fink I'm a Bolshevik when I go down that Council on Monday mornin'.’
Maudie had been expecting a better response from her friends, or at the very least a little sympathy, but they seemed not to care.
‘D'yer know they're atheists?’ she said hopefully.
‘What, the Council?’
Sadie asked.
‘No, the Bolsheviks,’ Maudie said impatiently.
‘Our vicar was tellin' us about the people who are leadin' the uprisin' in Russia.
They don't believe in God, an' 'e knows all about such fings.’
‘Who, God?’
Sadie asked, hiding a smile.
‘No, Reverend Jones.
'E told us on Sunday at the sermon.
Gawd knows what I'm gonna go,’ Maudie groaned.
‘If the people at the church find out Ernie's turned Bolshevik I won't be able ter old me 'ead up in there ever again.’
‘Sounds like ole Reverend Jones is tryin' ter frighten yer, if yer ask me,’ Florrie remarked.
Maudie Mycroft could see she was wasting her time seeking sympathy from the women and she picked up her shopping bag.
‘Well, I'll best be orf,’ she said coldly.
‘I've got no time ter stand chattin'.’
The women watched her leave and when she was out of earshot Florrie turned to the others.
‘Yer know, I fink she's goin' roun’ the twist,’she said, stifling a wicked grin.
‘It's that muvvers’ meetin' what's doin' it, I'm sure it is.
Ole Granny Watson was like 'er.
Wouldn't miss a meetin', an' one day she started goin' a bit funny.
It's wicked really but I 'ad ter laugh.
There she was out in the street in 'er nightshift shoutin' out at the top of 'er voice.’
‘I remember that,’ Maisie butted in.
‘She was on about the end o' the world was nigh.
Poor cow was frozen stiff too.
Mrs Casey took 'er in an' called fer ole Doctor Kelly.
They got 'er took away in the end.
That's 'ow she come ter move.
They found 'er a place near 'er daughter in Kent somewhere.’
The street was in full shadow by the time the group dispersed.
As Nellie Tanner started off Sadie called her to one side.
‘'Ave yer got a minute, Nell?’ she asked.
‘What is it, Sadie?’
‘It's my Billy.
'E's got 'imself in a bit o' trouble,’ she said in a whisper.
‘What sort o' trouble?’
Nellie asked.
‘Come indoors fer a minute an' I'll tell yer.
I can't talk out 'ere, Nell,’ she said, dabbing at her eyes.
Chapter Eight
On Monday morning the dining rooms in Cotton Lane were full of working rivermen.
The regular freighter from Denmark had docked and along the quayside barges were moored, filled with coconuts and spices which had been transshipped from the large Oriental freighters at the Royal group of docks downriver.
It was the first day's work in weeks for many of the dockers and all day a steady stream of men passed through the doorway of the little cafe.
In the small back room Danny Tanner sat listening to his old friend Billy Sullivan's problems.
Carrie's young brother was waiting to tie up a brace of barges to a river tug for their journey back to the Royal Albert Dock and he had taken the opportunity to visit his sister and her husband in the dining rooms.
Carrie was hard put to it and she had little time to talk with him, but it was not long before Billy turned up at the cafe eager to see his friend and Carrie directed him into the back room.
Billy was sitting with a mug of tea at his elbow, his flattish face looking serious as he spoke.
‘I wouldn't 'ave troubled ter go after the job in the first place, Danny,’ he was saying, ‘but yer know she worries.
That dopey Arnold told 'er there was a job goin' at the sawmills.
Anyway, she told me if I didn't go after it she was goin' ter chuck us out.
She said it was about time I started bringin' in some dosh, ‘specially now the ole  man's on short time.
Well, I decided I 'ad ter try.
Not that I was worried about 'er chuckin' me out, I know she wouldn't do that, but it was only right after all.
Anyway, down I goes.
It was that place underneath the arches in Abbey Street.
I ferget the name of it Brindle's I fink it was.
Well, there was a silly ole cow workin' in the office an' when I went in there she give me a dirty look an' told me ter take a seat.
I must 'ave bin sittin' there fer over an hour an' then this geezer comes out an' beckons me in 'is office.
There was nowhere ter sit an' so there was me standin' in front of 'is desk like a bad little boy.
'E said ter me, ‘What 'ave yer done in the past year?’ an' I said, ‘Nuffink.’
That didn't go down very well an' then 'e asked me why.
I told 'im I was gettin' over me wounds an' 'e said the work was 'ard an' did I fink I could manage it.
I said, ‘'Course I can,’ an' then 'e starts lookin' at these papers as though I wasn't there.
Well, ter cut a long story short 'e ends up tellin' me that the last bloke was put off fer losin' too much time an' I might be a bad time-keeper as well, what wiv me injuries.
Anyway, I asked 'im what 'e done in the war an' 'e told me it was no concern o' mine.
You know me, Danny, I don't go roun' askin' fer trouble but this geezer got me goin'.
I knows I ain't got the job by now so I ups an' tells 'im a few fings.‘
‘Like what?’
Danny asked, guessing the outcome.
‘I told 'im 'e was a no-good whoreson an' 'e shouldn't 'ave wasted my time in the first place,’ Billy replied, his blue eyes blazing at the memory of it.
‘Anyway, 'e told me ter get out an' called me a lazy so-an'-so so I stuck one on 'im.
It was only a slap really but it sent 'im sprawlin'.’
Danny winced.
He was well aware of Billy's prowess in the ring and knew that although he was far from well he could still punch his weight.
‘An 'e called the police?’
‘'Ow did yer guess?’
Billy asked, grinning sheepishly.
‘My Carrie told me when I come in 'ere this mornin',’ Danny replied.
Billy sipped his tea thoughtfully.
‘The ole cow saw me clump 'im frew the office winder an' she phoned fer the police,’ he said as he put his mug down on the wooden table.
‘I should 'ave 'ad it away smartly but instead I walked inter that little park opposite the firm an' sat down ter fink.
The ole cow must 'ave seen me go in there from the winder an' suddenly the law pounces on me.
These two coppers takes me ter the office an' the geezer who I whacked told 'em it was me what done it.
The coppers asked 'im if 'e wanted ter press charges but 'e said no.
Don't ask me why.
P'raps 'e knew 'e was in the wrong by provokin' me in the first place.
Anyway, they give me a good talkin' to an' one o' the coppers kept givin' me an old-fashioned look.
Suddenly, out o' the blue, 'e asked me if I knew the Tunnel Mob.
This was out in the street afterwards.’
‘What did yer say?’
Danny asked.
‘I said no, didn't I?’
Billy replied quickly.
‘This copper said 'e used ter be on the Tunnel beat an' 'e'd seen a bloke who looked like me knockin' around wiv 'em.
Mind yer, Danny, I ain't seen nuffink o' Freddie an' 'is pals since that time last year when we was gonna do that job I told yer about.
This copper said the Tunnel Mob's bin done fer a ware'ouse job in Wappin'. 'E told me they was still lookin' fer two more blokes who was involved but they don't know who they was.’
‘Well if yer wasn't involved yer got nuffink ter worry about,’ Danny reassured him.
Billy looked worried.
‘Trouble is, Danny, they beat the watchman up an' 'e picked 'em out in an identification parade, so the copper told me. 'E said I might be 'earin' from 'em.
S'pose they take me down an' put me in a line-up.
S'posin' the ole boy picks me out.’
‘Well, if yer wasn't involved 'e won't be able to.
I shouldn't worry any more about it,’ Danny said dismissively.
Billy was not so sure.
‘S'posin' I look like one o' the ovver blokes,’ he went on.
‘The ole watchman could make a mistake.
‘Specially if they was all over 'im when they was doin' 'im over.
Anyway, after what I did ter that silly ole goat at the sawmills the coppers might fink I'm a villain an' try ter get the ole boy ter say I was there.
It could 'appen.’
Danny grinned.
‘Billy, if pigs could fly.’
'What?’
‘Never mind.
Jus’ try ter fink where yer was when they turned the ware'ouse over,’Danny prompted him.
‘All yer need is somebody ter back yer up.’
‘But I dunno when it 'appened,’ Billy said irritably.
‘Well, find out.
Yer got friends down Rovver'ithe, ain't yer?’
Danny reminded him.
‘Ask about, or see if there's any ole newspapers lyin' about in yer 'ouse.
There might be somefink in there about it.
I'll 'ave a look too, an' I'll ask about, some o' my pals on the river might know somefink.
Once yer know the date an' time o' the job yer can fink back.
It'll all work out right, so don't worry.’
Billy looked gloomy and his friend got up and collected the empty mugs.
‘Let's 'ave anuvver mug o' tea.
I gotta get back ter work soon,’ he said.
It was nearing two o'clock and Annie McCafferty paused as she put on her coat in the back room of the cafe.
She had seen Billy enter the dining rooms in front of her as she returned from the park with Rachel, and the sight of him had sent a little shiver through her body.
Annie felt angry with herself for dwelling on thoughts of the young man over the weekend.
She had  been unable to concentrate on her reading, her mind constantly straying to the conversation she had had with him in the rose gardens.
He was obviously not very well educated by the way he spoke, and he seemed very troubled and disgruntled by what had happened to him.
She had thought at length over what he had told her and she felt truly sorry for him.
There were other, more delicate feelings which Annie realised had been awoken inside her by meeting the handsome young man.
He had looked at her in a way that frightened and worried her, but looking back she became excited and stirred by his attention.
Often in the past she had listened to other women talking about their young men and she had tried not to dwell on what they said.
Marriage was not for her, she told herself.
Now though she had met a young man and felt strange feelings which she could not quite understand.
It had only been a brief talk and nothing improper was intimated.
He had been very careful in the way that he spoke to her and was very apologetic when he swore.
He had said he was a very good friend of Danny, Carrie's brother, and it was likely that she would see him sometime in the future.
She had not expected to see him so soon, as she returned to the dining rooms.
Carrie came into the back room to take Rachel up for her afternoon nap and smiled at Annie as the young woman was buttoning up her coat.
‘Did yer 'ave a nice stroll?’ she asked.
Annie nodded.
‘We went to the swings and fed the ducks, didn't we, Rachel?’
The young child was more interested in her father who was busy cutting slabs of meat into small portions for the next day's pies.
‘I met that young man Billy Sullivan in the park the other day,’ Annie said casually, wanting to glean some information about him.
‘He said hello to Rachel and  introduced himself to me while we were sitting on the bench.
He seems a nice young man.‘
Carrie smiled.
‘Billy Sullivan an' my Danny are like bruvvers,’ she said.
‘We all grew up tergevver in Page Street.
Did 'e tell yer about 'is boxin?’
Annie nodded.
‘Yes, he did.
He also said he was going for a job that morning.
I wonder if he got it.‘
Carrie smiled again as she shook her head.
‘I wouldn't 'ave thought so.
Billy an' work don't get on very well tergevver.
In any case, 'e wouldn't be in 'ere terday if 'e'd been lucky.’
Annie tried not to look too concerned.
‘Has he not got a young lady?’ she asked, trying to sound nonchalant, but she could feel herself almost blushing.
Carrie looked at her child's nurse with renewed interest.
Until now she had never thought about Annie being interested in men, she was so reserved and proper, but it seemed to Carrie that Billy might have kindled a spark in the young woman.
‘Billy's never been all that interested in women, Annie,’ she replied.
‘Boxin' was 'is love, but all that's over now.
Mind yer, Billy's bin on about openin' up a gymnasium for the young lads around 'ere.
I don't know if 'e'll ever do it but yer never can tell wiv Billy.’
‘He said you and he walked out once,’ Annie mentioned with a shy grin.
‘He only said it in passing,’ she added quickly.
Carrie laughed aloud.
‘Yeah, it was only once.
Billy kissed me on the cheek an' I got all silly an' decided 'e was too forward,’ she said, not divulging to Annie what happened later, when they were walking home and Billy tried to make love to her.
‘Billy told me he kissed you in the rose gardens,’ Annie said smiling.
‘That's right, 'e did.
Billy's one o' the best,’ Carrie told her.
‘The family are Catholics and 'is farvver's  Irish.
They're regular churchgoers an' Sadie, Billy's mum, is very nice.
It was a terrible shame about what 'appened to 'im.
'E lost two bruvvers in the war too.’
Annie shook her head sadly.
‘It was terrible, the loss of life.
Billy got badly wounded, didn't he?’
Carrie nodded.
‘'E was shot in the chest.
It finished 'is boxin'. 'E was goin' ter fight fer a title before 'e went in the army.’
She paused for a moment.
‘If yer want, I'll tell 'im yer 'ere.
P'raps 'e'll walk yer 'ome,’ she added.
Annie shook her head quickly.
‘No, it's all right.
I've to hurry.
There's a nurses’ meeting at the church this afternoon and I mustn't be late,’she said quickly.
Carrie thought she caught a moment of panic in Annie's eyes and she held up her hands to reassure her.
‘It's all right.
Maybe you can 'ave anuvver chat wiv 'im when yer've more time,’ she said lightly.
‘Billy would be pleased, I'm sure.’
Annie McCafferty left the Bradley Dining Rooms and walked home feeling cross with herself.
She had wanted to meet the young man again, but now the opportunity had been afforded her she had not been confident enough to accept it.
Maybe she was being foolish in placing so much importance on those brief few words she- and Billy had exchanged in the park.
Her life was mapped out for her by providence, she told herself firmly.
She was going to stay in her profession and concentrate her energies on what she knew best.
She reached the busy Jamaica Road and suddenly felt depressed as she hurried across and turned into a quiet backstreet which led to her home.
It had occurred to her that by devoting her life to her work she would never have the chance to look after her own babies, and her thoughts turned once more to the young man with the dark wavy hair and the expressive blue eyes.
William Tanner finished tidying up the small warehouse stock and sat down to await the van which was due.
He had sorted the boxes of patent medicines and stacked them in one corner away from the cartons of collar studs and bootlaces.
He had repaired damaged boxes with sticky brown paper and stacked the large cartons of cleaning cloths and feather dusters up against a back wall, to make room for the consignment of cottons and wools which was due soon.
The warehouse looked neat and tidy with all the stock now sorted and listed and as he looked around William sighed to himself.
The job was a steady one, and he was left alone to manage the place.
Joe Maitland his boss was very often out buying and selling and he rarely interfered with the running of the store.
William realised that he should feel contented with his lot, but he was not.
Horses were his love and he had spent the best years of his life working at the Galloway stables.
William looked around at the stacks of cartons and bundles and felt that he had been wasting his time tidying the stock.
Soon the place would be full of various bits and pieces that Joe Maitland bought in bulk from the manufacturers and sold to outlets and stallholders in the markets.
The business seemed to be doing well and all day vans called for items which Joe had listed and William prepared for despatch.
It was a never ending task which offered William little personal satisfaction.
He could always get old Benny Robinson, his helper, to sweep the place up and tie up the piles of cardboard, but Benny had already swept up twice that day and he was now busy sorting out bundles of twine which had fallen out of a damaged carton and become unwound.
Benny was whistling noisily and he seemed happy in what he was doing so William left him alone.
Anyway, the van would be arriving any minute now and Benny would be expected to help in the unloading.
William glanced down at the list of stock he was cataloguing and sighed.
He pushed the sheet of paper away and looked around him, his eyes straying up to the dusty rafters.
He had been fortunate in getting the job with Joe Maitland, he had to admit.
He had been working at the Council depot as an attendant when Joe offered him the job, and he had been very pleased to make the change.
William had not been happy at having to work through the night and at weekends and the tasks he had had to perform were not always pleasant.
Sometimes he) had to push a heavy barrow through the empty streets full of paraffin lamps which had to be placed around holes in the road.
On more than one occasion he had had to remove a dead dog from the highway and take it in his barrow to the incinerator, and there were times when he had to take the place of a night watchman who had been taken ill on one of the larger roadworks and stay there until he could be relieved.
It had been a very unhappy time for him, especially since he knew that his advancing years prevented him from getting a job as a carman.
That would have been something he was very familiar with, having done it in his early years and worked so long with horses since.
The job with Maitland had at least given him his weekends off, and the pay was better.
He had a good working relationship with Joe too, having known him quite well when the young trader lodged with Florrie Axford.
William looked up at the clock and saw that it was nearing four o'clock.
The van was late in coming.
Benny usually went home around four-thirty unless the boss offered him some overtime, and Joe Maitland had not arrived back from his buying trip.
William realised he would have to handle the unloading alone if the van did not arrive in the next few minutes.
At four-thirty on the dot Benny put on his coat and  cap and bade William goodnight.
Ten minutes later there was a loud rat-tat on the heavy iron-fronted door of the warehouse.
William got up from his chair at the workbench and went over to open up with a puzzled frown.
It wasn't the van arriving for he would have heard the engine, and it couldn't be Joe Maitland.
He always used the side door which led into a small office.
As William slid the bolts the doors suddenly swung violently outwards, throwing him off balance, and before he could recover two heavily built men pinned him against the office wall.
Their faces snarled at him as he struggled vainly against their far superior strength, and a tall, broad-shouldered man came into the warehouse and walked slowly and deliberately towards him.
William saw that he was well dressed with a dark, double-breasted suit and polished shoes.
He was wearing a homburg and his face was swarthy, thickly browed and with a thin moustache, which gave him the appearance of a continental.
The man stopped a foot away from him and for a moment or two William stopped struggling.
‘Tell Mr Maitland his old friends have paid him a visit,’ the man said in a cultured voice.
‘And just so you don't forget…’
William saw the man lean back, one shoulder dropping slightly, then there was a flash of light which seemed to blind him and a searing pain.
William felt the floor move from under him, and then blackness.
Benny Robinson left the warehouse in Herring Street and walked across the road to the tobacconist's opposite.
Benny was turned sixty-five and a widower who lived alone in Abbey Street.
He had lived in Stepney for most of his life and had come to South London to work for Joe Maitland when the warehouse opened two years ago.
Joe had employed Benny when he was  buying and selling in the East End of London and found the elderly man to be a conscientious worker who could be relied on to keep his mouth shut.
At the time Joe Maitland was involved in some dubious dealing and his buying was not always from legitimate sources.
Benny Robinson was content to take his weekly wage and shut his eyes to anything shady, aware that what he didn't know couldn't harm him.
Joe had met up with Benny again on one of his rare trips to his old haunts and offered him a job, which Benny was glad to accept.
Moving to South London was no hardship for the elderly man.
He made friends easily and after his wife died there seemed little to keep him tied to his home area.
Benny had made friends with the local tobacconist and when he walked into the shop at four-thirty-five on Monday he was immediately drawn into conversation.
At four-forty-five Benny walked out of the shop and saw smoke coming from Joe's warehouse.
It was curling out around the edges of the large double doors and for a moment or two Benny stopped and stared, then with a shout of alarm he ran across the road as fast as he could and pulled on the hanging padlock flap.
As the doors swung outwards a cloud of black, evil-smelling smoke gushed out and Benny could see a fire raging in the far corner.
What frightened him most was the still figure of William Tanner lying prone beside the office wall, blood already beginning to turn dark on his battered face.
Benny knew he had to get William out of the smoke before he did anything else.
He bent down, grabbed the inert figure's wrists in his large hands, and pulled.
Carrie had finished cleaning the tables and was busy sweeping the floor when there was a loud knocking on the side door of the dining rooms.
Fred was in the  kitchen tidying up and putting the freshly washed pots and pans in their proper places.
He went to see who was there.
‘It's Carrie's farvver. 'E's bin in an accident.’
Carrie's heart was pumping furiously as she dashed through the kitchen to the front door.
She found Maisie Dougall standing in the doorway, a serious look on her ruddy face.
‘What's 'appened ter me dad?’ she cried out in alarm.
‘There's nuffink ter worry about,’ Maisie reassured her.
‘'E was in a fire an' they've took 'im ter Guy's ‘Ospital as a precaution.
'E'll be all right, luv.’
Carrie reached for her coat, her heart still pounding in her chest and a tightening sensation in her throat causing her to gulp.
‘Where's me mum?’ she asked quickly.
‘She's at the 'ospital wiv 'im, Carrie,’ Maisie told her.
‘Yer muvver asked me ter come round an' tell yer.
Yer dad's in Drake Ward.‘
Carrie looked anxiously at her husband.
‘Yer'll 'ave ter give Rachel 'er tea, Fred,’ she said quickly.
‘I'll 'ave ter go right away.’
‘Go wiv 'er, Fred,’ Maisie urged him.
‘Don't worry about the baby.
I'll take care of 'er till yer get back.’
Carrie hurried through the evening street and Fred struggled to keep up with her.
He had insisted on going with her but Carrie was beginning to wish he had stayed in the shop.
As they made their way along the Jamaica Road to the tram stop he tried to reassure her but Carrie's mind was racing.
‘I 'ope 'e's not burned bad,’ she muttered anxiously.
Fred squeezed her arm.
‘Yer dad can't be too badly ‘urt, luv,’ he said breathlessly.
‘Maisie said it's only a precaution.’
They sat together on the rattling tram, Fred holding  her hand and Carrie biting her bottom lip in frustration as the tram stopped at the Tower Bridge Hotel for the conductor to alter the points.
‘I do wish 'e'd ‘urry up,’ she groaned aloud.
Finally the tram got underway and as it started to pull up at the end of the track by the foot of Duke Street Hill Carrie was already out of her seat and waiting on the platform at the rear of the vehicle, with Fred at her side gripping her arm for fear that she would fall off before it actually stopped.
They hurried through the long arch, dodging between the workers who were making their way to London Bridge Station, and then quickly crossed St Thomas's Street and hurried through the high, wide gates of Guy's Hospital.
William was propped up against pillows as Carrie and Fred walked up to his bed.
He grinned self-consciously at them.
His face was discoloured and swollen about the eyes and a plaster was spread across his forehead.
Nellie was sitting at the bedside.
She nodded to Fred as Carrie leaned over and kissed her father gently on his cheek.
‘What 'appened, Dad?’ she asked.
‘There were some callers,’ he replied, a wry smile playing about his lips.
Carrie looked down at him, suddenly aware of how frail and haggard he looked.
‘Callers?’ she repeated, a puzzled look on her face.
‘Some men beat yer farvver up an' then they set the ware'ouse alight,’ Nellie said, her voice full of emotion.
‘Who were they, Dad?’
Carrie asked with anger rising in her voice.
‘D'yer know 'em?’
‘I've never laid eyes on 'em before,’ he replied, ‘but I'll never ferget the bloke who laid me out.
'E looked like an Italian but 'e didn't speak like they do.
'E jus' walked up ter me calm as yer like an' ses, ‘Tell Mr Maitland 'is ole friends 'ave paid 'im a visit.’
Then 'e  ses ter me, ‘Jus' so's yer don't ferget,’ then 'e put me lights out.’
Nellie looked very serious as she listened to her battered husband reliving his terrifying experience.
She leaned forward and gripped his hand in hers.
‘Now listen ter me, Will,’ she said firmly, ‘yer gotta tell Joe Maitland yer packin' up.
Tell 'im soon as yer see 'im.
I always knew there was somefink a bit fishy about that bloke when 'e lodged wiv Florrie.
She couldn't get ter the bottom of 'im.
Then there was that turn-out wiv the boxin' shows.
Yer told me yerself 'e put the finger on the goin's on at the Crown.
People like Joe Maitland make enemies an' I don't want you gettin' involved wiv somefink what's got nuffink ter do wiv yer, d'yer understand?’
William smiled at his wife and gave her a large wink.
‘Righto, Muvver.
I'll tell Joe-soon as I see 'im,’ he replied.
Fred leaned forward in his chair.
‘'Ave the police talked ter yer yet, Will?’ he asked.
‘They come in ter see me earlier,’ William replied.
‘They left jus' before Nellie got 'ere.
There wasn't much I could tell 'em except ter give 'em a description o' the Italian-lookin' bloke.
I can't remember what the ovver two looked like, it 'appened so quick.’
Carrie sat around the bed with her mother and Fred chatting for a while, and it was not too long before they saw Joe Maitland coming down the ward.
He looked very worried and nodded respectfully to the three of them before leaning over the bed, concern evident on his face.
‘'Ow are yer, Will?’ he asked anxiously.
The ward sister came over before William could reply.
‘There's only two allowed around the bed,’ she said stiffly.
Carrie got up and kissed her father before she left  the ward, followed by her husband who was talking to Nellie.
‘Yer was sayin' about Joe Maitland blowin' the whistle on the fights at the Crown, Nell.
What was that all about?’
Fred asked her.
Nellie was holding on to his arm as they walked out into the corridor and he felt her tense.
‘It was a couple o' years ago,’ she said with a sigh.
‘It was just about the time yer was gettin' married.
The police raided the Crown in Dock'ead an' stopped the boxin' that was goin' on there, an' they nicked a lot o' street bookies who was there at the time.
The same night the lan'lord fell down a flight o' stairs an' broke 'is neck.
Joe Maitland used ter go ter the fights, an' apparently 'e was the one who tipped the police off.’
‘But why should Joe Maitland do that if 'e went ter the fights 'imself?’
Fred asked, a puzzled look on his face.
‘Well, accordin' ter Will, Joe's bruvver used ter fight in the pub tournaments over Stepney,’ Nellie went on.
‘One night 'e got set about over refusin' ter chuck a fight.
'E died in 'ospital a few days later.
Rumour 'as it that Maitland only went ter the fights ter get all the evidence 'e could.
Mind yer, it's only rumour really.
I wouldn't repeat what I said, not to anybody.
The people round where we live never talk -about it.
Yer never know who's listenin'.
It was said that George Galloway was one o' the blokes who 'ad Joe's bruvver beaten up, but it was never proved.’
‘George Galloway?’
Fred queried.
‘But I thought yer was sayin' that Joe's bruvver got beaten up over Stepney.
That's a bit out the way fer Galloway, ain't it?’
Nellie's face took on a hard look as she walked beside him along the tiled corridor.
‘George Galloway is a swine, Fred, believe me,’ she said with passion.
‘Yer know the story about what 'appened ter my Will, but there's a lot yer don't know about the Galloways.
That ole goat used ter travel all over London ter the fights.
'E's a man wivout pity an' 'e don't care who 'e steps on ter get what 'e wants.
Believe me, I know.’
Nellie's last few words stayed in Fred's mind and later, in the comfort of the cosy front room above the dining rooms, after Maisie had left, he was moved to speak to his young wife about what her mother had said to him.
Carrie leaned back in her chair and stretched out her stockinged feet.
‘George Galloway is detested by everybody around 'ere,’ she answered him.
‘I've told yer before, 'e pays less than any ovver firm in Bermondsey an' 'e sacks 'is workers fer the least fing. 'E wouldn't tolerate the union fer ages an' as soon as any of 'is workers tried ter get the union in they were put off.
What's more 'e owns 'alf o' the 'ouses in Page Street an' they're fallin' ter pieces.
'E won't spend a penny on 'em.
I jus' loathe and detest 'im.
What 'e did ter my dad after 'im workin' fer the man all those years was enough, apart from anyfing else.’
Fred could see her hatred for the man showing plainly on her face, and he thought of Nellie's closing words which kept running around inside his head.
Perhaps there was something else, something between the two families which had spawned such detestation.
Both Nellie and her daughter wore that same look on their faces at the mention of the name Galloway.
Maybe it was better not to dwell on it, he decided.
Maybe some things were better left to the natural course of time.