

ARISTOCRATIC LIFE 98–1108
(a) The ruling class: its resources and means of self-aggrandizement
(i) Wealth
‘To him that hath shall be given’ was a truism of early medieval society.
Because lords owned large tracts of land at a time when the opportunities for its exploitation were particularly favourable, and could add to this profit from tolls and customs on increasing trade, they could hardly avoid a substantial increase in their resources in the course of the eleventh century.
But the fly in the ointment, from the princes' point of view, lay in the fact that their advantages were now more widely shared than they had been in the past.
And in some cases, most strikingly in Normandy, the landed gains of castellans had been made at the expense of the comital demesne.
There was thus a real danger, not of impoverishment, but of the closing of the gap between princes and other lesser lords, just at the time when display and liberality were increasingly important elements in princely political armouries.
Renewed effort to enrich themselves was therefore demanded.
Prima facie, it seems likely that princes joined with other laymen and ecclesiastics in encouraging the extensive forest clearance that characterized the French countryside; but proof is lacking.
The famous letter from the archbishop of Rheims to Baldwin V of Flanders, praising him for his activities in draining and ditching the coastal areas (presumably after the Dunkirk inundation of 1014–42 had at last subsided) is explicit evidence of an interest in agricultural expansion.
And the fact that wine-growing developed markedly on lands much visited by the dukes of Burgundy and Aquitaine is perhaps also suggestive of ducal initiative.
On the other hand, it is unlikely that the duke of Normandy, who granted out the larger part of the demesne in feudal tenures, or the count of Toulouse, who was slow to consolidate his lands, was a major contributor to agricultural progress.
Encouragement of trade was more widespread.
Again, the counts of Flanders were in the vanguard, with Robert the Frisian and Robert II offering protection for merchants crossing the county and their peace for the duration of fairs.
But at least as important was the provision of coinage suitable for reasonably small deals and sufficiently abundant for merchants to be able to rely on the supply.
Here, Normandy was outstanding.
As early as the beginning of the century, wealth in the county was reckoned in monetary terms; the implication that coins circulated freely was borne out when the Fécamp treasure was discovered in 1954.
But by around 1020, the quality of Norman coins declined markedly as a concomitant to the rapid increase in quantity.
Here there may have been a connection between the temporary weakening of ducal control over minting, in the troubles following Richard II's death, and the  production of a currency useful for traders.
In Aquitaine, too, this connection seems likely, in that silver coins modelled on those of Charles the Bald circulated until the serious financial crisis of 1103, brought on by William IX's crusading expenses; then the silver coin was devalued, followed in 1112 by a further devaluation, which preceded a period of marked economic growth.
In Toulouse also, the steadily falling value of comital coins in the second half of the century made them relevant at last to the needs of the merchant classes.
There was, of course, nothing disinterested about princely debasement; but in this instance, princely profit was consistent with mercantile gain.
Deliberate assistance to economic growth went hand in hand with administrative reform aimed at channelling its profits firmly into princely treasuries.
This policy indicated that princes were ceasing to regard their demesnes, those ragbags of rights and scattered pieces of land, chiefly as means of buying support, whether on earth or in heaven, and were viewing them instead as permanent assets, to be cultivated in a more business-like fashion.
Ironically the church, which had gained so much from the older cast of mind, was  prominent in propagating the newer outlook.
For the monastic reformers Odilo of Cluny and Richard of St Vanne were renowned for their consolidation of monastic demesnes, their determination to ensure that what had once been granted to their houses should remain their inalienable property.
Inspired by this objective, other churchmen, both bishops and abbots, appointed officials called prévôts for the task of collecting rents and dues from their estates.
Their examples were not lost on princes; Eudes II of Blois employed a prévôt in 1004 (see p. 196).
These officials differed from their predecessors as tax- and rent-collectors, the vicarii and viscounts, in that they were rewarded, not with a beneficium , but with a cut from the profits.
Initially, the office was often sold to the highest bidder, who would recoup his losses by assiduity in collecting.
But later it became hereditary.
The job always excited unpopularity, sometimes even danger.
Ademar of Chabannes told of the murder of the duke of Aquitaine's prévôt at St Jean d'Angély in 1026, and the destruction of his house by the angry inhabitants of the town.
But despite the risks, for a man of ambition and determination the reward was ample; for a prévôté might bridge the gap between the upper peasantry and the lower echelons of the aristocracy.
The introduction of these new officials on princely estates was a piecemeal affair.
Only in Flanders, where the comital demesne was in any case a large and solid block, was a complete network of prévôtés created before the end of the century.
Elsewhere, their appearance depended on favourable opportunity.
Some princes did not employ them at all until the second half of the century.
And where they were employed, their duties varied from place to place — some fulfilled judicial as well as financial functions, others might even have a military role.
But in performing their tasks all both reflected and further promoted the territorialization of power which was so prominent a feature of the eleventh century political scene.
Husbanding the demesne proved more difficult (except in Flanders) than appointing new officials to administer it.
Huge grants of land to the church became rarer (but so did the chances of resuming what had once been granted); from  the middle of the century, gifts were more likely to be of consuetudines from ecclesiastical lands or of other tolls and dues.
But the real losses in princely revenues were to secular lords, by a process of slow attrition.
For any moment of weakness in the fortunes of a great house — the minority of William the Conqueror, the early years of Fulk le Réchin — provided the perfect opportunity for castellans to establish their hereditary rights, or to exercise for their own benefit prerogatives which had hitherto brought profit to the princes.
The very substantial endowments most princes had accumulated in the ninth and tenth centuries could be curtailed without disaster in the favourable economic climate of the eleventh century.
And the assiduity with which Carolingian taxes like the fodrum or the pedagium were revived compensated in some measure.
Nevertheless, it must be supposed that there were economic as well as social inducements to the policies of expansion beyond the West Frankish frontiers pursued by the dukes of Normandy, Aquitaine, and even Burgundy, as well as by the counts of Toulouse, Flanders, and for brief periods Blois and Anjou.
Plunder proved a useful temporary boost to revenues; the annexation of new lands, with the opportunities for tougher exploitation which conquest brought in its train, could restore to princes their dominant position as by far the richest men within their principalities.
(ii) Justice
In 1010 Raymond III of the Rouergue died, leaving to Conques abbey, among other gifts, an estate called Pallas in Narbonne.
The monastery's right to Pallas was challenged by the Lady Garsinde, wife of Bernard le Velu, who declared that the estate had belonged to her first husband Raymond, from whom count Raymond III had taken it by force.
The monks' first attempt to obtain a judgement in their favour proved abortive; a second trial was therefore arranged at Pallas itself.
The abbot of Conques travelled there with his knights and vassals, to put his case before the chosen arbitrator, a certain Bernard.
Then the Lady Garsinde and Bernard le Velu arrived, accompanied by an even larger following.
When each side had pleaded its cause very noisily, the arbitrator  decided in favour of the monks, though the Lady Garsinde was to receive a monetary recompense for abandoning her claims; a concord was to be drawn up.
At this point, one of Garsinde's noble followers, unwilling to accept the verdict, arose and demanded that the decision be made not by arbitration but by battle.
In the tumult which ensued, the terrified monks made their escape, only to find their way blocked by the same young lord with fifty knights, who threatened them with death.
At this juncture, St Foy sent a storm, the aggressive aristocrat was struck by lightning, his terrified armed men ran away, and when the news of divine intervention reached her, the Lady Garsinde abandoned her case.
So, at least, is the story presented by Bernard of Angers in the Miracles of St Foy (it is clear, however, from the subsequent narrative that, whatever the short-term effects of the thunderbolt, Garsinde's claims were pursued again later by her husband.)
But what is important in the episode is what the narrator takes for granted: that when men of standing disputed, arbitration was hard to arrange, and often immediately unacceptable to the party which felt itself the loser by the judgement, even where monetary compensation was offered to soften the blow.
This point was a truism for contemporary princes.
In a case which occurred some time between 1037 and 1054, the abbot of Marmoutier complained in Geoffrey Martel's court that a certain Bouchard had seized back a mill which his brother, with Bouchard's consent, had earlier bestowed on the abbey.
In the course of the hearing, Bouchard was brought finally to admit that the abbot's complaint was true.
But out of pity for Bouchard's poverty, Geoffrey prevailed on the abbot to allow him possession of the mill for the rest of his life.
The strictly legal weighing of rights and wrongs played only a subordinate role in the outcome of the case, even where the judge was, in other respects, assertive of his judicial strength (see pp. 187–8).
and if Geoffrey chose to conciliate in aristocratic disputes over property, he was forced to the same resort on matters of crime; even powerful princes refrained from tough measures against those supporters essential to their own position.
So, though Geoffrey  expressed his anger after the knight Walter had killed one of his kinsmen, he accepted two mills from him as the price of his peace.
Likewise Robert the Frisian chose a mixture of mockery and persuasion, rather than judicial force, to bring to heel one of his knights who had injured another in a brawl.
Outright condemnation was as rare as condign punishment where the criminal was a man of high social standing; for if the delinquent vassal chose to submit himself to his lord, he had performed an act of self-abasement which, in itself, merited courteous handling.
In so far as the system worked — some disputes were settled, some crimes fully atoned for — it did so because it accommodated to the plastic and multifarious notions of justice obtaining within a small group of men, known to each other from youth up, often related by marriage, who had to reckon on continuing to live as neighbours after the case was over.
Because arbitration called for personal authority, tact, and understanding, some princes — Hugh of Burgundy, Robert II of Flanders — achieved a high reputation which attracted many disputes to their court.
On the other hand, with the expansion of feudal ties, there was a growing expectation that any lord ought to resolve the disputes among his own vassals.
As a consequence, even feeble princes like Fulk le Réchin met with requests for judgement.
There was, however, a technical difficulty in the path of litigants: because princes' courts were peripatetic, they had to be pursued around the countryside, as Geoffrey le Preuil pursued Fulk le Réchin in 1093; and this fact offered a convenient excuse for those summoned by their lords as defendants in a case.
In 1100, Geoffrey of Vendôme assured William IX of Aquitaine that he was trying to answer the summons to the ducal court, but that every time his messenger reached the appointed place, he found William had moved on.
This may have been the simple truth; it may, alternatively, have been an instance of the use of delay by an intelligent but reluctant pleader.
For the great weakness of feudal jurisdiction lay in its lack of muscle to enforce the appearance of both parties in court.
And this weakness was almost automatically exacerbated in some instances by the alternative of episcopal jurisdiction for infringements of  the Peace of God; this created procedural uncertainties in the minds of plaintiffs and judges, to delay yet further the chance of obtaining justice.
Only in Normandy were these problems transcended.
Jurisdiction over the peasantry operated on markedly more authoritarian principles; as a result, it was both arbitrary and capable of producing solid financial rewards.
But most of it had already escaped the princes' grasp in the tenth century; in the course of the eleventh, it passed squarely into the hands of local castellans, who exacted fines and imposed penalties on their peasants with remorseless vigour.
Princes derived profit solely from the courts on their own manorial lands or from those areas whose castellans were held in sufficient subordination to render dues to their lords.
As the number of these dwindled, princely jurisdiction apparently reached its low point.
Yet there were spasmodic and disparate indications of development in the opposite direction.
Geoffrey Martel and Raymond of St Gilles both had some — though temporary — success in asserting the superiority of their courts over all others within their principalities.
All over the south, men remembered, if they did not yet always act on, the tradition that serious offences, murder, rape, arson, ought to be justiciable in a higher court; by 1091, the Consuetudines et Justicie declared this Carolingian survival to represent the practice in Normandy.
In Flanders, the count's peace was becoming a meaningful concept, at fair times at least.
It was precedents like these which fired Philip 1 and his young son Louis VI to renewed policing of the royal demesne at the end of the century.
Less visibly, but just as significantly, by confirming agreements reached between castellans or advocates and the communities over which they held sway, princes played their part in the evolution of customary law across the whole of West Francia.
And that role was not always simply confirmatory.
Geoffrey Martel claimed the right to abolish bad customs; William the Conqueror worked towards securing uniformity of custom across the whole duchy.
The trail was blazed for more active princely participation in the following century.
(iii) Military resources
The exact date of the Vendôme charter, in which Count Bouchard gave full details of the military service owed to him from the area of Vendôme, is still controversial; but it is now accepted as an authentic document of the time of Fulk Nerra or Geoffrey Martel.
The charter provides evidence of a surprisingly well-worked-out system to ensure castle-guard of the town: in April, May, June, July and August, it was the count's responsibility, though he paid only for the first two months directly out of his own treasury;, the inhabitants of the town produced a tax for the following three.
Then the rest of the year was covered, a month at a time, by each of seven vassals, in return for the fiefs they held of the count.
Each night, five men were needed, three for the gates and two to move between them, so the responsibility was heavy.
The mixture of feudal service (the vassals' obligation) with mercenary forces (the count was reckoning to pay for his share of the duty) is characteristic of the eleventh century.
After treating of castle-guard, the charter goes on to specify all the fiefs in the surrounding area, and their military obligations,ost and chevauchée (long and short expeditionary duty).
The document presupposes a direct connection between the fully mounted warrior and the fief, which is unusually specific for a period as early as this; it is therefore indicative of well-developed feudal institutions, at least in part of the area under Angevin control.
The drawback to feudal service from the count's point of view was its limited duration.
The charter does not mention this, and the period may still have been imprecise; but it is not likely to have been above two months at most, which limited its usefulness considerably.
As a consequence, feudal contracts in the full sense of the term must have been more important for supplying castle-guard than for campaigning (though it would be pushing the argument too far to deny them any significance in the field).
In his conventum with William V, Hugh de Lusignan was entitled chiliarchus , the commander of a thousand.
Later it was recorded that the castellan of Amboise's army numbered  200 knights and 1,000 footsoldiers.
Though the figures may well be inaccurate, they attest the contemporary impression that even local forces could be very large, at least in time of emergency.
How many of the 200 knights should be counted as members of Lisiard of Amboise's household cannot be determined; the number is rather more what one might expect of the household of a great prince.
But some of them will have been men who lived permanently within their lord's gates, his closest companions, who, after several years' service, might hope to be rewarded with fiefs.
Others may possibly have enjoyed what later came to be described as ‘money-fiefs’, the regular receipt of some tax or source of revenue in return for service.
(Tenure of this sort was once regarded as an exclusively late development; but its roots are now thought to have been very old.)
Others again may simply have received pay for appearing to help Lisiard in his emergency, a battle with Thibaud of Blois.
The large number of foot-soldiers suggests either that they were mercenaries, or that their presence was accounted for by a surviving obligation under the ban .
Whichever it was, it argues for a strategy more concerned with battles, with expeditions, with sieges, than with chevauchées to dominate the locality.
In this, the lord of Amboise's armed forces provided a pattern for the future.
Granted these sizeable forces at local level, the princes' military success on their own territories was dependent on their ability to win active support from their castellans.
Supplicius of Amboise's refusal to assist Fulk le Réchin in the field, because Fulk's enemy was Thibaud of Blois to whom Supplicius had also paid homage, proved that the task was not always straightforward.i On the other hand, William the Conqueror was well supported against the royal invasions after 1051.
When the campaign planned was one of aggression outside the principality, there were solid grounds for assisting it, in hopes of booty or even territorial gain.
And an expedition which combined the prospect of gain with that of notable adventure, such as the forays into Spain or the Norman conquest of England, could rely on widespread support.
In these cases, the prince might well be surrounded by vassals  who owed him military service; but they would be present not from obligation but from desire, and they would be accompanied by large numbers whose reason for being there had nothing to do with feudal ties or fidelity.
William the Conqueror's host for the invasion of England, with its contingents of Bretons and Flemings, is proof that the military resources of princes could, on some occasions at least, far outrun knights' fees.
Troops who fought for pay were little discussed in the sources; but Henry I's insurance policy in the treaty of 1101 — not invoked, as far as we know — cost £500 sterling a year.
The treaty shows that money could be a decisive element in warfare.
It also provides a glimpse of Flanders as a place where a substantial number of fighters could be expensively equipped and then encouraged to leave the county for long periods.
This corner of West Francia, abandoned and defenceless in the late ninth century, had totally changed its character by the beginning of the twelfth.
Henry I was only concerned with hiring knights; hiring foot-soldiers was probably commoner.
It has been conjectured that the archers and many of the foot-soldiers who fought at Hastings and feature in the Bayeux Tapestry were fighting in return for pay.
The growing population, particularly in the towns of Flanders, provided the manpower for conflicts throughout West Francia; in the future, they were to collect an odious reputation for pillaging as they crossed the countryside.
Their great unpopularity may have been the consequence of the heavy financial burden they imposed on their employers; their mere existence is proof that money was circulating fast in western Europe; but that they were not always paid implies an economy too immature to support them readily.
(b) Feudal ties
A notable innovation in the eleventh-century diplomatic vocabulary of the north was the occasional use of the term fevum , a fief.
Its late appearance was inexplicable to the older school of historians, which regarded fiefs as characteristic of social organization throughout the ninth to the  thirteenth centuries.
Nowadays its appearance constitutes a convincing argument for those who believe that fiefs and vassalage were insignificant in aristocratic society before about the second quarter of the eleventh century.
But although the use of the new word probably does imply the growing importance of a hitherto minor institution, it may also reflect an intellectual change, a dawning awareness of the need for greater clarity in the realm of feudal relations.
A famous letter written by Fulbert of Chartres to William V of Aquitaine rehearsed the duties of the vassal in terms deliberately chosen to be easily remembered by the warriors to whom it was to be read:
Fulbert's application of ideas drawn directly from two ancient manuals of rhetoric, the Ad Herennium and Cicero's De Inventione , to an entirely medieval social institution, is a vivid illustration of the way in which churchmen moulded the ethical perceptions of the military classes.
In the letter, Fulbert used the words fidelis and vassus interchangeably; a vassal was one who had sworn fidelity and who enjoyed a fief.
But there are signs that not all his contemporaries saw the relationship in such simple terms.
Indeed, the cause of Duke William's concern on the matter was his clash with Hugh IV de Lusignan; in the course of this Hugh, embittered by William's failure to keep his word, renounced his oath of fidelity, except in so far as the count's  physical safety and the safety of Poitiers were concerned.
His words implied that there were two grades of fidelity: one which obliged a fidelis to promote his lord's interests in all things, and another that simply bound him not to injure him.
There was logic in this distinction; for if the duties of a vassal were such as Fulbert defined them, then in fulfilling them the fidelis whose estates were close to those of his lord would have to make many sacrifices, while for one who lived several days' journey away, not making a nuisance of himself would be a relatively painless matter.
Differences in perception of feudal obligation were partly a matter of simple distance.
Another variant in perspective was that lordship intensified as the social gap between lord and man increased.
Yet even with vassals of the same class, there might be differences.
Hubert le Hongre, a knight of the Mâconnais, lent his lord the castellan of Uxelles aid and counsel, witnessed his charters, testified for him in lawsuits, acted as hostage for his family, and entered Cluny's clientage when his lord became a monk.
His whole life was bound up in this relationship, despite the fact that the fief he received was not large, and that he also possessed allodial lands.
On the other hand, though the knights of the count of Vendôme (see p. 230) were heavily burdened with castle-guard and military service, their obligation was clearly defined, and once fulfilled, they were their own masters.
As far as can be seen, they were not involved in their lord's personal life.
There were, then, at least two models of knightly service.
On occasion, the vassalage extorted from a noble might, like that of a knight, emphasize his dependence on his lord.
When Herbert of Maine renounced his homage to Geoffrey of Anjou and recognized William the Conqueror as his lord, he received back everything from William ‘just as a knight received it from his lord’.
The point being made here was that William claimed superiority over all Herbert's lands; it was no mere personal bond he was enforcing.
The same might be inferred of the relationship between Baldwin IV and Baldwin V and the castellans of the comital demesne.
Here the counts rubbed in their superiority by appointing prévôts in each castellany to collect comital dues, and by  taking direct homage from the knights of the castle; therefore the castellan could scarcely forget the conditional nature of his tenure.
But any weakening, however temporary, in the prince's dominance would serve to produce a more normal relationship.
Over West Francia as a whole, the eleventh-century castellans became but loosely subordinated to their princes.
If fully independent castellans such as those of Bemy and the Mâconnais remained a rarity, nevertheless the princes' claim to control fortifications was at best spasmodically enforced, at worst absent in practice if recognized in theory.
For the concession of hereditary tenure, though made piecemeal over a long period of time, was universal by the end of the century.
Only rebellion could deny a castellan his inheritance; then, the punishment might be harsh.
In 1070, Fulk le Réchin, not content with disinheritance, pulled down the castle of Tréves, and blinded Hardouin, its lord.
But for the most part, later eleventh-century castellans had contrived to convert their homage into little more than a symbol of deference and willingness to perform service; the implications that their castle and office were enjoyed purely by delegation, that their duty lay in exercising powers and privileges only for the benefit of their lord, were swiftly transmuted into something much less rigid; exactly what depended on the prince's powers and proximity.Perhaps ironically, one important factor preventing precision and continuity in princes' demands of their castellans was the intervention of other princes.
Royal control over the castellans of the Ile de France was relaxed by Eudes II of Blois, who created his own network of vassals among them; in the same way, the dukes of Aquitaine attracted the lords of Parthenay to their court, though they were Angevin vassals.
Although, in the short term, these manoeuvres attained their political objectives, in the end they simply conferred new independence on the castellans.
Double allegiance could be a useful weapon, as Supplicius of Amboise had found (see p. 231).
In 1090 the lord of Montpellier exploited it even more successfully when he rose against his lord, the bishop of Maguelonne; worried by William's defection, the bishop bribed him back into the  episcopal mouvance by extending his fief.
In return, William was required to recognize that, since the fief he held of the bishop was now larger than those any other lord had bestowed on him, he ought to be ‘a better man’ of the bishop than of any of his other lords.
To mount the social scale again, the higher the rank of the underdog, the less his obligation would be defined.
When the counts of La Marche and Périgueux paid homage to the duke of Aquitaine, it implied acceptance on their part that to injure the duke's person or property would be a breach of faith, but little more; if they came to his court or assisted him on campaigns, it was because they saw profit or pleasure in so doing.
A similar relationship obtained between the count of Flanders and the comital family of Boulogne, between the Capetians and the old-established comital families of the Ile de France, between the dukes of Burgundy and the counts of Mâcon, Chalon, and Meaux.
At the apex of the pyramid came the princes' homage to the king — at least where they took it (excluding therefore the counts of the far south and of Brittany, and the duke of Normandy after the breach of 1051).
Helgaud reported that Robert the Pious secretly removed the relics from the reliquary on which he obliged his primates (magnates) to take oaths, in order to shield them from committing perjury.
The tale, if true, showed little confidence in the princes' intention to abide by the exact words of their fidelity.
But what was implied by the oath was genuinely in dispute.
At the beginning of the century, Dudo of St Quentin produced the argument that, since the homage of Duke Rollo of Normandy in 911 had been purely in gratitude for his baptism, it did not mean, either for himself or for his successors, that Normandy was a fief.
Rather Rollo and they had rendered services to none other than to God.
A less elevated but similar claim was made by Eudes II in a letter written to King Robert: ‘If it is a question of the nature of the benefice you gave me, the fact is that it does not come from your domain, but from the estates which come to me with your consent by hereditary right from my ancestors.’
In Eudes's eyes, then, he held Champagne hereditarily; it was not subject to the king's decision to grant or not to grant.
The  fact that the king thought differently on both these issues was of little moment.
On the other hand, William of Poitiers imputed to Guy Geoffrey, Thibaud, and Geoffrey Martel irritation at being obliged to perform military service when summoned — which suggests acceptance of their duty; Orderic's words imply that Fulk the Young clearly recognized the dependent status of Anjou in 1106 when he did homage to Philip I. The differences of opinion on a point that later lawyers were to regard as fundamental to the monarchy's position must be taken as proof that, for the great at least, the equation between a fidelis and a vassus could not yet be taken for granted.
Interestingly, there are signs that those who had escaped from the royal mouvance were not entirely comfortable in their independence.
In the absence of the king, they sought a higher authentication of their rights.
So Raymond of St Gilles, after he had claimed the Rouergue in 1079, prepared himself for his attempt to oust his brother as count of Toulouse, in a ceremony at the shrine of St Robert at La Chaise-Dieu:
The adoption of an overlord in heaven lent weight to Raymond's doubtful title in Toulouse, while infringing not at all on his earthly independence.
So the patron saint had become absorbed into the feudal world.
It was an example that, in rather different circumstances, was later to commend itself to the Capetians.
(c) Ruling families
As the count of Roucy journeyed to Rome, he fell into a trap laid by Falco, count of Burgundy, who demanded, as the price of his release, his daughter's hand in marriage.
The incident shows that force might still play some part in the creation of  marriage alliances in the eleventh century.
But the swashbuckling approach grew rarer; and with the  disappearance of the Carolingian and Ottonian houses a measure of excitement drained out of the game, for neither Capetian nor Salian brides enjoyed the same cachet as their predecessors.
In any case, as a result of the growing emphasis on patrilineal descent in all aristocratic families, even the noblest of wives could do less for an eleventh-century lord than she could have done for his grandfather.
The marriage between Robert the Pious's daughter and the count of Nevers brought obvious political gain to the king because it strengthened the royal hold upon Burgundy; the count on the other hand gained only temporary advantage, and subsequent generations in Nevers made little of their royal connection.
Behind this change lay a new and more business-like concentration on landed possession.
Symbolic of this was the slow decline in the importance of marriage portions conferred by husbands on their new wives, and a correspondingly avid interest in the bride's dowry.
Dowries could prove major blessings; that brought by the heiress of Rennes to Hoël of Nantes transformed the otherwise weak count into a major landholder.
But if the wife died before her husband, his right to keep the dowry might well be challenged by her family.
The war that broke out between Richard II of Normandy and Eudes II of Blois in 1013–14 was over Eudes's right to retain the dowry of his dead wife, Richard's sister.
And Raymond of St Gilles attacked the Rouergue immediately on the death of its countess, married to Robert of the Auvergne, rather than allow his family's claims to her lands to be forgotten.
Without military strength to assist in their retention, dowries could prove but short-term gains.
On the other hand, marriage might still create claims to territory which good luck and force could convert into possession.
Although in the end William IX of Aquitaine failed to make good his wife's right of succession to her father in Toulouse, a generation earlier his father Guy Geoffrey had succeeded in annexing Gascony, pleading in justification his father's marriage with the heiress Prisca.
And marriage beyond the frontiers of the West Frankish kingdom was seen as a preparatory step towards expansion by the counts of Flanders in their dealings with the  houses of Hainault and Holland, by the ducal houses of Burgundy and Aquitaine in Aragon, Barcelona, and Navarre, and by the count of Toulouse in Provence.
(These alliances had the additional advantage of earning ecclesiastical approval at a time when there was growing pressure from canonists against unions within six degrees of relationship.)
Because the death-rate was high, marriages were usually short-term; and divorce could be obtained where nature did not intervene.
On the other hand, greater prosperity and more settled political conditions combined to make barrenness less common than in the tenth century; Geoffrey Martel of Anjou and Duke Hugh of Burgundy were unusual in producing no heirs.
Problems were now far more likely to arise in determining the rights of succession among competing members of a princely family.
It has been stated that the principle of primogenital succession was increasingly observed in the eleventh century; but there was a substantial difference between accepting the customary right of the eldest son to succeed, if he were of age and competent, and accepting it as an inviolable rule, as was proved by the usurpation of Robert the Frisian, and perhaps also by the succession of Raymond IV of Toulouse (though here the facts are rather uncertain).
And the plight of even generously endowed younger sons like William Rufus and Eon of Penthièvre could arouse sympathy among their contemporaries.
Besides, where a prince had contracted more than one marriage, there might be disputes among the offspring of his various wives, as occurred after the death of William V of Aquitaine, and in 1032 in the royal family.
On that occasion the energetic opposition to Henry I's accession put up by Constance of Arles and her sons created a serious crisis, in the course of which Henry was driven to take refuge at the court of the duke of Normandy.
Though in the end his rights prevailed, the dispute had long repercussions on his control over the counts and castellans of the demesne.
So primogeniture was not automatically accepted; and where it was, it could create problems of a rather different sort.
Heirs grew over-ambitious: both Baldwin V of Flanders and Geoffrey Martel the Younger rebelled against their fathers in an attempt to establish their own dominion  ahead of time; more problematically, princes had the headache of finding adequate endowments for their younger sons without infringing on the patrimony.
But despite its drawbacks, primogeniture did offer a rule of thumb that commanded widespread respect.
So the real difficulty remained in families where there was no direct heir, as the Angevin succession crisis of the 1060s proved.
Perhaps a mature perception of this fact lay behind the rather surprising  acquiescence of most Norman lords in William the Conqueror's succession as duke in 1035, though he was but a child and a bastard.
The uniqueness of this step was long remembered.
As late as the 1180s, St Hugh of Lincoln dared to tease Henry II of England about the tanner's blood in his veins.
(William's mother was thought to have been Herleva, daughter of Fulbert, a tanner of Falaise).
William of Poitiers strove to emphasize the nobility of the West Frankish aristocracy, by calling Guy Geoffrey the Emperor Henry III's brother (he was his brother-in-law through the marriage of his sister Agnes), and by ascribing to Baldwin V connections not only with the ruling houses of France and Germany, but also with that of Constantinople (what he had in mind has not yet been established).
Nevertheless it seems that the eleventh-century history of princely houses was more mundane, more businesslike, than it had been in the past.
Marriage and inheritance were matters for bargaining and negotiation, no longer open to inspired manoeuvres.
And it is notable that harmony in succession policy evaded those whose political achievements were otherwise outstanding — Geoffrey Martel, Baldwin V, William the Conqueror.
Indeed it might almost be conjectured that those families in which political nous was widely distributed were just those that found the principle of primogeniture unpalatable.
(d) Courts
The life of the high aristocracy was lived on the move and in the open; tranquillity and privacy evaded them.
For a lord's status was directly related to the size of following he could support, and the larger his entourage the more frequently he had to move from estate to estate to feed them.
The count  of Flanders was usually accompanied by between fifty and a hundred armed men; the duke of Aquitaine took a hundred knights with him on a visit to the viscount of Ventadour.
Besides, there were the animals.
Duke Robert of Burgundy expected Gilly, an estate of St Germain-des-Prés, to provide food for his dogs as well as lodging for his horses and their grooms.
It was hardly surprising that few places could afford to entertain their lords for weeks on end.
On the march, there was little room for ceremonial.
When Geoffrey de Preuilly caught up with Fulk le Réchin's men to obtain a hearing for his plea, he found the count sitting on a table, his steward standing before him, his huntsman below, mounted and carrying the count's falcon.
The scene suggests a lifestyle familiar to the Franks from their first penetration of Gaul.
Just as informally, William the Conqueror once confirmed a grant ‘while sitting on his carpet between the church and the forester's house.’
Dirty, bloodstained, and exhausted lords surrounded by brutal warriors, making their way from primitive wooden castles to austere monastic refuges, must have been common sights on the West Frankish roads.
And if, on occasion, they pillaged or, like the following of Eudes of Burgundy, held up caravans of pilgrims and merchants to make a quick profit from their ransoms, few can have been surprised; for it was adventure, self-interest, and companionship that bound knights to their lords.
Rarely can St Augustine's dictum that bands of brigands are but petty kingdoms without justice (City of God , iv, 4) have been so easily comprehended as in the eleventh century.
There were, however, short breaks from the itinerant routine, when the great festivals of the church provided occasions for large gatherings, rich feasts, fine dress.
Princes usually celebrated Easter, Christmas, or Whitsun in cathedral towns or important monastic centres within their territories, giving advance notice of their intention so that other lords might  foregather with them.
When Robert II of Flanders passed Christmas at St Omer, ‘there came to him the dukes, the counts, the lords of many regions, nobles and knights from the whole of Flanders, and many French bishops’.
In such company, the ancient rituals of Christian worship shed  their warm glow of splendour on the court.
There might be some ceremony of welcome; there might be special prayers for the ruling family (the genealogies of the counts of Flanders at St Bertin and the counts of Anjou at St Aubin's suggest this).
And occasionally the bishop might call for the Laudes regiae , the litany ‘addressed solely and triumphantly to the victorious Christ in his divinity as the eternal king of heaven and earth, and as the exemplar and guarantor of power and prosperity to all potentes who upheld the fabric of a unitary Christian society — pope, king, royal family, clergy, lay magnates and warriors’.
This litany served to keep alive in French Christian memory the true place of the king as Christ's representative on earth, at a time when political realities bade fair to obliterate it; but it also elevated the lower ranks of earthly powers.
Only the duke of Normandy presumed to make this explicit, allowing his own name to be introduced into the chant after the prayers for the French king, so that the congregation called on the great warrior saints to guarantee the duke's safety and perpetual peace.
His arrogance was soon rewarded by a royal position which legitimated it.
But the caution of other princes may not have blinded their followers to the possible propaganda value of the Laudes .
Beyond the portals of the church, festival days were active ones.
Bishops might seize the opportunity to urge support for peace councils, abbots to press for protection, lay lords to obtain charters while plentiful clerical help was available to draw them up and suitably important men present to act as witnesses.
With his friends and allies about him, a prince might discuss future strategy, consider marriage alliances, resolve disputes.
Far from being rest days, the festivals of the church were times of heightened activity, in an atmosphere redolent of older, grander, more disciplined ways.
As the century wore on, the returning prosperity of the countryside brought a markedly higher standard of living in its train for those best able to exploit their opportunities;, the revival of trade facilitated the acquisition of luxuries.
Inevitably, princely trains grew to expect more lavish hospitality from the castles and monasteries that they visited.
When Robert II of Flanders called at St Thierry with his  sister, widow of Cnut IV of Denmark, the abbot Rudolph cleansed the whole building, hung it with rich hangings and tapestries, filled it with carvings, sculptures, and other precious objects, to turn his simple Benedictine house into a suitable environment for the reception of so magnificent a prince.
Though his extravagance was well rewarded, it must have placed a severe strain on the house's finances.
Even when living at their own expense, princes had higher expectations.
Fécamp, Bruges, Limoges, Chartres, Dijon provided backdrops for displays of occasional grandeur.
Because attracting important men to his presence was essential to princely authority, ostentation might offer sound political investment.
A prince's entourage provided his closest friends, his most trusted servants, the knights on whom he relied in time of crisis.
Throughout the century, these households retained the military character that was at the core of their lord's authority.
The household of William the Conqueror was the nerve-centre from which his military victories were planned, from which his duchy and the kingdom of England were held in subordination; its lay members held themselves always ready for battle.
The armed following that accompanied Robert the Frisian on his Jerusalem pilgrimage so impressed the Emperor of Byzantium, Alexius Comnenus, with its martial bearing that he requested similar assistance from the west.
Although many household knights were men of free rather than noble birth — in Flanders there were even recruits from among the unfree, like the German ministeriales — the prince's relatives and the sons of his neighbouring lords also found careers within their ranks.
So in the long term, the entourages of the great proved effective as social melting-pots.
Yet as the century wore on, their military character ceased to be the exclusive distinguishing feature of princely households.
When the countess Adela of Blois issued an important charter, it was noted that she was surrounded by her capellanus and her clerici, barones, milites et servientes .
her chaplain and her clerks, barons, knights, and servants.
The household chaplain, whose role it was to minister to the spiritual needs of princely families, could also produce letters, such as those written for Stephen of Blois to his wife  Adela while he was on the First Crusade; or charters, like those produced for the post-Conquest dukes of Normandy.
In Normandy, indeed, their importance grew so great that they began to be promoted to bishoprics after about 1060, a move reminiscent of Ottonian and Salian practice.
William of Poitiers, William the Conqueror's most learned and literate biographer, had been his master's chaplain for some years; in the future, household chaplains were regularly to combine the roles of secretary, teacher, and propagandist for princes, as he had done.
The mixture of usefulness and display that explained the growing importance of the chaplains also lay behind the rise of other household officers.
With growing princely income and expenditure, the charge of the purse became more responsible; chamberlains appeared everywhere — in Flanders as early as the tenth century — to control it.
Then large households required butlers and stewards to satisfy their material needs, marshals for ceremonial.
Someone must always have discharged these duties; but the mention of these officials in eleventh-century households pointed to two developments: firstly, a conscious imitation of Carolingian ways (for Charlemagne and his heirs had surrounded themselves with seneschals and stewards), and secondly, a revived interest in administration.
It is perhaps characteristic that the best evidence for the appointment of household officers in the first half of the eleventh century should come from Normandy, which combined reverence for the Carolingian past with respect for efficiency to a degree unparalleled elsewhere.
By the second half of the century, the practice was spreading.
In Flanders, in Champagne, in Anjou, on the royal demesne, chamberlains, butlers, stewards, marshals made their appearance.
Because their duties involved close co-operation with the prince, their holders were usually men of high social status, the prince's more intimate friends among his following.
In ceremonial, their role was everywhere prominent; interestingly, some household officials were beginning to discharge governmental functions, as in Normandy.
But their commonest duty was to act as witnesses in charters;, by the last two decades of the century, the royal household officials were excluding other lords from this task.
Along with the knights, the chaplains, and the officials, there travelled the ladies of the court with their servants, and a sizeable contingent of young boys.
Of these, some were present involuntarily, as hostages for their father's good behaviour — Supplicius of Amboise, for example, had to put his son Hugh in Fulk le Réchin's power as one of the terms of a peace treaty; but others were the sons of friends or allies, sent to the prince's court for the sake of education in knightly virtues, and to meet the men on whom their future political happiness could depend.
Princely households had common characteristics with the English public schools of past generations.
And though they too set social connection and sporting activities — hunting, combat, riding — above literacy, nevertheless it was possible to acquire learning at them; the opportunities exploited by William V of Aquitaine, William the Conqueror, Robert the Frisian, and Fulk le Réchin — all regarded as educated men — must have also been available to some of those who were brought up with them.
So eleventh-century courts were centres for ceremony, business, education; Charlemagne would have sympathized with all of these.
He would have understood, too, the presence at Norman and Angevin courts of clerks whose function it was to extol the deeds of their princes.
But, despite Einhard's assertion that he loved barbarian poems, he would surely have been disconcerted by the evolution of the Poitevin court under William IX as a centre of troubadour poetry, its prince as the most distinguished poet of all.
And he might well have dismissed the Flemish court, with its prince who hedged and ditched, its chancellor who audited accounts, as mercenary.
What must have surprised him, as it still surprises us, was the sheer variety of court life, its different rhythms, its stately ceremonial in buildings still primitive both by Carolingian and later standards, and the unique character bestowed on each court by the personality of its prince.
SOURCES 1108–1180
IN the twelfth century, writing blossomed.
Once an élite activity, almost the exclusive prerogative of monks, it now spread to the swelling ranks of secular clerks, to servants in princely households, even to some ordinary townsmen.
As it spread, its uses diversified so fast as to make any introduction to twelfth-century sources on the scale attempted in the earlier parts of the book (pp. 17–26, 124–32) impossible.
Nor indeed is it necessary; for the men of the twelfth-century renaissance used words and literary forms derived from the main stream of the European cultural inheritance.
Their writings speak for themselves.
In fact that familiarity can sometimes be deceptive; behind the restored classical vocabulary lurk more of the earlier aristocratic assumptions than would have been conceded by most nineteenth-century historians; so if anthropological interpretations become less useful, there is still danger in pushing narrowly juridical ones.
But it must be said that the historian's task is substantially simplified by the transformation.
Therefore the point of this section is only to draw attention to some aspects of intellectual and administrative change that can be more easily observed in a discussion on sources than in a more general context.
Few literary sources are more revealing of aristocratic culture than the Gesta Consulum Andegavorum and its off shoot the Gesta Ambaziensium Dominorum , produced in the Touraine in the first six decades of the twelfth century, for the pleasure and edification of the counts of Anjou and their castellans, the lords of Amboise.
The skeleton of the Gesta Consulum Andegavorum lay in a set of genealogies less reliable and less complete than those found at St Aubin's in Angers under Fulk le Réchin.
These may originally have been compiled by a Touraine monastic house so that the new rulers of the area could be commemorated in its prayers; but like the genealogies of the comital house of Flanders, they were soon adapted to a more secular purpose.
Around 1109 on the death of Fulk le Réchin, a monk, perhaps the abbot Eudes of the great house of Marmoutier, produced the first version of the Gesta , a series of brief biographies of the counts.
The literary form he followed derived from the Liber Pontificalis , that famous compilation of papal lives produced in Rome at the end of every pontificate by the pope's own clerks; especially in West Francia it had been adopted in the tenth and eleventh centuries as a model for the history of dioceses (e.g. the Deeds of the Bishops of Auxerre).
And it now provided a convenient framework for the praise of a comital lineage.
The author set the context for his story with a lengthy but fairly conventional genealogy of the kings of France, tracing their origins back to the Trojans as Frankish historians had done since Merovingian times.
This blend of Old-Testament-inspired genealogy with legendary classical origins enjoyed a new vogue in the eclectic learned circles of the period.
A possible Trojan link was claimed by William of Jumièges for William the Conqueror as soon as he became king; a late eleventh-century genealogy of the counts of Boulogne produced a similar conceit; and Genealogy IV of the Counts of Flanders, written about 1120, made them the most important non-royal family to trace its ancestry back to Priam.
So a legend which had originated with the attempts of Dark Age royal servants to give their masters a lineage as old and distinguished as that of the Western Roman emperors they had displaced continued in the twelfth century to satisfy the needs of new royal families and even of some princely houses.
In the Gesta this genealogy creates a sharp contrast between the kings and the counts of Anjou, whose origins are said to lie in a ‘new man’, a forester of the reign of Charles the Bald.
At first, the choice of such a humble beginning is puzzling, especially since Werner believes that the Angevin comital family was of the old Carolingian aristocracy, with connections by marriage into an Italian royal family.
But it is clear from Fulk le Réchin's history that the counts themselves knew nothing of their ancestry before the time of  Ingelgerus, Fulk the Red's father, an indication of the block that earlier, looser kinship ties created in human memory.
Besides, the author of the Gesta — like his predecessor who had produced the second genealogy of the counts of Flanders — was heavily imbued with Sallustian learning.
If he could not posit an ancient line for his comital family, then he would choose to emphasize its newness, its local roots, its dependence on heroic deeds for its rise.
For it was possible, on a reading of Marius' contio in Sallust, to associate the old nobility with inertia, the new with virtue.
The choice of a forester — also made by the author of a thirteenth-century Flemish genealogy — is interesting: the word itself was a new one, having no classical or late-antique Latin form; perhaps its associations with hunting and riding made it particularly appropriate for a family renowned for its martial skills.
From the author's point of view, its humble status highlighted the outstanding achievements of the individual counts in each generation of the family's history.
So though modem research has tended to discredit the idea of a medieval aristocracy ‘of service’, to insist on blue blood for the great lines of the tenth and eleventh centuries, and to see in the later eleventh and the twelfth centuries an ever-sharper patrilineal descent obliterating other considerations in family history, it should not be forgotten that at least one great princely house was encouraged to view its progress in quite other terms.
What made them lords were their noble deeds.
The clearest proof of this comes in the Gesta's treatment of Geoffrey Grisegonelle, Fulk Nerra's father.
Whereas, in Fulk le Réchin's account which preserved the comital family's own early tradition, Geoffrey was a solid but unremarkable figure, in the Gesta he has undergone transmogrification.
He is a chivalric hero, a mighty slayer of the Danes, a triumpher in single combat, a victor over the invading German hordes.
Halphen, who edited the text, believed that here the author was drawing on a vernacular epic; this may well have been so, for in the late eleventh-century manuscript of the Song of Roland , Geoffrey featured as Charlemagne's standard-bearer.
He had become a figure of legend.
His appearance in his new guise in the Gesta pinpoints the process by which the house of Anjou built up its own chivalric myth.
Apart from Fulk le Réchin, the other counts of Anjou are portrayed (albeit less colourfully than Geoffrey Grisegonelle) as pious and valiant defenders of their inheritance.
Fulk, however, comes in for stern criticism.
Indeed the aim of the work was to demonstrate how far he had fallen from ancestral glories, in order that his successors might rectify his errors.
The earliest version of the Gesta , finished just after Fulk's death in 1109, was a stern warning to the young Fulk V.
But the story of the Gesta did not end in 1109. just as later monks came back to the Flemish comital genealogies to keep them up to date and to add new material, so the Gesta attracted amplification.
The first to turn his hand to the task was Thomas de Loches, chaplain and chancellor to Fulk V and Geoffrey le Bel.
The significance of his additions lies largely in the proof they provide that a Touraine monastic source was the subject of study within the count's own household by a secular clerk of distinction.
His successor Breton d'Amboise's version was more influential in that it provided the base for three other amplifications, one anonymous, the other two by John of Marmoutier.
Of the latter, one was dedicated to King Henry II of England in a prologue taken almost word for word from Bede's preface to Ceolwulf at the beginning of the Ecclesiastical History of the English People .
There could hardly be a more appropriate blending of Henry II's traditional Angevin and new English cultural backgrounds.
Each of the later authors added to the legendary element in the Gesta .
The figure whose character achieved clearest focus was that of Fulk the Good, Geoffrey Grisegonelle's father.
Plagiarizing from the Miracles of St Martin at Tours , Breton produced material to turn Fulk into the conventional saintly layman who, assisting a leper, found that he had helped Christ.
It was recorded of him that he sang with the monks in the divine offices; when taunted by the king for his clerkly tastes, he responded that an illiterate king was a crowned ass (a cliché much favoured in twelfth-century Angevin circles, for it sprang from a sense of family superiority — the counts of Anjou were, by any standards, learned men).
So Fulk joined Geoffrey as an alternative model of the perfect layman.
As well as adding to the old part of the story, the continuators brought it up to date till the death of Geoffrey le Bel, occasionally slipping into detailed narrative of events: there is a long and useful excursus on the politics of 1118.
The original epic style was maintained for the description of Fulk V's Jerusalem journey and his coronation as king of Jerusalem in 1131, which was portrayed as the fulfilment of the family destiny, the union of its chivalric and pious traditions.
All in all the Gesta provided a somewhat daunting set of exemplars for King Henry II.
His ancestors were formidable men.
And — despite the fact that their portraits were largely drawn by monks — they were men in a distinctively lay tradition: not for them Gerald of Aurillac's yearning for the cloister; though they might put their sword to the service of the church, they wielded it just as often for secular purposes and to gain renown.
Their piety was set in a classical mould, a matter of obligations duly performed.
Their chief functions were of this world.
They were consules , men chosen for the protection of the common weal, men of ancient Roman gravitas and auctoritas .
The original version of the Gesta provided a model for the Gesta Ambaziensium Dominorum , written about 1155; and it, in its turn, influenced later versions of the Gesta .
Its author, perhaps a canon of St Florent, wrote after the death of Supplicius II, castellan of Amboise, to warn later generations of the family that a repetition of Supplicius' acts of disloyalty towards his overlords might ruin the family.
Yet despite his didactic purpose and his concern with detailed narrative, he produced the first work to immortalize a castellan dynasty in France.
From the historian's point of view, it provides valuable evidence about a corner of the Touraine crucial to Angevin domination but very difficult to hold, and about the resources and stratagems open to a second-rank aristocratic family determined to maximize its assets.
It is an unusually vivid piece of local history, told with an absence of contrivance or literary device that contrasts with its model.
Together, the works bear witness to the originality and liveliness in the learned circles of the Loire valley at the height of the twelfth-century renaissance.
The Feoda Campanie of 1172 shows originality of a different order.
It was compiled for Count Henry the Liberal  of Champagne, by clerks of tidy but innovative mind, alert to the political potential in acquiring, recording and categorizing information.
They set out to discover the names and fiefs of all lords and knights resident within the county, their liege lords, and the services each owed to the count.
The means employed was the sworn inquest, the ancient Carolingian legal procedure for establishing the facts of a case by procuring statements on oath.
Although this procedure had been used for administrative purposes in Normandy (where the English example of Domesday Book was an inspiration) and in Anjou before Geoffrey le Bel's conquest of Normandy, the Feoda marked an important step in its use in eastern France.
When the sworn statements were collected and sorted, the results were set out in a list preserved in the count's treasury at St Etienne in Troyes.
Until 1190, they were kept up-to-date; but in that year, Count Henry II of Champagne took one copy of the list with him when he set out for Outremer, and this may have inhibited his officials from making further changes in the copy left behind at Troyes.
Nevertheless, the document was still consulted in the early thirteenth century, which shows that it was regarded as an important statement of custom.
In committing the count's rights to written record, Henry's clerks had conferred on them new authority.
The Feoda contains the names of around 1,900 lords and knights, ranging from substantial aristocrats to landless warriors, grouped under the headings of the twenty-six castellanies of Champagne.
The grouping demonstrates Henry's clerks' clear conception of the administrative geography of the county.
On the other hand, the fact that some lords and knights are double-listed suggests doubt as to their rightful position.
It seems likely, therefore, that in the process of drawing up the Feoda , as clerks and local lords decided under which heading most fief-holders should appear, they helped to crystallize the castellanies.
And if the process of inquest clarified internal boundaries, it almost certainly also compelled fief-holders to reflect on the extent of the services they owed to the count.
Henry's clerks had perceived the important truth that asking the right questions was the path to consolidating gains.
All respondents  acknowledged they owed service in times of war; rather less than half were obliged to provide regular castle-guard.
The figures were high for a county in which comital lordship had not been noticeably demanding; the count's fortifications should have been adequately defended.
There was a correlation between those who owed castle-guard and those who recognized the count as their liege lord, again rather less than half the total.
Thirteenth-century inquests were to see a substantial increase in this percentage.
But if comital liegelordship (that superior bond to which all lesser allegiances must, in case of conflict, yield) was less advanced in Champagne than in Normandy or Flanders, it completely outclassed that of any other secular or ecclesiastical lord within the county.
The Feoda therefore provides a revealing glimpse of aristocratic society in Champagne; its full potential as a source has recently been exploited by Evergates.
Just as significantly, it betrays Henry the Liberal's view of feudalism as a clearly defined contract in which the holder of a specified fief of land performed a set amount of military service for the privilege; and, in cases where he had fiefs of several lords, had the obligation to recognize one homage as overriding.
This view — later to be the standard one among feudal lawyers — was not one which earlier counts of Champagne had embraced.
(Their own very complicated feudal position had been an inhibiting factor.)
It may be that Henry had to dispense largess to make it acceptable to his lords; but the Feoda is evidence that he had somehow overcome potential opposition, and could now capitalize on his position at the apex of the feudal pyramid in the county.
The Feoda's apparently innovative character makes the fact that it was produced in the same year as the Norman inquest into knights' fees seem more than simply coincidental.
Robert of Torigny described the Norman proceedings thus:
The Norman and Champagne processes were not identical.
But they were similar enough in method and assumption to suggest possible cross-fertilization.
The new bureaucrats may well have been willing to learn lessons from their fellows across the boundaries of principalities.
If so, they were preparing the path for the closer integration of French provinces achieved in the thirteenth century.
Finally, a short comment on charters as sources for twelfth-century history.
The most notable fact is their proliferation everywhere across the country.
Their chances of survival were increased by the creation of new archives — monastic cartularies became common, lay lords, notably the dukes of Burgundy and the lords of Montpellier, began to preserve their letters.
But much more importantly, there were new incentives to have grants or judgements enshrined in writing.
Confidence in the written word, noticeably low in the eleventh century, increased everywhere.
This reflected important social changes.
Earlier, in a small, strongly aristocratic society, where all those likely to resort to legal process were well known to their fellows, reliance on verbal contract before witnesses had proved a sound policy, allowing for future elasticity of interpretation within clearly-defined limits.
Now, with rising population, greater social mobility, and wider resort to legal processes, human memory ceased to be an effective guarantee of human contract.
As Geoffrey le Bel said in the preamble to one of his charters, ‘whatever happens at one point of time will scarcely ever reach the next generation in a reliable and true account unless it is committed to writing.’
This was particularly true for those small communities, small towns, or groups of peasants, who had won their privileges after long struggles against a higher authority.
Without the protection of a properly sealed and attested charter, their struggles might prove vain, since it was in nobody's interest but their own that their moment of victory should be prolonged.
There was, too, an underlying legal change: even though arbitration might still play a crucial part in their actual proceedings, courts gradually inclined to perceive justice as lying in precedent, or principle.
As a result the written record of an earlier judgement given in the court, or of  a grant, could create a prima-facie case for a favourable verdict.
In one dispute at least, that between Vierzon and St Florent of Saumur in 1105, the judges seem to have confined their role to inspecting the documents provided by each house, before delivering their verdict in St Florent's favour.
One factor inhibiting the spread of written documents had been fear of forgery.
And the increasing use of charters in lawcourts naturally created an incentive to forge, as those who had lost or never enjoyed documentary proof of their rights strove to make good the deficiency.
There was little prospect of containing this.
What made it easy was that earlier charters had been produced by so many different monastic scriptoria in so many house styles that spotting the inauthentic was a task for the dedicated scholar — who in any case was more likely to be employed in propagating fraud than in hunting it out.
But for new grants or privileges the answer, or at least a partial answer, lay in insistence on proper confirmation by the legitimate authority; by the second half of the twelfth century, all charters produced across the Angevin empire had to be confirmed by the Angevin chancery.
And better than mere confirmation was production.
As princely chanceries evolved across West Francia, their output was welcomed by the population at large because the set formulae they employed offered some assurance of authenticity.
Demand switched, from charters produced locally and confirmed by the attachment of a princely seal, to those written in a  prince's name by his own clerks in his writing office.
Under the pressure of new business, chancery clerks standardized their output, streamlined by cutting down on lengthy prologues, stated their business as succinctly as possible.
While chanceries were adapting their wares to public needs, they were also evolving new formulae for their princes.
Here the Anglo-Norman chancery was in the vanguard with the production of writs — commands addressed to the king-duke's officials, used in eleventh-century Normandy, but developed in the course of the twelfth into the chief instrument for central control over the localities and for legal innovation.
With Henry II's accession to the English throne in 1154, the king-duke's  chancery operated over Western France from the Pyrenees to the Canche, and set an example to all other princes, not least to the kings of France.
Everywhere the new crisp dispositive style began to displace the older random recordings.
From the historian's point of view, twelfth-century diplomatic makes it possible to study the legal, administrative, and political history of the period with a confidence and an ease simply lacking in earlier times.
Because writs, charters, and other chancery letters became everyday affairs, their language was now intended to express everyday realities.
The scribes had their eyes on the lawcourts, on the current political situation, on tangible concerns capable of exact definition.
They were assisting in the birth of government as the modem world has known it.
As sources, their work is of crucial importance in understanding their world.
Yet its very pragmatism bears with it an inbuilt limitation.
There was no room in their streamlined productions for that revealingly individual note — the self justification, the expression of highly personal piety — which had occasionally flashed through earlier charters.
In growing common, twelfth-century charters also became commonplace.
FORMATIVE TRENDS IN TWELFTH-CENTURY POLITICAL LIFE
(a) The revival of royal power
In naming his son and heir Louis (Louis = Ludovicus = Clovis), King Philip 1 had consciously aspired towards the glories of the Carolingian and Merovingian past.
Had Louis been inclined to forget the destiny his father had mapped out for him, he would have been forcefully reminded of it in the last decade of his reign, when his chief adviser was Suger, abbot of St Denis between 1122 and 1151, a man of humble birth consumed by a passionate devotion to the cause of monarchy in the Carolingian mould.
A letter Suger wrote for Louis's son to the bishop, chapter, and people of Beauvais began: ‘Heavenly and earthly peace from the king of kings and the king of the Franks’.
Charlemagne himself could hardly have matched this confident assumption of harmony with God's will.
In the century inaugurated by the Investiture Conflict, Suger's greeting was doubly remarkable.
Only the head of an ancient monastic house, confident of his standing with the Pope, would have dared to pen it.
The appointment of a Benedictine abbot as chief adviser to the king was sufficiently unusual to call to mind Benedict of Aniane's position in the early years of Louis the Pious's reign.
Though Benedict's austerity and reforming zeal were missing in Suger, his twelfth-century counterpart, there was perhaps a similar commitment to abstract political principle, to the notion of undivided imperial or royal power.
In Suger s case, this power was given sharper focus by its place at the apex of the terrestrial hierarchy; for, as he had learned from the presumed patron of his monastery, Pseudo-Dionysius, this was the proper ordering of earthly political authority.
What marked Suger out from other pseudo-Dionysians was firstly, that he translated his abstractions into concepts directly  relevant to French politics in his own time, and secondly that he proclaimed his views in the influential Life of Louis VI , written in the early years of Louis VII's reign.
As Suger saw it, the French king was feudal lord of the princes.
In his Life he made William X of Aquitaine protest against Louis's meddling in the Auvergne, with the words: ‘If the count of Auvergne has committed any fault, it is my duty to present him at your court on your order, because he holds the Auvergne of me as I hold it of you.’
Behind these words lay the belief that all offices and counties were fiefs held of the king, whether directly or through an intermediary.
Here again Suger was reasserting royal supremacy in a world which had long been deaf to such claims.
He was also prepared to grapple with the practical consequences of his view.
Clearly it was illogical that the king, chief lord of all, should be vassal of any.
So Suger persuaded Louis to begin the task — not completed till the reign of Philip Augustus — of extricating himself from the bonds of homage which bound him to various bishops in the realm.
Historians have considered this step as an essential preliminary to the later evolution of French royal sovereignty.
But in depriving the king of any earthly lord, Suger risked isolating him.
His solution to this problem showed his creative intelligence at work.
As abbot of St Denis, Suger was in charge of one of France's oldest and most revered houses, whose connection with the ruling dynasty went back to Merovingian times.
It had long been the traditional burial ground of kings; all Louis's royal Capetian ancestors — with the exception of his father Philip — were buried within its confines.
Suger devoted many years to rebuilding the great abbey church (in i style which was later to be hailed as the prototype of Gothic architecture) to make it a fit royal mausoleum, as well as a place of worship in which mere men could obtain a brief insight into the grandeur that surrounded the king of kings in heaven.
For Suger, in common with the monks of his house since the late ninth century — and challenged only by the foolhardy Abelard — regarded St Denis, the apostle and martyr of the Gauls, as the author of those writings produced in fact by a sixth-century Syrian mystic, now known as Pseudo-Dionysius.
The most famous  of these writings, that on the Celestial Hierarchies , provided the abbot both with his theory of the function of ecclesiastical architecture, and with a means of integrating the earthly power structure into that of heaven.
Under the abbot's influence, Louis recognized St Denis as his patron saint — a traditional enough step.
More surprisingly, he also saw in his patron a feudal lord.
This second relationship arose from an ingenious cover-up to a less than wholly honest piece of political self-enrichment.
Among the lands earlier ceded to the abbey of St Denis was the Vexin français, that natural bulwark between the French royal demesne and the now hostile Norman duchy, which had been held as a Norman fief, had formed part of Simon de Crépy's state (see p. 216), and finally was reclaimed for the French crown by Philip I. The Vexin had had a comital family, in origin probably the advocates for the abbey; but Philip had bypassed their claims, granting the territory to the young prince Louis, who met with such opposition in the area that it was not until 1119 that his possession was secured.
When Suger became abbot of St Denis in 1122, he reinterpreted the relationship between the abbey and the new count of the Vexin, to the profit of both.
Louis became the liegeman, not of the abbey, but of its saint.
In 1124, when the king summoned the great army to meet the threat of the Emperor Henry V's invasion, he bore the standard of St Denis at the head of his troops.
As Suger said much later, the king recognized that he held of St Denis and that, if he were not king, he would owe the saint homage.’
Here was a new dimension in the essentially Carolingian view of kingship that Suger restored to the centre of the French political stage.
Scepticism as to the historical importance of this highly personal view of monarchy seems in order.
Our dependence on Suger's Life as the chief source for Louis VI's reign makes his interpretation inescapable for us, as it was not for his contemporaries.
It is possible that twelfth-century laymen regarded his outpourings with an indulgent smile.
Nevertheless Suger was no cloistered academic.
As chief adviser to Louis VI in the last decade of his reign, and as Louis VII's most trusted minister until his death in 1152, he had many  opportunities to impress his theories on princes and lords who would not dare to scoff.
And for the crown itself, Suger's doctrine was timely.
The ecclesiastical reform movement had drawn a new, sharp divide between temporal and spiritual, forcing all temporal authorities to redefine their self-image.
The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, the kings Henry I and Henry II of England, had abandoned theocracy to develop the secular potential inherent in their offices.
The French king, with fewer resources, was reluctant to go so far.
Suger offered the vision of divinely inspired harmony, a place for the king below the saints and martyrs of the church, with his vassals the princes on the rung below, and other lesser men in their serried ranks below again, all enveloped in St Denis's protection, fulfilling their roles on earth until they took their place in heaven.
It offended no one; it preserved at least a whiff of the old tradition.
As vassal of St Denis, Louis enjoyed special spiritual favour which marked him out from those whose lord was a mere mortal.
Yet there was nothing in this relationship to gate against the susceptibilities of the reformers, for it implied no set position in the ecclesiastical hierarchy.
Naturally the monks of St Denis, who had most to gain by it, were happy to keep Suger's tradition fresh.
They imitated him in producing histories of the Capetian kings — the earliest being Suger's successor's work on Louis VII's crusade.
Suger and Odo of Deuil between them established the norms for the house's long tradition of royal historiography; of these the chief was that whatever the Capetians did should be presented in the most favourable light possible.
The image projected was consistently conservative; to the end of the dynasty, the kings remained the pious and holy defenders of Mother Church, the preservers of the kingdom's integrity, the faithful battlers against local tyrants.
The good press they obtained was no doubt deeply irritating to their rivals.
Louis had another method of attracting the devotion of those to whom abstract hierarchies were mere nonsense: he touched for scrofula, as Guibert of Nogent attested in a work written before 1124.
Many churchmen may have disapproved of the practice; but to those who flocked for  cure, it was a proof of the king's holiness, and a sign that Helgaud's miracle-worker king had not been entirely forgotten.
But if royal charisma continued as a dominant pillar of kingship, it was now well bolstered in more mundane ways.
Royal charters bore witness to renewed vigour outside the demesne as in it.
Louis's annual average production of charters — 12.1 — was a notable increase on the 3.6 of Philip's reign.
The new charters were likely to have been written in the royal chancery rather than by their recipients, permitting greater uniformity, a more dispositive note, and the regular appearance of only a few royal officials as witnesses.
At the same time, the geographical area within which royal charters were sought expanded again, particularly in the south, including the county of Toulouse, where the Capetians had never granted them before.
Louis VII's marriage with Eleanor, duchess of Aquitaine, meant more royal charters for Poitou and Gascony; his own political endeavours resulted in an increase for Berry and the Auvergne.
And thirdly, among the grants and privileges traditionally produced by the royal chancery, there appeared again regular records of judgements made in the royal courts, and royal letters of command,mandements , like the English writs absent since the reign of king Eudes.
The chancery had returned to Carolingian practices, but with an energy which outran its model.
If Louis VI's reign was decisive for the revitalization of the chancery, his son's saw the dramatic extension of royal visitations across the realm.
Louis VII's pretexts for visiting were many and various, but his aim was always to emphasize the specifically royal nature of his authority, to reclaim the Carolingian right of hospitality.
As was said:
He began his reign with a splendid procession into Aquitaine as Eleanor's husband, in the course of which he arranged an inauguration ceremony for himself — either a repeat coronation for the southerners or a service to mark his accession as  duke of Aquitaine — in the city of Bordeaux, where no king had penetrated for at least three centuries.
He used the opportunity to issue charters for places across the whole duchy, he rave judgements and established lasting friendships with one or two important lords from which he was later to reap benefits.
His journey through Toulouse in 1155, on his way to Compostela, was equally unprecedented, and equally fruitful.
Louis renewed contact with Raymond V, by now his brother-in-law, and met almost all the bishops of the Narbonne province; their subsequent requests for his assistance strikingly increased his authority.
In 1173, for example, he issued a diploma bringing the church of Agde under royal protection.
His interventions in Burgundy were more forceful.
The royal expeditions of 1166 and 1171 were undertaken in order to protect Cluny and to suppress ‘schismatics’— the supporters of the imperial anti-pope Victor IV.
They met with little armed resistance (which must have been a relief to Louis, who had little confidence in his own military skill), and gained considerable incidental profit: the king's person was seen in an area unvisited since the reign of Louis IV; the counts of Nevers, Chalon, and Mâcon were brought to heel; Burgundian lords appealed for the king's mediation in their quarrels (he also sought theirs); the count of Forez, hitherto only a vassal of the Emperor, declared his most important castles to be held as fief of the crown of France, the first step in the integration of Forez into the French realm.
All these benefits were acquired by a wily diplomacy.
Louis was perceptive enough to gauge the degree of royal influence that would be welcomed in the great principalities.
He avoided the bullying tactics his son was to employ; yet the results of his modest pursuits were in their own way as remarkable as those of Philip Augustus' domineering interventions.
To expand the circle of their fideles was a regular objective of both Louis VI and his son.
They recognized that a return to the Carolingian situation, in which, in theory at least, all free men were bound by oaths of loyalty to the crown, was an unrealistic aspiration; and they did not even succeed in asserting their lordship over all French rear-vassals, on the lines suggested by Suger.
But they did dramatically increase  the number of persons and groups of persons who recognized a bond with the crown through fidelity.
Their most notable achievement was their insistence that, for the safety of the church, all bishops not yet under the protection of a powerful prince should enter the king's garde .
As the bishops of Clermont, Le Puy, and Mende fell into this category, the Massif Central was opened to royal influence.
Then Louis VI claimed the bishopric of Arras for his patronage in 1128 — the only gain from his inglorious intervention in the Flemish succession.
By 1180, more than half the bishops of France were again royal fideles , with the consequence that they sought royal justice against their local oppressors.
Closely connected with fidelity was liege homage, which the kings were equally determined to extend.
Louis VI's reign began inauspiciously, with the refusal of some great princes to do homage, on the grounds that it was not customary.
Though their scruples were overcome, their objection pointed to their awareness that the ceremony was changing its meaning.
In 1106, after the death of his brother Geoffrey, Fulk of Anjou was recorded by Orderic as having received the county of Anjou from King Philip I; his homage therefore implied feudal subordination.
In the course of the century, Louis VI and Louis VII succeeded in imposing this interpretation on all their princes' homage.
In 1158, for example, Henry II swore to Louis VII:
The Angevin lands were recognized without equivocation as fiefs of the crown.
This new precision allowed the king to capitalize on his princes' territorial consolidation: when William X took homage, both Aquitaine and Gascony were included in the contract; when Raymond V became Louis VII's man, the Rouergue, Gothia, and part of Provence joined Toulouse as fiefs of the crown of France.
Thus effortlessly the kings extended their realm.
One royal prerogative never to be revived in its full Carolingian glory was the holding of assemblies for the whole  military aristocracy of the realm.
Ironically, this was a source of strength for the dynasty because, unlike its English counterpart, it did not have to face the potential opposition a corporate body of the great magnates could provide.
But both kings did benefit from public gatherings of bishops and great men, largely though not exclusively from within the duchy of Francia, on the model of the assembly Philip I had called to Orléans in 1077.
The most famous of these meetings — that held in 1155 and attended by the count of Flanders, the duke of Burgundy, the counts of Troyes and Nevers, in addition to the lords of the royal demesne — provided the occasion for Louis VII to come as close to legislating as any twelfth-century French or English king was to do.
Here he proclaimed the Peace of God for the whole regnum (realm — an ambiguous term, which may mean simply his demesne, or the old duchy of Francia), in accordance with the twentieth canon of the Second Lateran Council (1139), and established penalties for the violation of that peace.
The princes present consented to the extension of the peace to their dominions — though not necessarily in toto or without alteration.
The action lacked that forceful superiority which had characterized Carolingian capitularies, at least in the time of Charlemagne; but it revived the tradition whereby the crown was seen as the author of society's moral norms.
A commoner function for assemblies was coordinating plans for war.
When, in 1124, the Emperor Henry V planned an invasion, Louis summoned his nobles to Rheims to debate tactics and draw up the battle-lines.
Along with troops from the royal demesne and from those towns which relied on royal protection, the dukes of Burgundy and Aquitaine, the counts of Blois, Troyes, Nevers, Brittany, and Anjou, came in person with their men.
The assembly was so formidable that Henry V decided to abandon his campaign.
1124 found the French princes unusually united; assemblies to discuss wars against Normandy could never command such support.
Excuses for failures to attend abounded.
Yet though irregular both in incidence and attendance, assemblies provided a golden opportunity for the dissemination of royal propaganda, to insist on the notion of ‘public’ war (see p. 288), and to depict royal campaigns as undertaken ‘for the  defence of the realm,’rather than simply for the king's self-interest.
One further return to Carolingian precedent occurred at the very end of Louis VII's reign, when coinage from the king's mints and bearing his image began to circulate outside the royal demesne for the first time since the late ninth century.
Admittedly, its circulation in the kingdom was small, its rivals powerful.
Nevertheless it marked the first step — though only that — in the restoration of royal coinage inside West Francia.
As judges, Louis VI and Louis VII were far more impressive when operating inside the demesne (see p. 296) than when acting, in their royal capacity, beyond its frontiers.
The difficulty was the standard feudal one of failing to get both parties to appear.
In 1153, for example, when the bishop of Langres brought a complaint against Duke Eudes II of Burgundy in the royal court, all four royal summonses to the duke met with excuses; in the end, therefore, the royal verdict was given by default to the bishop, but without much expectation that a long-term solution to the conflict had been achieved.
Still, the case was important, because Louis had summoned Eudes for a breach of the peace, in accordance with the Second Lateran Council's definition.
The crown was thus establishing its right, even before the 1155 assembly, of prosecuting violence beyond the frontiers of the demesne.
And with lords of lower rank, the king dared more.
As early as 1108–9, Louis VI had led a campaign into Berry to force the lord of Bourbon's submission to the judgement of the royal court.
Where there was no breach of the peace, the kings continued to arbitrate, employing persuasion or pressure according to the standing of those involved.
In the 1155 peace between King Henry II and Louis VII, it was agreed that Henry's quarrel with Thibaud of Blois should be ended by arbitration.
To increase the chances of success, Louis offered Henry two teams of mediators; if he did not like the methods or conclusions of the first set, he could turn to the second.
But Louis was prepared to take a much tougher line with the count of Nevers to resolve his dispute with the abbey of Vézelay: although relatives of the count were allowed to  participate in drawing up the terms of settlement, Louis insisted that, if it failed, further aggression against the abbey would be treated as aggression against the king and punished accordingly.
The dispute could not be allowed to drag on.
So the reigns of Louis VI and his son proved a decisive turning-point in the history of the French monarchy.
After three centuries of decline, the first steps had been taken on the path to restoration.
A royal letter to the people of Limoges c.1137 ended, ‘You know that those who despise our orders lose our favour and incur our displeasure.’
This might seem a rather feeble threat.
But at least the people of Limoges had been reminded that royal favour and displeasure were worthy of consideration.
It is inevitable that the kingship of the Louis should be discussed in terms of a return to the past, for this was the way they themselves justified it: their innovations were resumptions.
Nevertheless behind the traditional concepts there lurked a marked change.
For Carolingian royal rights had applied everywhere except where a grant of immunity blocked them; but Capetian royal rights were respecters of strongly entrenched vested interests.
On the other hand, whereas Carolingian rights had been static, therefore subject to attrition, Capetian rights were elastic; with skilful manipulation they grew.
An example of this can be seen in Louis VII's second Burgundian expedition, already mentioned.
The occasion, in 1171, was a complaint by the monastery of Cluny against the count of Mâcon.
Louis's duty to respond arose from the fact that in 1119, Cluny, caught between its need of lay protection and fear that the local lords would seek to violate its famous immunity, had turned to the distant but pious Louis VI and placed its whole order in his guardianship.
So his son, no doubt unwillingly, was compelled to mount an expedition to discipline the count.
The king's appearance in the Mâcunnais revived ancient memories of Louis IV's visit in 950, which his successor exploited effectively, stressing the justice of his cause and the royal obligation to suppress evil.
Having subdued the count, Louis toured the castles, to remind castellans of the long-forgotten doctrine that fortifications were the monopoly of public authorities.
But while reasserting the old, he also broke new  ground in the claim that he was rightful lord over all men in the area who had hitherto had no lord.
And for good measure, he entered into an important pariage agreement with Cluny and the bishop and chapter of Mâcon, that resulted in the creation of a royal enclave within the county.
From this nucleus, royal territory was in the future to expand to the point at which, in 1239, the whole county could be annexed to the royal demesne.
In an area of weak lordship, Louis was prepared to capitalize on a simple right of protection to claim an old public obligation, a new feudal lordship, and a new territorial stake.
The innovative character of Capetian kingship is unmistakable.
The same point can be illustrated from the solid profit which was derived from the expanding royal protection of bishoprics.
On the face of it, Louis VI's claim to be lord of all bishops not already under effective protection looks a modest attempt to regain only part of the Carolingian inheritance.
And in one sense so it was, for by 1150 almost half the bishoprics in France still escaped crown control.
But there was nothing conservative about the way in which Louis and his successor exploited the bishop of Clermont's complaints against the count of the Auvergne to secure a foothold in the county; it was their preparatory work that made possible Philip Augustus' annexation of the Auvergne to the royal demesne.
Equally, Louis VII's intervention in the disputed election at Langres in 1138 prepared the way for his charter of 1179, taking the city and the whole episcopal fief under crown protection.
As caries sets in at a weak point in the tooth's enamel and spreads to rot the whole tooth, so an appeal to the crown could trigger the decay of local autonomy.
A different view of royal opportunism can be seen in the confirmation of charters for leading monasteries outside the demesne.
In 1146 Louis VII was asked to confirm the privileges enjoyed by the great abbey of La Trinité de Vendôme, under the patronage of the counts of Anjou.
In return for his good offices, the king inserted into the charter, after a clause designed to deter his own servants from causing depredations, a reservation of the ancient Carolingian rights of hospitality, procuration,ost , and chevauchée which no  Capetian king had hithertofore enjoyed there.
It was a lavish quid pro quo .
Less dramatic but far commoner was his habit of inserting a prohibition on religious houses trying cases of arson, rape, murder, and theft.
The motive behind this may have been the desire to assist monasteries in living according to canon law; for the Second Lateran Council of 1139 had forbidden churchmen to participate in justice de sang (the trial of crimes punished by corporal or capital penalties).
But if Louis's intention was high-minded, his own profit was well served; for the gap left by disappearing ecclesiastical jurisdiction was to be filled by the crown and its officers.
The extent to which Louis VI and Louis VII had consolidated royal powers was masked from their contemporaries by their policy of pushing hard only where they knew that resistance was weak.
Therefore the greater aggression, the more systematic pursuit of self-interest which characterized the reign of Philip Augustus seemed a decisive break with earlier Capetian trends.
Yet Philip's methods were those of his father and grandfather; and although he had a clearer notion of feudal lordship and a broader canvas on which to exploit that lordship, even here he drew on his predecessors' achievements.
Symbolic of the change that the Louis had effected was the increasing use during the twelfth century of the term corona , the crown, to describe the body of royal rights to be kept intact from generation to generation.
The impersonal and durable character of these rights was highlighted during the last years of Louis VII's reign, in the use in charters of the phrase corona regni (the crown of the kingdom), a phrase which marked out royal rights from princely by asserting their value to the kingdom as a whole.
This pretension was to be dear to the heart of Philip Augustus.
Walter Map, reflecting on the changed character of French kingship in the twelfth century, saw the period between Louis the Pious's reign and the accession of his namesake Louis VI as one of deep depression, with 1108 marking a decisive turning-point.
Louis VI  
There were those who might doubt the beneficial character of revived kingship; but no one could quarrel with Map's view that Louis was responsible for a major change of direction in the history of France.
(b) Communities
For one school of distinguished late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century historians, led by Luchaire, the twelfth century was essentially the century of the communes — those sworn associations of burghers who, spurred by economic change, challenged with violence the feudal ordering of society, and brought about a new world.
Few would now concur wholeheartedly in the terminology or the arguments of Luchaire and his school.
Yet they were surely correct in their fundamental premise, that what distinguished the twelfth century from its predecessors was above all the proliferation of new political communities, juridically defined by their consuetudines or coutumes .
For their appearance broadened the context of French political life, previously confined to the military aristocracy and the higher ranks of churchmen; and in the process of broadening it, changed its nature.
The roots of the new communities must clearly be sought in social and economic change.
As the swelling rural population cleared land and settled new territory, the isolated tillers of the soil acquired new neighbours; as lords, both lay and ecclesiastical, colonized the countryside to maximize their profits, villages replaced hamlets, towns villages.
La Rochelle, for example, established by a pariage agreement between Duke William X of Aquitaine and Louis VI of France in 1130, grew in the second half of the century into the chief port for the export of Gascon wines to England; the prospect of employment attracted immigrants, the settlement became a substantial town.
And old centres expanded as rapidly as  new.
The great abbey of Vézelay, dedicated to St Mary Magdalen, was so thronged with pilgrims in the early twelfth century that a rebuilding programme was carried out, resulting in some of the finest Romanesque sculpture to be seen in all France.
To satisfy the needs of monks and pilgrims, the small settlement beyond the abbey walls expanded into a town, its inhabitants including innkeepers, victuallers of all sorts, mercers, and some prominent money-changers.
Similarly the old Roman cities in Languedoc, Burgundy, and the Loire valley regained a truly urban character, after centuries of being pared down to walls, cathedral church, and market place; townsmen outnumbered clerics, new streets were built for their houses, roads inside the walls began to be levelled to prevent rubbish from blocking the entrances to new stone churches or entrance gates, trades diversified, immigrants poured in.
In Flanders, where the cloth trade provided an urban-based industry, the transformation of small centres like Ghent, Ypres, and Lille into the greatest cities of northern Europe was startling.
In themselves, congregations of people do not necessarily form political units; social and economic bonds may suffice.
But the inhabitants of some twelfth-century towns and villages moved last to associate for the protection of their interests against those of their overlords — bishops in the case of most ancient towns, abbots or castellans for newer foundations.
The most famous, and one of the earliest, associations made its appearance in Laon in the early years of the century, as a consequence of the expanding wine trade in the area.
The merchants of Laon, irritated by servile taxes, offered a large sum of money to the ‘the clerks, the archdeacons, and the nobles’ of the town for the privilege of having a commune — a sworn association for self-protection.
In 1112, however, the bishop Gaudry bribed the king to suppress the commune.
Guibert of Nogent, a distinguished raconteur, was in the city on 26 April, the day on which the burghers' resentment boiled over into rebellion, and left this account of events:
In the slaughter which followed, the bishop himself was slain.
From the burghers' point of view, his death was a serious blow, for it forced Louis VI to punish them.
As a consequence, it was not until 1128, and then in return for a very substantial sum, that they obtained royal recognition for their association, now called a peace confraternity rather than a commune.
The charter legitimated some degree of self-government, limited the charges on serfs, guaranteed justice; it therefore formed the foundation of the town's liberties.
Revolution was only one, and not the commonest, method pursued by burghers; taking advantage of political disturbance could bring more speedy results.
Here the classic case was that of the Flemish towns' exploitation of the succession crisis on the death of Count Charles the Good in 1127.
We are well informed about this by Galbert, a notary of Bruges, who wrote his account of the events as they occurred, betraying a humanity and reflectiveness rare among men of his generation.
The two most influential men in Bruges, the castellan and the dean of St Donatian's,ex officio chancellor of Flanders, were both members of a powerful new family, the Erembalds, which had risen from servile origins to prominence by the route of comital administrative service.
Their exploitation of this recently opened path aroused jealousy among the knights, one of whom refused to answer a charge levelled against him by the Erembalds in the court of Charles the Good, on the ground that his accusers' lowly social origins barred them from comital justice.
This allegation threatened the Erembalds' whole social and political position; so, when it appeared that Charles the Good was sympathetic towards it, they murdered him.
Chaos followed, for Charles  had no direct heir; and several of his cousins had roughly equal claims to succeed.
Louis VI intervened on behalf of one of them, William Clito, son of Robert Curthose, and therefore a claimant also to the duchy of Normandy; for some months it looked as though Clito would establish his right.
But his candidacy was naturally unacceptable to Henry I of England, who feared that the wealth and military power of Flanders would give Clito an unassailable advantage in Normandy; and the risk of antagonizing Henry was not one which the cloth towns cared to take, because they feared disruption of the wool supply.
So, in 1125, when Clito's violation of the Ypres fair peace provided an excuse, the burghers of Ghent sent to Bruges for support in pressing the claims of Thierry of Alsace.
Despite Louis VI's military aid, Clito died of wounds received in battle, and Thierry's claims to the county were upheld.
The outstanding lesson to emerge from this story was that comital succession, hitherto a matter determined within the comital family, could now be affected by interests from outside, even from outside the military aristocracy as a class.
The precocity displayed by Ypres and Ghent in securing a candidate favourable to their industrial future was not to be imitated in the rest of France in the twelfth century; still, other rulers, particularly those of Champagne, learned from it of the profit to be derived from allying with the increasingly powerful mercantile or industrial classes.
The part the Flemish towns played in the crisis of 1127–8 not only highlighted their importance, it also guaranteed their liberties.
For, in his endeavour to secure their support, William Clito began his reign by issuing charters to Bruges, Ghent, Aire-sur-Lys, and St Omer.
Of these, only the St Omer charter survives.
It included, along with clauses concerned with tolls and mercantile rights, a grant of freedom for the town and all dwellers in it; the abolition of the judicial duel, unpopular with merchants; the use of inquest in its place; and an enlarged competence for the échevins or boni homines , the successors of the Carolingian scabini , re-established in the town at the very beginning of the century.
It was the échevins who were to represent the towns in all the proceedings of the following year; and once Thierry of Alsace was  safely ensconced as count, he could hardly subvert their position.
Until his successor Philip moved to establish greater uniformity in urban law, the échevins of Bruges (and probably of other towns as well) were free to fix the customary law of their own community, which implied a remarkable degree of emancipation from external control.
In the south of France, other cities achieved as much independence by slow, steady accumulation.
In Toulouse, for example, while episcopal jurisdiction shrank under the Second Lateran Council's prohibition on justice de sang , the boni homines emerged before 1120 as important judicial figures, their competence enhanced by their control over the salvamenta established as a consequence of the peace movement.
The count of Toulouse, who had succeeded in uniting all areas of the town under his domination by 1119, was happy to allow the boni homines day-to-day management of the town's legal affairs, provided that the profits of justice remained largely his, and his rights to talage, unlimited military service and forced loans at will were preserved — as they were until 1147.
In practice, the count's absence in St Gilles and Provence allowed the boni homines gradually to accumulate powers and the town to acquire liberties, to a degree that shocked Raymond V after his return to the city in 1180.
His attempts at resumption provoked rebellion in 1189, which facilitated the establishment of the consulate in the city, the final step towards true urban independence.
The Flemish cities, Laon, and Toulouse were all commercial centres of more than local importance before they launched their campaigns for privileges; and if their leaders were not highly educated men at the beginning of the century — it has been suggested that the reason why weaving was concentrated in towns in Flanders was that illiterate merchants could not keep the complicated records necessary for a scattered cottage industry — then they rapidly acquired learning along with their corporate awareness in the course of the century.
In 1196, the dowager countess Matilda, confirming Ghent's privileges, ensured that no barriers would obstruct any competent person who wished to open a school in the town.
The church's monopoly of formal education was broken.
Before this was achieved, where the new town  governors' literacy proved too feeble to cope with challenges, it could be supplemented by the skills of notaries like Galbert of Bruges.
Thus the complex administration necessary for repairing and extending city walls, channelling water supplies, ejecting waste, hearing legal cases, punishing offenders, policing the streets, could all be supplied.
The culminating symbol of so much diverse activity was to be achieved in the thirteenth century, when the independent cities, led by those of Flanders, erected fine belfries so that their bells should rival those of the churches in summoning the flock to meet.
However the movement for some degree of independence, some autonomy, was not confined to substantial towns.
It is true that the privilege of smaller towns was generally couched in more negative terms: by defining their consuetudines they prevented other powers — usually castellans — from arbitrary exactions.
Yet very rapidly a list of prohibitions or limitations on the overlord's power could become a guarantee of the citizens' rights.
In a letter to Suger, Robert of Montfalcon declared that a case over whether or not a certain man was his serf should be tried either in the royal court or before the archbishop of Bourges, provided that the proceedings were in accordance with the customs of Bourges; for him, the consuetudines of his native town had assumed the status of a law binding on outside authorities.
Bourges was a community in a vital sense, bound by rules of the inhabitants' own making.
Both Bourges and Laon were wine-growing areas.
A contributory factor in their campaigns to secure charters was that the peasants who grew the vines around the outskirts of the town found arbitrary and unpredictable seigneurial exactions an intolerable burden on a form of agriculture for which long-term planning was essential.
Rural pursuits as well as urban required the protection that written and confirmed consuetudines could bestow.
In 1155, the customs confirmed by Louis VII for Lorris on the royal demesne established that no parishioner should have to pay taxes on food intended for his own consumption or on grain grown by his own labour; he should be exempt from tolls when he took his produce to the neighbouring towns of Etampes, Orléans, Milly, or Melun; if required for a chevauchée , he must be allowed to return  home at the end of the day; the only labour service he owed his lord was in carrying seigneurial wine to Orléans twice a year; and the burgesses of Lorris as a whole were exempted from seigneurial tailles .
These concessions, ideally suited to promote the interests of an agricultural community, ensured widespread publicity for the customs of Lorris;, they were therefore sought and obtained by a number of other rural communities, particularly within the royal demesne, in the second half of the twelfth century.
The appearance of privileged communities was not quite as haphazard as it may seem.
Where lordship was strong, as in Paris, the degree of self-government was strictly limited.
The same was true in Normandy, where Henry II's concession to Rouen between 1160 and 1170, soon to be a model for other cities across the Angevin empire, permitted internal self-government by a mayor and town council, but also allowed the duke to choose the mayor from a list of three names submitted to him by the council, and protected the ducal right to military service.
Elsewhere, the degree of urban independence varied with the amount of pressure the community could exert, its ability to exploit political crisis, and the condition of its neighbours.
The interplay of these factors was complex; the two areas where the most advanced urban institutions were found were Flanders, where comital control was tight, and Gothia, where by contrast the count of Toulouse's authority within the great cities was almost negligible, and where the clashes between vicecomital and episcopal powers facilitated independence.
On the lower rung of legal self-determination the grant of customary franchises might be in a lord's interests, for it could secure his revenues in perpetuity, even as it barred him the chance of arbitrary exaction; besides, an early concession might prevent more explosive demands later.
Some castellans and bishops were therefore amenable to bargaining; but others needed forceful persuasion.
Again, where local lordship was strong, above all in Normandy, the chances of concessions were small.
Those communities which did not receive franchises seem to have suffered a greater degree of extortion, as their lords strove to recover some of the profits they were losing elsewhere.
As a consequence, the condition  of the peasantry in twelfth-century France varied markedly from community to community', the extremes of contrast coming between those villages on the royal demesne protected by the customs of Lorris, and those in Champagne where serfdom retained its original rigours, where peasants remained the property of their lords, their labour services heavy, their safeguards against exploitative lordship non-existent.
On a pragmatic level, the pressure for self-government or franchise complicated the aristocracy's game of preserving their own lordship while subverting that of their rivals.
It could offer opportunities for embarrassing independent lords, as Alphonse Jourdain of Toulouse showed when he assisted the rebellious inhabitants of Montpellier against William VI; but his own financial losses when the right to take tallage or forced loans from Toulouse escaped his grasp in 1147, outweighed any advantage elsewhere.
No lords appreciated the possibilities inherent in the movement so clearly as Louis VI and Louis VII.
Their consummate skill in limiting demands for independence on the royal demesne, while favouring them elsewhere where a royal confirmation might create allies, has often been remarked.
But the clearest example of royal skill was found in Louis VII's cynical suppression of Vézelay's revolt against its abbot in 1152.
The rebels, provoked by Ponce of Vézelay's unyielding determination to maintain a monopoly of justice within the town, won much self-interested support in the neighbourhood; from the bishop of Autun, who wished to subject the abbey to episcopal control, from Cluny, which hoped to reabsorb the abbey into its order, and from the count of Nevers, who resented the legalistic and literal interpretation the abbot put upon his charter of immunity.
On the other hand Ponce was strengthened in his intransigence by a papal letter forbidding him to make concessions on the immunity.
But when his isolation rendered him vulnerable, he turned to Louis for assistance.
As a price for his reduction of the rebels, Louis forced from the very reluctant abbot the recognition that in temporal matters he was subject to the decision of the royal court.
Louis's behaviour betrayed no interest in abstract justice: he was prepared to force modifications of the  immunity in his own favour, but not in those of the count of Nevers or of the rebels; moreover, his opposition to the commune was inconsistent with his behaviour at Rheims or Amiens, and with long-term royal policy (by the end of the century, Vézelay had won its liberties).
But in the short term, the king was the only party to the dispute who benefited by it; for it allowed him to display vigorous royal action within the county of Nevers.
For all princes, the communal movement raised a rather different problem: each privileged community, whether fully self-governing or merely franchised, constituted in enclave subject to different rules from its neighbours; it was not therefore easily absorbed into the administrative framework of castellanies which the princes of the north were seeking to clarify and define.
Indeed, towns were as anomalous as the independent lordships the count of Champagne was bent on integrating into his castellan network.
Since what distinguished communities was their legal customs, anomalies could be reduced by greater legal uniformity within a whole castellany or, better still, a whole province.
There was no problem in Normandy, where, by the middle of the twelfth century, one customary law obtained virtually throughout the duchy.
Elsewhere in the north strong rulers, the kings, the counts of Flanders and Anjou, increased standardization by modifying customs when they confirmed them, or by persuading new communities to accept wholesale already existing customs.
But though the patchwork of random entities slowly yielded in places to more solid blocks, nevertheless between them many separate customs survived.
Later in the Middle Ages, the pays de droit coutumier , the land of customary law, was reckoned to consist of more than three hundred different customs (though only sixty of these were important and there were considerable similarities across blocks).
In the far south, Gascony, the Saintonge, Toulouse, Gothia, and the southern fringes of the Massif Central, things developed differently.
There the eleventh-century proliferation of consuetudines and castellanies had been modified by the survival (in places at least) of the old administrative framework, and by the tradition that serious offences were justiciable in  a court higher than that of the castellan.
The growth of independent towns in the twelfth century lent force to the revival of public courts on the Carolingian model; while Mediterranean contacts ensured a warm welcome for the learning of Bolognese Roman lawyers in the early decades of the century.
Although the academic study of Roman law took a long time to have practical effect, by the 1170s and 1180s it was occasionally cited authoritatively in some at least of the courts of the south.
The pays de droit écrit (land subject to written — Roman — law) was emerging, encompassing castellan and communal courts within its framework.
By this means the south was to achieve a rather greater legal  homogeneity than the north.
(c) The emergence of government
What distinguishes government from personal control is its unremitting character.
To be governed is to be subjected to the regular pressure of an authority operating according to fixed rules.
In the full sense of the word, it is arguable that nobody was governed before the later nineteenth century; it would certainly be foolish to maintain that either royal or princely government in the twelfth century operated according to fixed rules or without intermission or over all the inhabitants of a defined area.
Nevertheless, the perception that this might be desirable was reborn, whether for good or for ill, among the twelfth-century rulers of France.
What provoked it was in part the ecclesiastical reform movement.
For the reformers' vision of a fully-developed hierarchy, each man with his own sphere of competence, all subject to canon law and all beneath the discipline of the papal rod, evoked a mixture of admiration and envy in those laymen, accustomed to deference, whose position in the ecclesiastical scheme was lower than they would have wished.
They neither cared nor dared explicitly to challenge this picture, as the pro-imperialists among the Germans had done.
Rather they contented themselves by pointing out that, if the secular power was now confined to the rather lowly role of protecting the church's interests with the  material sword, that sword was in practice essential to the well-being of the church.
So Baldwin VII of Flanders, confirming the privileges of Zonnebeke abbey, declared:
It was powerful pragmatic argument.
But it did involve the acceptance of a spiritual authority beyond his control, to which his ancestor Arnoul I could never have bowed.
And those among the princes who refused to recognize that authority — notably Duke William X of Aquitaine in the Anacletan schism — suffered a weakening of their secular power.
In returning to the old imagery of the prince as the bearer of the sword, the reformers had in fact triggered off an important set of associations.
They recalled the Augustinian view of political authority as established not merely for defence against external enemies, but also for internal peace.
Thus far, French princes — with the notable exception of the Norman king-duke — had been wary of claiming for themselves the peace-keeping function within their lands.
It was no accident that Baldwin VII of Flanders moved to a new repressive interpretation of comital justice at just the same time as he claimed the superior advocacy over all ecclesiastical houses in Flanders.
His successor Charles the Good increased his own powers of coercion to protect the weak and the tillers of the soil, while limiting those of others through prohibitions on weapon-carrying in markets or towns, and on the lighting of beacons to signal the start of a private war.
For if the princes were to take seriously the one task the church now allowed them, they could not achieve it without also enlarging their criminal jurisdiction.
The epitaph on Geoffrey le Bel's tomb:
As ecclesiastical reform refocused ideas on the prince's function, it also had an effect on the way he fulfilled it.
In 1140 the monk Gratian in Bologna produced his Decretum or Concordance of Discordant Canons , in which he demonstrated that, given the proper techniques of critical examination, the authoritative statements of church fathers and ecclesiastical councils could be harmonized to yield fundamental principles of church law.
This approach, in which lay the seeds of later scholasticism, revived the notion of truth as an objective reality, attainable in the end by human endeavour; its appeal to the optimistic humanism of the twelfth century was therefore strong.
And its implication for the conduct of trials in ecclesiastical courts was that the processes of human inquest could yield objective facts which human reason was competent to judge.
Law could become once more an intellectual's chess-game.
Canon law was a practice as well as a theory well before 1140.
Bishops in every diocese in France could be seen sorting out conflicts in ecclesiastical organization according to its principles; parish priests and laymen were drawn into the processes, whether as parties to disputes or as witnesses.
For secular courts, the consequence was a revival of inquest proceedings on a much more extended scale than had been common in the eleventh century, causing a demand for documentary proof that chanceries and monastic scriptoria were hard pressed to satisfy.
Slowly it sapped at the roots of the kind of justice which had been dependent on the judgement of God; ordeal — in any case a last resort — grew rare; though trial by battle continued as a privilege of the military classes (in some places till the end of the middle ages), it too became somewhat of a curiosity.
Oath-helpers were still employed to swear to the good character of the accused; but everywhere evidence as to the facts of the case grew more significant.
Self-governing towns were swift to embrace this  new — or rather revived Carolingian — form of trial; for disputes between merchants were hardly susceptible of solution by battle.
And the areas of greatest urban expansion — Flanders and Gothia — were also those where Carolingian judicial forms had survived longest.
Their example inspired others.
But inquest necessitated a professionalism long absent from castellans' courts.
Boni homines or échevins ousted them in the self-governing towns; and slowly the day-to-day work of running courts in the non-franchised areas was taken over by knights or clerks with special knowledge of the law, leaving castellans to revert to their military role.
That this did not happen to princes was a mark of their ability.
Thibaud V was held by John of Salisbury to be one of the most learned lawyers of his day; Philip of Alsace was a man of rare competence; other princes gathered around them their band of learned advisers, their counsellors on whose pronouncements they could depend.
So all were seen by their subjects in their role as peace-keepers, and also as upholders and definers of customary law.
Only where the demands of the Anglo-Norman and then the Angevin empire dictated it was there regular delegation of the prince's judicial rights to an official; even then, this delegation was revoked when the king-duke visited.
Elsewhere, though crusading might cause a temporary break, the link between the prince and his court was close.
When Geoffrey le Bel was unable to arbitrate in person between the seneschal and the monks of Baugé in a quarrel over tithes in 1146, he insisted that his part in the case be acknowledged.
The charter setting forth the terms of the agreement ends:.
Princes were happy to exploit those elements in the intellectual ferment of the twelfth-century renaissance, which exalted their position as executors of justice.
Geoffrey le Bel would have been flattered by John of Marmoutier's comparison of his judicial aims with those of ancient Rome.
The study of the classics, even when unfortified by specific reference to Roman law, was a potent weapon in strengthening princely jurisdiction at the expense of others.
Equally, the theologians' new concentration on the literal meaning of the Bible produced a new view of the judge's obligations which Charles the Good of Flanders exploited for himself:
So behind and above the person of the prince, there formed again the abstract concept of ‘the public person’, the punisher of the wrongs and injuries, the bearer of peace, the mighty distributor of justice and equity.
Yet the scholarly energy which reinvigorated abstract concepts of political function was identical with that which satirized them.
For to believe in abstract principles of justice was to face a long series of disillusionments in everyday life, as the Goliardic poems, written by scholars trained in the new learning, amply demonstrated:
Having raised quite unreasonably high expectations, the intellectuals were among the first to invoke God's judgement against those very processes they had so recently emancipated from God's direct intervention.
Now, in the absence of ordeal, they could only await the final vindication of their cause in heaven.
The roots of disillusionment — in so far as they were the fruit of twelfth-century conditions and not merely the natural response to too high or too vaguely expressed expectations — lay in the intellectuals' belief, stated by John of Salisbury.
But even when princes did strive to fulfil this ideal, there were considerations which might subvert their intentions.
Thibaud IV of Champagne defended his decision to hang a criminal by asserting that he was the devil incarnate; yet the prince could not prevail against St Bernard's cry ‘I will hang this murderer myself!’
And though for St Bernard incarceration at Cîteaux was the equivalent of perpetual crucifixion, the criminal's reception into the monastic order may not have satisfied everyone's sense of justice.
The temperance of justice by mercy was therefore random in incidence when the criminal was not of aristocratic birth; when he was, political considerations entered into the verdict.
For though princes might now punish delinquent vassals or officials (see pp. 360, 286), there was solid political sense in not subjecting them to the same penalties as lesser men.
When Philip of Colombière's nephew killed the niece of the bishop of Bayeaux, King Henry II's court behaved as it would have done in the previous century in reconciling the parties by arranging a settlement between them.
On the other hand, princes felt free to vent their own anger in ways which they now blocked to others.
So Geoffrey le Bel, who would brook no interference with the privileges he had granted, tore up one of his own charters when its beneficiary, Gerald Bellay, had infuriated him.
A prince's treatment of his fideles was not susceptible to rules of impersonal and eternal justice; and no attempt was yet made to make it so (see p. 349).
Yet because a prince could now justify his coercive authority by reference to his peace-keeping function, those who failed to obtain what they saw as justice at his court, and who now stood to suffer punishment if they disturbed the peace to vindicate their rights, grew embittered.
Gerald Bellay's rebellion against Geoffrey le Bel, with his appeal for support to Louis VII, were significant presages of future developments.
The intellectuals' contribution to the practice of government was, at least in the short term, less of a mixed blessing than their political and legal theorizing.
It lay in producing  those written documents — charters, writs, letters, accounts — by which hitherto spasmodic personal contacts between princes and their officials and subjects could be regularized, and in inventing new ways of increasing efficiency.
The evolution of a rudimentary bureaucracy was, by 1180, the distinguishing feature of royal and princely administrations.
Again the example of ecclesiastical organization was formative; but by 1180, lay bureaucracies had acquired a momentum and an approach all their own.
Shortly after the middle of the century, John of Salisbury finished his famous Policraticus , a discursive and unanalytical work devoted to criticizing the contemporary mores in the ruling circles of church and state, and to putting forward a higher code of conduct.
Relying on the Bible, Roman law, and the classics to explain what ought to be, John also drew on his own experience to describe the contemporary scene.
Though primarily a commentary on Henry II's government in England, the Policraticus used the terms of Roman law,princeps for ruler and provincia , province, for the area of his rule; these suggest that John also intended his book to be relevant to France, the land in which he had been educated and to which he was to return as bishop of Chartres.
The most famous chapter in the Policraticus is that which sets forth the organic image of the commonwealth, the prince the head, the church the soul, the senate the heart, the soldiers the arms, the peasants the legs — a classical cliché brought up-to-date.
The importance of this image in the history of western political thought has long been recognized; indeed it has been hailed as the rebirth of the concept of state in the Middle Ages.
Its most striking feature is the importance attributed to princely officials: judges and provincial governors are the eyes, ears and tongue of the body politic; officials are the hands; and financial officers the stomach and intestines.
By the middle of the twelfth century, John's French readers would have had no difficulty in making the necessary identifications: castellans and viscounts,baillis and prévôts , household officers, the clerks, knights, and chamberlains of princely courts abounded.
Bureaucracy, long absent from the country, was making a rapid return, both at central and at local levels.
And John  of Salisbury was not alone in believing that the administrative class was in dire need of instruction, lest it subvert the common good in its own or its master's interests.
The social origins of the new administrators have interested historians.
The Erembald family, of which the chancellor of St Donatian's and the castellan of Bruges were members in 1127, was alleged by its opponents to be of servile origin; that its members chose to murder Charles the Good rather than dispute the allegation suggests its truth.
If this was so, their social ascent was uncommonly sharp.
But a recent study of the Capetian kings' household has traced a growing reliance on knights of lowly birth and clerks whose claim to prominence sprang solely from their usefulness.
The Cleer family in Anjou were of knightly status.
And in Normandy, both Henry I and Henry II favoured ‘new men’, some at least of whom were of modest families.
How their absence of social distinction affected the performance of their duties can only be guessed.
But it may be that, as men of little social consequence, they lacked that sensitivity to personal relationships on which the aristocratic society of the tenth and eleventh centuries had depended; for the newcomers, what was sauce for the goose was likely to be sauce for the gander.
Because they saw the world as composed of groups rather than of individuals, they found it easy to articulate rules of general application, to which exceptions required specific dispensation.
But of course this viewpoint was liable to emerge in any case at a time in which government was extending its reach down the social scale, to affect towns, privileged communities, and even on occasion serfs.
The schools springing up all over France in the twelfth century probably had a formative influence on the administrators, though this can rarely be proved.
At the court of Louis VII, there was Mainier, a lawyer, whose name was prefaced by the title magister , meaning that he had received a licentia docendi , a licence to teach.
Elsewhere, it is uncertain how many of the clerks and knights of princely households obtained from schools the pragmatic literacy on which they called in their day-to-day business.
It is rather more likely that clerks had benefit of formal education than knights.
But courts themselves were places of education; ‘With the king of England it is school every day’, as Peter of Blois remarked.
And literacy, at least in the vernacular, could certainly be acquired without the aid of schooling.
But whether directly or indirectly, the incipient bureaucracies clearly owed much to scholastic methods, to the categorization of information, the use of abstract nouns, and the search for system, that the schools had pioneered.
Because administrators depended on their lord's favour, they devoted themselves with vigour to Promoting his interests.
Here lay the spur to innovation, as can be seen in the Norman and Flemish accounting systems, which combined the techniques of survey and inquest with the new arithmetic to protect and increase the revenues available to the duke of Normandy and the count of Flanders.
The Norman exchequer (probably instituted in the early years of the century, at the same time as its English counterpart) used the tally, the chequered cloth, and the abacus to provide records for the illiterate and to overcome the considerable problems posed by the use of Roman numerals in addition and subtraction.
These were not new expedients; but their regular and systematic application to the ends of government effected a solid gain in efficiency.
The aim of the Norman exchequer rolls was to provide a complete record of the debts and revenues due from each administrative unit of the duchy.
The aim of the 1187 Grote Bref in Flanders was a little different: in adding all revenues and expenditures together, it offered a rough estimate of the count's total income (though in fact there were resources not mentioned in the account.)
A less exciting but equally innovative characteristic of princely officials was that they now existed in sufficient numbers to be used to check up on one another.
Henry H noted threateningly at the end of a letter of command addressed to one of his prévôts : ‘If you do not do this, William of Vernone or his servants will do it; and if they do not do it, my justice shall do it.’
Princes were at last within reach of achieving their ends — or some of them — without having to resort to lengthy persuasion, to bribery or to the use of force.
Hardly surprisingly, officials were unpopular, both with sophisticated men like Walter Map and the Goliardic poets  and with ordinary peasants.
So despite the enormous gains they conferred un their masters, they were often cheated of the loyal support they deserved.
There were few things more calculated to endear a prince to his subjects than a display of stern retribution on unjust officials.
John of Marmoutier tells the legend that Geoffrey le Bel dressed up as a rustic and listened to complaints about his prévôts ’ rapacity; on his return to court, he paid back the sums they had extorted, and threatened them with death if they continued to defraud the peasantry.
Though almost certainly untrue, the tale succinctly illustrates the prevailing princely ambivalence: they distanced themselves from the servants on whom they relied.
(d) Warfare and crusades
The poet Marbod of Rennes celebrated (in Latin) the vengeance which would befall a wicked castellan and his troops:
The poem highlights two important twelfth-century developments: the use of force in punishing aristocratic crime (the fruit of princely peace-keeping), and the increasing significance of siege-engines in warfare.
Intellectuals claimed a formative influence in the second too: John of Marmoutier declared that monks from his own monastery had read Vegetius' De Re Militari to Geoffrey le Bel when he was investing the castle of a rebellious castellan, and ascribed  his success to their advice on firebombs.
But common sense may have been more important than learning in perceiving the vulnerability of most castles to — battering-rams and catapults; for even in 1100 they were, as a rule, primitive structures.
Siege-engines demanded on the one hand skilled operators, and on the other a plentiful supply of unskilled labourers to move the necessary materials.
This effectively restricted their use to the wealthy and to those whose claim to assistance under the ban was incontrovertible.
Equally, the improvements in fortification needed to withstand their effects — thick stone walls, inner as well as outer defences — required incomes greater than those of simple lords.
The net effect was that, given dedication, princes — Louis VI, Geoffrey le Bel, Alphonse-Jourdain — could subdue rebellious castellans within their own demesnes, and could build castles of their own which were impregnable to all but lengthy and sustained attack.
Henry II's castle at Chinon, where the treasury of Anjou was situated, was the model for its generation, with its halls, upper chambers, tower, and curtain walling, set on a high point above a strategic crossing of the Loire.
It could be copied only either by those of nearly equal wealth or by those who could concentrate their resources chiefly on defence — princes, great bishops or, in the south especially, towns.
All others became vulnerable.
John of Salisbury's comment that not only the towns but also the fortresses of Gaul feared Henry I of England was revealing of the new situation.
Similarly, campaigning in the field imposed an increasing financial burden.
The treaty between Robert II of Flanders and Henry I of England, renewed by their successors, stipulated that each knight supplied to the English king should bring three horses with him — this at a time when a horse represented a major investment.
Then knightly armour grew more elaborate and costly throughout the century.
And though some knights might be supplied free by feudal service, household ones had to be maintained by their lords, mercenary ones needed pay, and those with money-fiefs constituted a regular charge on the treasury.
Besides, away from their home base, knights were useless on their  own.
In open battle and in the plundering expeditions that constituted the normal form of aggressive warfare, they needed the backing of archers, both mounted and on foot, and of numerous infantrymen.
The usual source of supply was town militias — Suger mentions those of Rheims, Châlons, Laon, Soissons, Orléans, Etampes, and Paris in the royal army of 1124.
But they might have to be supplemented by mercenaries from Flanders and the Low Countries, where the rapidly expanding population forced large numbers of young men into military careers.
In the eyes of the faithful, these ‘Brabanters’, with their freebooting and lack of discipline after the end of campaigns, were as dangerous as heretics; in 1171 Frederick Barbarossa and Louis VII agreed to expel them from their lands.
Their value in battle, as shields behind which the knights could shelter before they launched their charge, ensured their continued employment by those who could afford them — notably Henry II of England.
But the hatred they aroused meant that they were liable to be brutally slaughtered if captured afterwards.
Inevitably, therefore, war on the grand scale as fought by princes bore little resemblance in practice to the feuds of lesser men.
The divergence was sharpened by the application of a theoretical distinction, the fruit of Augustinian theology, amplified as the century went on by canon and Roman law reference; princes pronounced their campaigns just wars (fought against aggressors with the aim of re-establishing peace) or public wars (declared by a competent authority in the public interest), while they condemned the wars of lesser men as infractions of the peace.
Geoffrey Martel had perceived the propaganda potential of public war as early as the mid eleventh century; later it enabled Henry the Liberal of Champagne to claim the military service of all lords within his county, a reapplication of the Carolingian ban .
So it could be a powerful weapon.
Yet the logic of the definition suggested that it would benefit especially kings, whose competence to declare war could not be impugned: thus Thibaud of Blois failed to persuade the monks of Marmoutier that they owed him service when he fought against Louis VI; they claimed discretion in the matter; and in 1184, the mighty Philip of Alsace hesitated to commit to battle the army he had summoned against Philip Augustus, through fear that its ranks might melt away.
The contrast with the united front Louis VI and his troops presented to the emperor Henry V in 1124 was marked.
A royal banner now bestowed respectability on a cause; kings' wars were assumed to be for the sake of peace, even when cripplingly expensive and increasingly savage.
This goes some way to explaining why the complicated campaigns within Toulouse in the second half of the century were largely fought out under the banners of the Angevin, Aragonese, and French kings; and why the revolts of Henry II's sons had widespread ramifications.
The twelfth century was characterized, therefore, by fewer but more protracted wars, which smouldered for long periods between short, sharp bouts of conflict, like the war that covered must of the reigns of Henry I of England and Louis VI of France, the one inaugurated by the great rebellion of 1173, which outlived both Louis VII and Henry II, or that against Catalan claims in the south.
Into these large numbers of local conflicts were subsumed.
The pattern caused problems, in that the circumstances which might trigger off renewed fighting were unpredictable; yet the moment an opportunity offered, princes had to be prepared for invading their enemies; there was no time for lengthy preparation.
The usual tactic was to march troops across the enemy's territory, plundering and looting; to take fortified places if the task was easy; to obtain allies among the lords of the locality; and to retreat without fighting a battle if at all possible — in effect an application to a wider canvas of the some technique of warfare which had earlier made castellans formidable in the immediate environs of their castles.
It necessitated the rapid mobilization of auxiliaries to join a core of highly-trained troops kept constantly, at the ready — the princes' military households, which became the linch pin of the system.
John of Marmoutier's life of Geoffrey le Bel offers a glimpse of how strong bonds were created between the prince and his followers within the household, and how a high level of training was maintained at all times.
Geoffrey was brought up  from infancy with the sons of neighbouring Angevin lords, on whose companionship he relied.
When it came time for him to be knighted by Henry I in Rouen, he set off for Normandy with a crowd of these young men about him.
In Rouen, the occasion was celebrated with pomp, elaborate dress, and a great feast, and then the youths all demonstrated their military skill at a grand tournament, at which Geoffrey naturally won the highest honours.
It was within this kind of environment that chivalry flourished, that young men learned to identify, their vassalage towards their lord as a symbol of their honour, that they debated the relative merits of Roland's and Oliver's way of displaying loyalty; and that they learned the finer points of jousting.
Tournaments were disapproved of by ecclesiastics, for they could be both bloody and dangerous.
Yet they supplied real needs:.
that of an instruction in the martial arts compatible with the maintenance of a prince's peace; that of an outlet for competitive instincts within the claustrophobic confines of a court; and that of display to maintain princely social status.
So they flourished everywhere.
They offered opportunities for men of skill to acquire great position in the world — Arnoul of Ardres caught the eye of Countess Ida of Boulogne through his exploits; and they also conferred lustre on the great — Geoffrey le Bel and Philip of Alsace were  renowned throughout France for their distinguished performances in these show battles.
All this formed a background to the first century of crusading; and it goes some way to explaining the more secular aspects of the magnetism which drew French knights to take up the cross in their thousands.
Urban II, launching the First Crusade at Clermont in 1095, presented it as a natural evolution of the peace movement: warriors were to forget their petty feuds and squabbles in a campaign to promote the interests of Holy Church.
The war, declared by one whose moral authority was unimpeachable, was to free the Eastern churches, to end Muslim guardianship of the holy places, to restore Jerusalem to its proper state.
As princes saw it, it was a just war in the fullest sense of the term; those who were slaughtered in its battles were regarded as among the martyrs of the church.
When Raymond of Toulouse, Robert II of Flanders, Robert Curthose, Stephen of Blois, and Hugh of Vermandois responded to the call, past and present members of their military households fell almost automatically into rank behind them, to test themselves against terrible dangers, but also to enjoy the companionship in arms, the adventure, the deeds of daring which were the stuff of the chansons de geste .
That they shared, along with all other participants in the crusade, a fervent devotion, a conviction that their sins would be forgiven, is certain.
Yet for them crusading necessitated no large leap of the imagination, no millenarian vision; it was simply a challenging and a deserving extension of their everyday activities.
In French eyes, the hero of the First Crusade was Robert II of Flanders.
While Raymond of Toulouse remained in Outremer, Stephen and Hugh disgraced themselves in escaping from the siege of Antioch, and Robert Curthose, no matter how gallant, at least in his lifetime failed to impress, Robert II's prestige soared to the skies.
He became Robert of Jerusalem to his contemporaries; his deeds were recorded in the Song of Antioch ; his pious bravery totally expunged the memory of Robert the Frisian's usurpation; and after his death his son Baldwin VII harped on his father's achievement to justify his substantial use of coercion against the enemies of the church.
Outside Flanders, Robert's sister's marriage to Roger of Sicily was a mark of his new position in the world; like Louis VI's sister's marriage to Bohemond of Antioch, it stretched French kinship connections into the new Norman colonies, ensuring that travellers from the homeland would find a welcome in those distant parts.
Robert's example was a potent one.
After the next change in dynasty, Thierry and Philip of Alsace strengthened their shaky claim to the comital position by attaining for themselves the prestige attached to being the outstanding crusaders of their generation.
Thierry's remote connection with the family of Godfrey de Bouillon, along with his marriage with Sybilla of Anjou, Fulk V's daughter, gave him some claim to the throne of Jerusalem; as a consequence, the aristocracy of Outremer viewed him and Philip with mixed feelings, expecting much of them, yet fearing their ambitions.
In the end, it was not in Outremer but in the newly conquered  Byzantine empire that the Flemish crusading achievement was crowned with the elevation of Count Baldwin IX to the imperial throne in 1204.
But in the twelfth century, the house of Alsace could afford the high costs of their expeditions — Thierry went to Jerusalem four times, Philip twice — and the counts' repeated absences in fact promoted administrative reform; the baillis and the Grote Bref were as much the products of crusading as the English and Norman judicial system and exchequers were the product of the king-duke's divided attentions.
But if, on balance, the Flemish counts benefited materially from crusading,— as, arguably, did the Angevin — they were far from typical.
For other French houses a commitment to Outremer often represented a sacrifice of domestic political interest.
The achievements of Raymond IV St Gilles in consolidating his authority within Toulouse were threatened by his departure in 1095, especially since it was known that he had no intention of returning home.
Then his example lured his elder son Bertrand to Tripoli in 1112, and his younger son Alphonse Jourdain there in 1147.
Had not his grandson Raymond V fulfilled his crusading obligation in his early youth, thereby freeing himself from the necessity of interrupting his career in the county, the principality of Toulouse might have disintegrated altogether.
William IX's crusade of 1101 brought about serious financial problems in Aquitaine which caused rapid devaluation in the hitherto stable currency; and Robert Curthose's decision to mortgage Normandy to William Rufus in order to cover his crusading expenses exacerbated a conflict over the duchy which was not settled until the death of his son William Clito in 1128.
All in all, it was not surprising that Suger, mulling over the precedents of early crusading, tried to dissuade Louis VII from embarking on his Jerusalem journey in 1145.
Yet the appeal of crusading was, if anything, even stronger to those aristocratic houses just below the level of the princely: it was, after all, the house of Boulogne which produced the first two rulers of Jerusalem.
The counts of Nevers, the lords of Montpellier, the lords of Amboise and Lusignan, the Trencavels, were fervent devotees of the ideal; so the problems of absences, shipwrecks, death abroad plagued them as much as  their princes.
On occasion, their determination to sacrifice for Christ played directly into their overlord's hands, as when the count of La Marche, who had no direct heir, sold his county to King Henry II in 1177.
When it did not, accompanying their princes in a joint crusading venture, as the lord of Amboise accompanied Fulk V or Hugh VI de Lusignan William IX, created new personal links.
The political spin-offs from crusading are therefore more difficult to calculate than at first glance they might appear.
Nevertheless it is clear that the chief gainer was Louis VII.
The irony of this lay in the fact that the Second Crusade was counter-productive in Outremer, embittered relations with Byzantium, and resulted in the deaths of enormous numbers of its participants, particularly those drawn from the non-aristocratic classes.
Yet it consolidated the king's position within France, partly through the skilled regency of Suger, but also because, in taking on himself the leadership of the expedition, Louis re-emerged as a credible ruler of men.
His noble gesture appeased those churchmen who had been appalled by his early obstinacy over the archbishopric of Bourges.
The disasters that befell his army paradoxically heightened his personal charisma: even the barons of Outremer continued to look on him as their one potential saviour.
His friendship with Raymond V of Toulouse, a fellow warrior, reversed the trend of history since the middle of the tenth century, in bringing the princes of the far south back into the king's mouvance .
The crowds of Burgundians who accompanied the king learned to respect him; on their return, they sought the arbitration of the royal court in their disputes, and they welcomed Louis's intervention within the counties that fringed the duchy of Burgundy.
As William of St Denis put it,
Even as early as 1147 it was apparent that the crusading movement had provided a new sense of aristocratic cohesion  in the realm.
The great joint expeditions, the combined leaderships, although not without friction, had been justified by their outstanding achievement, the conquest and maintenance of Jerusalem.
They were the Gesta Francorum , the deeds of the Franks, or the Gesta Dei per Francos , God's deeds performed through the Franks, as two of their earliest chroniclers entitled them.
But what was missing before 1147 was a clear sense of who the Franks were.
The Second Crusade, however, was launched with St Bernard's ringing appeal to the count and barons of Brittany:
In taking his place at the head of the Second Crusade, the Rex Francorum decisively hastened the transformation of the Franks into the French.