

Making It Happen
It would be very difficult for anybody who experienced the winter of 1946/7 to forget it.
It was the year the North Sea froze.
The year when Europe was still heavily rationed, and short of almost all the basic commodities of life.
The year when most of us were far from our homes.
And the year when the industrial base of Germany was being systematically dismantled and shipped to the victors.
Little did those of us who were involved in that exercise know that we were laying the foundations for the industrial resurgence of Germany.
Little for that matter did I believe that this experience was to be the start of a whole new direction in my life, the lessons of which I have attempted to set out in this book.
I have grown very tired of the ‘in one mighty bound Jack was free’ sort of management book: the instant prescription, which if followed will solve every ill from bankruptcy to athlete's foot.
The life that I have led has never been like that!
There has never been an instant solution, indeed in some cases there has been no solution at all.
What there has been is a steady process of learning that management and business is a pragmatic matter depending entirely on people and how they react.
Everything I have learnt teaches me that it is only when you work with rather than against people that achievement and lasting success is possible.
It is this belief that I am trying to express, for it is an art which is applicable to any enterprise of any size in any area of life's activities.
It is as applicable to the running of the parish council as it is to the leadership of IBM  and I hope that you find in this book something, even if only one thing, that you can apply and that will help you gain the results you seek.
I arrived perplexed, cold and totally ill-prepared as a young naval officer at Wilhelmshaven that winter.
My task, after having been subjected to a six months' course to learn Russian, was to supervise the packing up of the Wilhelmshaven dockyard, and arrange its shipment back to the Soviet Union as part reparation for the enormous damage that had been done to that country by Nazi Germany.
I was twenty-two years old, and had never had any industrial experience of any sort.
I was a serving naval officer, whose experience had been almost entirely in small ships and submarines where I had learnt some of the problems of leadership of compact teams, for whom the aim was painfully apparent: sink, or be sunk.
I was now faced with the administration of a problem of almost mind-boggling complexity.
The Germans, defeated, suffering every form of deprivation, were not and could hardly be expected to be enthusiastic about dismantling the only source of their livelihood and handing it over to the hated Russians.
The Russian team of twelve, who were my primary responsibility, disliked, or, more accurately, hated the Germans.
They believed that anything could be obtained by force and were determined to exact the last drop of blood.
The Wilhelmshaven dockyard had been, in its day, the largest naval yard in Europe, and is likely to go down as the largest purely naval yard in history.
The Russians were determined to remove every last item of its inventory, down to the lavatory brushes and the steel tracks on which the dockyard trains ran: indeed it was a miracle to me that they did not demand the cobblestones as well.
They were deeply suspicious.
Although, as I soon found out, the Russians themselves were models of inefficiency and poor organization, they nevertheless believed that anything that went wrong  was a deliberate act of sabotage rather than the normal sort of mistake which occurs in every large organization.
In the middle of all this there was a small team of British, a number of whom were regulars, who found the task they were being given something they had neither expected, nor been trained for.
The majority were individuals doing their national service, who had little enthusiasm for that, let alone for a task of this type in this perishingly cold country.
They found themselves sandwiched between the unhappy and unwilling Germans, and the aggressive, intolerant and uncomprehending Russians.
There was no communication of any sort between the Russians and the Germans, not only in the linguistic sense, but in every other sense as well.
They had suffered too much at each other 's hands to be able to communicate now.
This rather unpromising background was my first introduction to the complexities of industrial problems and industrial leadership.
Although I hated every moment of it, and found the task unbelievably difficult, in retrospect it was a marvellous learning ground.
There was, after all, no doubts as to the aim and objective of the exercise, which was to transport the yard, in working order, to Russia.
What happened after that was no business of ours.
We had unlimited German labour available, and also at our command their talent for organization, which is rightly seen as a German national characteristic.
We had the potent, theoretical motivator of vast unemployment in the area, and those who were working for us were considered to be the fortunate.
Moreover, in a country where all supplies of food were quite inadequate, the food provided for our workers was less inadequate than that of others.
In theory the task should have been simplicity itself.
In practice we proceeded at absolute snail's pace, and every step that we took was hindered by constant misunderstanding, suspicion and argument.
Nothing went smoothly, even when it appeared that the most minute details had been described with no further room for misunderstanding.
It was only by being constantly on the scene, as a neutral, that we seemed to me to move at all.
I was particularly fortunate to have my neutrality reinforced by the sort of understanding which derives from speaking both languages.
I had learnt German at Dartmouth where I had specialized in my last year in what would now be known as arts subjects: languages, English and history.
I learnt Russian by a more accidental process, really motivated by a wish to attend a university in any sort of role I could achieve.
I had spent six months at the Admiralty's expense at Cambridge acquiring an interpretership in Russian.
Despite this great advantage I don't think that I have ever, before or since, worked in such frustrating conditions.
Indeed when the time came to leave Germany I made a mental decision never to return.
I'm glad to say that in the Navy such luxuries were not a part of our conditions of service, and when I was ordered back to Germany in 1949 I had no option but to return.
I thus started a relationship with that country that has been constantly rewarding for the rest of my life, and indeed I now regard it almost as my second homeland.
It was apparent to me, even then as a young officer, that what was missing in this sorry scene was any commitment to the task on the part of those who had to execute it.
Moreover, when I actually stopped to think about the problem I became uncomfortably aware that it was very unlikely that I would be able to obtain such commitment.
Why, after all, should the Germans derive any satisfaction from the task of giving to the victors that which they themselves had worked so hard to build up?
The only occasions on which we got fleeting moments of commitment were ones where I or my British colleagues were present and involved.
We could, for short periods of time, motivate our work force to  achieve the objective which was our responsibility, but as soon as we left, things invariably fell to pieces again.
It was a vital lesson.
Plainly, in any large enterprise the boss cannot be directly involved in everything, and some means has to be found to transfer his belief and commitment to others.
It was the custom, in those days, on leaving a command or a ship in the Royal Navy, to receive a hand-written report known as a ‘flimsy’.
Unlikely though it may seem, as I wandered miserably in the snow in a duffle coat, puffing my pipe, around the cobblestones and concrete of Wilhelmshaven, I was still, in naval terms, serving aboard a ship, HMS Royal Rupert to be precise.
The Commanding Officer of Wilhelmshaven at that time was Captain Eric Condor, a legendary man in postwar Germany, and a man who carried out his difficult tasks with exemplary fairness.
He had a degree of concern for the vanquished Germans, and respect for them as individuals, which taught me another valuable lesson, and which still makes his name in Wilhelmshaven one which is honoured rather than reviled.
When I left he handed me my ‘flimsy’, which was meant to be a summation and extract of the very full personal report that was submitted secretly to the Admiralty, and on which one's future chances of promotion very greatly depended.
The words on my ‘flimsy’ were ‘Lieutenant Harvey-Jones is an able officer, who knows how to make things happen, albeit tactfully.’
I have been trying to learn how to make things happen ever since.
Some years later, when it was apparent that my daughter would not recover from her poliomyelitis, I felt that it would no longer be possible to continue serving in the Royal Navy, which entailed long periods of separation from my home.
It became necessary to look for other employment.
I needed a job which would enable me to work at home, and be with my family  every evening.
At that time I believed that the United Kingdom would be facing severe economic problems in the future, and I decided that I wanted to work somewhere where I could serve the community, and make a contribution to the resolution of those problems.
I wanted to find a job which was basic rather than peripheral.
I wanted to find a job which I believed would be secure, since my primary responsibility was, and remains to this day, the support of my family.
Perhaps I was not at first sight the most employable of people.
I was merely a naval officer, with some years' experience in intelligence, and two languages.
But I thought about my experience at Wilhelmshaven, and the fascination of the task there, despite the appalling environment.
That had at least prepared me, in ways that no other part of my experience could have done, for the chaos and complexity of industrial life.
And I knew that I had shown some ability to fight my comer.
I knew that I could achieve results despite the difficulties, and I knew that I had been able to demonstrate the ability to work with people of other countries.
I had been deeply impressed by a number of experiences in my life.
My time in submarines had brought me closer to people of a totally different background and I had learnt a great deal from my sailors about their home circumstances before the war.
I still number some of them as personal friends all these years later, but at the time what struck me was their unbelievable competence and sheer quality compared with the wretchedly small scope they had been given in prewar Britain.
My experience of working with other nationalities both at Wilhelmshaven and later, when with David Wheeler I had set up the German Fishery Protection Service in the Baltic, also taught me some fundamental lessons.
This tiny group of former German naval people, never more than forty in all, produced a disproportionate share of the leaders of the postwar German Navy.
We ran the  ship, an E-boat modernized and stripped of its armament, as a German ship.
The officers messed with the men, and in the narrow confines of this tiny craft got to know each other very well indeed.
Here again I learnt to admire and like these people, with whom I had been so recently at war, and to see clearly both the differences and the similarities between people of different nationalities and the fantastic ability of people to respond to leadership tuned to their needs.
I liked and respected people, but here I learnt to listen to and rely on others.
At that time one of those coincidences, which so often appear in life, cropped up.
My brother-in-law was working for ICI and liked the company.
In addition, two colleagues in naval intelligence had recently been taken on by ICI to be trained as work study officers, and spoke enthusiastically to me of how they were treated by the company.
I applied for an interview, and shortly afterwards found that I had a new job.
I did not expect another career, since I felt that I had already had one, but in the event I found not only that, but a fascinating path through life that my original naval calling could not possibly have produced.
I have had constant new experiences, and I have never stopped learning.
The job itself changes, the conditions are never static.
It is these experiences which have prompted me to set down in this book some of the lessons I have learnt over the years.
I am no longer the chairman of ICI, having retired at the beginning of April 1987.
Even though I use many examples and experiences from my years with that company, the views expressed are mine and if my recollections or impressions vary from others' that is to my account, and not ICI's.
My choice of industry might seem surprising, in view of my wish to make some sort of contribution to the world's well-being.
Industry is widely misunderstood in the world today.
A smaller and smaller part of the  population is directly involved in industrial manufacture.
Most people's historical picture of industry consists of the concept of the ancient production line, the dark satanic mills and so on.
There is little understanding of the tasks and challenges of the present day.
The purpose of industry is to create wealth.
It is not, despite belief to the contrary, to create jobs.
The jobs are created from the wealth that industry produces.
There are not many of us left who, in the economists' phrase, ‘add value’— we toil on in manufacturing industry, in the extractive industries, and in agriculture.
There is of course, now, a growing ability to add value in other ways, particularly in the knowledge industries.
But without manufacturing, mining, and agriculture the world cannot — in the present state of science — survive.
It is these primary industries which will decide our economic success.
I don't want to suggest that social problems can be cured by the application of wealth.
But without wealth they cannot be tackled at all.
The provision of more, and better, education, the provision of more, and better, health care, the building of roads and housing, all these depend on the creation of wealth.
It is for these reasons that I felt then, as I do now, that in pursuing an industrial career I was performing a social service, of no less significance than my service in the armed forces.
So what is the world of industry really like, and why do I find it so interesting?
First, and perhaps most importantly, it is a world of change.
The task of industry is continuously, year on year, to make more and better things, using less of the world's resources.
Management in particular is not about the preservation of the status quo, it is about maintaining the highest rate of change that the organization and the people within it can stand.
The pressures for change in industry come from three main areas.
First of all, of course, there are the changes in people, and in their  aspirations — both the people within and outside the company.
One doesn't have to be a reader of Shakespeare to know that there are many enduring human characteristics, but when it comes to work, and the part it plays in individuals' lives, what they bring to it, and their expectations of it, one sees an enormous rate of change.
To give some small examples within my own experience, ICI, in the past, expected its managers to be prepared to move, and work, anywhere.
Indeed it was a condition of service with the company, and still is.
My company is an outstandingly tolerant one, and has great respect for the individual.
Nevertheless, we seldom considered, in my early years with the company, the effect on a wife's career if we asked a manager of promise to move to another part of the country.
We of course understood if he could not move on personal grounds, but those grounds could be related to health, or elderly parents, or children's schooling — never his wife's career.
Now only some fifteen or twenty years later we would know that both partners in a marriage are likely to have important careers, and may well have decided that neither one of the two should be the ‘lead operation’.
Companies, in the past, have tended to expect that their employees should conform to the wishes of the company.
This is becoming less and less practicable as a philosophy of operation, and I believe absolutely that in the future it will be the company that conforms to the individual that attracts and motivates the best people.
Companies will have to be more flexible in their demands, to accommodate more and more the individuals' different hopes, wishes and ambitions.
To do this is not easy, for it means in turn abandoning many of the systems of personnel management, and taking far more responsibility for encouraging and supporting difference.
In all large companies there is a lot of comfort derived from administrative systems that  purport to be ‘fair’ but in reality remove from individual managers the responsibility of trying to reward and administer people's careers while allowing for differences which are immeasurable in quantitative terms.
The problem only becomes worse where the end results — the rate of pay, or the hours worked, or the promotion achieved — are easily quantified and compared.
It is this conflict which leads increasingly to the urge to treat people as groups rather than as individuals — but it is an abnegation of responsibility on the part of the leaders and for the future it will not do.
All over the world individuals are asserting themselves and refusing to be codified, or grouped or collectivized.
Unless companies change they simply won't attract the best, and so they will die.
Important though changes in people's expectations are, the most obvious force for change in industry is technical advance.
It is technical advance which makes it possible to create the world's goods with the labour of fewer and fewer people.
It is technical advance also which is increasingly removing the natural advantages of countries with low labour costs.
There is no reason why a British robot shouldn't be just as productive as a Japanese one.
Technical progress, as well as affecting the means of production in ways which are making industry a matter for brains and creative thinking rather than brawn, is in addition creating, almost daily, possibilities for new products.
Working as I do for a technically based industry, I hope I may be forgiven for believing that almost anything can be achieved through technology, if we are dear enough about what is needed.
Technology however does not replace the role and contribution of the individual.
The craftsmen, and we shall always need them, combine through the use of the whole range of human skills such extra elements as proportion, difference, originality, and the ability to work with the grain or the particular unique characteristics  of the materials they work with.
There is indeed a skill of craftsmanship in applying technology; knowing just how far to go in programming the machine and what to do by hand; selecting from the materials and technologies and applying them in different ways; deciding exactly what one should attempt to achieve through technology.
All of these things demand the application of human gifts and call for the experience, skill and taste which categorize the craftsman.
This brings me, of course, to the last driving force for change in industry, which is the force of competition.
Competition is what keeps industry moving, and indeed those of us who have had the experience know that almost the most difficult industrial task is to run a near monopoly.
The fact that it is very difficult to do doesn't prevent a lot of people wishing to achieve it, but it is very seldom that, in the industrial world, anybody has achieved and held continuously a pre-eminent position over a very long period of time.
Industrial organizations are amongst the most fragile in the world.
When so much attention is paid to the vast power of multinational companies, it is perhaps wise to think of the numbers of international names that have disappeared from the scene, even during our own lifetime.
Even though we may think that in Britain we have had more than our share of industrial decay and change, the catalogue of proud names that were in the vanguard of German or American industrial might at the turn of the last century is very different from the list of those who are in front today.
Let me give a few examples of vanished empires which at the time seemed invincible.
It is of course true that the work they carried out may or may not be done by a small part of some other organization but this in itself is a startling example of fragility.
In 1905 the most powerful companies in the United Kingdom would have included J. & P. Coats, The Calico Printers' Association, The Bleachers' Association, Sir W. G. Armstrong Whitworth & Co., Bolckow Vaughan and many others who have either closed down or been absorbed into other more powerful groups.
Interestingly enough I looked into the same situation in America and Germany and in all three mighty industrial countries six out of the top ten firms had gone.
So over half the strongest firms had fallen in these eighty years.
Little wonder then that the battle for sheer survival is so important a part of the task.
There is an intrinsic impermanence in industry, and indeed the management task is to recreate the company in a new form every year.
Industry is a bit like the human body.
The cells are continuously dying and unless new cells are created, sooner or later the whole thing will collapse and disappear.
These three potent forces — people, technology and competition — mean that industry cannot afford to become institutionalized.
We have to be more adaptable, and quicker on our feet than many of the other great national institutions which create the external conditions under which we operate.
I would imagine that industry confronts and copes with more forms of change than any other branch of our life.
The second characteristic of my industrial world is that it is incredibly international.
In a multinational company people of every colour, creed and race work together for the achievement of a common end.
It is one of the very few institutions where the shared goals overcome nationalist or racial considerations.
No industrialist can think in terms of a single market.
If he does, he is signing his death warrant.
My own company operates in more than seventy countries, and we employ more people in other parts of the world than we do in our homeland, the United Kingdom.
There is never a month that I am not overseas, and hasn't been for many years — long before I achieved my present position.
My telephone calls, my business colleagues, my competitors, my own ambitions for my company, are all international in nature.
I am perhaps fortunate in having lived in a number of other countries.
In addition to having worked in Germany and the USSR, and lived for some time before the war in France, I was brought up for the first five years of my life in India in a native state where I was the only white child.
All my friends and playmates were Indian and, since my father's job was to act as guardian to a Maharajah some five years older than me, I looked upon Bahadur as an older brother.
This experience has left me with a love of the East and an ability to feel at home there which has been an immense help in my business life.
I was fortunate to have had these advantages; it is quite impossible to operate at any level in industry without being aware of the world forces which are pressing upon us.
My colleagues and I spend far more time discussing world development than we do national ones, as indeed we should, since nearly eighty per cent of our business occurs in the rest of the world.
Cartoonists may portray the international businessman flitting from five-star hotel to five-star hotel, and waking up to wonder if he is in New York or Tokyo.
But although we must operate throughout the world, we cannot ignore the national differences in the marketplace.
National characteristics come to the fore continuously, and I am always interested to see how widely differing they are.
I believe it is true to say that my company has hardly sold a single product in Japan (and we sell many) without having to respond to some particular specification, different to that pertaining in other parts of the world.
This is not, as it is sometimes believed to be, a matter of crude protectionism; it is a measure of Japanese difference, and has to be recognized as such.
It is not the slightest use my pointing out that my product is good enough to sell in America, or Italy.
If it is to sell in Japan it has to be in the form, and of the characteristics, that the Japanese wish and require.
Another feature of the international nature of our competition is that within our own home market, the United Kingdom, we meet every one of our international competitors who maintains a UK subsidiary company.
There is thus a British branch of the Dow, Dupont, Hoechst, Badische, Bayer and Ciba Geigy companies in my home market in exactly the same way as there is an ICI company competing in America, Germany or Switzerland.
None of us has our own patch to ourselves, and we meet, fight and compete in nearly every country in the world.
It is vital for the industrialist to have a degree of sensitivity and understanding of national differences.
It is surprising how easy it is for businessmen to assume that other nationalities will react in exactly the same way as they themselves do.
I remember a graphic example of this when I was working for a blessedly short period as a Russian interpreter in Berlin in 1946.
Leaving alone the fact that I and many of the other interpreters were singularly ill-equipped for the task, the room for misunderstanding far exceeded the chance of agreement and harmony.
The quadripartite Allied government sought to agree on how to control, in the most detailed way, every facet of the running and administration of Germany, a country where, at that time, there had been a complete collapse of the economy, the agricultural system and everything else without our ‘help and interpretation’.
In those days the interpreters were allocated on a first-come, first-served basis, irrespective of relevance of experience or choice.
Fate decreed therefore that my very first exposure to this unlikely world was as interpreter for the British representative (a pleasant dairy farmer used to having a hundred cows he knew by name) at the milk pasteurization subcommittee of the Central Agricultural Control.
The United States representative, as I recall, had a background in a state university, the Russian had run a vast collective farm and the qualifications of the  French representative did not emerge during my short acquaintance with this example of Allied teamwork.
The interpreting was sequential and formal.
We were obliged to interpret from our native tongue into the language concerned and everything was repeated in English, Russian and French.
I was struck with terror, since my Russian vocabulary, while exemplary on maritime matters, extended little further than ‘cow’, ‘milk’, and ‘bull’ which I didn't feel was quite adequate for the occasion.
I need not have worried.
The meeting opened in fine form with the American Chairman outlining a bewildering series of statistics about some abstract point of milk production.
This.
was interpreted impeccably (since the American interpreters had the advantage of speaking all three languages fluently).
The Russian replied.
Russians are robust and tend to avoid circumlocution; he therefore said the figures were wrong and the American was a liar.
I waited with bated breath for this statement to be interpreted in some tactful way, such as, ‘Could you please check your figures since mine are at variance with yours?’
But no.
The interpreter stood stolidly there and interpreted verbatim.
Uproar, the end of the meeting, and a day off for Harvey-Jones, but a quite unnecessary break in what was really a rather uninspiring task in any event.
It may seem trite to observe that Eskimos are not, at heart, British public schoolboys who choose, for greater comfort, to live in igloos and wear fur clothes.
Although few of us would expect an Eskimo to react or think in the same way as we do, we are nevertheless continually guilty of the same foolish assumption in regard to nationalities closer to home.
Perhaps the biggest area of misunderstanding here is in our approach to our American customers and competitors, where we are lulled into complacency by our similar language.
Working within this international world it is, of course, a great help if one speaks several languages, but  my own experience has been that it is not the ability to speak another language, rare enough this essential tool of international business is amongst British people, but the experience of having lived and worked with people in another country which is the decisive factor.
One of the many things which has changed out of all recognition during my lifetime is our ability to teach languages to mature students.
Sadly, teaching of languages in schools has not kept pace with the relevant technological advances, but we find now that it is almost never necessary to recruit an individual specifically for linguistic skill.
The use of modern language laboratories and deep immersion techniques can teach practically any individual, either manager or shop-floor worker, enough to work in another country after some two or three months' experience.
I recently visited a plant in Mexico where two employees of my company, a Canadian and an Englishman, were operating happily in Spanish, with an entirely Mexican management and labour force.
In fact their total experience of Spanish had been a two-and-a-half-month deep immersion course, which they had both undergone only three months before my visit.
It was an impressive demonstration of what can now be done.
The point that I am trying to make is that the experience that they are gaining, by working and living with their people, day in and day out, will give them a depth of understanding which, sadly, no amount of university training would give.
It is an interesting fact that countries can be divided by their ability to adapt to other cultures.
Perhaps because of our seafaring and imperial history, British people rate very high in this international league table, second only after the Dutch, who possibly derive their skills and abilities from the same type of background.
Not only are British managers outstandingly good at adapting to foreign countries, but they tend to leave an equally indelible imprint when they have gone.
Because we are international, and operate across the world, we have to be keenly aware of economic change and budgeting policies world wide.
At any moment the fortunes of ICI are more likely to be affected by the trend in exchange rates, or oil prices, or the budgetary policies of the United States of America, or the attitude to international trade of the Japanese, than by things which are more directly within our own control.
This forces upon us a breadth of interest and concern which readily prevents us from becoming too absorbed in the affairs of our own small island.
The last characteristic of the industrial world that I would like to mention is the whole area of achievement.
Industry is, in some ways, rather like war; there can be no doubt whether one is winning or losing.
Unless a company is progressing the whole time, it is, in fact, moving backwards.
It is quite impossible to maintain the status quo, or a steady-state position in the international marketplace.
One has only to think of the British motorcycle industry and its once-prime position to see the folly of believing you can sustain a world leading position without constant innovation.
While such world-famous names as BSA and Triumph were modestly adjusting and ‘tarting up’ models which in their day had been in front, the Japanese and particularly Honda looked at the situation through new eyes.
They did not accept the limitations and constraints the British world position had led us to assume.
They reasoned, correctly, that a substantial increase in the revolutions per minute of the engine would increase the power to weight ratio and permit a whole range of new developments.
This they did and we all know what happened.
Interestingly, when Honda's pre-eminence was threatened by other Japanese companies and they began to lose market share, their instant reaction was to increase the rate of innovation.
In one year they launched more new models than their leading competitors put  together.
It shows yet again that good habits persist as do bad ones.
Provided you are honest about the causes of success you can revive them again.
Moreover, the forces of international competition deal very harshly with failure, and failure c. cannot be concealed.
The profit and loss statement, and the viability of one's company, are the clearest possible indication of the success of one's efforts.
It is not a fair world.
But then what world is?
The international businessman is battered and buffeted by so many external forces that even if he is operating skilfully within his own limitations he may not always win.
But at least it is a world where one is in no doubt whether one is winning or losing, and where the prizes of success are substantial ones, not only for oneself, but for all one's friends and colleagues within the organization.
There is a certain sadness in the harshness of this environment, since few, if any, marks are awarded for effort, and indeed some of the most difficult industrial situations involve tremendous effort in trying to retrieve a position which has already been lost.
The irony is that all too often one needs the very best people to deal with the very worst industrial situations, which are seldom of their own making.
Not all industrial situations are retrievable, or winnable.
Once a certain amount of market position has been lost, retrieval is very difficult indeed, and usually is only possible through some outstanding technical or production achievement.
Running down, or, as the current euphemism has it, rationalizing a business, while keeping the enthusiasm, loyalty and commitment of one's people, and fighting back in the marketplace, is one of the most difficult of industrial situations, and certainly separates the sheep from the goats in a management sense.
All too often it is this harsh environment which actually develops some of the best management, and it is noteworthy within our own company, how many of the leaders of the company have come from businesses  which have had more than their fair share of struggle and adversity.
I am, however, not totally convinced that those who have learnt their craft is such ‘bad weather’ conditions make, necessarily, the best aggressive ‘fair weather sailors’.
This is because the qualities required for contracting a business are not always those required for aggressive expansion, although some are common.
Both tasks require courage of a high order, imagination, and the ability to lead people, but the last is very much easier when plainly you are advancing, and your organization is on a winning streak, than when you are trying to hold the team together while struggling against what at times appear to be nearly impossible odds.
This last characteristic of achievement is one which either one likes, or which one finds extremely difficult to endure.
I personally have always liked the one-hundred-per-cent aspect of life; I have always enjoyed life at the extremes.
People either like the risk of absolute success or failure (and the one rarely comes without the other) or prefer a more modulated and less risky environment.
A friend of mine once asked me why I always sought to heighten experiences, and could not be satisfied with the middle ground.
I do not know the answer, but I do know that I'd rather win or lose.
After all, if you do lose it is usually all too obvious what you must do about it!
Looking back on the elements I have enumerated — of change, internationalism and achievement — I do not find it so surprising that I chose an industrial career, although I knew nothing of all this when I joined ICI.
While the characteristics of the industrial world do not lead to comfort they certainly lead to stimulation, and I found I continually had to adapt and learn.
There is singularly little chance in industry to put your feet up, and become self-satisfied, or set in your ways, for the tide will just sweep you away.
This is the world that I enjoy, and that I have spent the second half of my life  so far in exploring and learning about.
The rest of this book seeks to outline some of the lessons that I have learnt in my service in this world.
My comments are not meant to seek to prescribe to others how they should go about things, nor are they written in the belief that the ways that I have so painfully worked upon are necessarily the best, or the only ways of doing things.
But, and it is a big but, I learnt the hard way and have been proven in practice.
I find myself intolerant of management books that seek to prescribe exactly ‘how it should be done’.
My own experience shows that there are many different ways of achieving one's aims and many different ways of leading an industrial company.
I have worked with leaders whose style is so totally different to my own that I have found it incomprehensible that they achieve results, but nevertheless they do.
Each one of us has to develop our own style, and our own approach, using such skills and personal qualities as we have inherited.
The chapters that follow seek to outline the ways in which I have pursued and developed my own management skills, and the lessons that I have learnt on the way.
My own experience of trying to teach and train managers is that it is extremely difficult to teach grownup people anything.
It is, however, relatively easy to create conditions under which people will teach themselves.
Indeed most people wish to improve their own performance and are eager to do so.
That is why there are so many books on management published and that is why I have read practically all of them.
As I said earlier, too many make impossible promises and claims for no one can manage or lead in someone else's clothes.
What each of us does over a long period of trial and error is to acquire a set of tools with which we are comfortable and which we can apply in different ways to the myriad problems which we need to solve.
I hope that this book will stimulate you to look at problems in  another way and try some approaches which are different from those you normally use.
If you do and they work you will keep them, or adapt them until you feel comfortable with your ‘tool kit’.
Management and industrial leadership is an art, not a science.
Each of us approaches the problem from a different background, and each of us is dealing with a different situation, and a different culture, and from a different starting point.
There are, of course, common points and common factors which apply to us all, but prescribed systems of management are seldom transferable.
There seems to me to have been a growing wish to find this ‘philosopher's stone’, a universal system which can be applied to everything, everywhere.
Just as it is almost impossible to apply what is now called the ‘Japanese’ system of management to other parts of the world, because of the differences of culture and background of the people who are working in industry, so it is equally unlikely that the particular, precise ways that I have found so useful will have the same application to others; Nevertheless, since I have spent so much of my life developing these ideas it may be that some of my experience will hit a chord of recognition or cause others to reflect or contemplate.
Management is an absorbing interest.
Industrial management, perhaps above all, has depths of fascination which few other callings can enjoy.
I have found over the years that it is immensely helpful to take time out and try to think things through, and I would imagine that most other managers do the same, even though all of us are heavily action-orientated.
One of the lessons I have learnt in life is that a bit more time thinking and planning will immeasurably increase the effectiveness of one's input: if these comments help any of my friends and colleagues in this way it will be, for me, as great a reward as ICI's success today is a satisfaction and recognition of our predecessors.
Setting the Direction
Although I am convinced that the prime management problem is ‘making it happen’, one has to accept that in life there is always at least an evens chance that one is going the wrong way.
Not only is it extremely easy to go the wrong way, and indeed many businesses have foundered on the basis of one, usually inadvertent, mistaken direction, but all of us are aware that a lot of businesses aren't going anywhere at all.
This is indeed the most dangerous situation of all.
It is deceptively easy to keep busy maintaining the status quo, and belief in this function of management has been the source of the relative decline of many proud companies.
You may be improving your productivity every year.
You may be maintaining your profits more or less in line with inflation, and hence giving a spurious impression of growth.
You may be laboriously producing marginal improvements on your primary product.
But you can be absolutely sure that, if that is the position of your business, somebody else somewhere has got your card marked as an easy number and is about to take you by surprise.
Many of these points characterized ICI's position during the 197O's.
In 1980 a series of events occurred which forced us to look at ourselves in a new and harsh light.
The trigger was a rapidly strengthening pound which quickly pushed our exports into loss.
At that time they accounted for nearly two thirds of our production.
But worse was to follow.
Our UK customers first began to look shaky and soon afterwards began to shut  down at an alarming rate.
Before the worst was over and the pound began to depreciate again, some twenty per cent of them had gone for ever, and a further ten per cent were so weakened that they too shut down in the next two years.
In the first quarter of 1980 the ICI group was making profits at a rate of six hundred million pounds a year and in the third quarter we posted a loss for only the second time in our history.
This was a mind concentrator of the first order and forced us to examine every facet of our business and the way we did things.
When the full force of competition hits, it is desperately hard to recover your company, set the new tempo that is required, and seize the initiative back from the.
competition, for remember, at that stage he will be hitting you not only with his carefully laid plan for the first phase of his attack, but also, without any doubt whatsoever, he will have his reinforcements grouping for a second and third attack.
The business that is not being purposefully led in a clear direction which is understood by its people is not going to survive, and all of history shows that that is the case.
One of the fascinations of the industrial world is that there are no limitations of any sort on what a company can achieve if it wants to.
At the end of the day a company is no more (but even more importantly, no less) than the sum of the people and the skills that comprise it.
The physical embodiments of the company, the balance sheet and the money, the ironmongery, are to a considerable degree wasting assets unless purposefully managed and constantly changed.
Almost by definition the manufacturing assets of the company are out of date the moment they are put up, because of the march of technology (the purpose of management is, after all, continually to improve things).
You have to start with the assumption that each plant that you have built, however good of its kind or however modern, is  already on the road to obsolescence.
It is the job of those responsible for managing that plant and that technology to be thinking furiously what the next step is, and what changes and improvements they can see, because if you are not doing this your competitors will.
During the 1970S my colleague Bob Malpas, who was responsible in ICI for technology, coined the phrase ‘designing the plant after next’.
It was a potent stimulator for our technical people, not just for the marginal improvements from our operating experience which would be built into the next plant, but to look for the major change in thinking which alone would put us ahead of the competition.
Even if your company's main task is, for example, to carry on business in the chemical industry, this can probably be changed, if you wish to, merely by going to the annual general meeting.
There are many examples of companies which have developed right away from their original business and yet still remain proud names.
Singer no longer make sewing machines.
Thyssen doesn't make steel.
They are unfortunately exceeded in number by the famous names of the past who clung to what they knew best without being prepared to adapt or change, and slowly but inexorably saw their business disappearing beneath them.
Far too many leaderships, far too many industrial managers, fail because of the acceptance of self-imposed constraints.
Indeed one of my personal invariable rules is that when I have mentally decided that something cannot be done, for what appears to be a very good reason, I test that apparent constraint, hopefully to destruction.
For example the most usual constraint we impose on ourselves is to believe that it is incumbent on us to carry out all the steps of a manufacturing process ourselves.
At some time or other the twin siren songs of forward and backward integration have led most large companies  to do everything for themselves from manufacturing their own plant and spares, sometimes even as far as owning their own retail outlets.
Once such a chain is established, even if you are aware of the weak links, you are accustomed to believe the whole lot is interdependent.
But in reality you can always break the chain at a number of points by buying in.
It is only when you test the possibility of buying, the price and delivery, and the actual consequences, that you realize that you have constrained your thinking unnecessarily.
Many companies today have changed their image dramatically.
One can think of tobacco companies who decided that their future lay in financial services, like BAT, or in foods, like the Imperial Group.
One can think of companies like Hanson Trust which, though still present in transport, its original roots, is now a mighty conglomerate in two continents, or companies like W. R. Grace, far away from shipping now, or Allied in the States where chemical activities are now only a small part of the whole.
There are no practical limits to the changes that can be made, but the process of change in leaving one's own skill base is an extremely risky one — much, much riskier than trying to develop and adapt your existing business, which you know and understand, to the changing conditions of tomorrow's world.
Probably more management books have been written on the problems of planning, or strategic direction, or strategic analysis, or competitive advantage and how to assess it, than on any other subject.
There is no lack of advice, much of it very useful, on how to analyse your situation, and of course there is no point in deciding where your business is going until you have actually decided with great clarity where you are now.
Like practically everything in business this is easier said than done, as the plethora of books, theories, advice and consultants testify.
Just as the most difficult task of the manager is ruthless intellectual honesty about his own  skills, weaknesses and motives, so it is notoriously difficult to be as near as possible totally objective about the strengths and weaknesses of your company, particularly because in many cases a perceived weakness can actually be utilized as a source of strength.
For example, for many years we in ICI considered that we were too thinly spread and too diverse both in technological and in geographical terms.
This astonishing diversity manifested itself in great complexity of relationships and in our lacking dominance almost everywhere.
It had one advantage of which we were aware.
In former days the economical cycle hit different parts of the world at different times and the spread gave us a degree of stability.
But as the world became increasingly interdependent this ceased to be the case and we became more concerned at our apparent weakness.
When, however, we took time out and discussed it, we realized that the fact that we were more diverse offered us a strength against our competitors if we could only capitalize on it.
From this came the concept of linking the market needs of the world to the diversity of our science base, and a number of organizational and behavioural changes which would enable this to happen.
Establishing with clarity the starting point of a business is rather like playing three-dimensional chess.
You have first of all to establish where you are, or where the business stands relative to where it has come from because that indeed will produce the current direction and speed of movement which unless changed will tell you pretty inexorably where you are likely to end up.
In this part of the analysis optimism tends to reign.
I've never known any business that does not claim to follow the ‘hockey stick’ pattern of earnings and every one of us must be familiar with it.
This invariably shows some modest dip in earnings in the immediate future to be followed by continual improvement stretching to infinity.
Each year the ‘hockey stick’ moves on a year, or sometimes two years, and the only certainty is the constant conviction that five years out everything is going to be all right.
Anybody who has operated in business for more than five years knows that invariably in five years the business is not all right unless something has been done about it.
When you analyse the ‘hockey sticks’ you usually find the claim that, despite all practical experience to the contrary, a simultaneous combination of your own increasing volume with increased prices will work the miracle.
This is an even more beguiling picture since the forecasted increase in demand will bring the existing plants up to capacity and necessitate the building of a new one, of course on much the same technological base as exists today.
This optimistic picture of forward growth of earnings and constant expansion lay behind the overexpansion of ICI's Agricultural division ammonia capacity in the late 1960S, and the heavy overexpansion of our Vinyl Chloride Monomer capacity in the 1970S.
In the first case a combination of inflation and world growth ultimately saved us (as it did so many other sixties' optimists), and subsequently ammonia and fertilizers became one of our most successful businesses.
In the latter case, only a decade later, the world had changed, inflation was being controlled and growth had slowed, so that recovery from the overexpansion could only be achieved by retrenchment.
For another industry that followed the same path one has to look no further than the world's steel industry.
Vast amounts of capital and capacity were installed all over the world in expectation of continuing rising demand and no technological change.
Not only was the demand not to materialize but the revolution in distribution costs introduced by containerization, changes in marine technology and handling methods at docks opened up the world from what had been a series of regional markets to a single  one.
Then the pendulum swung again and the concept of the low capital cost mini mill was introduced in the USA.
Such mistakes in the future are likely to have an even more serious result, because of the changes in expectations of inflation, the reduction of growth, and a new factor, the shift of many of these basic businesses to lesser developed countries.
If establishing where you are relative to your own past and predicting your future trajectory is difficult, assessing your position in relation to your competitors' strengths, weaknesses, position and strategies is even more so.
For an international business like ICI this is particularly the case.
We may tend to assume that other companies and cultures operate with the same sorts of motivations and criteria of success as we do, despite the fact that Japanese companies, for instance, turn in a very low rate of profit compared to those in the United Kingdom, and indeed do not need to do so because of the low interest charges and ready availability of capital in their country.
Equally well one's German competitors tend to be financed by banks, rather than by equity, and their approach to the handling of their shareholders is very different from our own.
My American competitors operate against yet a different set of expectations and criteria of success.
Their stock market and their investors are particularly ruthless on short-term performance and I always admire the ability and determination of American companies to operate long-term policies of research and development in the face of such intense short-term pressures.
For example, despite horrendous pressures for short-term earnings after the acquisition of Conoco, the Dupont company never wavered in its support of its superb research department even though many of the targets and pay offs lay far in the future.
Ultimately it is the development that your competitors will make that will give you the opportunity — or the problem.
These  comments may seem to apply only to the large international manufacturing corporation, but nowadays there is no business so small that it is immune to the effects of international competition, and many service businesses are only just beginning to feel these effects.
The small town cafe which finds Kentucky Fried Chicken or McDonald's producing crippling competition in its own area, is just as much a victim of these trends as ICI, Shell or Unilever.
Not only do you have to work out where your competitors stand at present, but you also have to try and project their future course in the same way you have projected your own and look at how this will affect your own policies in future.
It is quite obvious that if all of you are going for the same niche in the marketplace, as is happening increasingly at present, then it will be a highly competitive situation where you will have to rely even more than usual on the superiority of your own skills or technology to bring you through.
Interestingly enough, more and more information is now.
available on a world basis about competitive strengths.
There is a mass of well-informed financial analysis of companies and the directions in which they are going.
A study of the patenting profiles of competitors reveals with great clarity the direction of their technical thrust.
We have studied this, and other features of our competitors, for many years.
As a generalization, competitors are more open with each other that they have been in the past and there is much more information available.
It is a poor leader who does not know his opposite numbers, and while I do not go to the extent of General Montgomery in the desert with a picture of my primary competitors hanging on the wall of my office, I know them all, and have a healthy respect for them.
I am continually reappraising in my own mind their strengths while looking for their weaknesses (although there are depressingly few of these  visible).
I try to put myself in their shoes, because it cannot be emphasized often enough that business is very much like war, despite the optimistic view that there is enough scope and space for everybody to be successful.
The war analogy is not too far-fetched since for every winner in industrial competition there is bound to be a loser.
Moreover, just as war involves every branch of a country, every citizen and every skill, so does industrial success.
Many of the statements on strategy and thinking of Clausewitz or the earlier Chinese military authors are as applicable to competition in the business world as they are in military matters.
Furthermore, industrial success or failure on a grand scale can have as much, albeit slower, effect as military defeat on the lives and well-being of a country's citizens.
The difference is of course that we fight for economic superiority, but many wars have derived from the same aim.
Even though companies' actions are the result of a substantial contribution of views from many people it is surprising how often one can predict the competitive gambits from knowledge of the characteristics and prejudices of the leader.
We know, in ICI, which of our competitors' leaders look on loss of market share as a personal affront and will react accordingly, and we know which will always seek technical excellence regardless of commercial application.
We know who likes to ‘do the deal’ himself and who delegates such matters.
We know who, because of his background and upbringing in a particular business, will stick with it through thick and thin despite losses.
The leader still has the same weaknesses and strengths as any other man and it is as well to study and know them.
Nowhere is this more obvious than when looking at the competitive reactions to the acquisition of other companies.
No one likes to be outsmarted, and the man who loses out once will be that much more aggressive and determined the next time, although others may react by refusing to deal with those that they don't know and trust.
The aim of the business leader must be to be the best, for only the best command their own destiny and achieve the sort of rewards that are sought for themselves and their people.
In a cycle of reinforcement, the best people wish to join the best companies.
The best companies are able more readily to make alliances or purchase technology or be welcomed into countries other than their own, or obtain financial consideration from banks or shareholders, or escape some of the more scathing criticisms which can be so damaging to a company if produced in the public arena.
But remember that the best is a relative not an absolute measure.
The standards of the best are set by the competition and one's aim is always to exceed them.
However, as in many other aspects of business management the best, if sought in absolute terms, is the enemy of the good.
Perhaps because the company in which I have spent most of my industrial life is scientifically based, we have a passion for perfection.
We have all heard the phrase ‘paralysis by analysis’, and it is depressingly easy to analyse to greater and greater degrees of minutiae, becoming ever more dissatisfied with the conclusions that you are forming, until eventually you decide that there is not sufficient data to take any action at all.
But be sure that others will not be so inhibited, and too much hesitation will lose the competitive race.
The greatest help in setting a strategy is a hefty slice of cynicism and the openness of mind to re-examine cherished beliefs.
When this operation has been done according to the conventional wisdom you then decide whether you like where you are apparently going to end up.
Then, if you don't, you must decide what else you will do.
It is at this stage that suddenly the chorus of advice dies away and the armies of theoreticians depart.
This is the  decision that shows the true quality of industrial leadership.
It is in this area that the majority of people expect the chief executive to have a personal vision of where the company should be going.
I believe, on the contrary, that in deciding where you would like to be, as opposed to where you are probably going to end up, you need a great deal of discussion and a great deal of development of new thinking and new processes.
The idea of doing this through the planning department, or through a paper on strategy presented to the board, seems to me to be quite inadequate.
This process involves large amounts of time and constant discussion with those involved lower down the line who will actually execute the strategies on which the whole picture relies.
This sort of circular debate, frequently widening out to involve others within and without the company, goes on until all are satisfied that the result is as good as they are going to get.
The whole exercise may be held up while consultants are asked for a view on a particular market, technological advance or commercial strengths, and with that new input the whole cycle will start again.
I start with the view that the final responsibility for the future of the company depends upon the board as a whole, and therefore the direction in which the company is to be led is the unique responsibility of that board.
We have a peculiarity in Britain, inasmuch as the clear responsibility for the company rests with each member of the board in a collegiate sense.
No one can remove that personal responsibility from you, and if you do not discharge it (through fear of a powerful chairman, or personal ambition, or even seeking an easy life), you should not have accepted the job in the first place.
It is a sad commentary that in many cases and places, board members have failed to observe their responsibilities, and powerful chief executives have, to a large extent, hijacked their boards.
There remains  however the subtle difference that in this case no board member can be hijacked unless he or she is a willing and compliant co-conspirator.
If you think that this cannot happen, read Lee Iacocca's book on his years in the Ford Motor Company.
In deciding where the company ideally would like to be, I believe that businesses should operate both from a bottom-up and a top-down view.
Very frequently people closer to today's marketplace than to the board are more realistic about the possibilities for their business than those at the top.
It took an enormous amount of discussion to persuade me that we had enough intrinsic skills to mount a successful oil operation, but those closer to the competition and the marketplace knew better than I their own relative abilities.
An industrial manager at any level should endeavour to have a clear view of the future, and the role that he would like his business to play in that future.
After all, if he doesn't like the future he has the personal possibility — and responsibility of moving to another outfit whose potential he thinks is greater.
At the very least one owes it to one's family to do this, as well as to oneself and even one's current employer.
Most people ensure that they spend their lives working for something which they think has a future, and which will provide the sort of life and opportunity that they wish for themselves and their dependants.
Be they industrialists or Buddhist monks it is necessary to tap into those views of the future which the young people have, for they see a different perspective, and often greater opportunities, than the board does.
Given their commitment and dedication, very often they will prove themselves right, as our Fibres people showed us when they decided to change from a bulk to a speciality business, in the face of our scepticism.
After all, our record of innovation into the marketplace, of the sort of fashion sensitive effects wanted and needed in the garment  business, did not seem a good one.
We had a long record of significant invention and development of such items as polyester fabric (Terylene and Crimplene) but were we really capable of producing to order, so to speak, a constant family of new variations on a theme?
Even if we could, could we do it quickly enough?
Even given that all the changes worked, would such a new strategy pay?
Every new development costs money and every new product into the market has a launch cost.
Was it really possible to command such a premium price that one could recover the extra investment?
We doubted that it was technically possible, or that there would be a niche for such a business, but they proved us to be wrong and that was the beginning of the launch of Tactel, our highly successful family of fibres for leisurewear, the ICI record campaign, and so many more besides.
One reason why you should try to develop the direction in which you think the company should go from both ends of the company at once is that in the process you gain the commitment of those who will have to follow the direction — and ‘make it happen’ and in a free society you are unlikely to get this commitment without a high degree of involvement and understanding of both where the ultimate goal is, and the process by which the decisions regarding that goal have been reached.
Ultimately the responsibility lies with the board, as the most experienced businessmen in the company and also, particularly, as those who look at the corporation as a whole.
A high degree of constructive conflict is almost essential in this process and I should perhaps quote the comments of a wise manager I worked for at one time, who pointed out that in industry the optimum level of conflict is not zero; just as no friction or one hundred per cent friction immobilizes movement in a mechanical sense, so total absence of conflict or one hundred per cent conflict will  immobilize movement in a company.
The seeking of business success is far too difficult and serious a matter to be done in a cosy way.
Of course one wants to avoid situations where the conflict reaches excessive levels and actually gets in the way of running the business, but if the right decisions are to be taken it is essential that conflicting views are heard and thrashed out.
The fact that you are up at the top of a business hierarchy does not confer all-seeing wisdom.
It also increasingly removes one from the contemporary marketplace, and makes it even more difficult to foresee the future.
In my own case by the time I became chairman of ICI, I had not actively sold in the marketplace for nine years, although, of course, as a director of a large international company I was involved from time to time in negotiations of one sort or another.
Even more importantly, I completely lacked business experience in certain vital parts of the world.
Although I knew most of these countries from my naval days, the perspective one gains visiting the coasts of a country as a sailor is very different from the view of the businessman.
I had not conducted business in Latin America or in Africa at all, and visits to both countries soon after I was appointed revealed how extraordinarily difficult it was to get an accurate view of both their problems and opportunities merely from reading, no matter how assiduously.
Most of us do not find it easy to imagine our futures and it is extremely rare to meet an individual capable of projecting himself mentally more than about five years ahead.
If we are already working from an out-of-date database (because we have moved up the hierarchy) it is very likely our vision of tomorrow's world is much closer to today's, while others in the organization, whose database is perhaps more up-to-date, may well be able to see beyond us.
The directions in which the company and the business should head seem to me to be best developed by  iterative processes, both within the board, including the non-executive directors, and between the board and those responsible for running the businesses at a wide range of levels.
Probably the longest-playing show in town in this area has been the, at times, seemingly endless debate about the future of our colours business, the manufacture of synthetic dyestuffs — now securely on dry land and once more full of confidence and bounce.
Throughout all our travails we have always known we wished to stay in the business which is the repository of our Organic Chemical skills and has been the parent of many of our best operations.
This aim has.
never changed.
The interesting thing has been that each time we have revised the strategy we have been partially right, but it has only been as a result of a whole series of revisits, reorganizations and reassessments, as well as changing people, perspectives and systems, that we seem to have got enough right to be able to fight our corner.
We started many years ago by believing that innovation and uniqueness would provide the revenue to give us a good return, and for a time it did.
We then realized that our costs were too high so we narrowed the range and cut the costs.
We then realized that we had gone too far and lacked the critical mass to support the heavy selling effort involved, so we bought another company to fill out the range again.
We had a terrible time administering the company, which we had bought very cheaply and which was in disarray.
We continued to cut costs and still lost money.
We then re-examined our whole hand, studied in more detail than before the costs and revenues from individual products and found, hey presto! that we had a mixed bag between the good profit earners and a few large loss leaders and so on and so on .
Maybe we should have solved our problems more quickly (of course in a perfect world everyone always should), but better by far to have gone on and on, testing, probing, questioning and changing, until  we finally had a solution which worked and could take us where we wanted to be.
In our case this iteration has gone on at great lengths and I and my colleagues have had to struggle to ensure that we have allocated enough time to deciding the direction in which the company should be going, and the changes that have to be carried out in order to get it there.
The overwhelming temptation and the external pressures will inevitably lead the other way; to take a quick decision and move on.
The demands of running the company today always seem paramount, and have the added advantage that one is working from one's direct experience and not having to indulge in the extremely difficult and risky business of projecting into the future.
Even when you have decided a broad direction, and I should emphasize that it is only possible to set ambitions in a broad sense and only helpful so to do, there will inevitably come times when external events show that one has made a false assessment of one's starting point or the ability of one's competitors, known or unsuspected, to seize the initiative.
If it appears that the original decisions were taken on the basis of assumptions which have not stood the test of time it is as well to re-run the exercise.
It is far better to recognize that external circumstances have changed, or simply that one made a mistaken series of assumptions about one's own relative strengths, rather than to plough on in a situation where plainly the goal you have set yourself is unattainable.
A good example from my own experience of this problem is the constant re-examination of our oil strategy in ICI.
The strategy was originally conceived as far back as the late 1960's when it appeared to many of us that unless we obtained a greater command over our raw materials we would be exposed to a fatal squeeze from the oil companies, who were increasingly entering our own field of business.
It was with this in mind that  when oil was first discovered in the North Sea, ICI set about joining a number of exploration consortia.
This initiative, in the event, paid off handsomely, both in terms of profit and in terms of giving us an illusion of independence when one of our consortia, which we shared with the Burmah Oil company, discovered oil in what is now the Ninian field.
By a stroke of good fortune Ninian was earning at its maximum rate when much of the rest of ICI was suffering severe competitive pressures from exchange rate movements.
However it speedily became apparent that for us, oil was a totally different sort of business, requiring a different sort of perspective.
The money we put into oil exploration, if we were lucky, would find us a new field, which would have a limited life only.
Government incentives, both in the North Sea and in most other parts of the world, are designed to ensure continuous ploughing back into exploration, because after all, that is the basis for the future prosperity of the country, taking, as most countries do, so large a part of the ultimate revenue.
One therefore gets trapped into a situation where it appears much easier to carry on in the business than to divest, or move out.
At the same time the oil business is very demanding of cash, and at the development stage enormously greedy for investment capital.
Not altogether surprisingly, if you put a lot of capital in and the business succeeds, you get a lot of capital out.
We have agonized over and over again about our relatively small oil business.
We are, after all, a large chemical company, and a very small oil company.
It has always seemed to us better to face our competition on the basis of our chemical abilities, where we are undoubtedly strong.
The situation has recently become a great deal clearer, with the break in oil prices, which to some extent forces us to make up our minds.
When it is apparent that external circumstances have changed, you have to decide whether to cry chicken  and run too early, or continue to reinforce and spend time, money and ever increasing numbers of your best people, who are invariably sucked into the most difficult areas of the battle, trying to fight a war which you cannot win.
There is quite a lot of evidence in industry, and my own experience, that sheer determination can very often overcome structural weaknesses or difficulties which theoretically should scupper the entire effort.
As always, however, these are nicely balanced by examples of people who have gone ‘a bridge too far’, stuck with totally unobtainable ambitions and allowed the whole company to be pushed into the pursuit, usually, of a product dream which the market has quite clearly rejected and which cannot be made to fly.
It is very, very seldom that adjustment of a product, once it has been rejected by the marketplace, will re-establish it.
A good example of dogged determination to try to force into the marketplace an extremely ingenious invention which had been rejected by the consumer, was our pursuit of merulite packings for soft drinks.
These were a new form of packaging involving a collapsible polyester tube, coated to withstand carbonation, which was presented to the customer in a cardboard sleeve.
The advantages were plain to see.
There was no problem in moving empties to the bottling plant or destroying the empties after use.
One was not moving either weight or air around the countryside.
The sleeves themselves replaced bottles, which were difficult to dispose of, and re-cycling of which was expensive.
Plainly, merulite tubes removed one of the favourite weapons of attack at football matches, and since the containers were easily disposed of by burning, without any pollution effects, appeared to us to have strong advantages from an environmental point of view.
The cost of the entire operation was competitive with glass bottles and, moreover, the package and  contents could be dropped without damage or loss and therefore should have been an attractive proposition to supermarkets and bottling plants alike.
Despite all these obvious advantages, which lured us to follow the extremely expensive development of the project, the product had only one snag.
Consumers did not like it!
Consumers liked being able to lift a bottle to their lips, and were not so hung up about the problems of disposing of bottles.
We doggedly persevered in our pursuit of consumer acceptance, so convinced were we of the superiority of our product, but, as always, ultimately the customer is king, and our product was rejected and has joined the ranks of many other good ideas whose time may come one day, but certainly is not with us now.
If one has to take a view of the balance between the reinforce-and-stick-with-it, or the cut-your-loss schools, I think I tend to favour the cut-your-loss brigade.
There are already, within any company, enough people with egg on their faces who will argue that one more mighty heave will get us there, but it takes, I think, more courage to be prepared to acknowledge that we were wrong in the first place.
Plainly you cannot apply that view to everything or the whole of your business is in a continuous state of stop/go, or like the good old Duke of York's troops, marching up and down the same hill with monotonous regularity.
In considering the issues of where you are, or where you would like to be, there is also a great tendency to think that the grass is always greener somewhere else.
This is why it is so important that one's initial analysis of the strengths of the company be done in a very clear-minded and thorough way.
The whole of business is about taking an acceptable risk.
Companies that take no risk disappear.
Companies that take unacceptable risk plainly also disappear.
The problem is therefore invariably to minimize the risk that  can be minimized, while taking quite high levels of risk in areas which cannot.
One of the areas where risk can well be minimized is avoiding the temptation of a total step out from your existing field of business.
A great deal of work has been done in academic and business schools on the track record of success of those who have diversified totally outside their own fields of experience.
While of course the whole business game involves doing better than most of your competitors, the attempt to diversify away from one's basic business, which so much experience elsewhere has shown to be an extremely difficult operation, is a risk that I have always tried to avoid.
All companies have the need to adjust, or correct the faults of the existing portfolio of businesses, such as slow growth, or inadequate room for innovation, or environmental hazards, or product substitution from some other area of business.
I have always tried, in these cases, to ensure that any diversification we seek is found in an area which is contiguous to our own skill base.
Indeed ideally it will employ more than one of the skills which one has recognized as being competitive strengths.
For example, we have found that we can make good businesses by selling services that we developed for use in our own company.
These are businesses which have grown naturally because of a need that we have recognized and it is reasonable to suppose that if we have done the job right, and tested the external market to see if such services are not available to our satisfaction elsewhere, we would start with some sort of competitive edge.
It would also be surprising if the problems for which we have developed such services, be they, in our case, radio isotope testing, or information retrieval software, or computer systems for stock or other control, were not equally recognized by competitors and people in other fields of business.
These can provide the basis of a new business opportunity with relatively  little risk.
Equally we have found some success in moving into areas where, for example, we bring either a customer base, or a skill or research base which can be applied to another business.
I have always been, however, and I believe with some justification, unconvinced of the virtues of taking a punt totally outside my own business.
I have to observe that there are some business leaders who have apparently succeeded in doing this, very frequently by forming conglomerates; but I have never believed very much in the conglomerate.
It seems to me that unless you can convince yourself that a grouping of companies adds more than the sum of its parts, there is no raison d'etre for the company at all.
My colleagues and I spent many hours discussing this issue, when we first sat down to decide how we were going to approach the running of our company.
Unless we were adding value to the constituent parts of the group it seemed to us that our plain duty would be to break the group into smaller constituent parts and hand them back to the shareholders.
After all, unless we can show that we are able to do better with the totality of the sums, and the totality of the business, why should any shareholder believe that we know better how to deal with his money if we are to invest in areas outside our particular expertise, than he can by individual investments?
It is far more important that the owners of the company, the shareholders, be given the choice of whether they want to invest in, let us say, a bank, an agricultural business, a food business, or a retail chain, than that we should build our business in different fields, unless we can demonstrate a high degree of mutual reinforcement from such an exercise.
In other words we have to be able to demonstrate that we can do better by some sort of synergy in the group; if we can't do that then the group is better broken up and the individual parts allowed to fly free and attract their own  shareholding.
This is, I think, a difficult message for industrial enterprises to take, but it may be one which is even more necessary than in the past.
There have not been many examples of large companies breaking themselves up voluntarily.
But there is little doubt in my mind that the future will only go to the large company if that large company is really able to release the energies and the synergies that ought to be a part of the grand design and make more than the sum of the parts.
The large company is by definition more difficult to run than the small one.
I and others are devoted to the idea of obtaining simultaneously the massive resources of the large together with the speed of movement, closeness to the market and greater personal satisfaction of the small.
Nevertheless the onus of proof is in my view on demonstrating that the large is able to do things the small cannot, as well as not hampering the smaller units.
The necessity therefore to ensure that size does not become an aim in itself is overriding.
That is after all the task of the board and leadership of a company.
When deciding where the company should be going for the future it is extremely important that one should not lose sight of the need for synergy since adventuring outside one's own field contains high added risk which the shareholders will very quickly appreciate.
On past experience it seldom brings high added reward unless the benefits of synergy are there.
When considering the future direction of the company it is as well to remember the advantages of not following whatever current fashion is sweeping through one's competitors.
There is at present in my business a great dislike of the bulk chemical businesses, and a great wish on the part of most people to shift out of them.
Like all generalizations, this is too simple.
Our own bulk chemical businesses vary between some which are very good, because most of the competition has abandoned the field, and some which are very bad, because they are in areas which are attracting new entrants the whole time, and moreover, new entrants who are seeking to compete in either a slow-growing or non-growing market.
One thing is absolutely clear: no bulk chemical business can afford the elaborate overheads, the heavy research and development, or the expensive sales force that a fast-growing high-margin business can.
Bulk businesses have to survive on the basis of their costs,
An outstanding example of this occurs in the whole field of petrochemicals.
The Middle East in particular, with very low oil costs and large amounts of entrained gas, starts with an almost unbeatable comparative advantage in terms of its raw material costs, which in the petrochemical business typically are over half of the total cost picture.
However, it is important when you see an advantage in one area not to minimize the advantages you may have in others.
The capital cost of building plants in the Middle East is very high.
The operability in the past has tended to be low.
Although manpower costs in petrochemicals are extremely low by comparative business standards, averaging around six to seven per cent, nevertheless in that area costs of effectively trained manpower are much higher in the Middle East than they are in Europe.
You can imagine the trauma of facing up to the realities of our competition.
Polythene was perhaps the most significant invention ever to come from our research labs.
Not only was it an important factor in winning the Second World War, for its specific electrical insulating properties were a key to the development of radar, but it is one of those rare inventions which create an entirely new industrial development.
Although we think of it now as a packaging material and the ubiquitous polythene bag appears to be a major support of modern life, its primary contribution was in the impetus it gave to the plastic moulding industry and the first  development of plastic buckets, sink bowls and so on.
Probably, in terms of company drive, this product was the sacred cow of all sacred cows and yet the economic tide was flowing against us.
Not only was the material advantage of the Middle East one which would ultimately prove critical, but also we had, through our own fault, lost the technical leadership.
Union Carbide as well as others, including ourselves, had developed a new product — linear low-density polythene.
This offered cost advantages in production which we had judged insufficient to warrant its development.
However, others saw in it greater advantages than we had and were keen to invest.
All in all, with new investment in an oversupplied market and loss of economical competitiveness at the raw material end, it looked like a blood bath for us.
We therefore laid our plans and moved out in good order over a long period of time.
Although the first fruits of this decision took place in l982, the writing had been on the wall, and read by us many years before that, and it took a period of some years to find a way of moving out of polythene, which was not only ICI's own proud invention, but an area where we had been acknowledged world leaders for many years.
On the other hand, in certain other areas of our bulk chemicals we have been very successful in maintaining a good margin business over a long period of time.
The mere fact that something is sold as a bulk product to a specification need not, in itself, decide that one should move out of it.
It seems, for example, very unlikely that world agriculture will be able to do without fertilizers for a number of years to come, although one can dream of a technological situation in the next century where direct nitrogen fixation will have been genetically engineered into plants and the whole nature of the fertilizer business will have changed.
The problem in considering the future of fertilizers is rather to consider the changes  which will occur in world agriculture, and it is already apparent that they will be many.
One cannot really believe that the whole of the world is going to go on maximizing production of agricultural produce, when — I much is already destined to end up as mountains of grain, or butter, or meat — or lakes of wine or olive oil.
nevertheless the world will continue to require food, and efficient food production — until the era of nitrogen fixation — will require fertilisers.
For us the fertilizer business has been a good business, in many parts of the world over many years, and even its downturns have been of fairly limited duration.
The business problem in that area has always been to ensure that we provide the maximum amount of service with our products, and that our production costs are as low as anybody else's.
There may well be cases where staying in a business in which others are getting out ultimately will bring its own substantial reward, at minimum in terms of having good, sound, cash-generating business and one which i relatively unbuffeted by competition.
But this will only occur if the style of running the business, the skills applied to the business and above all the cost base of the business, have been attacked ruthlessly in the interim period.
This is a matter of having set an early direction against a clear vision of the future.
So far in this chapter I have tried to spell out how important it is to be clear where one starts from, where present trends are taking one to, and to be ruthlessly honest about the threats from the competition and from the external environment.
I then advocated the creation of the vision of where the company should be going by means of an iterative process combining both bottom-up and top-down planning.
I'm uncomfortably aware that this doesn't actually tell anybody exactly what they should do next.
I'm also uncomfortably aware that nobody has yet, to my satisfaction, demonstrated the  superiority of one way of attacking this problem over another.
Let me with some humility, therefore, describe the manner in which I and my colleagues have sought to try and create our own dream of where our company might fit into tomorrow's world, and how this process of marrying the vision from the top with the visions from below has been carried out within ICI.
It is far too early to say whether this produces the right result; only time and history will show.
All one can say at present is that though the process is difficult, time-consuming, and at times very unsatisfying, it is at least an improvement over those processes we have followed in the past.
I have seen many other companies working the same sort of processes, and I have yet to find one which seems to have the final solution.
There is plenty of room for experimentation in this area.
To a large extent the way in which the problems are tackled depends on the balance of technical skills, imaginative skills and the way in which the board is accustomed to working together.
Our own approach to this derives from our ethos and our history.
Our forebears have given our company a tradition of open speaking and respect for differences of opinion which in my view is the most precious single inheritance that we have.
There is no way in which a vision of the future can be developed among a group of people unless those people have a very high degree of mutuality of respect, tolerance, and above all humour.
It is of course a great advantage if the organization starts, so to speak, with this in place and in our case I believe our scientific heritage and background lead naturally to a wish to hear, dissect and learn from others' views.
However, plain speaking and tolerance are tender flowers which have to be nurtured and helped to grow.
One ‘hangover ridden’ shortness of response, or a snappy turn-off to views you don't like, causes infinite harm.
These understandable human  reactions have to be channelled against the waffler, and the apple polisher: the man or woman who by verbal skills seeks to evade taking a position, or even in some cases actually saying anything at all.
In corporate terms it has to be made more dangerous to acquiesce than to dissent and this is not an easy trick to turn.
It has to be possible to dream and speak the unthinkable, for the only thing that we do know is that we shall not know what tomorrow's world will be like.
It will have changed more than even the most outrageous thinking is likely to encompass.
We invariably start our process by trying, together with the help of younger people, to look at what the present trends of the world are likely to lead to.
Is the trend towards growth of technological leadership in the Far East likely to continue?
Is the share of the world's manufacturing likely to move increasingly to the Far East?
Is manufacturing as a part of gross national product likely to continue to decline in Europe and the USA?
Is the European market likely to become a genuine market which operates in the same way as the USA, and therefore give Europe the basic strengths of a vast internal demand?
Or is it more likely to be so affected by nationalism and the historical preferences of its peoples that it will remain a heterogeneous collection of individual markets linked together in a loose customs union?
What new commercial freedoms does the advent of the microchip give us?
One can already see many examples where skilful use of information technology has given imaginative and creative business people enormous commercial advantages.
Are such approaches applicable to our business?
How real are the present trends in India and China?
For the first time for many hundreds of years both countries are able to feed themselves.
One has seen within the vast population of India the emergence of a  substantial middle class with purchasing power equal to any European nation.
India looks as though it can be self-sufficient in energy within the next few years.
Do these changes mean (since all of us who have had the privilege of working with Indians know the tremendous intellectual power of that nation) that India will begin to play the role in the world which many of us have expected and foreseen?
These and many hundreds of other questions, views and theories are debated endlessly by us as a group until we reach a view which satisfies us that, at least on the basis of the knowledge and data we have at the moment, we have some sort of cohesiveness.
We do not seek for all to be totally convinced.
But we need to have a degree of common ownership of at least the broad parameters of what the world may look like, and we then seek the whole time to simplify down and down and down.
Above everything, the view and the aim has to be looking outward rather than inward.
There is a trap here into which many people fall.
The actions which have to be taken are by definition inward ones — things we can do ourselves.
After all, only Canute believed that he could alter external forces without actually doing anything, and we all know what happened to him!
But the inward and Internal actions are to respond to, and hopefully influence, external circumstances, and unless you are clear on this nothing will happen.
The industrial equivalent of fiddling while Rome burns is to spend hours of internal management time arguing about the allocation of costs between departments or divisions, when the real problem is that the whole cost of the operation is too high.
No amount of reallocation makes the total reduce and yet the first reaction to bad numbers is almost always a rush to blame someone else on one's own side!
We need at the end to have simplified to a stage where one sentence, almost a slogan, will describe what we believe, and  what we can accept and work to.
This process of simplifying down involves attacking the ‘weasel words’.
We aim to make the simplifying process one of distillation and concentration, rather than trying to make ‘umbrella’ statements which are unobjectionable.
We haggle and argue over single words.
But we know when we have ‘got it’, and when we have got it we believe it and can work to it.
For example, we believe as a group that we can only survive in our chosen business of the chemical industry if we serve the customers who are at the leading edge of development, wherever they may be.
We know from years of experience that we are not capable of reading other people's problems as well as they are.
We also know that the time scale of development in our business is longer than in many other areas because, after all, in the chemical business we are, so to speak, molecular engineers: our skills consist of rearranging the chemistry of the world which has been created so that we can produce the new products.
We therefore have to be in a position to share the dreams and the understandings of those people who we believe are making the running for tomorrow, wherever they may be.
Since we see, in many cases, that technical leadership and development is being exercised from, for example, Japan in some areas, or the USA in others, it follows that — those businesses have to be established in those countries.
Or at the least very strong links have to be created with those customers.
Another consideration which plays largely in our minds when thinking of tomorrow's world is the knowledge that all businesses go through cycles of growth and then reach maturity.
In our sort of high-technology business, the high profits tend to be made over a fairly limited time, which in many cases appears to be getting shorter.
It takes great patience to build up a new technological business.
In the past, typically, businesses  have remained cash-negative for up to twenty years.
In many cases they have gone long periods before they have even made a profit.
However, in the past, these businesses have been compensated for by very high profits when the business reaches take-off point.
An outstanding example of this sort of pattern in our own field is the synthetic fibre business which, historically, could be considered to have started in the days of rayon at the turn of the century.
It took years before the business really took off with the addition of more and more synthetics, starting with the discovery of nylon and followed up by the discovery of acrylics and polyester.
Enormous growth in this business occurred through the substitution phase and for a period of some years the business was extremely profitable.
It is true to say, however, that since the business has become mature, the period of readjustment has been extremely painful and very few fibre companies have made much money over the last decade.
The world is full of similar examples.
There was a period during which lighting, which for many years had been provided by gas mantles, was starting to be provided by electricity.
The demand for electric light bulbs quickly became phenomenal and continued at a very high rate for many years.
This growth in demand was accompanied by more and more technical developments from the original flickering wire to the high-intensity lighting we see today.
Even today we are still seeing developments in the electric light bulb, but the basic growth in the demand for them is over.
There is never a situation in which there is simultaneously a demand from a marketplace which requires replacement sales of a commodity that it already has, as well as the basic growth which occurred as household after household abandoned gas and moved into the new form of lighting.
Only if there is a totally new technical invention can one get substitution growth, which is probably the fastest natural growth in  demand that the businessman can see.
Invention, for example, of a completely new recording medium like the compact disc may grow very fast because all of us have become addicted to recorded music.
The fact that there is something quite new and of a different quality means that we will rapidly discard the old and move into the new, just as colour television sets were substituted for black and white, and created a very high growth rate over a period of years.
It is necessary to look continuously at the portfolio of one's businesses.
If one possesses some which are at or near the high' earning period one must plan in the realization that the high earning period is not likely to continue indefinitely.
For a dynamic company which is growing through its own efforts it is important that we should have other and new businesses of a similar nature coming along.
This means seeing the opportunity years in advance.
In the past, many of these businesses have arisen almost ‘naturally’ as contiguous to our existing areas of skills.
But increasingly we are finding that they are developing across the interstices of the organizational and technical skills which have served us so well in the past.
We and others have therefore introduced a sort of helicopter scanning of technological progress throughout the world from which we have sought to see where the enabling inventions may lie.
This process of trying to take a broad overview of the whole field of technical progress, and understanding what will be the key development, calls for great knowledge coupled with an understanding of technical history, and imagination.
Frequently the key to advance is in better ways of measuring or quantifying technical processes, or material advances which in themselves remove one of the constraints on development.
Very often despite more and more sophisticated ways of manipulating data, the actual measuring sensor is still an old-fashioned  thermocouple or flow measurement device.
The modern control room fools us into thinking that we have more accurate and basic control, while the basics of actual quantification of change have not altered, merely the presentation of inaccurate data in more sophisticated ways.
It is the same as the clinical mercury thermometer which one reads directly, or which can now present its reading electronically.
The actual accuracy of the measurement has not changed, merely its presentation.
I recently read a paper by an industrialist I greatly admire, Sir Arnold Hall, in which he pointed out the enormous changes that have occurred in such mature manufacturing businesses as diesel engines, electrical transformers, and small electrical motors.
In almost every one of the analyses that he showed, the primary enabling inventions that led to such advances lay in the materials field.
It is our judgement at ICI that the world contains enormous further opportunities for those who are able to marshal the skills and have the imagination to direct the development of such products.
One needs therefore deliberately to seek the setting up of some new high-growth businesses (in our case based technologically), which will replace those which are so successful at present, such as pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals.
In our dreaming we need also to think of the problems of style.
Increasingly as the world becomes more and more competitive and as the skills of manufacture become more easily replicated, the selling of a defined product against a formula becomes, from a competitive point of view, a matter of cost and ability to command a market position.
But there is already much evidence that the market is prepared to pay for services in a way quite different from that in which it pays for products.
It could be, and indeed it is my belief, that the chemical industry of twenty years hence will be more of a service  industry and less of a manufacturing industry.
One can already see trends in this direction.
Such successful companies as Nalco, in the USA, and some of the companies that ICI has bought recently from the Beatrice group, in the speciality field, discovered this secret many years ago.
They have developed an ability to provide a chemical service to customers, rather than selling products in a bag.
This involves turning a conventional chemical company almost upside down.
The effort put into marketing and customer service far exceeds the effort in production and in research.
The production task becomes one of very speedy reaction to customer need, and the research targets become ones of basic understanding of the products and processes, so that continual development of new effects can be created ‘on the run’.
But these are different ways of utilizing existing chemical skills in a new amalgam.
If we believe the nature of our industry is likely to change, then it behoves us to experiment, and set up different ways of running things to see whether such approaches are more successful than the traditional ways of doing business.
An important part of the dreaming relates to balance.
It is obvious that for any group of companies to grow, a good balance is required between those which continually need cash injections to stay in business (the capital-intensive type of enterprise which is typical of much of the chemical industry) and those which can generate very high profits and throw off cash when things are going well.
It is impossible quickly to reposition a capital-intensive business flexibility is seldom one of its features.
Research-intensive businesses are also, of course, very high risk, but at least the cash input is more quickly controllable.
Geographical balance is important.
My own company has for many years had the ambition to have our business spread in rough proportion to the pattern of chemical demand in the world market.
Even though there are signs that the world's economies are beginning to operate closer together in time terms, nevertheless in the past it has been seldom that every part of the world has been simultaneously in total depression.
Moreover the ideal geographical balance gives one almost automatically the best chance of picking up tomorrow's trends early.
In all of the dreaming for tomorrow, the question of balance is essential.
I remember being shocked at one time when I heard one of my predecessors say that his objective as chairman was to retain our position as a private company operating on a world basis in the chemical sector.
But the more I have thought about those comments, the wiser I think he was.
Although the responsibilities of leadership certainly entail ensuring that the company is going somewhere, and can maintain its relative position, an even greater responsibility is to ensure that the company continues to survive.
This is where the question of balance comes very much to the fore.
Although one may from time to time admire people who hazard their entire company on one major throw, it has to be a risk that for most of us would be, hopefully, both an unnecessary one and certainly an undesirable one.
Probably to the British the most stark example of this was when Rolls-Royce went bankrupt.
It really was as though the Bank of England had shut its doors.
The pride of British engineering going bust in the same way as an ‘under the arches’ car body firm.
This modern disaster occurred because the whole company was bet on the development of one main aircraft engine and the ability to sell it profitably.
As history showed, despite the engineering skill deployed and the excellence of the final product, the sums didn't work out and the whole company fell.
In addition to these sort of dreams of tomorrow's world, we also need to have dreams of tomorrow's social conditions: the needs and requirements of the  young people who are making their way in industry today, as opposed to those of us who joined many years ago.
We need to have technical vision, and technical imagination, and financial dreams.
For example, if we are to see a major confluence of the world's financial markets, we need to have prepared our financial structure and planning in good time to take advantage of such changes.
The sharing of all these things can only be accomplished by hours and hours of talk.
We have found that this sort of discussion requires a certain amount of structure, but a great deal of flexibility, and is best carried out in environments other than our normal working environment.
We seek to make such discussions as different as possible from the normal way in which we work.
We wear sweaters and jeans, we do not keep minutes of what individuals say, we do tremendous amounts of work on flip charts, we form a lot of our conclusions ‘on the run’.
The outcome of perhaps three days' work is often no more than ten points on a flip chart, and we would consider that a good rate of striking.
The discussions are always, as indeed are practically all our discussions, highly informal and we encourage each other to produce ideas, no matter how fanciful.
We normally continue working over drinks, over dinner, and frequently after dinner as well.
We find the process simultaneously tiring, frustrating and rewarding when, at the end of tussling with some problems, we reach a shared view and a commitment to that view, which is usually of a different order to that which we can achieve by any other means.
The essential is to keep on distilling down, and following ruthlessly the consequences of the dreams.
So far this has been the approach we have made to our top-down dreaming.
It is paralleled by a sharing of what I have called the bottom-up dreams of the businesses themselves.
We have to start with some broad-cut  view of the areas of the company which we believe should be encouraged to go ahead, the areas of the company which we believe have got to be held back or even disposed of, those which are to perform the function of cash cows, and those we wish to encourage to develop in more aggressive and adventurous ways than they have hitherto.
When we have what one might call this coarse-cut overview, we then have tended to approach the businesses and ask them to produce a variety of scenarios ranging from what they would like to do in a totally free world with access to unlimited money, to the extremes of divestiture at the other end.
We invariably ask the custodians of the business to exemplify what they would see as their preferred way ahead.
We also seek to give some indication of the overall role we would expect the business to play in our picture of the future of the company, and ask them to develop plans which fit in with that role.
We then all sit down together and discuss these various options over and over again until the board has reached a position of understanding of where in broad terms we think the strategy of the individual business should fit.
This is a process which may take a number of reruns to achieve what we would consider to be a satisfactory outcome.
But when we have got such a satisfactory outcome, unless subsequent events show that we have got it wrong, or that we have wrongly read the environment or some other major change, we would aim to stick with it for some years.
It is in this process of iteration that the commitment of the businesses themselves to their role in the future of the company is achieved.
It is an essential part of the whole process as we work it.
I have tried to describe the process of setting the direction for our constituent businesses and the company as a whole, which I and my colleagues have been  evolving over the past few years.
While I believe that some parts of this routine are absolutely essential, I am only too well aware that the ideas still have to stand the test of time.
To summarize, the start of everything is to locate, as honestly as one can, the position of one's company and where the current trends will take one.
That in itself is bound to reveal a number of outcomes consequent on pursuing present policies which are very different from those one would like.
A considerable amount of scanning of the outside world, both the competitors in an individual business sense and the external environment in a broader sense, is then necessary.
Then the development of broad-scale corporate dreams must be carried out by the board.
These have to be married with the individual dreams of each business who, in addition to achieving the best they can ask for their business, have to perform and deliver what the board has asked of them for the company as a whole.
Lastly, although it would be nice to feel that everybody charts the forward direction absolutely correctly, the reality of life is that this is an almost impossible ambition.
It is far more important to be moving forward in broadly the right directions than to be stuck still without the businesses going anywhere.
The process of deciding where you are taking your business is the opportunity to get the involvement and commitment of others, which actually forms the motive power that at the end of the day will make it happen.
While one cannot assert unequivocally that determination will win, in the balance of life you can alter direction more easily on the move than you can if you are static, and if you have set the direction in this way it will almost alter itself.
Switching On or Switching Off?
Supposing we have decided, broadly, where we want to go, the problem then becomes how to get there, how to make it happen.
This is of course where many good business ideas fail.
Part of the secret, as I tried to demonstrate in the last chapter, is the way in which we discuss again and again our ideas and proposals up and down the company, continuously adjusting, altering and probing our positions until, at last, we reach a conclusion which we can all accept and work to.
In deciding where we should go we have to transfer ‘ownership’ of the direction by involving everyone in the decision.
Making it happen means involving the hearts and minds of those who have to execute and deliver.
It cannot be said often enough that these are not the people at the top of the organization, but those at the bottom.
With the best will in the world, and the best board in the world, and the best strategic direction in the world, nothing will happen unless everyone down the line understands what they are trying to achieve and gives of their best to achieve it.
In so many cases their best is so much more than they themselves think is possible.
This is the reward of industrial leadership: to see people, who do not believe they have the capability of being a winning team, gaining confidence and effectiveness and morale, and the respect not only of their peers but also of their competitors and the world outside.
When that has happened, an organization is difficult to beat, and even if the directions that were set are slightly  wrong, a team with those characteristics is very nearly unstoppable.
Very often such a team will achieve the unachievable and will overcome even the problem of what, in hindsight, might appear to be the wrong strategic direction.
A good example of this would be our Fibres operation.
Having led the world into polyester fibre and been highly profitable for many years, we lost the lead position due to a combination of circumstances.
We failed to lead the race for new products and we contributed to and suffered from heavy overcapacity.
By the time I was involved the business had chalked up losses for many years and was in deep trouble.
The chairman of the division and I discussed endlessly what our strategy should be.
We had a good nylon business which we judged, wrongly, was incapable of radical change although it needed re-equipment.
We also had a polyester business where we had to both change the technology and the products if we were to win.
At the same time we had to cut our costs and reduce the numbers to at least ameliorate the losses.
I put a paper to the board saying I was not sure we could overcome all the difficulties and we might in the event have to quit the business altogether.
The people in the business had lost confidence in themselves and all in all it was a dismal picture.
My first meeting with the senior management did not go well.
The chairman and I demonstrated what needed to be done and how we hoped to fund the re-equipment of polyester, when we had invested what was necessary from the nylon cash flow.
We were greeted with disbelief and they finally said, ‘You know nothing of this business, you come to us with a facile and futile plan.
Surely you realize that if we could have done this we would have done.
It's impossible and a waste of time.’
I remember saying there was no choice.
We did this or we shut down and if they wanted the latter we should shut down our plants immediately.
In the event the strategy we laid  out was wrong.
Polyester was too far gone, starting from where we were, and with the limited resources we could put in.
But, with a research department reduced by over a half and with the strategic use of a cash cow, the nylon business produced innovation after innovation.
Today the business holds its head high and is a world leader in its specialized fields.
This was achieved by resolve, leadership and teamwork, coupled with a fierce determination not to be beaten.
Battles are won tactically; they are not won by strategy.
But equally well, of course, you may have a brilliant tactical win and through a failure to appreciate the strategic significance of what is going on, throw away the game.
Since in the last resort everything has to be achieved by people, the first thing we have to consider is the sort of environment in which people can give of their best.
The curious thing about industry is that if we think for ten minutes and draw a picture of the kind of organization we would least like to work in, and hence the one where we are least likely to be effective, we often look about and see just such an environment around us.
In part this occurs, I believe, because large organizations have a curious and almost inevitable tendency to centralize.
Large groups of people become so fascinated with the internal workings of their own organization that they are continually tinkering with it.
Far from seeing the main enemy without, they increasingly become absorbed with blaming failures on organizational, rather than behavioural omissions.
You then enter what I have termed the cycle of increasing authoritarianism, or the cycle of increasing centralization.
A business mistake is made, and it is assumed that the mistake would have been avoided if somebody at a higher position in the organization had known about it, or had intervened.
The assumption itself may patently be wrong, but nevertheless it is difficult for people in superior positions to realize that they are just as fallible  as those below.
A power that had been delegated previously is therefore removed, usually in quite a small way, by an instruction that in such and such a case the matter is to be referred upwards.
Of course exactly that case never occurs, or if it does it occurs in such a way that it is not recognized as being a repeat run of the previous bitter experience.
You therefore get an increasing tangle of bureaucratic instructions which seek to legislate for an endless series of unlikely events which have occurred at some time in the organization's past.
Unless there is a really determined effort to ‘burn the books’, and reduce this tangle of bureaucracy, the people at the bottom of the organization on whom everything depends feel an increasing lack of responsibility for the achievement of the objective.
Success in the organization becomes a matter of following the rules, and it is much easier to obtain advancement and favour by avoiding mistakes, than it is by actually achieving the goals so vital for business success.
Such organizations have many other characteristics which anybody who has worked in them for any length of time will recognize.
In the pages that follow I will characterize some of the more obvious signs of a badly organized and motivated operation.
I would hasten to say that I have never yet had the misfortune to operate anywhere which possessed all these undesirable features, but every one of us has seen some of them, or combinations of them in different circumstances, and everyone knows, from their own personal experience, how demotivating these characteristics are.
Many of the observations that follow apply particularly to British people, and companies.
It is perhaps inevitable that I think in these terms, since I have more direct experience of leading the British than any other nationality, and I am deeply conscious of our national foibles.
Almost all the characteristics that I enumerate apply to other nations in one way or another.
In a later  chapter I address some of these differences in behaviour, values and approach, but the principles of ‘switching on’ apply everywhere.
Some countries are more easily ‘switched off’ by one characteristic rather than another, and all nations have different approaches and traditions.
No one would accuse the Americans of being frightened of the new, or the Indians of refusing to show emotion, or of inability to communicate, but all need to work in an environment which encourages them to give of their best, and encourages them to look outwards rather than inwards.
As much attention needs to be given to the ‘switch offs’ in other countries, as in our own, and as much conscious effort has to be applied.
I suppose the organization which fails to make it happen is best characterized by a lack of truthfulness and openness.
Truthfulness and openness without fear of the consequences is a most difficult trick to turn within a large group of people.
It is not that large outfits inevitably seek to recruit liars.
It is a tribute I suppose to the English language that there are so many forms of circumlocution that it is remarkably easy to persuade yourself that you have made a bold statement, or conveyed the bad news, whilst in reality there is no conceivable possibility that the recipient has actually understood what you are talking about.
Truthfulness in these circumstances really does mean ensuring that the point that you are trying to get across has been received.
Bad news in organizations is seldom received with much enthusiasm.
The reality of life is of course that it is the bad news man who should be the most prized.
It is all too easy to get people who will tell you the nice things, and after all there is not a lot that you can do about that, but those who will stand up without fear or favour and tell you, hopefully tactfully, that things are not really the way that everybody else thinks they are  pearls beyond price.
I believe that ‘political management’ in large organizations stems primarily from this lack of absolute openness.
After all, if you are discussing the realities of the situation it is quite difficult to trim, to conceal, or to mislead.
People, however, are ill at ease with bluntness and, curiously, are almost as uncomfortable at stating things bluntly as they are at hearing blunt statements.
Frankness is not an admired characteristic amongst British people, and in some cases is actually considered to be slightly uncouth.
Truthfulness and openness are particularly difficult aims to have in a British organization where so much of our education and background has been devoted to concealing feelings and to suffering heroically without protest.
As far as I am aware, no other country, certainly none in which my company operates, so prizes the stiff upper lip, rigid control of emotions, and ‘politeness’ which conceals rather than reveals, than the British.
There are many other characteristics of bad organizations, ones in fact which are designed to switch off their people rather than to switch them on.
Let us start with the objectives.
In bad organizations the objectives are decided unilaterally, very often as a result of a political trading-off process at the board and at other levels, and are perceived by those below to be quite unrealistic and impossible of achievement.
Not only are they perceived to be such, but they are.
The most unhelpful position that a board of directors can take when a business is performing badly is to respond by saying that such a performance is unacceptable.
It may be an absolutely true statement, but it does nothing whatsoever to give any guidance as to the ways in which performance may be improved and merely passes a message down the line that those at the top do not want to know the bad news and would like to dissociate themselves from it.
In a good organization the objectives that have to be achieved are decided with considerable interaction  between those who are going to carry them out, and those who ultimately have the responsibility for the leadership of the enterprise.
This does not mean that the objectives have to be liked.
No organization likes being told that it has got to hold back its expansion or abandon some pet project.
But, first, they have to understand why such an instruction is given, even when it appears to be against their interests, and secondly they have to have been involved in the decision and to understand and accept the consequences of such a strategic direction.
They have to believe that there will be an advantage commensurate with or greater than the sacrifice that they are going to make.
In a well-led and well-motivated military force it has always been possible to form a rearguard who will fight tenaciously on behalf of their colleagues.
Some in industry have to carry out the same operation.
The next characteristic of a switching-off organization is that there are far too many people and far too many layers so that each employee feels that he has little or no headroom.
In such an organization you feel hemmed in by people who can refuse you permission to do something or who are only waiting to jump all over you if you appear to be taking the initiative, or achieving something which even they may recognize as being highly desirable, in ‘the wrong way’.
A feature of such organizations is that the means are all-important and the ends are of relatively secondary importance.
It is far more important to be at one's office desk on time in the morning, to leave late at night, to process the endless paperwork which characterizes such organizations, to attend the endless meetings, and never to complain if they appear to achieve little, than it is actually to achieve the business objective of making more profit.
In fact it is the preservation of the ‘form’ of company behaviour which becomes the aim of the actor on the scene rather than the actual business achievement.
I worked at one  time for a man who was incredibly able at doing his job, apparently effortlessly.
So effortlessly in fact that he would often go off during working hours with his gun to bag a pheasant or a hare rash enough to have entered our grounds.
He was universally considered to be no good, lazy and a bad manager.
He was, in fact, a superb achiever and should have been recognized as such, and loaded with so much extra work and responsibilities that the pheasants would have been left in peace.
Organizations which set great store by behavioural conformity often develop patterns of operation which can appear ridiculous in their manifestations.
At an earlier stage in my career I was transferred from one division of ICI to a new one.
My previous employers were keen on understatement rather than fireworks.
They liked calm achievement, and placed much emphasis on apparent control and not being taken by surprise.
There was a strong sense of form.
Manners and the preservation of an image of the manager as being all-seeing and ahead of the game, were very important.
Everything was meant to have been thought out and planned, and woe betide any signs of undue excitement or stress.
Imagine my amazement when, on my first day in the new set-up, I found that everyone fought for attention by dramatizing every event.
Not, in that division, the belief that achievement would find its own reward.
The form was to rush to the boss, roll on the carpet,— explain excitedly the catastrophe one was faced with, and rush out again.
Some hours later one returned and claimed, modestly, that one's own efforts alone had won the day, and the crisis had been averted.
The whole performance was an almost total waste of time, and was accompanied by a belief that it was necessary to demonstrate that one was working long hours in the evenings, and preferably all weekends as well.
Both patterns of behaviour occurred inside a single company, and within five miles of each other.
Each had taken  their cue, at some time or other, from the behaviours that were believed to be appropriate, and had developed to the point where they were thoroughly dysfunctional.
Such organizations look inward rather than outward.
Customers, or suppliers, or competitors, or even what is going on in the outside world, seem of far less importance than the endless struggle to achieve and operate the perfect bureaucracy.
As well as little headroom, there is even less support for the individual manager either laterally or vertically.
In such an organization one's boss is forever seeking to cover himself and to avoid taking responsibility.
The most headroom you will get from him is a wink and a nudge.
Seldom if ever will he invite you to carry on, and assure you that if things go wrong he will bear the burden of guilt.
Laterally things are even worse.
The aim of your colleagues in the research department, or production, or sales, is to satisfy the written and unwritten codes of behaviour for their own functions rather than to sacrifice some part of the perfection in order to achieve some more profit for the enterprise as a whole.
To achieve anything in an organization such as I have described requires an endless study and understanding of the politics of what is going on, even if you yourself are not politically inclined.
It would be foolish to believe that any group of people can interact without a political undercurrent.
As long as individuals are different and have personal aims, ambitions and needs they will seek to achieve those for themselves.
But there is a big difference between the organization where an individual's requirements are in the open, and those where, although evident, they are never tacitly acknowledged and therefore tend to dominate almost every decision and action.
All too often the highly political organization derives from lack of clarity in the leadership as to what is expected, and lack of consensus about the common aim.
Politics tends to develop and generate  within all large groups of people, but in the bad organizations which I have described politics dominates everything.
It all becomes a matter of working out how to get something done in the company, and this in itself is a matter of finding the right lever to pull, since all the concentration is on political in-fighting, and only the bare minimum on the actual achievement of a competitive advantage in the real world outside.
Because of this there is little or no possibility that somebody somewhere else will recognize the merits of the actions you are taking, or the opportunity that you have uncovered, and of their own free will line up and help you.
This is not the way this kind of organization works.
Make no mistake, organizations like this exist in every trade and every setting, be it Yes, Minister or The Corridors of Power , be it in retailing, finance or manufacturing.
Equally sadly the development of a company in this way can occur with a very strong autocratic leader or a weak one.
The only breeding ground which is infertile is one running at high stress for achievement, tightly mapped and with the maximum openness.
Unless there are political brownie points from on high it is most unlikely you will receive assistance.
The political process in such an organization is made even more difficult by the fact that there is little communication.
Since the objectives themselves are unreal and unclear, and since there are so many people at every level, multiple messages come down the line the whole time.
A characteristic of such an organization is often that it has a very large board.
The board processes themselves often do not work, so one often hears the remark: the company policy is X, but of course I am not personally in support of this, I believe we should be doing Y. Since industrial success depends totally on getting the concentration of effort of widely differing groups of people with different skills to be applied at optimum effect to the achievement of the common goal, it is not difficult to see why such disparate messages strike at one's heart and give one a more than usual dose of despair.
After all it is bad enough when you think you know what ought to be done, and instead it is decided to do something quite different.
But it is infinitely worse if you are so divided that it is apparent you cannot take any action at all.
This leads very quickly to the ‘hoping something turns up’ syndrome which is anathema to most managers.
The messages which start differently through each of the functions, and become even more disparate when relayed (because of the lack of commitment at board level), go through an endless chain of levels.
They go through at least twice as many levels as they would in faster, more effective organizations.
No man is complete without his deputy or deputies.
More recently management theory has poured scorn on organizations which feature ‘one on one’ systems.
They tend to favour a minimum of two or three reporting to one man at a level above them.
This has led inevitably to situations where everyone has two or three deputies instead of none at all.
The endless levels might appear, superficially, to hold great promise of promotion for an ambitious man.
In such an organization there is a constant movement of people through the outfit because of this plethora of layers.
The achievement of such movement becomes an aim in itself.
Unfortunately, as we know all too often, the players in the game of musical chairs are only a small part of the total group.
The company rapidly becomes divided into two companies, one of which comprises the hewers of wood and carriers of water who are toiling away and actually achieving the relatively little that the company can achieve; while the others, a separate band, although quite possibly a band of high potential in actual business terms, are playing the game of political musical chairs.
The constant movements  is, of course, extremely bad in terms of the effectiveness of the company externally.
The managers, in each area, have seldom had as much experience as their competitors.
A lot of time is spent ‘getting to know the new man’, and the new man's characteristics.
In my own case, from 1957 when I joined ICI until 1973 when I was appointed to the board, I had no fewer than nine jobs.
Nine jobs in sixteen years gave me an average of almost two years in each job.
I was therefore always just working in and becoming established with my boss, my staff, my customers and my competitors when I moved on.
In my opinion it is very doubtful whether all this disruption to so many people was justified by the experience I gained.
Your boss, or your boss's deputy boss, changes every two to three years.
Each change introduces other variants of how to do the job, seldom if ever a total change of direction, although even that has been known to happen.
Enough disruption to ensure that the place is in a continual ferment of reorganization which in other companies may well be a good thing to have.
Reorganization and change are a feature of the switched-on company, but the reorganizations and changes come from recognized broad strategic needs and are explicable.
They do not arise from the continuous political efforts of managers who, hoping they will have a short tenure of office, try to make their mark by some evident organizational change.
Another feature of such a company is the ‘bums and heroes’ syndrome.
Organizations like this are not good at remembering the things you have done well and if, as most of us are, you are at the bottom of the pile, you will find that you are considered to be alternately either the best thing since sliced bread, or a liability to the organization.
As each new incumbent arrives in the levels above you he will have a different idea from his predecessor as to how things should be done.
Inevitably, if you pleased the predecessor you will displease the new man.
In the bad organization the remuneration system is manifestly unfair.
The remuneration system depends first of all, to some degree, on ‘Buggins’ turn', and the discretionary element which is a feature of most remuneration systems these days is entirely based on pleasing your boss of the moment.
The golden boys, those who never give the bad news, who make sure that when the plant breaks down they are not available to inform anybody, and have made absolutely certain they weren't around during the run-up to such a disaster, are rewarded.
The individuals who are recognized by their peers as those who actually keep the thing going, are not only unrewarded, but actually held back.
Not for them promotion.
They are ‘too valuable’ in the job which they are doing.
An interesting fact of large industrial organizations is that there is always a nearly unanimous clarity amongst those involved at the lower levels on who it is who is actually keeping the thing going, because in every organization somebody is.
In far too many companies this is viewed as being somebody well down the line, very frequently a section manager, who is ‘the only one you can get a decision out of’, or ‘the only one who actually knows’.
The hierarchy which actually exists bears little resemblance to the way in which the thing actually works.
Since ultimately everybody has to achieve something, enormous amounts of time are spent round the formal organization in order to achieve the little that is achieved.
The informal organization is well recognized by everybody except those above it.
It is well recognized because unless you have managed to work out how things actually happen you have no chance of achieving anything at all.
The sad thing about all the comments I have made so far is that in even the best organizations you can  recognize one or more of these undesirable characteristics.
What we don't see so often, however, is an attempt (when the characteristic is recognized by management and leadership) to correct it, or to understand why it exists and to try to set in train processes and plans to change these undesirable attributes.
It is really quite extraordinary that this doesn't happen.
In even the worst-run factory, faults on the production line are speedily recognized: even if there is not enough money to effect the ideal repair, something is done almost immediately.
In even the worst-run sales department, the danger that you are going to lose a key sale is recognized and every effort is made, within the limited headroom that you have, to try and retain it.
Why is it that there is such total myopia in business about the things that lead to the release of human energy and talent?
Why is it that we can look at organizations which we ourselves have worked in for most of our lives, where we have complained bitterly, where over drinks with our colleagues or at the Christmas pantomime or some other time we have given vent to our irritation at these bad organizational and behavioural characteristics; and yet when we reach high positions in companies we consider them to be something which is beyond our capability to influence?
It is almost as though bad organizations are self-created Frankenstein monsters beyond the control or influence of leaders.
I think part of the reason for this collective blindness or, more accurately perhaps, this collective lack of action, is that we lack conviction that many of these problems are solvable, and we lack understanding of what actually can be and needs to be done to correct them.
It is true that the corrective measures that can be taken do not usually have an immediate response, and that in many cases they appear to be quite small actions, relative to the size of the problem with which you are  grappling.
Nevertheless, nothing ever changes unless a conscious effort is made to change it and no organization will make it happen unless its people at all levels are switched on.
Let us go through some of the main features we discussed earlier and consider some of the actions that can be taken to correct them.
First, the objective.
In the last chapter I described some of the iterative processes we carry out to try to ensure that the objective is clear, understood, and has been achieved with a large amount of involvement throughout the whole organization.
Even when a clear objective has been achieved (and by a clear objective I really mean a single sentence which everybody can carry in their minds and which everybody can understand), it is necessary to ensure that this is known, understood and accepted at every level of the organization.
The achievement of such simplicity and clarity is not easy.
It means shaving away constantly at the sort of multiple objectives which we normally like to set ourselves, until one reaches an absolutely clear message of a mission and role.
It could be, for example, ‘Achieve technical leadership in your field’.
It could be, ‘Operate to maximize cash flow into the parent company’.
It could be, ‘Operate within X and Y financial parameters and develop the Chinese market’.
Whatever it is, it needs to have been thrashed out endlessly with the top leadership of the business and to be able to be expressed in a single, understandable, clear and unambiguous sentence.
The ideal organization and the one which has the best chance of success is one where, if you ask anybody from the chairman down to the newest recruit on the shop floor what that business is trying to do, you'd get the same answer.
The answer need not have exactly the same words as your prize sentence, but the answer must indicate clarity at every level.
Clarity, ownership of the objective, and widespread  knowledge of it only come from endless repetition and endless iteration and endless checking that the objective is still possible, and relevant.
Your people will be switched off the moment the objective that you have set appears to be unobtainable.
They will strive and fight for an end, even if they think there is only a small chance of success.
But the stage at which they come to believe there is no way in which they can achieve the aim is the stage at which you need to re-examine the objective that the business has been set.
You need, first of all, to have a sufficiently open system to know that this change has occurred, and secondly to be willing to acknowledge the change, and go through the whole exercise again.
In such an open system individuals will feel secure enough to question directly with everyone concerned whether the objective is realistic.
In closed systems the fear of being considered faint-hearted, or uninvolved, or unsupportive prevents such doubts being voiced at all.
The good leader has his ear to the ground and will know the stage at which real doubts are growing.
He can raise the issue by voicing his own increasing doubts about the achievability of the goal and can check very quickly whether he is trampled underfoot in the rush to agree, or scoffed at for his lack of understanding.
The second area to turn attention to after the objective, is this whole area of stretch.
The demands made on people need always to be heavy.
They need to be understood and to be considered and honest.
One of our major industrial problems is that we usually do not ask enough of our people.
People at all levels of the organization can accomplish very much more than they are asked to under contemporary conventions.
You have only got to see what your people can achieve when you are in an enormous period of expansion.
Some of us have only got to look back to what was achieved by people during the last war.
I was at sea as  an officer in the Navy by my seventeenth birthday.
I was the second in command of a submarine before I was twenty-one.
My captain at that time was aged twenty-four.
One has seen people from the shop floor sent to help start up plants overseas, and seen them rapidly take responsibilities far beyond those which they had been given in their home organization.
When occasions have occurred, as they do in all organizations, where it is necessary to take a ‘big’ risk on a young man whose experience and background we think inadequate for the task, nine times out of ten not only does he rise to the occasion but he does even better than we would expect.
Looking back I am constantly amazed and grateful for the high risks that others took by giving me responsibility in my early years in ICI.
Indeed I have often chided myself with the realization that I have not lived up to the standards that they set.
I remember, for example, being sent for just after I joined the Heavy Organic Chemicals division, and asked by the then chairman of the division, Tom Clarke, to take charge of a company mission to investigate the price of naphtha.
Naphtha at that time represented half of our total costs, and was bought by central purchasing in London.
The division, which prided itself on its knowledge of the oil companies and the oil world, believed (as it subsequently proved, with some justification) that we were paying more for our naphtha than we strictly needed to do.
There had been an immense row inside ICI, and it had been agreed that a mission should be sent round the world to investigate the actuality of the situation.
I had been in the division only about three months, and barely knew what naphtha was.
It had not been my direct responsibility to purchase it and I was operating in a field where everyone else — the companies from which I might buy, those from which we now bought, and the management of the division — was an expert.
Nevertheless, with all my lack of experience, the chairman of the division unhesitatingly gave me the responsibility for leading the mission, and it proved to be a turning point in my career.
Perhaps because I was unaware of the enormity of the task I had been set, I went at it with tremendous dash and verve, and together with my two colleagues, nominated from other parts of the company, visited no less than twenty companies in eight countries in three weeks.
The results formed a report which was out within a month, and which led to far-reaching changes in our company's approach to the problem.
I learnt an enormous amount during this process, and I am sure that the company benefited from the results of the mission.
All the same, I doubt very much that when I was in a comparable situation I would have had the same faith and determination that Tom did.
The reality is that we are conservative in our appreciation of others' abilities and we are reticent and uncertain about our own.
Not only is it necessary organizationally to stretch others, but it is also necessary that we should stretch ourselves.
How many times have you told yourself you could not do something but when you ultimately faced up and had a go, to your amazement you succeeded.
The art of ‘growing people’ lies to a great degree in this stretching process.
First, everybody in a well-run organization should feel himself under some pressure.
Nothing is worse for young people when they start work, particularly if they join large companies, than to spend a year or so sitting with Nelly before they are trusted to do anything.
A characteristic I look for is that young people coming just out of university should be frightened by the responsibility they are given, rather than bored by the lack of demand that is made on them.
People's self-confidence grows when they achieve more.
Each time they achieve more, an even more ambitious or difficult target needs to be  set.
I am firmly of the belief that most people in this world achieve only a fraction of what they are capable.
Indeed one of the great worries that I have about life in general is the lack of growth which so may of our admirable people, particularly those who have not achieved educational qualifications, actually manage during their working lives.
One sees again and again that such people grow in outside interests.
Some time ago I commented in an article that too many people sought their main interests outside their work.
This was not actually what I meant but it was reported as a sort of ‘leadership whinge’ and general complaint.
If we do not stretch people enough at work it is inevitable that they will do more outside.
It is the responsibility of the leadership and the management to give opportunities and put demands on people which enable them to grow as human beings in their work environment.
Many people have such potential energy and ability that even the most demanding work environment cannot stop them achieving recognition and expertise in other areas.
I, for one, certainly would not wish to put people under so much pressure that they never have time to read a non-work book or attend a concert, or pursue a hobby, or do worthwhile work in the environment or the community.
These are features of life that are needed for a balance.
It is because there is so much potential in individuals that even the largest degree of stretch that we can put on them still leaves plenty more capacity, provided it is applied gradually, like stretching elastic; and I believe this is a prime feature of an organization which utilizes the skills of its people.
The next area is headroom.
The headroom that is available is partly a feature of the number of layers, but also a feature of the tolerance and openness of the environment in which we operate, an element which we seek to encourage.
It is important, because controls  in large organizations are cumulative, that quite regularly one should examine the control systems in force, and clear out as many as possible.
In my own company we recently made a bonfire of our control systems.
The board now seek control on only the parameters of profit, cash and broad strategic direction.
We seek to influence in many other ways.
But in terms of actual control, we have forsworn many other areas where hitherto we sought to control by centralized edict.
In the past we sought to monitor and control all the major variables in a business.
We sought, irrespective of the relevance to the particular concern, to measure improvements in the use of energy, the productivity of capital, the numbers employed and improvement in productivity and so on.
The point is that many of these specific areas of functional excellence are not independent of each other and improvements in one area may be at the cost of worsening in another.
What matters is the ultimate profit, and if it can be increased by employing some more salesmen so be it, even if the numbers go in the wrong way.
Such judgements, however, are best made as close to the action as possible rather than on a theoretical basis a long way away.
Paradoxically, my own company has always given plenty of headroom, but not everyone perceived it thus.
In my early days, I had merely assumed, since I knew so little of industry, that I was employed to achieve certain ends.
As I now recognize, I trampled happily across many unwritten preserves of others and must have sorely tested both my superiors and my peers.
However, I was lucky enough to have joined a tolerant company that believed in giving people a chance.
At no time can I remember ever being stopped from pursuing an objective which was of ultimate potential gain to the company.
In our case I believe this stems both from the traditions of our company and also from the fact that we are a technical and scientifically based company: we  therefore have the respect for the individual and the respect for novel ideas emanating from others that is a feature of the scientific method.
I know of many other companies and organizations which do not, however, operate in this way.
Despite the openness and tolerance of our company, the possession of too many layers in the organization inevitably reduces the perception of the headroom that exists, and means that people put more effort into internal argument than external achievement.
One of the early steps that I and my colleagues took was to encourage the removal of intermediate layers, and to try to apply the theory of ‘added value’ to hierarchical organization.
This means that we should only add another layer of management if there was a unique extra job which would increase the value of the whole.
Such job descriptions as ‘supervise’, ‘advise’ and ‘coordinate’do not add value to that while the people can do so on their own.
We started, and indeed I started, by removing all deputies in the organization, and then trying to persuade others to ensure that another hierarchical layer in the tree only occurred when there was a quite measurably different job to be done from the layer below it.
Any job description which started off by describing the job as being ‘supervision of others’ was ruthlessly destroyed.
Unless we could discern some clear difference between the task to be performed between the levels, including that of the board, we sought to get it eliminated.
Not only did this operation result in vastly increased headroom, but it also, interestingly enough, led to vastly improved communications.
I remember asking on the shop floor of a division, the board of which had been reduced from fifteen to four, what the major difference was This was not because the fifteen previous board members had felt to be down the line, and was told, to my surprise, that the biggest difference was that they now knew what was going on.
sought to prevent communication, but in fact was purely because the news was always the same and there was much more identity of message coming from the top.
This identity of message was recognized down the line, and had the effect that one would have expected.
The point of headroom is that those above should act as a support rather than as a control.
The control and supervision must be done discreetly and quietly and hopefully even without the awareness of those who are being supervised.
It is essential in a well-run company that in addition to the feeling of plenty of headroom and space to create and carry out one's job, there should be absolute confidence that those above will support one and that one can always look to them as a resource or as a help.
If the burden becomes too much and the responsibilities too great, one must always feel that one can turn to somebody who is more knowledgeable, or has broader shoulders and who will share the burden.
The burden should be shared but the burden should not be taken away.
If it is taken away one will never grow.
If it is shared then trust and confidence will grow between the manager and his subordinate.
Equally, support should come not only from one's immediate boss, who should be seen as a resource, rather than as a boss.
I hope that as chairman of ICI the contribution that I can make is to be looked upon by people on all levels as someone whose experience they can call on at any time.
Indeed I am always immensely flattered when somebody a long way down our hierarchy rings me up and asks me to do something which they believe I am in a particularly good position to do.
It may be they know that I am meeting somebody they are trying to affect through his hierarchy; or it may be they need to find out something which they think I am in a better position to find out than they are.
That is an admirable use of my time and a tribute to the openness of the system.
The support should also be available in a lateral sense.
This support will become more readily available from parallel functions such as accounts, or selling or marketing or production or research, if all of you are crystal clear what the objective is.
The support from one's functional colleagues requires first of all a high degree of mutuality of respect for each other 's expertise and a shared acceptance of the objective that you are trying to achieve.
But even that is not quite enough.
There is a need for receptiveness to new ideas as opposed to the instantaneous rejection which is our normal British heritage.
It is only in the United Kingdom that the word ‘new’ is not an instant recipe for making a sale.
The word ‘new’ tends to mean untried, risky, scatterbrained, probably unworkable.
The word ‘new’ actually means opportunity, the possibility of the removal of a constraint, the possibility of achieving competitive advantage, the possibility of moving faster in the direction which we have set.
But receptivity to new ideas is best achieved in organizations which have mutuality of trust where it is known that you will not be too harshly blamed for mistakes.
Tolerance of mistakes cannot be infinite, and mistakes vary a lot in kind.
But mistakes which are made in an attempt to change things, to introduce the new, to progress faster, deserve and should receive high degrees of tolerance and sometimes even praise.
For many years I had the somewhat perverse view that instead of rewarding the salesman who always got the business, we should reward the one who lost it.
This derived from my own sad experience when I was selling.
Those who have not tried to sell — and particularly sell in a highly competitive market where there are very large contracts, the possession or loss of which can have a fatal effect on one's whole business — do not know how testing it is of courage and nerve.
I remember on one occasion having strained my own courage to the absolute limit on a contract worth 10 million, which at that time was very large indeed, in order to obtain another 200,000.
I spent a week on the rack, far away from home, constantly trying to achieve this extra margin which, I hardly need to point out, would have gone straight down to the bottom line and would have been shown as profit.
As the week went on I got more and more anguished telegrams from home telling me to conclude the deal and come home.
But I was still convinced that we could get the extra 200,000.
On the fifty-ninth minute of the twenty-third hour, as I was leaving the country, I finally achieved the contract.
I felt exhausted, worn out, but very triumphant.
When I got back to base, instead of being welcomed as the returning hero I thought myself to be, I was asked what had taken me so long.
When I replied that I had been fighting for the extra 200,000 I had managed to achieve, I was remonstrated with for having put the business at risk.
If we wish to encourage risk taking, we have to be prepared to accept and recognize that people will fail.
Particularly in the area of sales, the salesman who always gets the sale is almost certainly selling too soft.
The task of the salesman is both to establish an ongoing relationship with his customer, and also to charge as close as possible to what the market will bear.
Such a calculation is not a perfect one, and there is bound to be a failure from time to time if you are really trying to achieve that objective.
The next prerequisite with a switched-on organization is perhaps the most difficult of all to achieve in a British environment, and this is openness of communication.
I touched earlier on some of the reasons why we find open behaviour in this country so difficult and I believe it is partly to do with emotion.
Communication without emotion is almost impossible.
Yet of all people the  British seem to take the greatest pride in suppression of emotion.
From one's earliest years one is taught that the showing of emotion publicly is ‘bad form’.
I do not mean by this that I expect managers to cry, or to clasp one another like footballers after a goal has been won.
But I do expect to have a lot of laughter, I do expect to have a relaxed and open atmosphere.
I do expect occasionally to have temper, because it is only when we are discussing the right subjects that temper will arise: if people lose their tempers it is because they are emotionally involved in the problem, and we are probably talking on a subject which needs to be aired.
Somehow or other one has to make flattery, or playacting at agreement, more dangerous than argument.
Argument will only grow in a large organization if it is actually encouraged, and if the example is given from the top with courteous listening and praise for differences of view.
It is even more essential, when for some reason the opposite view that is being expressed is not being accepted, to take extreme care to make it known how much you appreciate the views being expressed by the individual.
We have to have a far greater tolerance of difference and a far greater respect for differences of view.
I have said many times I do not wish to hire yes-men.
Yes-men come cheap.
There is no need to pay high salaries to people who will continually agree.
What we are looking for is what I call constructive no-men.
My own personal rule for very many years has been that anybody is free to criticize me, to criticize the company, to question or argue against anything that we are trying to do — provided they will satisfy the one criterion that they will tell us what I or the company should do differently.
I have no time for bitching.
Continual moaning and criticism of others gets you nowhere.
But the sort of criticism that says ‘if we want to achieve X, I believe we are going the wrong way about it, what we  ought to be doing is Y’, seems to me to be exactly the approach that is needed.
It should be possible for anybody in the organization at any level to make such a suggestion.
Even if the suggestion that is made is not feasible, it should be listened to with courtesy and responded to with the respect that such an offer demands.
It is not easy in a country as hierarchically inclined as ours to continually question authority in a constructive way.
It requires a lot of faith to believe that such questioning will actually be recognized, liked and rewarded.
The cultivation of openness in a large organization needs a lot of things.
Above everything it needs an example from the top and a readiness to be critical of polite praise and to insist continuously on the bad news.
It needs the development of shared values, and above everything, of mutuality of respect.
It needs the recognition that the enemy is without our organization, and not within it.
I spend enormous amounts of time trying to develop this characteristic in my company.
I try to set an example, and I am more than willing to accept any degree of personal criticism and, indeed, get a lot of it — some of it rather hurtful.
But the prize is so infinitely rewarding and so badly needed that a little hurt surely should be acceptable on the way.
The next area is the rewards system.
I am personally very interested in sociology, and sociological work.
Although this appears to be a field of management studies that is going out of fashion, nevertheless I think one disregards the work of sociologists at one's peril.
Certainly my own personal experience tends to confirm Herzberg's theory that monetary reward is not of itself an incentive, but poor or unfair reward is a major disincentive.
There is a growing belief that payment by results schemes or reward linked to achievement of goals is an unleashing factor and it certainly appears at the present time to be working that way.
But I do not  believe that financial rewards are themselves enough or are important except in the Herzberg terms.
Rewards which are perceived to be unfairly distributed are a major switch-off.
Relative rewards within the organization, unless demonstrably fairly apportioned, have the same effect.
Fortunately in real life this is not always as difficult as it might appear.
There is almost always total consensus in an organization on the best and the worst performance, although there is rarely any agreement at all about the ranking of the group in between.
In the reward area, I believe public recognition is almost as important as financial reward.
Public praise is very seldom given in the industrial world.
Very seldom is enthusiasm shown, or thanks given.
We are quick enough to admonish and complain and rebuke, but all too seldom do we actually give praise when either an outstanding achievement has been made, or even more rarely, when an outstanding effort has been made but has not succeeded.
Yet the effect of these things is totally disproportionate.
We have in my company a system of good work bonuses which are totally unsystematized.
They involve quite substantial amounts of money at any time for a task which we consider has been especially well done, usually, in fairness, further than we would expect just for the execution of the job.
The receipt of such a bonus has an effect far outside the regular annual rise, which again in the case of ICI is a matter of such Byzantine complexity that it is often difficult to know whether one is getting a good or a bad one!
The importance of the good work bonus, or the public recognition, is in its very unexpectedness.
I make a habit of sending a certain number of cases of wine each year to individuals at any level of the company who have done something which I have come across which seems to be particularly meritorious.
I send it to the individual's home and I include a personal note from me thanking him for his achievement.
This  kind of recognition seems to me to be as important in its own way as the lavish rewards which American companies give on complicated criteria.
I am not against linking rewards to achievement: rather the reverse.
But one must recognize that whatever system one puts in has only got a limited life before it becomes irrelevant, and if the payment is for achievement it must do just that.
Lack of achievement must result in reduction of reward.
On the other hand, I believe that in the area of remuneration it is the avoidance of unfairness which is the most important single factor, and the ability to reward and publicly acknowledge outstanding effort in ways which are cost effective seems to me to be another important feature.
Because in the United Kingdom companies have not been influenced sufficiently, I believe, by the problem of rewarding their shareholders and therefore have tended not to pay enough attention to their stock prices, I am very must in favour of share option schemes.
Apart from anything else, this gives the individual manager the best chance of building some capital, and the problem of a large organization as opposed to the self-employed lies in the area of capital accumulation.
Capital accumulation is a relatively easy matter for the self-employed but is almost impossible for the professional manager to achieve out of income.
Unless we can get professional managers who are as good entrepreneurially as those who set up for themselves we shall have major problems ahead.
What most of the foregoing amounts to is that in the organization that switches its people on, the individual is king.
He feels that he is trusted, respected as an individual, treated as one and rewarded as one, and that it is his individuality that is needed: his individual contribution, rather than conformity to some sort of ideal ‘company man’.
I had the privilege of being interviewed for Desert Island Discs some time ago, by the  late Roy Plomley, and his opening remark switched me off a treat.
He introduced me by saying in that courteous and gentle way of his: ‘Our guest this week is an industrialist, a company man.’
I immediately froze.
I froze not because I am not proud to have worked for my company, and indeed consider myself fortunate to have done so — and not because I do not admire my company and put everything that I can into serving it.
Indeed my wife believes that if when I die I am cut in half, the letters ICI will be found stamped through me from top to bottom, like Blackpool rock.
What I reacted against, and what others will also react against, is the implication that one's contribution is important only insofar as it conforms to a company picture, and that it is not the individual's unique and personal contribution that matters.
I pride myself on the efforts I have made to retain my individual values while working for my company.
I honour my company for its willingness to accept me and my idiosyncrasies.
It takes a pretty tolerant company to put up with my taste in ties, for example.
It is this that one is seeking to transmit and show, and it is this which is the key to the wholehearted and free contribution of the individual.
We must always remember that there is nothing that compels anybody to work for an individual company even in an era of high unemployment.
You owe it to yourself and to your family to move on elsewhere if you are not satisfied that the objectives are worthwhile or if the prospects are insufficiently good.
We therefore have to make the company one in which the individual feels wanted, needed and respected.
Fortunately it is in the company's interests so to do, because it is only by such means that the free, wholehearted collaboration of free men can be enlisted.
There in one other characteristic that I would like to mention.
It helps enormously if the external regard for  your organization is high.
It needs particularly to be so in the communities in which you operate.
Again, in our case it is an absolute requirement that we should have the support of the localities in which we place our factories.
Not everybody wishes to live near a chemical factory.
We have to recognize that it is our responsibility to ensure that the natural fears and concerns that people have are allayed.
We require also to recruit and motivate the best people and this in turn requires a good reputation, not only for the goods we make and the worthiness of our contribution to society, but also the way in which we do these things, the sort of people we employ and the contributions we make in the area, and whether we are good citizens or not.
As with so many things in the industrial life, many of these aims are self-reinforcing.
The best people are recognized as readily outside the company as within it.
The best people involve themselves in their communities and you will find them playing a role disproportionate to their total numbers in such fields as education, the arts, local government and so on.
These are all parts of the switch-on mechanism because the switch-on mechanism depends upon a decent organization employing decent people and treating them as we individually would wish to be treated.
That is the difference between switching on and switching off, and switching on is an absolutely essential ingredient to the art of making it happen.