

Individuals at work
Introduction
This book is about behaviour in work organizations.
It begins with what affects the behaviour of individuals, then moves those individuals into interactions with others.
Subsequently, we will look at the behaviour of groups and, finally, we will look at how organizations as collections of individuals behave.
In the second half of the book we will address such managerial issues as managing the organization, leading it, designing it and finally changing it.
But, first, what characteristics of individuals have been found to affect the way they behave at work?
This is a complex question.
Yet the reality is that, within even a small group of people at work, there will be significant differences in the way they perform their jobs.
Some will be more active than others, some more friendly; some will be more aggressive than others and some more satisfied with their work.
So let us look at what factors appear to affect the performance of individuals in their jobs.
Performance
The performance of an individual at work is a function of the following factors:
Abilities, capacities, capabilities
Experience
Goals and values
energy or effort
Rewards
You will notice that I have avoided the word ‘personality’ here.
There are many theories of personality but the relationship between them and performance is difficult to establish despite the numerous personality trait tests on the market and their huge databanks.
Personality has not been shown by industrial psychologists to be a very helpful predictor of performance.
This does not mean it is useless; any insights into a person's capacities and motivations may be useful.
It is more an admission that, at this stage of development, the personality trait literature is not very helpful in predicting performance.
I am not suggesting we abandon it: the fact that we have not found ways to extract the information does not deny the  existence of the factors or traits.
What I am doing is leaving that literature to one side and considering factors that have been found to affect performance at work.
ABILITIES
Abilities are inherited; capacities or aptitudes are learned.
From a very early age we discover that some children are better at drawing, speaking or running than we are; so much for the myth that we are born equal.
Subsequently, schools, universities and colleges attempt to assess differences in abilities as predictors of student performance.
However, this has not been particularly successful.
For example, business schools have not been able to show that the Graduate Admission Test (verbal and mathematical abilities) correlates with subsequent performance as a manager.
Abilities are only indicators of potential, not predictors of performance.
Nevertheless, they clearly do affect performance: if I want a musician then musical ability will be assessed; we will listen to the playing of a musician in the same way that we will ask athletes to reveal their athletic ability.
However, whether the musician or athlete will perform well involves more than just ability.
The most frequently cited abilities are:
Reasoning
Spatio-visual
Perceptual speed and accuracy
Manual
From these general groups a variety of additional categories have been identified:
Reasoning
— Verbal
— Numerical
— Abstract
Spatio-visual
— Practical intelligence
— Non-verbal ability
— Creative ability
Perceptual
— Clerical ability
Manual
— Mechanical ability
— Manual ability
— Musical ability
— Athletic ability
However, most of these sub-categories are mixtures of ability, interest and goals.
For example, mechanical ability (or aptitude) is a complex of other aptitudes and characteristics.
It consists of spatial visualization, reasoning and experience.
However, despite its complexity, it can be treated as a unit and measured reliably.
Other complex aptitudes that can be measured in tests are:
Musical aptitude
Manual aptitude
Some abilities are found more strongly in men than in women and vice versa.
Overall, a random sample of females will consistently perform better than males on tests of verbal ability, while males invariably outperform women on tests of mathematical reasoning and spatial relationships.
Some of these differences occur early while others do not appear until adolescence and adulthood.
However, it is important to remember that the differences based on sex are small and the overlap between the sexes is very great.
This has led some commentators to observe that it is possible to find an individual of either sex who will show almost any specified degree of any ability that we might care to select.
So beware of generalizations about abilities based on sex difference.
(We are on firmer ground if we analyse differences in behaviour.
Judi Marshall has shown there are male/female differences in the way managers manage.)
Statistical analyses of sex differences have led to a popular belief that men's behaviour is dominated by the left hemisphere of the brain (logical, linear thinking, structured) and women's behaviour is more frequently dominated by the right hemisphere (intuitive, visual, lateral).
First, there is no evidence to suggest that right or left hemisphere dominance is sex related.
That is, there are as many men dominated by the right hemisphere as there are women.
Second, while the concept of left brain and right brain is attractive, even seductive, the evidence of its relevance in management is almost non-existent.
We are concerned with people, some of whom are men and some women, and the cognitive differences between them are not easily traced to their gender.
There are intuitive men and intuitive women; there are mathematically logical women as there are mathematically logical men.
Abilities and management
Are these abilities related to ‘good management’?
Most top managers are above average in intelligence (numeric and verbal reasoning) but are not in the genius class.
Similarly, most middle managers are average or above average in intelligence.
The other commonly assessed abilities have not been found to relate to managerial performance.
The one glimmer of recognition of a distinct ability comes from common-sense observation of business-school academics and top executives that there is a perceptual-analytic aptitude which is important to managers at the top.
This aptitude is often referred to as ‘seeing the big picture’, ‘seeing the forest not the trees’, or the ‘helicopter ability’.
This spatio-visual ability involves seeing situations in their totality, identifying their important components and their relationships and suggesting strategies for resolving problems.
The problem with researching the ‘helicopter’ aptitude is measuring it.
The closest psychological construct to it is called ‘field independence’ or the ‘capacity to differentiate psychologically’.
At the other end of the scale is ‘field dependence’, which is characterized by poor conceptual skills, an inability to isolate issues, and dependence on the situation rather than being independent of it.
Research on field independence in a wide sample of people has shown that it reaches its peak at fifteen years of age, remains on a plateau until the mid-thirties and thereafter declines.
This may mean we need younger managers, if we are to capitalize on the correlation of ‘helicopter’ ability with managerial performance.
More recently the fashion of assessing managerial competencies (ability, motivational, interpersonal, etc.) has revived interest in whether there are cognitive abilities which differentiate the good manager of a unit from the less effective manager.
The ‘helicopter’ ability has emerged again.
However, by using different assessment methods, the concept has been refined to include how managers perceive their world, how they search for and select data, and how they conceptualize with that data to give it a framework and meaning.
These capacities do have a relationship with effectiveness.
For managers at the top of the hierarchy the capacity to conceptualize has been seen as one of the predictors of managerial success.
This capacity relates closely to the ‘helicopter’ concept.
What does it mean?
It refers to an ability to identify patterns or relationships in information and events (inductive reasoning) and to convey the meaning by developing a framework using appropriate metaphors and analogies.
Subsequently the highly rated manager develops creative solutions and provides new insights into problems.
Similarly, if the framework proves to be unhelpful in reducing a lot  of information to a managerial level, then that framework is dropped and new conceptualizations or frameworks are developed.
Abilities do affect performance.
However, knowledge of abilities does not allow us to predict performance — only to predict the potential to perform.
Among managers of above-average intelligence, the ‘helicopter’ ability, which is a perceptual ability incorporating data collection, data processing, conceptualization and conceptual flexibility, has been found to correlate positively with managerial performance.
EXPERIENCE
An experienced employee will outperform the novice.
Temporary staff suffer inordinately from a lack of experience within the organization — experience of its people systems, structure, strategies, etc. (by experience we mean knowledge, skills and practice, and situational familiarity).
Performance will increase with experience wherever knowledge, skill and practice are relevant to the job.
Performance also increases if an individual ‘knows the scene’.
However, we cannot predict people's actual performance from their level of experience.
It may contribute to performance but it is, like ability, merely a guide to potential.
The practical advantage of experience is the effect it has on confidence.
Knowing that one can do the job provides an excellent foundation.
GOALS AND VALUES
Of all the factors affecting performance, an individual's motivation is the best predictor of performance.
Human beings are purposive; a person's performance has reasons behind it.
We choose to behave in particular ways.
We select goals or ends which are important to us and attempt to achieve them.
In our most basic moments these goals are easy to identify, like food or drink.
In our careers the goals are more complex.
When a person attempts to achieve a goal we refer to the behavioural outcome as ‘motivation’.
This motivation arises from the individual's choice to participate or not in an activity.
The person decides consciously or not to devote time and energy to a particular activity.
For much of day-to-day activity this is automatic; we are not conscious of any decision process.
But for major decisions about interpersonal relationships, careers, investments, etc. we may be very conscious of the decision process because it often causes stress.
Motivation is the process whereby goals are recognized, choices are made (consciously or not) and energy is  directed towards achieving the goal.
This mental/behavioural process involves:
Goals
Arousal
Choice
Persistence
The most popular goal-arousal theories are called ‘need theories’.
These theories collect goals, aspirations, values and behaviour into motives and call them drives, wants or needs.
Some writers (e.g. Maslow) in the sixties and seventies proposed that we could rank these needs into a hierarchy and predict the order in which individuals would try to satisfy their ‘needs’.
I have great difficulty in accepting this concept of a need as a psychological construct.
Nor does my research, or that of others, support the concept of a hierarchy of needs.
Yet, like much of the common-sense research, it appears that the early theorists were ‘on to something’.
People do seem to find some goals more attractive than others and will pursue them sometimes with frenetic activity.
To avoid the complications of need theories it has become more acceptable to talk about goals, values or work orientations — i.e. to acknowledge that people have tendencies to return to similar ends or goals that seem to be (sufficiently) important to them to suggest an underlying theme, pattern or goal behind their behaviour.
This concentration on behaviour (as opposed to an inner force) overcomes many of the difficulties of the earlier theories.
What research has shown is that these tendencies to behave in certain ways are deeply embedded in past experiences.
It is no accident that people who are driven to climb corporate ladders have parents who believe ladder climbing is important.
Conversely, it is no accident that people who search in their careers for stability, structure and avoidance of risk acquire these values to a large extent in their childhood.
Nor is it an accident that the managerial and professional classes reproduce themselves in their own image as do the process and clerical groups.
Upward job or career mobility occurs for many, but rarely in quantum leaps.
The more generalized view which I have thus adopted is that we have goals which relate to our work.
If we can articulate those goals and their underlying values and beliefs, then we have some picture of what, given the right circumstances, may lead to arousal and potential activity.
Moreover, goals relate to situations, so arousal may be as much situational as  internal; we may be aroused by the presence of others and the knowledge that other people are evaluating us, thereby linking goals or values important to us to the situation in which we find ourselves.
Thus the cues of subordinates, peers, supervisors, family and friends become important triggers to arousal.
Arousal may arise from the appeal of the goal, the feelings that it engenders, the hormones it stimulates.
In work situations the attractiveness of the goal relates to the way it is presented, hence the importance of the advertising department in presenting our products.
The creative advertiser has the function of stimulating arousal in buyers.
Can we generalize about goals?
I believe we can.
Human behaviour is always an intricate blend of the universal and factors more specific to the individual.
Unfortunately, psychologists have become obsessed about individual differences to the exclusion of the universal.
I believe we have more in common than separates us.
If we are to help managers understand motivation then it is the universal goals, values and beliefs that they need to know about.
Indeed, talk to any manager and he or she already has common-sense theories of motivation, often built up over long periods of observing people at work.
These theories are usually not very different from those of the theoretician or researcher.
However, where the theoretician can help managers is in providing some framework into which they can put their observations about goals.
In this sense, labelling is inevitable.
We label people all the time as ‘ambitious’, ‘smart’, ‘quiet’, etc.
By this process we reduce the complex to manageable simplicity.
Occasionally, the researcher may show that the common-sense theory of the manager has no empirical evidence to support it; for example, the distance between a person's eyes has not been found to correlate with criminality.
However, most of the time, empirical research merely refines the common sense of the managers.
Central to my analysis of goals is the proposition that the backgrounds of individuals provide us with themes or patterns which reappear in values, beliefs and goals, and then overtly in behaviour.
Identifying those themes is primarily a lateral or intuitive process — bits of data are collected into a theme.
One piece of information on its own is not necessarily useful.
For example, we may find that a job applicant for a position in sales was an international athlete in her teens; on its own this piece of data is interesting but provides almost no insight into future performance in sales, especially if there is no demand for athletics in the job.
However, behind that piece  of information will be a myriad of pieces of evidence for the selectors to collect — information about parental values to do with winning and losing, about school attitudes to the athlete's success, about energy, persistence, etc.
Add the additional evidence, and a theme or goal of achievement, success and hard work could emerge.
If individual goals are the key to motivation, can managers discover the goals of their staff?
I believe they can, but the capacity to do so is widely dispersed.
The people who appear best at linking seemingly unrelated data into a theme (or a goal) are intuitive rather than logical.
They collect data like information sponges: watching, listening, asking for clarification.
Exactly how they transform those unrelated pieces of data into a theme is difficult to explain.
They will tell me they can ‘see’ the theme emerging as they interview a person.
However, this information is not very helpful for those who are not intuitive or not so confident about their intuition.
For them a systematic process is more plausible and most human resource departments in firms have systematized procedures (application forms, interview schedules, psychological tests) to extract theme data at the time a person joins the firm.
Thereafter, managers are usually on their own and, inevitably, they develop their own theories to explain people's behaviour.
If we take the research on goals plus the experience of practitioners in the selection business we will find a high degree of consensus about the more frequently cited goals that individuals attempt to satisfy at work.
I have called these:
Comfort
Structure
Relationships
Recognition and status
Power
Autonomy, creativity, growth
These goals reflect the backgrounds (values, beliefs and experiences) of individuals and do not emerge fully formed at 20 years of age; they are acquired over long periods, and particularly during childhood.
Similarly, they do not remain fixed: goals at 20 may be different from those at 30 and 40 and 50 years.
But some underlying patterning remains, despite the intervening years and the subtle shifts in values and beliefs.
Managers and goals
If we ask a large sample of managers to rank these six goal categories in terms of their relative importance to them (on a scale from unimportant to very important, the aggregated responses for each goal providing a range from 0 to 100) then we can produce the bar chart shown in Figure 1.1.
Not surprisingly, for the average European manager comfort, structure and relationships goals are much less important than recognition, power and autonomy.
However, for the average factory worker the rankings will be different.
For the factory worker, comfort, structure and relationships are much more important.
Among the professions, recognition and autonomy will be ranked more highly than power or relationships.
ENERGY OR EFFORT
We have looked at abilities, experience and goals as they might influence behaviour at work.
The fourth variable is energy, and there appear to be two issues here.
Deciding — consciously or not — to expend energy involves a choice and an assessment of the total energy available.
Some people simply have more energy than others, while others decide to put a higher proportion of their energy into their careers.
Why is it that some people have more energy to give to their careers than others?
Like all the other factors we have discussed, energy is not easily isolated from goals, rewards and abilities.
However, any observer will note that the energy people are prepared to expend in pursuing organizational goals varies greatly.
Yet we tend to assume it is equal in all people.
Further, we have difficulties isolating energy from social approval.
Are people who work till 10 o'clock in the evening more energetic than those who stop at 5 o'clock?
Perhaps the former are slower; or perhaps they are doing it because they want people to say they are working hard.
Assessing overall energy levels in people can be a relatively simple matter.
Clues are:
Activity rates
Number of hours of activity
Hours of rest (sleep)
Choice of participation in leisure and sporting activities
Those people who seem to spend their entire lives in a state of hyperactivity provide a selection interviewer with plenty of information.
For example, they seem to survive on a few hours' sleep; they will report waking and getting up early (often to the annoyance of their families); sporting activities include frenetic games (squash) and/or strenuous single person sports (running, swimming).
They will, conversely, be disparaging about inactivity; for example, watching the television is a ‘waste of time’.
This theme of energy or stamina reappears in their careers as a determination not to go under when the ship hits a storm, a striving to avoid failure.
Beyond these fairly obvious signs, the interviewer has problems.
Many people take their careers extremely seriously because it is the only way for them to establish who and what they are.
Indeed, the whole of the Western economic system depends on a strong link between personal identity and job, although there are significant cultural differences between the newer societies (United States, Australia) and the older (UK, France, Holland).
If individuals do not need a job or title or status to know who they are (e.g. in older societies), then the energy they put into their job or career may seem slight to those in the new societies.
Yet these same people may have great sources of energy which are only seen in non-career activities.
Guilt also plays a part in the energy expended.
If child-rearing practices include guilt and a strong work ethic, then the probability that energy will be expended in work tends to increase.
Indeed, the popular  myth that the work ethic (by which people mean an emphasis on hard-working, persistent and conscientious behaviour) is dead is not supported by research.
Work, if not career or employment, remains a primary source of goal satisfaction for all people.
What we know less about is why some people expend energy in short bursts while others sustain much longer bursts.
In organizational terms, some employees rise to middle management and ‘fade’, while others continue into top management.
Some appear to fade at 35, some at 45, some at 55, while others are still highly motivated to achieve at 70.
Some researchers believe that this is related to the time orientation or how far ahead an individual thinks or plans.
Those with short-term orientations will not have the tenacity to hold on, to fight, to be pushed down and still to get up again, simply because their time orientations are too short (6 months to 1 year) for the longer-term perspective (5 to 10 years).
Whatever the reasons for the differences, the range of energy levels is wide.
Chapter 2 looks at variations that I and others have noted in orientations at work: goals change; circumstances change; energy levels decline, all with a notable change in career-motivation profiles.
REWARDS
Organizations offer the individual inducements to work and to work hard.
These inducements are both extrinsic and intrinsic.
Extrinsic rewards Those tangible rewards that probably attract most of us into the workforce in the first place.
Indeed, they provide a more likely explanation for the level of employment than the work ethic — i.e. necessity is the motivator.
Extrinsic rewards include wage, salary, bonuses, commission payments, working conditions, a car, pension, etc.
These rewards are often called ‘hygiene’(as in basic) factors.
Intrinsic rewards The opportunity to satisfy other goals — lifestyle, comfort, a sense of achievement, companionship, status, public acclaim, challenge, interesting tasks, etc.
These rewards of work are often referred to collectively as ‘job satisfaction’ or ‘motivators’.
It is sufficient here to recognize that individuals at work are motivated by the sorts of rewards that are available.
Thereafter it is a choice as to whether, with their abilities, experience, goals and energy levels, they will choose to work.
Expectancy theory adds another condition to the importance of the reward as an influence on performance: that is, the individual's  assessment of the personal importance of the reward and the likelihood of that reward actually being achieved.
Outcomes and the value of those outcomes are clearly relevant.
One of the mistakes of the twentieth century was to standardize reward systems in terms of salaries.
This assumed that the same rewards (salaries) would be sufficiently important to all individuals to motivate them.
The evidence against these assumptions is overwhelming and alternatives like promotion, challenge, interesting tasks and fun have largely overtaken salaries as important rewards on a day-to-day basis.
THE PERFORMANCE EQUATION
Performance at work is a function of all the factors we have identified:
However, this equation ignores the situation in which work is occurring.
Important situational variables are the nature of the job, the formal and informal structures, the technical system, the boss, colleagues, etc.
All these variables can affect performance and will be developed throughout the rest of this book.
For the present, if we extract the uniquely individual characteristics from the equation (abilities, experience, goals) then we are left with the well known equation:
Performance is a function of E (effort-energy) and R (rewards)
Finally, effort is a function of expected rewards or outcomes (EXP) and the importance or valency (V) of those outcomes for the individual.
The importance of goals
Of those factors relating to the individual (abilities, experience, goals) it is goals which are most effective in trying to predict a person's performance at work.
Yet an individual's goals are difficult to establish.
Abilities or aptitudes can be tested psychologically; experience can be validated by talking to peers or previous employers.
Goals are another issue.
Managers often have difficulty in identifying their own goals let alone the goals of others.
The following section of this chapter attempts to simplify these issues by explaining the goals listed earlier, by showing the sorts of  themes that might emerge to indicate the strength of a goal and by illustrating the sorts of jobs which satisfy certain goals.
Remember, the eight recurring goals were:
Comfort
Structure
Relationships
Recognition/status
Power
Autonomy, creativity, growth
COMFORT GOALS
Need theories referred to this group of goals as ‘body’ or ‘primary’needs or drives.
Hence, goals such as sufficient food, drink, shelter and sex were included as basic drives.
Most employees in this country are now reasonably certain of their supply of food, drink and shelter, and more subtle forms of comfort have become important goals.
These include the physiological comfort of pleasant working conditions and the avoidance of stress caused by illness or shortage of money.
These goals are best summarized as the goal of a comfortable lifestyle.
Clearly, income is an important variable in attempting to satisfy this goal; it is certainly what most people tell you they come to work to get, even though the number of people actually solely motivated by it is very small.
Of all the goal categories, this one includes the largest variability because it reflects an individual's experience in a socio-economic environment.
What is a palace for one person may be a cottage for another.
For example, process and clerical employees will rank concern for comfort goals more highly than chairs of a board; most of the latter have enough wealth to provide the lifestyles they and their families want.
Further, discomfort is much more prevalent at the base of an organization than it is at the top, both physically and psychologically.
One of the corporate myths is that top managers have a monopoly on stress — the incidence of stress is actually highest at the bottom of the hierarchy among process, clerical and service personnel.
If a search for money and/or an avoidance of stress are two indicators of strong arousals from this goal category, then it is clear that some people can be motivated for long periods of time either by stress avoidance or by  accumulating more and more money.
Some individuals would prefer to avoid stress rather than seek any other goals.
They will subjugate their other goals for a ‘quiet time’.
Other people can be motivated into activity year-in-year-out just to acquire more and more money.
However, both categories represent a small fraction of the population.
This is not to suggest that most people will not respond to the reward of money.
Everyone has their price.
But for most of the workforce this price is relatively high and short-lived; money will motivate for a short time especially if it is a potentially large sum of money (e.g. football pools, lotteries, gambling).
In contrast there is a much smaller number of people in selling jobs (cars, real estate) and in some service professions who will respond over and over again, year-on-year, to performance-related payments of money.
In these latter cases, one clue is that performance and reward are always very closely related regardless of what they do.
What theme might we expect to find in the background of someone highly motivated by money over long periods?
Deprivation — they began life with no money.
Alternatively, the family had money and lost it.
They began selling at an early age, certainly before 10 years of age.
From that first step into making money there is a pattern of change in product or profession or activity which is explained by the opportunity to make more money.
They buy possessions to display their wealth (cars, boats, clothes, jewellery).
Often their partner is used to exhibit possessions.
Each job has a close relationship between the performance of the task and the immediate reward of money (conversely, they avoid salaries in preference for commission payments or fees directly related to their performance).
Finally, they avoid positions where the time between performance and reward is too long.
This reflects the time orientation of each individual (how far ahead they think — hours, weeks, months, years).
Pensions as a form of work reward suffer from an absurd time-lag; no one at 25 years of age thinks in 40-year time horizons.
At 25, young men and women want the rewards now, not at 65 years of age.
Comfort goals are very sensitive to work and domestic problems, especially personal or family illness.
When these problems occur, some individuals appear to alter their preferences dramatically for certain goals, and comfort goals become dominant.
Once the illness or pregnancy or death or disappointment is accepted then the preference ranking will shift again.
The shift in ranking of preferences appears to be related to social class.
Working class individuals (who report a higher incidence of stress than the mobile middle classes) adjust their goal preferences more slowly than high-achieving middle class individuals.
This is partly a question of social mobility but it may also be a response to the sort of repetitive jobs many of these people are performing.
For them career achievement is not ranked highly —‘a job is a job’.
However, we must keep the influence of socio-economic origins or social class in perspective.
Some of the most highly motivated individuals (in a career sense) begin life at the top of the working class and energize themselves into the middle classes.
Retailing and banking have been very effective in attracting managers of this sort.
Conversely, those individuals who began life in the managerial and professional middle classes may seek power and status rather than concentrate on stress avoidance or a guaranteed supply of money from their careers.
Athletic interests are also related to comfort goals.
People who are aroused persistently by career goals (high achievers in the organizational sense) are not as likely to play team sports, where stress and uncertainty are shared; they prefer golf, running, swimming or squash.
People for whom career goals are less important than comfort goals (lower achievers in an organizational sense) are more likely to watch others play sport; their first sexual experiences occur younger and more frequently thereafter.
High achievers report less physical illness and spend less time discussing their ailments.
The incidence of nearly every illness (including coronary heart disease) is higher at the bottom of the organizational hierarchy.
Of course, these differences are reinforced by the nature of the work people do.
The answer to the question whether motivation arousal patterns derive from one's past or from the situation in which one finds oneself is that they derive from both.
However, in selecting people for jobs, it is the current profile of goals that provides vital background and career history to date.
And in every case a perceptive manager should be able to discern a clear pattern.
STRUCTURE GOALS
The second set of work goals can be collectively called structure.
Earlier theories of motivation (1930–60) identified financial security as a primary goal.
In those times this was probably true.
However, financial security is no longer the problem it was for most people; welfare systems ensure survival.
Consequently, there has been a shift in concern away from whether  we will survive financially or socially to how much we can reduce financial and other kinds of uncertainty.
And at a time of great economic uncertainty, this goal assumes increased importance, especially in an ageing population.
Structure, certainty and security are goals which are closely linked to comfort goals.
The two sets are so interwoven that it is difficult to claim they are separate.
However, in analysing behaviour in organizations, it is extremely useful to consider the two sets apart — on the one hand the goals relating to the individual search for a comfortable lifestyle, and on the other those relating to the search for a definition of what is required of each individual.
What factors correlate with people who rank structure highly?
Childhood insecurity: deprivations, death of parent(s); numerous domestic changes (ten homes in ten years).
Birth order: first and/or only child.
The most cited reason for the statistical correlation between strong structure goals and being the first (or only) child is the inexperience (and uncertainty) of the parents.
That insecurity is transferred to the first child.
Over-anxious parents; stressed partners.
Physical punishment at home and/or school.
High levels of discipline at home and/or school.
Rejection as a form of discipline (‘If you don't like it here, move out’).
Experience of personal and family deprivation: war, recession, redundancy, depression.
Parental role models working in large, structured, ‘safe’ jobs.
Prolonged illness in self or family member.
Career evidence will reflect the search for stability:
Stable job history in structured functions (accounting, engineering, process work).
High preoccupation with time and clarity of role.
High concern for security provisions, salary, pension, etc., at time of recruitment.
Organizations have traditionally relied on structure and threats of insecurity to control the behaviour of employees.
If employees deviated from the required behaviour patterns then they were threatened with the sack (and insecurity), isolation (and insecurity) or promotional restrictions (failure and insecurity).
Control and discipline rest on some form of insecurity, even if the outcome is called self-control.
Even the Church threatened its  members with the ultimate insecurity of damnation or purgatory (with the added organizational advantage of no feedback loop).
While the strength of the structure set of goals varies with circumstances during our lifetime, the period when it influences our motivation arousal patterns most powerfully is in childhood.
The child-rearing practices of a society lead people to develop expectations about structured or unstructured environments.
And if we compare practices across cultures then we will find distinctive and subtle differences in the way structured behaviour is learnt and compliance is assured.
The Japanese concept of structure is different from, say, the British or the Swedish.
In Japan, structure relates to the hierarchical nature of a collective society; in individualistic Britain structure appears to rest on a sense of being reasonable; in Sweden structure seems to have its origins in group perceptions of what is expected, it is an interpersonal process rather than a legal process.
In Germany structure relates to a power culture and to the constraints on the use of power (as Weber noted 100 years ago).
Whatever the national differences, there has been a shared complaint among employees over the past 20 years, a reaction against over-structuring, over-controlling and over-integrating work in organizations.
A predominantly twentieth-century belief that structure can produce rational, scientific systems of action has been questioned.
The result has been some unbundling, loosening and decentralizing of control in some societies and in some organizations on some tasks.
Nevertheless, structure remains a dominant goal for many people.
It attracts those who seek it to large structured organizations and into programmed, structured jobs.
It turns them away from looser, unstructured organizations.
Banks, the armed forces, universities and religious organizations attract those seeking structure.
Agencies (advertising, real estate) and small businesses attract those not seeking structure: people with a high tolerance of uncertainty and ambiguity and capable of ‘muddling through’.
What would be a theme for someone seeking a highly structured environment?
First child.
Parent a middle-level civil servant.
Child-rearing beliefs based on structure, order and discipline.
Use of physical punishment, deprivation and delayed gratification.
Attended a large, highly structured school, perhaps a boarding school.
Graduated in accounting (or law or engineering).
Worked for a clearing bank.
Has been in the same bank all the time.
At job interviews asks detailed questions about:
— salary
— pension
— work location
— performance expectations
While I have deliberately exaggerated this example to illustrate the emergence of a pattern or theme, there are a large number of people in our society who would satisfy two-thirds of these items and who are working in large structured organizations in which their search for predictability is reinforced on a daily basis.
Ironically, in some cultures (e.g. UK), many of these people will spend much of their time complaining about the very structure and rationality they were seeking.
In other cultures (such as Japan) this complaining behaviour is not common, the link is positive.
Turn to a risk-taking, entrepreneurial company and you are likely to come across the converse of the structure theme:
Not first child.
Creative, loosely organized family environment.
Discipline based on self-direction.
Progressive school.
Graduated from university in arts (to avoid being ‘locked in’).
Has worked for numerous organizations; will change to get more freedom, autonomy, creativity and direct rewards based on performance.
Again, to illustrate the importance of themes I have taken an extreme.
But research shows that it is possible, simply by asking questions at an interview, to establish a person's goals in this area.
My critics will say that this is a dangerous business — the wrong evidence may be collected, leading to false assumptions.
Of course, one might be wrong, but what other choice do we have?
Experience to date and motivational goal data give us our greatest chance of picking a winner.
Further, I believe that you can choose any job, identify the people who perform best at it and show that, if you go back over their lives and careers, you will find themes, patterns and trends from which you can develop a selection interview designed to find more of them.
RELATIONSHIP GOALS
Everyone wants to love someone, to be wanted, to have relationships with other people.
We grow and develop as a result of those interactions.
Yet the degree to which this goal is important to people varies widely within societies and among different cultures.
People who have very strong relationship goals will seek out employment and leisure activities where they can form lasting relationships — deep, warm relationships which will endure over many years.
Conversely, some people are introverted, and seek out relationships with very few people and then only on their own terms.
Positions which attract people with strong relationship goals are process and clerical work and some of the caring professions and other people centred areas (nursing, supervisors, personnel officers, counsellors, etc.).
Most high achievers, in an organizational sense, do not seek those forms of relationships.
They have many, varied, fleeting relationships with a wide range of acquaintances, often preferring their own company to that of others.
Conversely, Fred and Myrtle's work on the factory floor is highly interdependent with that of their colleagues, and this reinforces their relationships (often called solidarity).
These relationships may continue in the pub after work (often called sociability).
Women seem to be currently more prone to seek longer-term close relationships with other women than men are with other men.
In Western societies, men (even those in process work) still tend to be taught to seek relationships with a larger number of people and to control the amount of emotion they invest in these relationships.
In looking for background themes the following have been found to correlate positively with strong motivation-arousal goals for forming lasting relationships with friends and an organization:
Birth order: later children in large families (third, fourth).
The correlation of fourth child and strong relationship goals appears to be the result of more relationships as a child and the greater number of ‘parent’ roles in mother, father and older brother and sister.
Giving and receiving affection (that is, relating to others) is emphasized.
Families which frequently and openly demonstrate affection.
Strong and persistent pattern of close school-friends.
Frequent interaction in pubs, clubs and societies, families and friendship groups.
High concern for a job where relationships are ‘good’ and cooperation is strong.
An organization with a well-known name (e.g. IBM, Shell, Marks & Spencer, Olivetti, Siemens).
If we ask people to rank in order the six goals listed earlier, approximately 60 per cent of the workforce will put their highest value on relationships  at work and home and not on advancement or achievement in a career sense, unlike top managers who place relatively much less emphasis on relationships.
The majority of this 60 per cent will remain at the base of the hierarchy, forming strong interpersonal relationships with their friends; and, contrary to a common assumption, they do not seek the sorts of ego-gratifying goals that the executive class seeks.
They are aroused to activity by others, by friendship, by relating.
Many of our industrial problems have their roots in loner, career-motivated managers designing jobs for people motivated by relationships goals; the managers isolate people from each other in factories or offices because they (the managers) want to be isolated.
To do this to someone seeking relationships is absurd.
We should learn from the Japanese manager whose prime function is to develop relationships.
In the West the prime function of the manager has been the task, not the relationships between the people.
Not surprisingly, those for whom relationships are paramount have sought them elsewhere — in trade unions, movements, pubs, sports and social clubs and football crowds.
RECOGNITION AND STATUS GOALS
Much of the literature on goals has linked recognition and power and concluded that they are the same goal set.
Certainly, there is an overlap between a desire for status and power.
However, there are great advantages in separating them when assessing a person's goals.
They certainly do produce different behaviour patterns.
Most importantly, they point to different careers and an interest in different rewards.
Recognition is one of the strongest goals among high achievers.
Like all goals it develops in childhood.
Part of a child's development is the evolution of a concept called by psychologists the ‘self.
In crude terms it is the picture I have of ‘me’ and is basic to my self-respect.
This picture of myself develops from a myriad of experiences, particularly from the feedback I get from other people.
For example, it is related to parental love in that children learn at a very early stage that behaving well or being ‘OK’ means they get more affection; being ‘not OK’leads to a withdrawal of affection.
This use of recognition as positive reinforcement occurs for most of us throughout childhood.
‘If you eat your supper you can watch TV.’
Perform and you get the reward; no performance, no reward, or, even worse, withdrawal of another reward.
As the child gets older and time orientations lengthen, the reward may be delayed; gratification may occur days, weeks, months or even years  later, and this may result in a ‘work ethic’ style in which persistence becomes a sub-goal in itself.
Schools extend this reward and punishment system further.
If you fail to achieve the desired standard then you receive lower marks, are demoted, or at worst may be asked to leave.
Between parents and school; individuals develop very strong appetites for recognition.
This enables organizations to continue the same system with salary increases, titles, superior offices and furnishings, cars, expense allowances, stock options, etc., which are, after all, only more sophisticated examples of the process which began with the child's first jellybean.
Some people develop very strong appetites for recognition and are attracted to jobs which provide them with endless ‘jellybeans’; for example, the reward systems of the armed services, higher education and the professions offer substantial opportunities to be recognized and praised for one's performance.
Factors which we have found correlate positively with the emergence of strong goals of recognition, status and praise, and which provide themes for selection, are:
Parents with childhood backgrounds of middle and upper-middle socio-economic groups.
Middle and upper-middle socio-economic status achieved by parents.
Certain occupations of parents (especially professional).
Use of rewards as opposed to punishments in childhood.
High expectations of parents for children's performance.
Parental use of delayed gratification.
Unwillingness to drop standards even in the face of contrary data.
High status and power goals of parents.
Deprivation — insufficient recognition of the child's achievements.
Of all these background themes, the last has been the most powerful in explaining adult goals.
It is the deprivation effect which dominates the themes of academics, doctors, judges, salespeople, consultants, etc.
By deprivation I mean that the parents or school recognized the child's achievements, but only grudgingly, for example, ‘You have done quite well’ or ‘You've passed this exam, but you have still more to pass’.
This recognition with a ‘bite’ appears to lead in some people to an endless search for higher status and/or higher achievement, especially among professionals and sub-professionals in the middle socio-economic groups.
It is less prevalent among managers — their goals are very much more concerned with  power — but among people in sales, entertainers, union officials, academics, service chiefs, doctors, barristers and other public performers this goal appears extremely powerful as an arousal trigger.
The importance of recognition as a goal is that it provides managers with unlimited opportunity.
It appears to be almost impossible to satiate those seeking recognition in large doses.
Put crudely, there is little danger of over-use.
However, in a society where we tend to reject praise, it is vital a manager observes whether or not a subordinate accepts the praise when it is given.
We have a strong tendency to reject it —‘Go on, you say that to all your sales people!’
Used effectively, though, recognizing performance is one of the manager's most powerful arousal techniques.
Behaviour can be transformed by its use.
Recognition has two referents: recognition by me that I have done well, and recognition by others.
In some societies the former is thought more admirable; people should know if they have done well without public assessment.
This is true of some Scandinavian societies.
In contrast there are other societies (United Kingdom, Italy, the United States) which use public recognition frequently and generously to differentiate one person from the others.
What is essential is that the manager using recognition should understand the local mores.
What is acceptable in Italy could be seen as vulgar in the Netherlands or Sweden.
Central to recognition of oneself by oneself is a move in work organizations to the assessment of performance on a continuous basis of individuals, groups or businesses against agreed performance criteria.
One consequence of this control system will be fewer managers and more group/individual self-control.
For example, if the athlete comes third in a race (a very clear, unequivocal performance criterion) does the athlete need to be told by a coach (manager) that he or she is third?
This is self-assessment: the criterion is clear (come first).
The athlete knows that he or she has failed.
The greater use of self-assessment against known criteria will be more successful in some cultures than in others.
In collective cultures (Sweden, Japan) assessments will be group-based.
In individualistic cultures (US, UK, France) it would be more appropriately individually based.
Both systems have major consequences for motivation patterns.
POWER GOALS
Compared with the public performers mentioned above, effective managers usually give much lower priority to recognition.
Their primary goal is managerial power, i.e. the opportunity to influence, control and reward the behaviour of subordinates.
In research into effective managers it is this  background theme which correlates positively with success, not the recognition theme.
That does not mean that people who have recognition as a high priority should not be managers.
All it means is that a preference for managerial power rather than recognition is more likely to be a successful mix for a manager.
One of the difficulties in separating ‘power people’ from ‘recognition people’is that organizations and societies make the separation more difficult simply by mixing power and status together.
To reinforce the authority of the position (rather than the person) we attribute status, titles, honours and other props to power, all for the exclusive use of those occupying the position.
Hence, the judge is dressed in extraordinary clothes; the managing director has a large car and a chauffeur (although the director is the only passenger in the car and is perfectly capable of driving); the pop star has all the glitter and pomp of the medieval monarch.
It ought to be noted that radio and television advertising titillates these status expectations by offering (at a price) beauty and recognition, power and recognition, love and recognition.
When managers are being selected, an attempt should be made to separate recognition goals from power goals.
Factors which correlate positively with a strong search for power are:
Birth order — first child or first male or female.
our research suggests that the development of strong power goals in first children arises from parental expectations.
The first child is expected to look after or manage other children.
Hence this correlation is less common in only children.
A power figure as a role model (parent, teacher, coach).
Experiences with power (school, college, university, work).
A succession of managerial roles.
Confidence and good presentation at interview.
The desire to manipulate others, to ‘run’ something.
A power theme might therefore look like this (remember, one piece of data is useless — a theme is needed):
Parent a police officer.
First child; head boy/girl at school.
Community official.
On faculty committee at college.
Captain of a sporting team.
Supervisor at 25.
District manager at 30.
Dominant in very close relationships.
Add to this theme positive appraisals as a manager through the internal appraisal system and you have a strong candidate.
Indeed, of all the data available on a potential manager, information on past managerial experience through a series of jobs is the best predictor.
Unfortunately, with a commendable shift to shredding appraisals after three or five years, such longitudinal data may be non-existent.
On the other hand, over how many years does one need to assess a person's managerial behaviour?
AUTONOMY: CREATIVITY AND GROWTH COALS
The ‘need’ theorists' concept of self-actualization or self fulfilment has a long history (Jung, Adler, Goldstein, Rogers) yet remains one of the fuzziest and least developed in psychology.
For this reason, it will be useful to define it more closely here.
It consists of
A search for independence rather than dependence, for control over self rather than control by others (autonomy).
A search for opportunities for originality and creativity.
This relates to autonomy in that creativity may flourish in freedom, but the two goals are not necessarily found in the same person (creativity).
A search for growth and challenge; extending the boundaries of the self; stretching the options, experiencing novelty (growth).
It is clear that those who seek autonomy may also seek opportunities to be creative.
Others seek autonomy and believe unquestionably that they are creative.
Still others seek autonomy but do not seek creativity.
However, both the autonomy and creativity groups seek growth.
In the simplest explanation, these goals relate to an ideal that may become real.
They relate back to Allport's concept of ‘becoming’ which, by its very definition, is never-ending.
Over time, age and reality catch up with the dreams but, even though the dreams have to be modified, often painfully, the search for an opportunity to stretch oneself, to let the potential emerge, is endless.
As the workforce becomes more skilled, and professional, we appear to be producing more and more individuals seeking autonomy, creativity and growth.
One study after another comes to this conclusion.
Hence, employed or sub-contracted professionals on performance-related fees are part of most scenarios for the future and this poses well documented issues for motivation.
The culture of the professional (autonomy; allegiance to profession first and to organization second; professional not organizational criteria for assessment of performance; minimal managerial interference) is in conflict with the power culture of management  (cooperation and control; allegiance to organization goals; facilitating processes and procedures).
The management of professionals with strong autonomy goals, highly mobile careers, and flexible working and income-earning options is one of the dilemmas posed by the professionalization of the workforce.
Factors which correlate strongly with autonomy are:
Strong goal orientation, even to the point of creating unnecessary hurdles.
Realizable but challenging goals.
expectations of parents for very high standards of performance.
Long time orientation (three to five years).
Capacity to modify unachievable goals.
Strong defence mechanisms to retain confidence.
Preference for self:regulation and avoidance of controls, systems and rules imposed externally.
For those seeking creativity as well:
Evidence of creativity — writing, art, design, etc.
Pattern of lateral thinking, even in conversation.
History of searching for a role (‘What will I be when I grow up?’).
Tendency to seek perfect solutions to problems.
Growth goals reflect the endless striving that other writers have noted:
Seeks challenge.
Wants to live life to the full.
Easily bored with repetition or details.
Initiates rather than completes.
Tendency to mania; has highs and lows.
Sees growth as own problem, not the employer's.
Tends to idealize possible outcomes.
Many of these growth-seeking people do manage organizations.
Unfortunately, if they have little interest in power they may not be very good managers.
Indeed, characteristics of some of the extreme cases are:
Failure to tell others what the goals are.
Setting impossible standards for others to follow.
Tendency to delegate all the trivia.
Poor communicator — they know what they are doing but have not told anyone else.
Behaves in a frenetic or disjointed way.
It could be argued that telepathy is a desirable characteristic for the subordinates of such a person!
Yet it is these autonomous, creative, challenge-driven people who are responsible for new businesses, new techniques, new insights, new products, new buildings, new research projects and new forms of art.
What jobs attract them?
Where both the autonomy and creativity are goals, we find film directors, theoreticians, writers, artists, conceptualizers, architects and research academics.
Where there is merely an autonomous goal, with less creativity, we find problem-solvers, consultants, integrators, market researchers, entrepreneurs, advisers, forecasters and corporate planners.
It is ironic that the media tend to promote individuals in this last group — the autonomous but less creative — as the superstars of the business world, yet many of them are not actually very productive in our economic system.
What is worse is that managers have been downgraded in comparison.
We seem determined to produce more and more of these ‘butterflies’ and, as a result, have enormous difficulties finding general managers to run our corporations.
Organizations can absorb only a small number of people with these work goals.
They see themselves as special, and their search for challenge, novelty and change, their intolerance of errors in the work of others and their aversion to formal controls make them difficult to manage.
The easiest way I have found to assess the strength of this group of goals is to give individuals a single sheet of paper and to ask them to write down in five minutes what they hope to achieve in the next five years.
People who place great importance on the goals of autonomy, creativity and growth will have no difficulty in filling the paper.
They are so goal-directed that they are unlikely ever to suffer from having nothing to do.
Conversely, lower achievers who do not segment time into past, present and future (time is now) will write down only one or two goals.
They are not lazy, they just do not think in the free-flowing goal-oriented way that the ‘butterflies’ do.
They seek friendship, fun, love — different sorts of goals — and, what is more important, they may in fact have more satisfying lives than the restless high achievers.
Summary
The factors that appear to influence the way a person behaves at work are abilities, experience, goals and values, energy and rewards.
Abilities indicate potential rather than actual performance.
Of all abilities only the capacity to conceptualize has been found to correlate  with the performance of managers.
Experience is predictive when the experience is relevant to the job being done.
But experience does not allow us to predict how a person will perform, only the potential to perform.
Goals and values plus energy provide us with the vital information on motivation to perform and it is these variables which provide the best data on how an individual is likely to perform.
Six goal categories were suggested: comfort, structure, relationships, recognition, power and autonomy/creativity/growth.
Rewards will affect performance.
As a generalization, organizations get the behaviour from individuals that they reward.
Rewards are both intrinsic and extrinsic.
Individuals attach different values to different rewards and have expectations about the likely outcomes of effort and rewards.
We can summarize the performance issue in the equation:
If we then extract the individual differences for the workforce, the equation becomes:
If we allow for the expectations of individuals and the values (valency) they place on certain outcomes or rewards, then we can propose that the degree to which they will release energy in the pursuit of their goals is a function of their expectations about likely outcomes and the importance they place on those outcomes or rewards:
The chapter concludes with an analysis of goal profiles of individuals and illustrates what evidence correlates with specific goal categories as a way of understanding the goals and motivation patterns of others.
References
Individuals and organizations
Introduction
The first chapter developed a framework for analysing an individual's capabilities and work goals.
In this chapter we look at how those goals may be in conflict, and how they are affected by age, culture and a person's job; 1 consider how organizations attempt to motivate people by rewarding performance, and thereby rewarding those goals; finally we look at the outcomes of goal/organization mismatch which lead to dissatisfaction, disillusionment and stress.
Goal conflict
Patterns of profiles of goals are established through inheritance and childhood experiences.
By the time we reach the mid-twenties a distinct and enduring pattern will have developed and that pattern will last for many years.
So if recognition is important to a person in their twenties it is likely to continue to motivate throughout their career.
It is very rare to find people who reverse the patterning other than for specific periods.
Even the popular teenager who rebels against parental values and goals is likely to return to them by the age of thirty or so.
This patterning or prioritizing of goals leads people into certain jobs.
Those whose goal priorities emphasize security and recognition, for example, will be attracted to jobs offering those rewards.
These are likely to be professions like law, engineering, medicine.
Those seeking money as number one priority will be attracted to jobs where performance and reward are closely linked and performance is paid for in money, preferably cash in the hand.
Those who rank relationships highly will be attracted to jobs where relating with people is a major part of the work.
Throughout this chapter we assume that individuals know what motivates them and can isolate their goals and discuss them separately.
Of course, in reality this is not the case.
We all operate as integrated wholes, not as six independent goals.
Whatever goal I am pursuing, all the others — plus many I may not even recognize — are involved.
Hence, I may have great difficulty in answering a relatively simple question like ‘Why do you put so much energy into your career?’ and I would have even more difficulty in deciding how much energy 1 should put into my career and how much into my family.
Yet this does point to a dilemma — goals are not necessarily consistent.
They often conflict with each other and much of  the stress that we experience comes from the conflict of one goal with another: career versus family; structure versus excitement and risk; individual versus collective; autonomy versus team-work; money versus challenge.
Each of us has to make choices, to pursue some goals at the expense of others, and some of these choices are painful.
Should we take the job in Paris and disrupt the family or stay where we are and continue to enjoy that community?
Shall 1 take the boss's job and risk spending more and more time in the office?
Should I go out on my own and start a business, or would the insecurity be unbearable?
Of all the possible goal conflicts, the two that arise most frequently when we interview managers are:
Relationship goals versus autonomy goals
This is a well-documented conflict, especially among creative people who need isolation at certain times and company at others.
The conflict is often hurtful for the family or close friends, who have to guess whether the creative member wants company or not.
Many spouses blame this conflict on the organization, and this is reinforced by their partners who similarly blame the organization For separating them from their families.
Yet the real conflict occurs within the individual, who could decide to spend less lime on self and more with the family.
Priorities could simply be rearranged.
But rather than admit that the family is secondary to the pursuit of autonomy, creativity and growth, the company is blamed.
‘It's not my fault, the company expects me to be there.’
People rationalize by saying there will be a time to catch up with important relationships (spouses, children, friends) later.
Unfortunately, time lost on relationships cannot be retrieved.
Structure/security goals and power goals
The second most common conflict between managers' goals is between structure/security goals and power goals.
The fear of taking risks inhibits the potential for managing larger groups.
The familiar comment of ‘Darling, what I could have achieved had 1 not had to consider my pension and the mortgage’ reflects this conflict.
Again, the conflict is within the individual rather than between the organization and the individual and is a common excuse for procrastination and avoiding risks.
The popular fantasy ambitions focus on this conflict: one is to run one's own business and the second is to manage or buy a farm.
Both may be escapist, but when pressed the most frequent response is ‘Yes, but the farm/business would put my family at risk’.
In fact, if the individual chose to realize one of these fantasies the conflict might become unbearable.
Hence we have to adjust our expectations and, rather than blaming others for preventing resolution, accept that some goals are achieved at the expense of others.
Goal conflict is related to social mobility.
That is, the socio-economic status of one's childhood does affect the degree to which goals will be compromised or energy will be devoted to achieving a particular goal.
When individuals from families of low socio-economic status climb the organizational hierarchy, they may feel ‘out of their depth’ at certain levels and be unable or unwilling to play the games familiar to those from managerial and professional middle-class families.
Conversely, the offspring of wealthy, middle-class, high achievers whose parents have devoted enormous energy to their careers may find this orientation unappealing and choose to devote minimal energy to career goals, often to the distress of their parents.
Social mobility — improving one's lot in life — is not an endless process of refinement.
Just as highly intelligent parents may produce less intelligent children, so, too, do highly goal-oriented adults often produce less goal-oriented children.
Through this process of the return to the mean or average, the superbly intelligent, highly motivated race remains an illusion.
Most of us will be average, and our children will remain at our socio-economic level or move marginally higher up the social order in line with an overall improvement in standards of living.
Quantum leaps from working class to the chair of a board of directors of a multinational corporation are rare, which is why they attract so much attention when they occur.
Goal conflicts make this socio-economic leap extremely difficult for any individual to absorb.
The sets of values embedded in one's goals in childhood have to be modified so radically and conflicts resolved so ruthlessly that few attempt it.
Yet it is the fantasy on which television ‘soaps’ depend.
Age
I have argued that most of the values and beliefs that will influence a person's goal priorities are established in childhood.
By the time a person leaves school a pattern of goals will have developed.
However, puberty affects values and beliefs so much that it may not be until the mid-twenties that we can ask realistically what career priorities a person has.
For example, post-puberty is the time when peer group friendships may take over from parents as the major influence.
Other goals may become subordinated to a search for relationships, providing a misleading profile.
Hence, career advice for teenagers is fraught with problems.
How can  they concentrate on career priorities when so many biological and social changes are occurring?
Yet this is the very time we ask teenagers to make career choices, which may partly explain the findings that by age 35 over 60 per cent of men and women will say they chose the wrong career.
They were asked to choose a career at the wrong time; there are more pressing issues at 18 years of age than careers.
By the mid-twenties, on average, most men and women will be satisfying their search for relationships through either a series of relationships or one stable relationship.
Having satisfied that goal, they will be making choices between autonomy and security, between money and power, etc.
They may not be using these terms but, for the first time, a career counsellor can obtain reliable data from interviews or questionnaires which detect goal priorities and motivation profiles.
The high-achiever, fast-track graduate employees will no longer rank relationships as the most significant goal — autonomy or power or recognition will be the dominant goal.
When a young couple has a child there will be a re-ranking of priorities — comfort, structure and relationship goals will dominate again as life becomes focused on comfort, structure and relationships.
This realignment may last for 9 to 12 months, depending on the health of the child and whether the domestic arrangements for caring for the child are resolved.
For a career mother, the three roles of mother, career woman and spouse may prove to be impossible without considerable domestic help.
For this reason some women have no alternative but to give up one or more of these roles following the birth of their child.
By the early thirties a stage often called ‘career launch’ arrives.
Here the dissatisfactions of the twenties seem to give way to a realization that life is not a rehearsal; careers are for real.
A dedication to career goals of autonomy or power or recognition (or some combination of these) takes over from the parental concern for comfort, structure and relationships.
Energy is channelled into careers, both at work and at home, providing periods of high satisfaction and a strong sense of achievement.
Organizations respond to this burst of energy with promises of promotion (and recognition) or status (and autonomy) and of real influence (and power).
Some studies suggest that more energy will be devoted to a career at this stage than at any other as the race to achieve really takes off.
And the rewards of autonomy or power or recognition are stimulated and partly satisfied.
MID-CAREER
The energy release of the early to mid-thirties is reinforced by the expectations of further children, by demands for possessions and by promises of  more autonomy, power, recognition and money from the employer.
Yet, for many men and women, something seems to go wrong.
There is increasing evidence of disillusionment among middle managers which goes beyond the long-established mid-career crisis literature.
There have been many studies which identified a mid-career crisis in managers.
Our own work found that one in three managers appeared to go through a sense of crisis in their late thirties.
The most frequent trigger to that crisis was career blockage, the realization that they, with the vast majority, would not make it to the top.
Recent research shows the disillusionment is more widespread and no longer confined to the late thirties or early forties: nor is it just about career blockage or perceived failure.
Rob Goffee's research suggests that this disillusionment is about a change in the rules: that the rewards of employment (security, money, etc.) are no longer reliable; that careers are no longer predictable.
Whatever the causes, the resultant disillusionment with employment leads to a reappraisal, a conscious or unconscious decision to allocate less energy to careers and to concentrate on comfort and relationship goals at work, and/or to satisfy the autonomy, recognition or power goals outside of employment.
Energy is diverted from the employer to other interests.
Most research would suggest that this is a problem of employment, a failure to satisfy the goals the employee is seeking.
Other writers suggest that this reprioritizing of the goals is sensible, as the individual has devoted too much energy to career and too little to family, friends and outside interests.
FORTIES
For the majority of people, who have no mid-career problems, the profile of the thirties continues into the forties.
However, their circumstances are changing.
Children are leaving or preparing to leave home, parental careers may reach their peak, possessions and other signs of success are available.
Some realignment of personal goals is inevitable.
Two patterns appear to emerge.
First, there seems to be a shift in some people of the outlets for achievement.
Whereas previously the career held most interest, other outlets now become attractive.
Leisure activities such as golf, sailing or bowls, or tasks centred on underutilized skills such as do-it-yourself home repairs, car maintenance or gardening, take up more energy than previously.
The second trend is a questioning of relationships.
Marriages that have survived appear, on average, to go through a renegotiation of the ‘contract’.
What was sought from a partner in one's twenties may be very different from what is sought 20 years later.
Together the partners appear, consciously or not, to negotiate a different  relationship based on their interests and activities in their forties, turning again to each other, especially as the children withdraw from their lives.
This is linked, for some, to a turning into the community to help with welfare or charity work.
Sometimes several goals are combined; e.g. the pursuit of a neglected interest in sport is linked to a voluntary contribution to the activities of a club.
The friendship patterns which will be important in the fifties and later are settled, faults are forgiven and relationships cemented.
The same trends tend to occur at work.
Managers in their late forties begin to see that they are no longer the up-and-coming stars — indeed they may have come as far as they are going to go.
Acceptance of this fact often provides a marvellous feeling of relief to accept what we are and to know that the striving for position, for power, for status is nearly over allows us to accept that others want our help.
As one writer has noted, ‘There is a turning from being a star player to being a coach, from being the patronized to becoming a patron, from being totally preoccupied with oneself to being preoccupied with the generation which will take over’.
Common-sense observers have long noted this ‘mellowing’, yet it is only recently that empirical data have demonstrated that concern for relationships does on average increase, that concern for stability and structure also increases, and that enthusiasm for the radical or the different is replaced by conservative views of the world.
And this begins a shift which tends to continue until death, as comfort, structure and relationship goals become, very slowly, more and more important.
RETIREMENT
On average, the goals are ranked almost equally by the mid-fifties high achiever.
Comfort, structure and relationships now warrant as much attention as the high-achievement goals of recognition, power, autonomy, creativity and growth.
This appears to be an age of contentment — less stress, less aggravation and the approach of retirement.
Yet age has taken its toll.
This is the time of life at which friends and acquaintances begin to die; women have been through the menopause and men can no longer deny that their virility is diminishing.
Physiological problems associated with ageing may already have begun to appear (hernia, haemorrhoids, arthritis, heart murmur, etc.).
Concern for comfort, health and certainty are inevitable outcomes of this physiological decline.
Retirement forces a reappraisal of relationships.
Family, friends and grandchildren must take the place of the employing organizations that for many years conferred identity, values and status.
This rift in work  relationships can be shattering, producing a sense of redundancy at a time when it is too late to retrain or seek another label and identity.
Purpose has to be redeemed; the potential loneliness of the aged becomes clearer.
Far-sighted high achievers have slowly been transferring their energy from employment to other activities, just to meet this moment.
Sport, hobbies, a small business or charity work have been occupying more and more attention through the late fifties, in preparation for retirement.
Yet, while we can preach the sanity of this shift, few indeed make the effort.
Hence, the shock of retirement is a shock of lost relationships, an abyss of nothingness.
Skills and aptitudes required at 60 are rarely learnt in the fifties.
Most of the skills, especially sporting skills, are learnt much earlier.
Preparation for retirement remains one of our least developed life stages.
DECLINE
There is a further shift in goals.
For the first time, concern for comfort, structure and certainty, and relationships dominates even the high achiever.
Achievement is now less important for the average ex-manager.
Concern about death and the circumstances in which it will occur increases the shift of focus to security goals.
Isolation from family, and particularly from children, produces its own dependence.
If we examine the research literature we find life expectancy is related to several factors:
The ‘right’ parents — the effects of genes.
Activity — having purpose, using energy.
The price of being a high achiever is that one cannot stop.
To do so eliminates the level of stimulation both brain and body require.
Decline is rapid without that stimulation.
Relationships — enjoying the support of other people.
Structure — having a routine (this seems to be especially so if the job was highly structured).
Mission — a wish to help others, to leave a legacy, to pass on knowledge, to serve a purpose.
And even if these are all positive, the end must eventually come.
The last life stage will be closed.
Culture
Just as age affects the way people prioritize their goals, so too are there differences between cultures.
Relationship goals are stronger in Scandinavian managers than, say, British; Japanese managers also put heavy emphasis on relationships and power but much less on autonomy or money.
Italian managers favour recognition; German managers favour power.
British, French and Swiss managers are attracted to structure goals.
Managers in the Netherlands stress relationships and appear to be less impressed with recognition as a goal.
The results of a survey of over 5000 managers in 9 countries is presented in Table 2.1.
Managers were asked to rank the six goals in terms of their importance to them now.
There are clear differences between the samples.
What is less clear is whether these are national cultural differences, differences in the use of language and/or corporate culture influences.
In the main the results are consistent with other researchers (e.g. Hofstede) and reinforce the conclusion that what is effective in one country may be ineffective in another.
Global solutions are rarely possible.
Cross-cultural differences are difficult to research even though anyone who works in different cultures will assure you they exist.
People are people and there is more in common than there is to separate them.
Hence, the differences are often subtle and impressionistic rather than obvious.
References to studies of cultural differences are given at the end of the chapter.
It is sufficient here to note that culture does not appear to affect the way people rank goals, with the proviso that these are Western concepts, anyway, and translating them for comparison into certain cultures is fraught with difficulties; often there is no local word available.
What do security and structure mean to a manager in Thailand who believes in predestination, based on previous lives?
There is no point in redesigning structures and controls if the future has been determined already.
Similarly, autonomy in Japanese organizations is quite inconsistent with the dependence-producing child-rearing patterns employed by many Japanese parents.
The word ‘peer’ is not  translatable into Dutch.
We must allow for these cultural differences.
Even within our own society, differences exist: they exist between north and south, between diverse creeds and cultures within the national cultures between rural and urban.
Where statistically significant differences do not exist is between high-achieving men and high-achieving women.
Position
The sort of jobs people do also affects the priorities they allocate to certain goals.
Certain patterns of goals do seem to push people into certain jobs.
We know, for example, that process workers are more concerned with comfort, structure and relationship goals than with recognition, power or autonomy.
Indeed, studies of process workers show that their major motivations in employment are money and relationships.
While money has been used to reward them the intrinsic motivation of working in a harmonious team has been eliminated in many jobs; for example, checkout operators in a supermarket, process workers in a manufacturing plant.
Jobs offering recognition (sales, the professions, academia) attract and reinforce those goals in their employees.
Jobs attracting people seeking power (managers, union organizers, police officers) also attract people seeking those goals and then reinforce them.
Entrepreneurial jobs offer and  attract autonomy-seeking individuals with low concern for risk, low concern for structure and a high concern for recognition.
What is difficult to establish is whether the job attracts the sort of goal profiles that are suitable or whether the individual is attracted by the job and then develops a profile suitable to it.
I believe it is the former rather than the latter.
People are attracted to jobs which suit their goal priorities.
However, a converse also holds.
If the job fails to satisfy a goal that is important to an individual then that frustration will, over time, affect adversely the behaviour of the person, unless the job is redesigned (enriched) such that the person's goals are met.
Hence, the man or woman seeking power but occupying an advisory staff position with limited power will become increasingly concerned and frustrated that they are not gaining managerial experience (and power).
The person seeking autonomy may become extremely frustrated and angry because of the number of controls head office is imposing.
Similarly, the staff turnover in check-out operators in supermarkets relates to the fact that these people seek relationships but are denied them; customers are processed quickly, friends are too far away for a chat.
Position clearly has an influence but it is probably most significant when the individual's goals are not being satisfied by the opportunities within a job.
For example, engineering, accounting, and personnel staff positions attract individuals more concerned with structure and power.
It could be frustrating to these job occupants to work in highly uncertain environments and have no power to change those environments.
Conversely, creative jobs in advertising, television or merchant banking seem to thrive on uncertainty and attract people much less interested in power in a managerial sense.
Caring jobs attract individuals who place high priority on relationships.
However, effective managers have an interest in power and relationships.
Some of the least effective managers are those seeking autonomy, creativity and growth — all of which are highly individualistic goals whereas management concentrates on collective goals.
Rewarding performance
Motivation is a choice to channel energy into certain activities in the expectation that valued goals will be rewarded.
In simple terms, behaviour that is rewarded recurs.
However, we must be realistic.
There are very few superb performers in any field.
Most of the really useful people, those who keep organizations alive, are average performers doing a good day's work in exchange for a fair reward.
Nevertheless, there is a massive mismatch in some organizations between the goals the individual is seeking to achieve and the actual rewards these organizations are able to offer.
Conflicts between the aspirations of individuals and the objectives of organizations have been well documented.
The moment the individual seeks employment in an organization is the moment a compromise begins.
We give up something and we gain something from employment.
If the loss if greater than the gain then the job holder should leave.
For effective motivation, the rewards of employment must exceed the losses.
The single greatest limitation to effective performance is that many of the rewards organizations offer are ineffective.
That is, the rewards do not satisfy the goals individuals are seeking.
If we wish to change the
Effort
Performance
Reward
equation to induce better performance then we should look to the reward system.
People withhold their best efforts if they see little relationship between what they do and how they are rewarded.
Sorting this out involves three questions:
What behaviour is expected?
How will that behaviour be assessed?
How will that behaviour be rewarded when it occurs?
What behaviour is expected is determined by the job, but we can generalize.
Most organizations would expect the following:
1.
A supply of new recruits (ATTRACT).
2.
Compliance with rules, regulations (COMPLY).
3.
Continuity of employment and effort (CONTINUE).
4.
Performance up to standard (PERFORM)
5.
Cooperation with others (COOPERATE).
How will that behaviour be assessed?
This obviously depends on the job.
What we do know is that assessed behaviour is better (quantity/quality) than non-assessed behaviour.
This partly explains the interest of some managers in performance assessment and performance-related pay.
However, two conditions are necessary for the performance/reward link to work.
First, the performance criteria must be relevant to, and cover, the full job.
The wrong or inadequate criteria will lead to inadequate performance.
That is, managers get from subordinates the behaviours they measure.
Second, over-quantification of measurement scales can eliminate judgement.
Judgement is not easily quantified.
It involves bringing together many sources of information; relying on narrow, numeric scales to assess certain criteria (e.g. sales, costs) can fudge complex interrelationships and lead to poor judgement and bad decisions.
How will desired behaviour be rewarded?
Organizations have not been slow in devising reward systems.
Unfortunately, many of them are not very effective.
Among the worst rewards are some salary and wage systems.
These are paid on a regular basis, with little or no regard for performance and on time-scales (monthly or weekly or daily) which may or may not be relevant to the individual.
To worsen this travesty, the money is paid directly into an account in a bank so that employees do not even get their hands on it.
We can classify reward systems into the following categories:
Common benefits: vacations, sick leave, pensions.
Individual rewards: salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, merit awards.
Group rewards: group incentives; parties; group bonuses.
Compliance: satisfying ‘official’ expectations; structural controls; the reward of doing it right.
Job satisfaction: intrinsic satisfaction; challenge.
Goal congruence: employee and organization share the same goals (e.g. a football team, a religious society); the reward is an emotional wellbeing from believing in or being committed to a superordinate goal.
Of these possible reward systems the most potent, overall behaviours are goal congruence (sharing the same goals as the organization) and job satisfaction.
But the effectiveness of rewards varies with the desired behaviour.
For example, in attracting individuals to work for the firm, salary and other individual rewards are very important.
Conversely, in motivating individuals to leave or withdraw, relative deprivation of individual rewards is a major influence.
In retaining people in the firm group rewards and group cohesion are powerful.
In producing structured, predictable behaviour the compliance rewards are important.
If the firm wishes to stimulate creativity then the compliance rewards are not effective (indeed, can be counterproductive) and the job satisfaction rewards of challenge, stretch, autonomy are important.
Demotivators
What interferes in the effort-performance-reward equation?
So far we have suggested that, in analysing the performance of individuals at work, there is a series of rational decisions which determine how much effort an individual will give for a level of performance and reward.
In fact, decisions are rarely so rational or even conscious.
You and I behave as wholes not as rational machines.
So organizations are also about love and hate and anger and disappointment and disillusionment, and these emotions intervene in the neat logic of effort, performance and reward.
Many of these emotions energize greater effort but others negate effort and lead to dissatisfaction, stress and withdrawal.
In a system which promises promotion, status and success to all and, in reality, confines these rewards to a very few, disappointment is inevitable.
There is an extensive literature which illustrates that the link between effort (E) and performance (P) is rarely linear or smooth.
Individuals get distracted, time orientations (how far an individual looks ahead) differ, goals become unclear (ambiguity) or less important than other goals (displacement).
So the number of possible breakdowns between L and P are infinite.
Often these are the result of poor management or incomplete training, or unclear performance targets or uncertain rewards.
Commitment to a performance target is not assured because a boss asked for that commitment.
Unless an individual commits to a performance then the release of energy (E) may not occur.
At best, instead of P we get P2 or P3, which is not the performance the boss wanted.
Similarly, the link between P and R (reward) is not guaranteed.
If the reward is unattractive or insufficient then the individual may not perform at all.
We all have the option to withdraw our energy on a temporary or permanent basis.
These breakdowns in the neat E/P/R logic are often grouped together as signs of dissatisfaction.
There is a huge literature on what causes dissatisfaction among actors in organizations.
Let me take one example of mismatch between individual goals and organizational objectives.
Motivated behaviour requires positive rewards when the desired behaviour occurs.
In reality, centralized reward systems rely on negative rather than positive rewards; that is, deviation from a norm rather than recognition of performance beyond the norm; criticism for failure to reach the expected performance rather than recognition of good performance.
This leads to the strange practice of encouraging counterproductive behaviour.
For example, typical Japanese workers in a large company have lifetime guaranteed jobs  and are rewarded with a salary and a share of the profits.
As up to 4() per cent of their income comes from corporate profits they have a vested interest in working for the common benefit.
In short, Japanese factories get high productivity because that is the behaviour they reward.
In the West we see a different pattern.
The average factory worker is paid a wage which is unrelated to productivity or protects and which is squeezed out of management, often through painful industrial disputation.
Jobs are often not secure so any new technology which may improve productivity is resisted as it threatens employment.
The perceived reward for increased productivity is insecurity either through job loss or the necessity to learn new skills and be examined.
In these cases the reward system encourages counterproductive behaviour in the form of restricted output, resistance to new technology, and time-consuming industrial action.
In an attempt to eliminate what we know is stupid, we are often forced into a bureaucratic game through which we hope to define our expectations and the rules of the game so that emotions will be controlled and rationality will triumph.
Unfortunately, the more we structure these issues the worse and more childlike behaviour becomes.
Instead of cooperation we have a destructive form of conflict in a social system whose very existence depends on cooperation.
So we structure it further, which reinforces the negative process we have created.
This makes it all sound extremely complex, but it need not be.
If we decide what behaviour we want and how we will assess it, and then reward that behaviour when it occurs (a practice found in any family), then we have a chance of pleasing both individual and organization.
What this example of structural bind illustrates is that many structural devices (systems, hierarchies) are a major cause of dissatisfaction.
other sources of irritation are incompetent managers, poor working conditions (canteens, parking), unfriendly peer groups and inequitable individual or group financial rewards.
These extrinsic or hygiene factors of employment are environmental influences on the effort-performance-reward relationship.
They may begin as mild irritations arising from the compromise of entering an organization and creating dependence, but they may progress to induce high levels of stress.
So far we have shown little interest in our work organizations in dealing ‘officially’ with these emotions.
Feelings are not part of the rational system of action.
What we need are outlets for emotion.
Most families tolerate and encourage the release of conflict whereby irritators are released through crying or yelling or confronting in other ways.
Work organizations have yet to develop such coping mechanisms.
The result is clear — there is large research literature on  dissatisfaction and disillusionment.
Too much emotion has been bottled up for too long and in some firms the performance-reward link is seriously distorted.
Summary
Work goals are affected by numerous situational variables.
However, the most significant causes of dissatisfaction in work organizations are conflicting demands among goals, differing age expectations of the person, the culture in which the person works and the nature of the reward systems.
The most common goal conflicts are those of relationship goals versus autonomy goals.
The second is the conflict that arises between structure and power goals.
Goal conflict is also related to social mobility.
Age probably has the greatest impact on the way people rank their goal priorities.
While there is ample evidence of different goals being important at different stages of a person's life, organizations make little allowance for these shifts.
Before the mid-twenties it is difficult to obtain reliable information on a person's priorities because the period of adolescence is all about sorting out parental peer group and personal goals.
It is unfortunate that this is when most societies expect young people to choose a career.
That assumes they can decide which goals are more important than others.
Very few people can do it.
However, after the mid-twenties, patterns of life stages appear.
These have been labelled by a variety of writers as career launch (early thirties), crisis (late thirties to early forties), achieving and mellowing (forties/fifties), and retirement (sixties).
At each stage goals shift in importance and organizations tend to ignore this fact.
National culture clearly has an impact, but it remains one of the least researched areas of business.
Broad generalizations (the Japanese are concerned about relationship goals, the British about recognition and structure) are familiar to any international manager.
What is less clear is the significance of these differences for the practice of management.
The job or position to which a person is attracted has a strong link to their goal profile.
Hence, staff functions have traditionally attracted individuals wanting structure, autonomy and creativity while line manager positions attract people wanting power and relationships.
Mismatches between individuals and jobs are common.
Reward systems often exaggerate the mismatch by offering the wrong rewards to the wrong people.
The most significant impact a manager can have on  motivation and performance is to design reward systems which satisfy individuals and the objectives of the organization.
References
Individuals and other individuals
Introduction
In this chapter we look at how individuals see themselves and the world outside.
Perceptions and attitudes affect subsequent behaviour.
Then we analyse how individuals collect data about each other and what they do with those data.
This leads to interpersonal relationships.
Finally, we watch an individual join others in an organization.
The self
In Chapters 1 and 2 we looked at how individuals relate to the world to release energy, to satisfy goals and to attain rewards.
These relationships depend on how they see or perceive the world outside their inner world.
The behaviour that we, as observers, see in another is the result of that individual's perceptions of the world.
For example, if I perceive you to be friendly, then I am likely to act in a friendly manner towards you.
What you perceive will be different from what I perceive but there will probably be overlap.
This separation of me from the rest has led psychologists to develop a concept called ‘the self’.
That is, behind the overt behaviours is a ‘real’ person, the central influence on what we call a person's personality.
Carl Rogers, the American psychologist, described this influence as ‘the self.
The self is how people see themselves as whole beings.
It is that pattern of perceptions, feelings, attitudes, goals and values that individuals have about themselves.
This self helps to explain recurring behaviours, attitudes and feelings.
These recurring threads have led some psychologists to argue that there are enduring personality traits (see Chapter 10) and others to suggest trait combinations or personality types (see Jung's functions, Chapter 9).
Indeed, most psychometric testing of applicants for jobs is based on an assumed consistency of traits or types.
However, despite their enormous popularity, personality tests, on their own, have had a disappointing history in predicting behaviour at work.
What is less controversial is the central function of an individual or the concept called the self.
So, I have pictures of myself as a boss, a father, a spouse, a friend, etc.
I also have an idealized picture of myself — what I would like to be in an ideal world.
This idealized version is most imaginative as a teenager when any fantasy is possible.
As we get older reality requires that the  ideal and the self are reconciled; ambitions are relaxed; unrealistic goals are abandoned as time and opportunity compel us to change the idealized concept we have for ourselves.
We call this maturing.
For the mature individual, reality and the self-concept are reconciled.
(For the psychologically ill, reality and the self concept may drift further apart.)
One advantage of the self-concept is that it allows us to examine people as they are, as ‘wholes’, not as a series of personality dimensions.
From this position, perceptions can be seen to guide human action.
Phenomenologists study the perceptions of experience as one way to assess individuals; what they perceive in the world determines their behaviour.
What meanings do individuals give to their experiences?
From this view any attempt to quantify or verify the meanings is misleading.
The experience is subjective and should be assessed as subjective yet vital in understanding the individual.
So if an incident occurs in which the boss is perceived by an individual as evil and uncaring, then whether that is true or not is irrelevant.
What is relevant is that the subordinate's perception of the experience will affect his or her behaviour.
The concept of the self develops from a child's physical separation from the parents.
The child is not the same as they are.
Subsequently, children distinguish between what is part of themselves and what is not, and internal and external worlds develop.
We learn to protect the self by a number of defence mechanisms (repression, regression, rationalization, projection, etc.).
We are not sure why some individuals use certain defence mechanisms, say aggression, while others use different mechanisms, but they do appear to be learnt from parents or other role models.
We all use defence mechanisms to protect our ‘self, especially our most private dreams and fantasies.
Rarely do we discuss this private world with a stranger.
Our sensitivity in discussing our fantasies, our dreams, our disappointments, our weaknesses with people unknown to us reflects the tenderness of the self-concept.
To the stranger we present the face of control and rationality.
If you want me to change my behaviour then I need to perceive some advantage in doing so.
That is, I need to change my self concept, which is not always easy, especially if the change means forgoing one of my most treasured dreams about myself.
Perception
Perception is that process by which the individual organizes an abundance of information (stimuli) into meaningful patterns.
By this process  we reduce an indigestible amount of data into meaningful lumps.
Some of this information comes from inside (hunger, sexual arousal, tiredness, muscular drive, thought processes), some from outside through receptors (eyes, ears, skin surfaces, taste buds, nose).
The brain receives and processes the information for us.
While we all have the same receptors our capacity to use them varies greatly, as does our capacity to process the data.
Hence, the blind person may develop a superb sense of smell or highly sensitive hearing.
Loss of one sense leads to the development of others.
Sensing is different from perceiving.
Sensing refers to receiving the information.
Unlike a computer the brain does more than receive information.
It interprets and patterns it.
That process is the essence of perception.
Information that is not required is filtered out.
Human beings do not respond to what is there (or what is real) but to their filtered version of what is there, that is, what they perceive to be the case.
In this sense they are selective in their perception.
To distort reality further, large or bright or moving or repeating or noisy objects attract more attention and are more likely to survive our filtering than small, dull, stationary, non-recurring or quiet objects.
The meanings that we attach to these objects are not intrinsic to them but are learned through experience and are influenced by our current goals, values and energy levels.
So we all have our own perceptual world seen through the ‘eyes’ of our unique self-concept.
And for all of us, until contrary data are received, our perception of reality is ‘true’.
No wonder individual differences have dominated research in psychology.
To counter this diversity, though, we also have the following common or shared characteristics: the same sense receptors; similar goals; recurring experiences; and recurring issues and problems.
And it is on the basis of these similarities that much of the behaviour in organizations depends and is perceived.
Recurring events or objects lead to patterns in our minds.
These are referred to by researchers as attitudes, values, beliefs and opinions.
Each is a more or less stable filter mechanism.
Attitudes are generally seen to be more stable, opinions more variable, but this is an entirely imposed language rather than a reflection of some inherent stability.
Attitudes are a statement of a position an individual has about an object, an event, a person or a belief.
Often they are seen to have three ingredients: a cognitive ingredient (what I believe, say, about pollution); an affective ingredient (how I feel about pollution); and a behavioural ingredient (what I am prepared to do about pollution).
Values are different from attitudes.
They are usually seen by researchers to be deep-seated concerns about standards.
Beliefs are usually seen to be different again (at least by researchers); they are propositions about work and society.
Opinions are seen to be less stable than values and relate to less important or transient issues.
These devices are thought to reflect some filters of the brain through which perceptions are directed.
Some attitudes are negative; some positive.
Attitude formation is thought by some writers to depend on personal characteristics.
For example, introversion and extroversion have been found to be associated with the acceptance of favourable or unfavourable attitudes.
Authoritarian personalities have been found to display attitudes of hostility towards inferiors and to reject other authoritarian people because of attitudes about authority.
These sorts of personality-type theories are difficult to separate from childhood influences, especially values and beliefs (both espoused and practised) within the family unit.
From adolescence on, peer groups exert more influence on attitude formation.
In employment the induction rites influence attitude formation about the firm; in training professionals the attitudes of leaders of the profession exert strong influences on attitude formation.
Hence, accountants have been found to have attitudes about risk which are very cautious.
But like all these sorts of research findings it is difficult to know whether the accountants became cautious as a result of their training or whether the cautious attitude developed in the family as children.
My preference (as illustrated in Chapters 1 and 2) is that the enduring attitudes are developed in families.
Changing attitudes can be difficult.
Three sources of attitude change have been identified by researchers:compliance (new attitude is adopted for ulterior motives),identification (peer group membership requires a change) and internalization (the new attitude is accepted as one of a group of attitudes with which the individual can live).
(When we discuss change in organizations in Chapter 11 we return to this question.)
Cognitive dissonance arises when two or more cognitions (behaviours, attitudes, thoughts, opinions, feelings) are inconsistent.
For example, for most managers, firing someone is not a pleasant experience.
The dissonance between the act of firing someone and the manager's beliefs about what is acceptable or decent behaviour from one individual to another can be extremely painful.
For the fired person the act of dismissal can create even greater and more painful dissonance.
(‘How can this organization that preaches security and concern for human beings do this to me?’
‘How stupid I was to believe in my manager's rhetoric of concern for human values.’)
PERCEIVING OTHERS
When two people interact, the attitudes, values and goals of each of them are involved.
They interact as wholes, not as bits.
Various dynamic clues are absorbed in the communication process — posture, facial expressions, gestures, body movement, direction of gaze (the so-called ‘non-verbals’ × tone of voice, accent, emphasis, speed of speech, use of vocabulary (the so-called ‘verbals’).
These clues affect the interpretation the other attaches to the messages.
We begin interactions with an implicit assumption that other people determine and control their behaviour.
This is our first error: conscious control over behaviour is generally overstated.
We behave in the ‘here and now’ and do not examine every move as a scientific investigation.
This error in judgement about other people leads to other errors: we confer positive and negative traits on people on the basis of whether we like them or not (the halo effect).
This appears to be closely related to whether we share the observed characteristic or not.
If I think hard work is admirable then I seek it in others and overreact (often on limited data) when I think I see it in others.
A recent development in theories of person perception is attribution theory.
This refers to the way we explain the behaviour of others.
We attribute meanings to it.
We try to establish what caused it — was it an internal or an external cause?
If it is internal then the individual could control it.
If external then the situation caused it and it may have been outside the control of the individual.
Generally, we tend to assume that more of other people's behaviour is internally controlled and more of our own is externally controlled.
This bias leads to oversimplifications in the attribution of causes.
Relating with others — communicating
Relating involves perceptions and communication.
Traditional theories of communication suggest that the process of communication involves a transmitter, a receiver, a channel and a message.
This highly simplistic view omits many other influences such as the stages in an interaction, familiarity and the individuals' perceptions.
The fact that for 30 years social scientists have struggled to produce a theory of interaction tells us just how complex it is.
Conversely, there are many, so-called, all-inclusive communication models which are so grotesque as to be of little use to anyone.
Communication is an exchange in a never-ending process.
All behaviour is communication.
A flood of information inundates any situation; some  of it will be perceived.
Communication occurs when information is shared between a minimum of two participants.
Individuals who wish to communicate have the opportunity to select one or more of four channels:
Visual: using the eyes as receptors.
Auditory: using the ears as receptors.
Olfactory: using the nose as the receptor.
Tactile: using the skin surfaces (including taste buds) as receptors.
When we meet each other, in a work organization, we enter a continuous barrage of never-ending communications.
Ours is not an isolated episode.
Within this cacophony of communications we are partially restricted in our interactions to approved channels — most often the visual and auditory channels.
It is not acceptable in our society to start smelling each other closely or to feel each other, except in approved salutations.
This does not stop us using the olfactory or tactile channels but we are restricted by social norms in how we use them.
So we talk to each other and collect data about each other through our eyes and ears.
The olfactory channel is used and has been found to be important in making judgements about a person being ‘good’ or ‘bad’!
The person who comes to an interview smelling unfavourably may be seen to be a ‘bad’ applicant.
Tactile clues will also be important, but will probably be restricted to shaking hands.
This can, nevertheless, be decisive: the candidate with a limp, damp handshake may well create an insuperably bad impression.
When we know each other better we will use more tactile communications, such as pushing, slapping, stroking and supportive gestures.
In intimate relationships olfactory and tactile channels will be used extensively.
One touch will convey a wealth of information.
In our work roles we are usually restricted to visual (non-verbal) and auditory (verbal) clues about each other.
Let us look at the most common non-verbal signals which affect perceptions.
NON-VERBAL SIGNALS
Proximity
Where you stand or sit will affect my perception of you.
If the relationship is to be intimate, then we will be close together.
If you are applying for a job, then your sitting too close may irritate me because I will be expecting to use visual and auditory rather than tactile or olfactory channels.
Proximity varies with the situation.
If we are having a party, then physical proximity, in a confined space with background music and dim lighting, will help in the getting-to-know-each-other phase.
However, we are unlikely to see a similar scene in union-management negotiations for new wage or salary awards.
Distance will replace proximity, and barriers to tactile communication (e.g. tables and chairs) will inhibit opportunities for touching.
There are cultural differences as well.
Japanese managers will maintain distance; Italian managers reduce distance and use more tactile communication.
The way people use and perceive space, including their seating arrangements and conversational distance, reflects what Ardrey has called the territorial imperative — a tendency to stake out a personal space and protect it.
Posture
The way a person stands — e.g. the position of the arms and the leg stance — also gives us clues.
Height and good posture are assumed to be ‘good’ signs for people motivated to succeed in work organizations.
As height is genetically determined, it is difficult to see what it has to do with an acquired goal of achievement, except where parents or teachers convince tall children that they are achievers.
Physical appearance
The attributes seen as constituting physical attractiveness differ from culture to culture.
When I meet you I have in my mind commercialized pictures of attractiveness which have been ‘sold’ to me from birth.
The pictures relate to height, physique, face, hair, hands and so on.
On to these pictures we attach behavioural predictions — attractive people are more able, but attractive women are perceived (by men) to be less intelligent; fat people are lazy or jolly; people whose eyes are close together are dishonest; and so on.
These physical stereotypes, too, have been ‘sold’ to us and we may never question them, despite the considerable evidence disproving them.
Clothes, jewellery and other physical embellishments are only relevant within a particular culture and, within that culture, in the context of particular organizations or professions.
For example, if you arrive in my business dressed as a surgeon, a priest or a barrister when I was expecting a banker then we may have initial problems in communicating.
Gestures and facial expressions
Emotions, attitudes and beliefs may be transmitted through facial expressions.
Some of these clues have universal significance — weeping, blushing, turning white and the dilation of the pupils of our eyes all indicate various emotional states.
Gestures, however, are much more diverse because of the number of different possibilities; some merely reinforce verbal signals while others convey much more information.
Next to the face, the hands and arms give the most important non-verbal clues, and the functions of these clues are different from those of facial expressions.
Hands and arms are used for illustration, for replacing speech, for indicating emotional states, and for grooming oneself.
Facial expressions may do all these, but in addition may indicate understanding, concentration and attention.
Direction of gaze
Eye movements tell the transmitter something about the receiver.
Interaction usually begins with a period of eye contact which appears to signal from me to you (and vice versa) that we are ready to relate.
Thereafter, direct eye contact is intermittent (25 to 75 per cent of interaction time) and is longer for the receiver than for the transmitter.
VERBAL SIGNALS
By using verbal as well as non-verbal signals we have the chance to test our pictures of each other.
We can classify most speech or verbal signals under five functions:
Egocentric utterances —‘I have just been called to head office.’
Questions —‘On what flight are we booked?’
Conveying information —‘Flight 234 at 11.15, Monday morning.’
Influencing others —‘Don't confirm the tickets until I tell you.’
Establishing and sustaining relationships —‘We must have you over for dinner before we leave.’
We ‘dress’ the function of conversation with a multitude of verbal signals about ourselves.
The words we use, our accent, tone, volume and speech errors give more clues about us.
The structure of sentences, the use of repetition, the linking (or not) of thoughts or ideas, the variety of words used and the grammatical structure of sentences yield yet more clues.
The use of these verbal clues varies according to the person with whom we are conversing.
The training officer conducting a programme for line  supervisors will use very different words and sentence structures from those used when working with top management.
Indeed, one of the most damaging behaviours affecting interpersonal relationships can occur if the training officer misjudges the nature of the group and uses inappropriate phraseology.
This is particularly so in the use of slang, swear words and inappropriate jokes.
LINKING NON-VERBAL AND VERBAL SIGNALS
Usually our verbal signals are reinforced or supported by non-verbal ones.
The non-verbal signals expand or clarify the verbal.
Yet in our day-to-day lives, we are witnesses to communication breakdowns, misinterpretations and blockages, where the transmitter's attitudes, values, experiences, language, posture, etc. do not link together in a consistent message, or where the message itself has inaccuracies, or where the receiver's attitudes, values and perceptions cause so much filtering of the message that the intended information does not get through — what is heard is what the receiver wanted to hear, not what was said.
Communication breakdowns are the most prevalent symptom of organizational problems.
However, they are usually symptomatic of something else; people don't set off for work with the intention of causing a communication breakdown.
Yet, while other factors (such as structure) cause most of the breakdowns, it is undeniable that your faulty perceptions of what I am saying, and my faulty perceptions of what you are saying, can cause a whole chain of problems.
Some people are just much more sensitive and perceptive in transmitting or receiving data than others.
Fortunately, most training programmes designed to help managers ‘see’ and ‘hear’more have moved beyond the ‘Look at that!’stage to identifying, from verbal and non-verbal clues, the underlying theme or patterns from which behaviours or opinions might be predicted.
We can improve interpersonal communication in the following ways:
By continually signalling attentiveness and responsiveness to the signals of the other — it is infuriating to talk to someone who stares out of the window all the time.
By continually sharing speaking and listening — if you are trying to convey something, it is very distracting if the receiver keeps interrupting you in the middle of a sentence.
By signalling attitudes and intentions towards one another— it is off-putting to try to communicate honestly with someone who remains  totally bland, giving no verbal or non-verbal clues as to agreement or disagreement.
By checking, over the course of time, on the assumptions about, and perceptions of, each other 's signals — it is confusing if I interpret your expression as annoyance when you are concentrating hard.
By using gestures which are consistent with the words — it is highly inconsistent if your boss tells you to stay calm, while rushing about, nervously playing with clothes, pens or paper clips.
By using gestures only to illustrate speech — it is distracting to discuss, say, marketing strategy with someone who is engaged in continuous grooming.
By providing continuous feedback on how the message is being received — if there is no response, no feedback, a dialogue becomes a monologue.
(Research by Lynda Grattan and Tim Morris on effective succession planning in organizations points to the considerable importance of feedback to men and women early in their careers.
In organizations with successful succession strategies, the role of feedback is recognized formally; mentors (off-line managers in advisory roles) are encouraged to provide non-evaluative, helpful feedback to their advisees about their interpersonal and communication skills.)
If some of these distracting behaviours in other people annoy you, remember that we are probably guilty of such behaviour as well.
Indeed, organizational life encourages us to give incorrect feedback, to be less than honest, to pander to our superiors while neglecting our subordinates, to play a multitude of political games.
In a hierarchical structure, where success is seen in terms of promotion but where promotional opportunities become increasingly limited, playing the power game is inevitable.
However, games lead to communication breakdowns.
For example, I tell you, my boss, what I think you should hear, and leave out much of the rest; and you, in turn, are telling your boss what you think he or she should hear, again leaving out the rest.
As long as bosses can influence the careers of subordinates, this filtering or laundering of communication to present only the positive side of ourselves will continue.
Further, we must ask ourselves, do we really want total honesty in communication?
As we are all less than perfect, we actually need laundered messages, filtered feedback, even deliberate lies, to protect ourselves and avoid hurting others.
This dilemma points to a central conflict of organizations —‘me’ versus ‘the system’.
The system is designed for unfiltered, open communication; ‘me’ wants privacy, protection and some filtering  in feedback.
Finding the balance between me and the system is well-nigh impossible.
Conducting more communication-training programmes will do little to help.
Only interpersonal trust has been found to reduce the extreme forms of communication filtering arising from a defensive ‘me’ fighting the system, and even trust rarely reduces filtering to zero.
Few marriages, even, have totally open communication.
We all have our private dreams, fantasies and secrets.
USING VERBAL AND NON-VERBAL SIGNALS TO DEVISE LABELS
You and I receive signals from each other and interpret them.
If you have influence over me, I may try to predict what signals you would like to see or hear, and consciously send them to you.
If you send an inconsistent signal, your verbal and/or non-verbal signals will tell me to explain or correct that signal.
And while you are collecting and structuring data about me, I am doing the same about you.
We both draw inferences about each other as we order our perceptions into tidy links.
Labels are thus slapped on to people with little regard for accuracy.
Unfortunately, we need language to communicate, and language needs labels in order to refer to things (objects, people, feelings, events, traits, etc.).
Without labels, verbal communication is impossible.
However, what is worrying is that, once labelled, we are likely to live up to that label.
For example, children who are told they are stupid tend to live up to that expectation.
Children who are told they are ‘sickly’ often actually become sickly.
Fathers who tell their boys that they will be engineers may be delighted with their success rate, at least initially (many such sons subsequently flood into business schools to get out of engineering).
Managers who see union leaders as aggressive, pig-headed and irrational treat union leaders in such a way that they elicit aggressive, pig-headed and irrational responses.
Labels thus become self:fulfilling prophecies.
Similarly, the labels we use to point to nationality, race and religion tend to foster stereotypes (e.g. Tony is Italian).
The terms ‘Jewish’, ‘Irish’, ‘Japanese’, ‘American’, ‘Russian’ and ‘Muslim’trigger different snapshots of assumed personality traits.
This passion for stereotyping illustrates yet again our need to structure our perceptions and to reduce the infinite variety of incoming information to manageable levels.
Interaction is easier if certain labels, such as those indicating socio-economic status, are established.
When we meet people we have at our disposal a series of acceptable ways of establishing minimal data levels: ‘Do you live near here?’,
‘Do you work in the city?’
It might be easier if we all presented a resume of ourselves rather than waited for the questions!
The most blatant stereotyping occurs because of supposed differences in the sexes: ‘Men are more intelligent, ‘Women are more emotional’, ‘Men are physically stronger’, ‘Women are more creative’, etc.
It is remarkable that this sexist labelling has continued as long as it has, even though most of the research on differences attributable to sex has not supported these labels.
Other causes of distortion include our reliance on our own pet theory of personality (‘Its worked well so far’), selective perception (‘I know what I want to hear; don't confuse me with the facts’), the so-called halo effect — forming opinions on one piece of information and generalizing from it to other pieces of information (e.g. ‘She was brilliant in the Geneva post; she'll be brilliant wherever we send her’), or its opposite, the horns effect (‘He was hopeless in Paris.
He'll be just as hopeless in Madrid’).
Assumed similarity is another tendency, especially if I like the person (‘We're both strong on sales.
We're very similar, really’).
Projection is used to distort perceptions in two ways.
First, I project my motives onto others (‘Everyone is motivated by money’).
Second, as a way of defending myself, I project a fault in myself onto others (‘Isn't Fred untidy!’ or ‘She has no imagination’).
Factors affecting label accuracy
Research on communication in work situations has shown that the following factors may result in inaccuracies:
If our work goals are involved, our perceptions of verbal and non-verbal signals become more distorted.
If you and I are emotionally involved, distortions are greater.
If I am dependent on you (subordinate-boss), then your perceptions of me are more distorted, and vice versa.
If our relationship is very aggressive, our perceptions of each other will be more distorted.
If either of us has a psychological disorder, distortion of our perceptions of each other is increased.
our perceptions of each other may become more accurate if.
I have known you well over a long period of time.
I can check my assumptions.
We are peers (rather than boss and subordinate).
Our interaction is two-way (I talk to you and you talk to me).
I learn to listen, look and find themes, not instant pictures.
Interpersonal relationships at work
Recurring relationships, for example at work, are strengthened by three behaviours:
Imitation
Reciprocity
Reinforcement
Imitation occurs if I send you verbal or non-verbal signals and you respond with similar signals.
For example, we meet and I tell a joke; we both laugh; you respond with a joke; we both laugh.
Reinforcement occurs when I help you in some way and you reciprocate by helping me.
Reinforcement occurs when you reward me (respond positively to my signals).
I tell my joke and you laugh genuinely and enthusiastically.
In addition to these behaviours, organizations have other ways of forcing and reinforcing relationships.
Verbal signals can be controlled, broadcast and edited.
Formal devices are designed to reinforce expected behaviours and, where deviations do occur, members employ these devices to correct those deviations.
Joining an organization
I decide to join an organization.
It may be a church, a corporation, a hospital, a small business, a tennis club, a multinational company.
These are all organizations.
So what is an organization?
An organization is an identifiable social entity whose members pursue multiple and shared objectives through their consciously and continuously coordinated actions and relations.
Hence, an organization is characterized by:
People who belong
Common objectives
Division of work
Coordination
Continuity
When I decide I would like to join, I believe (my self-concept) that I have something to contribute — skills, actions, aptitudes, abilities, potential, etc.
If I have a free choice, I seek an organization which I perceive has goals, values and beliefs similar to my own.
The employer buys a contributor to an objective and tasks, but also buys a person, me, even though those tasks only require a part of me — the part that can do the job.
The employer's expectations and my expectations will be different, and inevitably compromise will characterize our relationship from the day I join until the day I depart.
Indeed, organizations rely on compromise; we are compromised from the outset.
We consciously or unconsciously agree to give up something (i.e. our freedom) in exchange for something (e.g. money, promotion, etc.)
Even before I decide to take the job, I develop naive expectations about what it will be like.
If I know very little about the firm or the people in it, then, to reduce my uncertainty, I will invent my own snapshots of what to expect.
The disorientation of actually entering the organization shatters some of these naive expectations.
I am confronted by an explosion of non-verbal, verbal, written and tactile clues.
I can only reduce the painful uncertainty and bewilderment of those first few days by learning relevant information quickly.
But some of the information takes months to emerge, let alone learn, and the pain of joining is the pain of gathering enough written, verbal and non-verbal information to ‘learn the ropes’.
I know, and the employer knows, that I have a role to play, and I want to learn the role as quickly as possible in order to reduce my uncertainty to certainty, and to merge myself into the rest of the cast of actors or members.
The process of acquiring the role I have to play has been analysed by researchers in four stages.
STAGE 1: THE ANTICIPATORY PHASE
This phase occurs before we actually arrive.
We take in written and verbal data provided by the personnel department or by interviewers, as well as highly generalized data about the company and the industry.
The more naive our expectations, the greater the subsequent chance of our leaving; therefore employers have a vested interest in telling the truth, or at least not telling untruths, in job interviews, particularly about the less attractive aspects of the organization.
But this information still may not get through.
Saturday work is usual in the retail trade; however much the social disruption is stressed at interview, keen candidates may nevertheless filter out the information they do not want to hear, resigning six months later to find a Monday to Friday job.
STAGE 2: THE FORMAL PHASE
From the moment we enter the organization, we are submerged in the multitude of verbal and non-verbal signals.
Some of these signals are  about required behaviour.
Formal signals are often grouped together in an induction programme, and so anxious are we to reduce the total uncertainty to something we can understand that we will swallow the formal induction without even a whimper.
The more important security, structure and definition are to us, the more readily we will absorb the formal signals about expected behaviour.
Within hours, the new recruit may have agreed, explicitly or implicitly, to objectives, tasks to be performed, hours of work, codes of behaviour, boss-subordinate relationships, work territory, and so on, all in exchange for specified rewards, usually monetary, and unspecified promises, such as promotion.
STAGE 3: LEARNING THE EXPECTATIONS OF WORK ASSOCIATES
Informal values, norms and expectations are just as important as the formal ones.
Through the verbal and non-verbal signals of informal or friendship relationships we acquire the social props to our identity.
We are lonely and isolated so we accept the informal group's dictates about ‘how we get on here’ with little evaluation.
Group norms about work, work rates, dress, conformity, and so on, are soon added to our concepts of the role we are to play.
STAGE 4: COMPLETION OF THE ENTRY PROCESS
This occurs much later in the entry process.
It may be months later, when naive expectations have become realistic beliefs.
By then we feel comfortable.
The stress of joining the organization is over; verbal and non-verbal signals are synchronized and ordered; we know the formal and informal expectations, and we are making our contribution to the output of the organization.
In return, as agreed on joining, we receive regular payments of money and intrinsic satisfaction from our work.
In this pleasant and mostly satisfying environment, the personal stage of role acquisition occurs.
We begin to change the role to include our expectations of what it should be.
We may even use our verbal and non-verbal signals to persuade others to change the formal requirements to bring them closer to our expectations.
By now, we have entered fully into two contracts — a legal contract and a psychological contract.
The legal contract specifies my status in terms of tenure, salary, pension, dismissal, redundancy, discipline, etc.
The psychological contract is a contract of expectations between ‘them’ and ‘me’— it links what I expect from them and what they expect from me.
‘Them’ includes bosses, peers and subordinates.
It is inevitable that one or more of these sub-groups will be disappointed in me from time to time and I will be disappointed in them.
As Handy has argued, the more reconciled their and my expectations are, the more positive the effect on my performance.
The more my expectations and theirs are in conflict, the greater the negative effect on my performance.
Major changes in organizations in the last 20 years have often led to dissonance over expectations.
For example, when a firm which has espoused a full employment policy decides to eliminate tenure or employment for life and operate a redundancy policy then it has quite clearly violated the psychological contract which promised a career for life.
Such conflicting expectations change the nature of the psychological contract not only for those who survive the redundancy programme but also for those who will join subsequently.
The employees modify their expectations; some of the trust between them has gone and with it, as Goffee noted, loyalty or commitment to the organization is reduced.
Successful socialization of a new member should be reflected in job satisfaction, role clarity, high levels of motivation, acceptance of the corporate culture, commitment and high performance.
Conversely, poor socialization will be indicated by the opposite: low performance plus the usual indicators of poor commitment — absenteeism, illness, conflict, dissatisfaction, high turnover of staff.
Roles
A role combines the cumulative formal, technical, informal and personal expectations about a job.
It is the link between the individual and organization.
Role conception is how I see the role I am expected to play.
Role performance is how I actually behave.
As a new member of the organization I will have to reconcile the expectations of others, including the systems imposed on me, with my own theories and understanding of how the world works.
My perceptions and theories are not rigorously developed.
Tacit knowledge, acquired over time, makes me wiser than I was.
I share this knowledge with others and we behave in appropriate ways in particular situations.
We are the actors in a social environment.
We do not scientifically analyse our acts any more than we endlessly scrutinize our theories or tacit knowledge.
We take these for granted as common sense.
At the end of the working day most of us retreat to families and/or partners and play other parts.
Reconciling the demands of different roles in different contexts is not  without strain.
Conflict is inevitable.
However, next morning the actors return to work and the organizational drama continues.
An organization is a collective of actors performing roles in the pursuit of ends.
It is an arena where expectations and processes change, some gradually (e.g. formal expectations), others (e.g. personal or informal expectations) quite rapidly.
It is the arena where some actors impose their will on others in an endless power game in which the others, who are imposed upon, allow that imposition to continue for reasons of their own (rewards, money, promotion, love).
It is impossible to describe an organization in behaviour terms (i.e. processes) other than momentarily because the processes are always changing; but when we speak of the processes we freeze that dynamic interaction for a single moment, take a picture, and know that a moment later the picture will be different.
ROLE STRESS
Acquiring a role raises problems for some individuals.
Living up to other people's signalled expectations is often a pleasure/pain experience: pleasure in the recognition we receive for satisfying others' expectations, pain in the sense that we lose some of our independence and freedom.
For this reason, roles may never be totally satisfying other than for short periods.
The result of this conflict between ‘them’ and ‘me’is stress.
Role conflict occurs when more than one role is required in the same situation.
Role ambiguity occurs when others' expectations are badly signalled or received and remain unclear.
Role overload occurs where expectations of others are too high.
Role underload occurs where expectations of others are too low.
ROLE SETS
When I join an organization I do not have a relationship with everyone.
Indeed, I am most likely to have relationships on a day-to-day basis only with a relatively small number of people.
These are people such as my boss, his or her boss, my peers and (if I have any) my subordinates.
At the most, this may amount to 20 people, and of these there will be fewer than 10 with whom I interact frequently.
This small group (within the larger group, the organization) is often called my role set or my team, and it is their transmitted expectations which affect my performance most of the time.
We communicate with each other in the set through a large number of mostly informal networks.
But there are also extensive external networks (formal and informal; electronic, written and oral) to which we have links, and which in various ways bind us to the rest of the actors in the firm.
Those members of my set who have more power have most influence on my performance.
Hence, my boss is more likely to produce a change in my role-performance than one my peers.
My peers are more tolerant, more willing to accept me for what I am rather than for what I might produce or become in the hierarchy.
However, if my peers decide that I have violated our psychological contract then they, too, have great power to influence my behaviour.
Power and influence are what social systems live on.
If power is important to me, then I will try to acquire it.
The next chapter discusses power and its acquisition and use in organizations.
Summary
Individuals see themselves as separate from others.
This has led psychologists to develop the concept of the self which is central to an individual.
In simple terms, the self is how I see me.
It affects how I see the world and how I behave.
Perception is that process by which the individual organizes the mass of information which impinges on the self into meaningful patterns.
First, we sense the information and then we digest it through past experiences, attitudes, values and beliefs.
Information that is irrelevant is filtered out.
So we respond to what we perceive to be the case rather than what is the case.
Distortions are inevitable.
When I perceive others my attitudes, values and beliefs filter what I see or wish to see.
Generally, we assume other individuals have more control over their behaviour than they do.
We describe their behaviour by attributing our explanations to those individuals.
Communication links sensing and perceiving into action in a never-ending exchange of signals.
When people interact, they emit a range of verbal, visual, olfactory and tactile signals, using the eyes, ears, nose and skin surface as receptors.
All these data are channelled through the process of perception.
We filter these signals through our own goals, expectations, attitudes and experiences.
We structure the data into simplified snapshots, attributes, traits and types, and attempt to give ourselves the understanding we need and to predict the behaviour of others from this process.
Proximity, physical appearance, direction of gaze, and gestures and facial expressions all affect our perceptions of one another.
Speech patterns, use of words, accent, volume, and so on are verbal clues which we add to our structuring behaviour.
If we take these characteristics of perception into an organizational setting, then the verbal and non-verbal signals still provide data for interpersonal relationships.
However, formal induction procedures and the allocation of a job to perform can structure the signals a great deal more rigidly.
New employees join an organization of interacting players, whose perceptions and expectations establish norms of required behaviour.
Organizations are behavioural processes which live on influence and power.
References
Power in organizations
Introduction
Organizations are political systems in which those who understand power and politics win.
So in this chapter I look at what is meant by power and how some individuals and groups exercise social power.
I then look at structural and cultural sources of power in organizations.
This leads me to analyse political behaviour, especially as it relates to conflict.
Finally, I address the limits on power in work organizations.
Few words in the social sciences cause such debate as the word ‘power’.
Yet we know that organizations are power systems in which political skills are vital.
We also know that effective managers are motivated by power and enjoy influencing the behaviour of others.
Conversely, we know that less effective managers have enormous difficulties in dealing with power because they are not really motivated by it.
With such a clear need to understand power, why has it, until recently, been avoided by managerial researchers, especially when sociologists have been analysing it for more than a century?
First, because of its multidimensional nature, power is a complex phenomenon.
Second, in a world of scientists who need to define and measure their subjects, power is, to say the least, difficult to define and even more difficult to measure.
Thirdly, as most of this century has produced a managerial literature based on a fervent belief in rationality and structure in organizations, power as a subject of investigation goes somewhat against the trend because it incorporates so much that is irrational, indefinable and not easily structured into neat manuals of best practice.
And, finally, as destructive conflicts are usually about blatant power or win-lose situations there is something not quite nice about discussing power in research seminars or even in work organizations.
Yet work organizations depend on shared power in win-win cooperative effort.
It is time we gave up these reservations in work organizations.
Organizations are political systems and we need to recognize the sources and manifestations of power if we hope to understand the behaviour of individuals or groups within them.
So I will avoid the controversial academic debates and try to explain what power is and how individuals or groups get it.
Work organizations usually represent order and stability as opposed to instability and disorder.
Order requires power to produce compliance and  cooperation among the organization's members.
Power is, therefore, central to organizations.
It is essential to the association of individuals in the first place and essential to ensure its continuation by sharing codes of behaviour.
Power is also essential to the endless readjustments that members make to ensure the survival of the firm.
Power defined
Power is the capacity to affect other people's behaviour with or without their consent; it allows for the deployment of resources to achieve ends.
It is context-specific as it relates to a particular set of actors.
A person is not powerful or powerless, in general, but only in respect of particular people in specific situations.
Hence, the powerful manager at work becomes the powerless driver of a vehicle caught in a traffic jam.
The powerful surgeon in the operating theatre is powerless sitting in the dentists chair.
Influence is often separated from power.
If power is a capacity to affect behaviour then influence is generally seen as the actual behaviour resulting from that capacity to affect.
One is the potential to affect; the other is the actual effect.
Politics or political behaviour is power in action.
Power differs from authority in that authority stems, initially, from a conferred right to control some resources of the organization (finance, information, people, etc.).
However, authority acquires legitimization only if others recognize that right.
Authority is conceded by subordinates.
In this sense authority is limited.
Power need not be.
A manager may have authority to control resources but may be powerless; authority does not guarantee power — indeed, it is merely one possible source of power.
Authority relates to a position in a hierarchy.
If I, as a subordinate, recognize that authority to control resources in my boss and, on that basis, allow him or her to exercise that authority, then my boss has power based on a position in the hierarchy.
For this reason, authority is often called ‘positional power’.
What is appealing about power is its importance and its potential.
To possess power is the ultimate ego trip for many people.
For this reason, throughout history individuals have striven to acquire it.
And the opportunities to acquire it are infinite, for power is not limited.
Your gain is not necessarily my loss.
Indeed, in effective cooperation your gain may be my gain as well.
Sources of power in organizations
There are at least four sources of power in work organizations:
Interpersonal (social) power
Structural power
Cultural power
External power
Social power
What variables appear to affect the amount of social power an individual acquires?
Capacity The characteristics of the individual, e.g. knowledge, wealth, beauty, strength, charisma, authority, skill, intelligence.
Dependence Social power exists only in interpersonal situations; others are involved and must be dependent on the skill, knowledge, strength or whatever of the powerful.
Scarcity The rarer the skill, beauty, money, strength or whatever, the greater the power of the individual.
For example, international stars in opera, football, art and music often acquire considerable power because of the rarity of their talents and our willingness to recognize those talents.
What power do you have?
In addition to capacity, dependence and scarcity, what else affects your power?
How motivated you are to have power.
The number of power bases you can draw upon.
The political skills you have to increase your power and influence within an organization.
organization.
MOTIVATION TO HAVE POWER
People aroused by the possibilities of social power will seek it more consistently than those who are not aroused by power.
In Chapter 1 we analysed power goals in detail; those individuals whose profiles reflect a persistent theme of power will expend effort and energy in seeking more and more of it.
Unlike many other goals, it is difficult to satisfy a strong desire for power.
Wanting power is no guarantee of getting it.
Other people will decide whether or not to allow that goal to be satisfied.
POWER BASES
The second influence on individuals' social power is what are called the bases they have to draw on.
There are many of these power bases and  their usefulness depends on whether other people concede that the individual has them as bases for power or not.
For example, you may be the greatest athlete in the world but your capacity to influence my behaviour is very small if I do not know you are a famous athlete or do not value athletic ability.
This process of acknowledging a person's power bases is called legitimization — the recognition by me that I will allow you to affect my behaviour.
If a man has a loaded gun we will probably recognize him immediately as having power.
The power base in this case is physical violence, even death.
However, few managers have guns.
More and more power in organizations is shared and cooperation rather than physical violence is how work gets done.
But the conscious or unconscious decision to allow my boss to share power with me (to empower me) is still my decision to make.
The following are some of the power bases used in work organizations.
They all depend on those with less of that power base conceding influence to those with more of that power base.
Legitimized power bases
Authority The right to control finance, information, people, equipment, materials etc. in organizations and to have access to important decision-making processes.
(This is sometimes referred to as ‘positional power’.)
Function The importance of one's function in the organization provides a power base (I develop this further later in this chapter).
Hence, the marketing function, the finance function or the establishment function provides a power base for individuals within and without those functions.
Personal characteristics Height, beauty, strength, endurance, achievement.
Intellect A personal characteristic but worthy of separate mention.
This is not simply intelligence, but in work organizations a capacity to diagnose and solve problems; to provide structured solutions for situations of uncertainty.
Charisma A unique combination of personality and behaviour.
Interpersonal skills Empathy, sensitivity, ‘sixth sense’, social skills (articulateness, listening, observing, etc.).
Access To powerful people — for example, the chief executive officer's chauffeur, the office cleaner and the board's secretary all have access to powerful people.
Wealth Private funds; financial independence.
Connections Powerful, famous friends and acquaintances.
Family Prominent, famous family (e.g. Kennedy, Rothschild, Windsor).
Performance Superb performance, outperforming others.
Referent power The use of the power of others is usually based on admiration of another (e.g. gods, famous leaders, rock stars).
People wish to emulate their leader and are willing to be controlled in the ‘process.
More subtle forms of referent power occur when an individual asks others to complete a task because ‘the chief executive’ or ‘the minister’has asked for the work.
The power of the chief executive or minister can in this way be used to increase the power of someone else.
Internal referent power links one to the internally more powerful (e.g. chief executive); external referent power links to external (e.g. ‘The prime minister has asked for this’).
This tactic of reference combines an admired or revered position with an effective individual to increase a less powerful person's clout.
Expertise Expertise is a major power base.
It exists in three forms: expertise from experience (‘I am the only one who has done this before’); expertise based on knowledge; and expertise based on a particular skill (e.g. the surgeon, the programmer, the writer, the foreign exchange dealer).
All these power bases depend on perceptions.
At any time those with less of a base might withdraw their concession of power from those with more of that base, in which case the legitimacy of that power base is lost.
For example, the employees who reject their manager's ultimatum and vote for industrial action have withdrawn their concession that the manager can control their behaviour.
Similarly, an expert selling obsolete knowledge may soon find power is withdrawn.
Concession or legitimization can occur up, down or across the hierarchy.
Hence, in a crisis, the otherwise powerless clerk who has advanced medical training suddenly finds she has a power base of limitless importance.
However, three other power bases do depend much more on the capacity of the powerful to affect directly the perceptions of the less powerful, even when the latter are resisting that influence.
Reward power
Managers influence the behaviour of their team members by rewarding them.
They have at their disposal two categories of reward:extrinsic rewards (salary, wages, merit increases, bonuses, cars, holidays, discounts on goods); and intrinsic rewards (praise, a better job, more power, promotion, more autonomy, public acclaim).
As we noted in Chapter 1, both forms of reward can have a marked effect on behaviour.
Coercive power
Physical coercion is banned in most organizations, yet it does occur.
More subtle is psychological coercion: modern organizations are full of ‘illegitimate’ uses of psychological coercion, such as hints to the less powerful that promotions may be missed, that salaries will not be increased, that redundancy may be necessary.
Information power
The release and/or the withholding of information provides an extremely strong power base.
For example, why is it that personnel appointments take so long to be announced when there is often no adequate reason for the delay?
One explanation is that withholding information reinforces a power relationship.
Conversely, why is it that finance managers seem to think they have a monopoly on numeracy?
Indeed, why is so much that is trivial in organizations treated as though it were a state secret?
In most cases it is because someone is withholding information to increase their power.
INFLUENCING UP THE HIERARCHY
Most discussions of power assume that the pattern of influence is always top down.
Although the probabilities of success differ, most of the same power bases apply in influencing those above us.
The exception is authority simply because, as a general rule, those higher in the hierarchy have more authority to control resources.
Nevertheless, there is enormous potential for social power at the base of the hierarchy and much of our industrial relations experience has demonstrated the collective power of a disenchanted workforce when it decides to withdraw its labour.
If the lower-level members refuse to accept and legitimize the social power of those above them, then those managers have great difficulty in carrying out sanctions and operating the organization.
Further, lower-level employees have power bases of their own — knowledge and skills — not shared by those higher in the hierarchy.
What is interesting is how rarely these lower-level employees do exercise their power overtly to resist the instructions of their managers.
(There is, of course, much more evidence that they exercise their power covertly, by establishing informal rates of work, by absenteeism, by working to regulations.)
The most common styles of influencing up the hierarchy are persuasion, manipulative persuasion and manipulation.
What differentiates them is the degree to which it is acknowledged that an attempt to influence those above is being made.
Persuasion uses power bases (expertise, charm, skills) overtly; the method and the objectives are clear to all.
In  manipulative persuasion the influencer openly admits the attempt to influence events but does not reveal the real reason; e.g. the employee who commends the boss on a recent decision, knowing that if implemented other, unintended outcomes will benefit the employee or the group.
Manipulation occurs when the attempt to influence events and the objectives of that attempt are both concealed; for example, filtering important information deliberately, conveying false information, claiming expertise when none exists (‘I have been to Brazil and it won't work in that culture’).
Most frequently, upward influencers use rational presentations as their favoured method.
The rational presentation of information opens the way to a variety of power bases (expertise, reward, intellect) which can counter any suggestion that this is manipulative.
After all, the argument is being presented rationally, scientifically, non-emotionally.
This rational presentation often follows a period of ingratiation through which the subordinate aims to get superiors to like him as a charming but intelligent expert.
Ingratiators in low power positions use favours, self-promotion and flattery to induce superiors at least to listen to the ‘rational’ case.
However, we must guard against the impression that all upward communication is manipulative.
Organizations depend on upward communication and a multitude of systems are designed to force that information to flow.
Similarly, participative structures are consciously designed to encourage upward influence to ensure the creative ideas of those lower in the hierarchy are heard and seen.
So Japanese organizations attempt to minimize ingratiation and deception by developing corporate cultures based on a collective sharing of responsibility.
In contrast, highly individualistic cultures encourage rational self-interest and are consequently much more overtly political.
Peter Smith believes that in recent years a new type of upward influence has developed called ‘whistle blowing’.
Here, an individual or group takes a high-risk position to expose an injustice or inconsistency which produces a sense of moral outrage.
To date, research on the effectiveness of this tactic is very limited.
Clearly, as it is high-risk, the failure rate must be high.
But the determinant of its effectiveness will be, as always, the context in which it occurs.
If the degree of moral outrage is widespread and simmering then the individual who ignites the fire has a high chance of success; the enormous, potential power of the base of the hierarchy is ignited.
If the outrage is confined to a few then the chances of success are small.
Organizational members up the hierarchy will cohere to block the threat to their situation (see Chapter 5 for the social power of groups).
Structural sources of power
As several writers have noted, the recent preoccupation in the managerial literature with social power has led to the neglect of structural power which determines so much of our behaviour at work and which has interested sociologists for more than 100 years.
Tasks are divided up between departments, units, individuals, divisions and yet they do not have the same power.
In this sense, power can be a structural phenomenon created by the division of labour.
That division creates authority which I have defined as the right to control resources (money, people, materials, information, energy).
Authority is the central focus of hierarchy, which is the chief coordinating mechanism of work organizations.
The power of a position or a function (a number of linked positions) will depend (as Hickson argues) on the following factors:
Centrality How central is the position or function to the objectives of the firm?
How well networked into the whole firm?
How persuasive; how immediate?
Substitutability Can we substitute the position or function with other positions or functions?
Can we sub-contract the work?
Dependency is lost if the answer, to either question, is yes.
Coping with uncertainty Specialization allows some departments to deal with the ambiguous or unpredictable.
These specialized functions create dependency among those less able to cope.
Other researchers have suggested that the following factors also affect the power of a position or function or department.
Visibility Especially to those bosses with more power.
Flexibility The amount of discretion in decision-making, work assignments, etc.
Relevance The relationship between what they are doing and the goals of the unit or firm.
Hence, the high-performing division has more power and autonomy than the less-performing division because (at this stage) it is contributing more to the firm's goals.
In addition to the power associated with positions and functions or units there is a network of control mechanisms which influence our behaviour on a day-to-day basis.
Technical control arises from work processes which allow the manager to monitor and intervene in the labour process itself.
Bureaucratic control binds individuals through incentives and disincentives to behave in predictable ways.
We complete forms and reports and act out other behaviours in response to written or electronic signals  received from other reports, memos, terminals, deadlines, diaries, etc.
Often there is little, if any, human interaction but the power link remains to control behaviours and induce compliance.
Networks occur both formally and informally.
Both are structural in the sense of being enduring.
Structural power in these networks affects access to information, to resources, to decision-making and to cooperation.
Exclusion from networks reduces a function's power.
This partly explains the desperate desire of nearly every function in the business to be represented on the board or the management committee.
To identify the powerful function of an organization we can ask two questions of the members:
Which function has most power in this organization?
Is it marketing, finance, service?
Which function is in the ascendancy?
(That is, which is increasing in power and influence?)
In any organization there will be both a leading function and a function on the rise.
Studies of horizontal power relationships (i.e. across functions or units) also reveal the influence of structure and the division of labour.
Conflicts that arise between line and staff positions and between strong and weaker functions are largely the result of an imbalance in power.
In studies of conflicts between line and staff employees, line managers are found to rely on reward and authority power bases; staff rely on expertise and coercive power bases.
Since the line managers are typically allocated the authority to control resources and staff are not, or are allocated authority only over the resource in which they specialize, there is an inevitable imbalance.
Add the different backgrounds of the two groups (one practical and experienced, the other highly educated but often inexperienced) and discord is inevitable.
The professional versus administrator clash is a second structurally induced clash over power.
Again the resources available to the two groups differ.
Professionals rely on expert knowledge and professional codes of behaviour; administrators rely on controlling resources including the allocation of funds, support staff and facilities plus intangibles like perks, official titles, access to decision-makers.
These differences in resources force the two to use different styles of influence.
The professionals stress the negative consequences (‘We'll never be rated as top class if we don't invest in this equipment) and criticize the use of information control as being unprofessional and inconsistent with their autonomous position as professionals.
Their allegiance is first to their profession  and second to the firm.
The administrators rely on threats of dire consequences for the firm as a whole but generally are more committed to the firm (having weak professional institutes — if any) and are less marketable should they want to change jobs.
A third form of structural power imbalance occurs vertically.
Here head office has infinitely more power than, say, the division or business unit.
Like the other examples of structural power, the hierarchical structure creates and depends upon a situation of power imbalance.
Thereafter, individuals attracted to the different units have different goals which reinforce the imbalance.
Hence, head office attracts the power brokers skilled in the politics of resource allocation.
The division attracts those interested in getting the job done, in ‘hands-on’ managing, in responding to the market, in preserving their autonomy on a day-to-day basis.
Like the line and staff clash or the professional and administrator conflict, the head office power brokers and the autonomous divisional general managers will inevitably clash, simply because the structure has built in massive imbalances of power.
Corporate culture as a source of power
All organizations develop cultures of their own and, within the firm, subcultures develop around groups, sites, divisions, etc.
By culture we refer to the shared values, beliefs and basic assumptions about what we are doing.
We transmit those values, beliefs and assumptions to new members through stories, myths, jargon and rituals as valid ways to think, perceive and feel in relation to what we do.
Some organizations have quite explicit cultures in which the values and norms are simple and clear.
others are less explicit and require longer periods of induction to absorb their meanings.
This has led some writers to suggest strong' and ‘weak’ cultures.
Strong cultures (IBM, Marks and Spencer, Olivetti) will have a stronger influence on the power relationships; less strong cultures (some utilities, professional firms, civil service departments) supposedly have a weaker influence on power relationships.
More relevant to us is whether the culture is powerful in influencing our behaviour or not.
It is most powerful where the individual and the organization share the same goals.
Here cultural power and compliance can be overwhelming, as it is in some religious organizations.
In most business organizations, the tit between me and ‘them’ is likely to be less controlling.
When the fit is very poor, individuals, given a choice, are likely to seek employment elsewhere.
Their goals are incompatible with those of the organization.
Where the fit is close they may serve their entire career in that organization.
Networks are the primary means of transmitting culture to the firm's members.
The clearer the messages, the greater their power and the more likely the messages will be received.
Culture is primarily developed through oral processes; structure becomes formalized through documented or written processes.
For this reason culture is difficult to analyse scientifically but we all sense assumptions from it the more closely we become associated with a firm.
In our first few hours of membership we are highly attuned to some of the assumptions.
Over time we absorb them as our own and the culture shock retreats as we internalize the values and beliefs (I discuss this in some detail in Chapter 6).
There have been various attempts to classify different corporate cultures and to look at the consequences of those types for the use of power (see Deal and Kennedy; Handy).
So a ‘power’ culture is dominated by one individual with the effect that others have little power.
The owner manager in the middle-sized firm is often a good example.
Certain industries appear to need this dominance (property, newspapers, retailing).
A second type of culture is a ‘process’ culture, found in insurance, public utilities and heavily regulated firms.
Feedback is slow in these firms and measuring performance is difficult.
Consequently, people concentrate on how they do things not on the end results.
Technical perfection becomes the admired power base; technical imperfection leads to punishment.
Those staff people who measure technical perfection (often internal audit) acquire extraordinary power even to the point of terrifying those they are meant to assist.
As they devise the measures and control the measuring devices, only they understand the significance of what they do.
Similarly, the personnel function in these firms often has amazing power as it manages each individual's assessment.
Moreover, it can move individuals from one area of technical expertise to another where their experience is irrelevant, meaning that they face a period of low technical achievement.
More subtle forms of cultural influence also abound.
We join an organization feeling relatively neutral about an external group of competitors but within months regard them as malevolent enemies.
We begin work feeling that certain codes of dress and conduct are acceptable and within six months we have agreed with the norms that indicate that certain codes of dress and conduct are certainly not acceptable.
Within our immediate group we can learn to reconcile personal and group differences to the point of rejecting personal values and beliefs.
And in a democratic society we are able to confer unbelievable power on a boss simply in the expectation that the value of the rewards the boss controls is great enough to make  this subjugation bearable, even though, in law, we are equal.
Such can be the power of a corporate culture.
External sources of power
Power does not only exist around individuals or within functions.
It crosses the boundaries of the organization and allows us to differentiate between the power of members (e.g. those employed) and non-members (those external to the organization).
So far we have concentrated on the internal distribution of power.
Outside sources of power will arise, dependent on individuals, on coalitions of individuals and on structures, particularly legal and government structures.
Sources of power for these externals are similar to those already discussed.
The greater the dependence on an external individual, group or organization (e.g. the oil company's dependence on the Middle East for the supply of certain types of crude oil), the more power that external supplier has.
The more the external reduces uncertainty, and the less replaceable the external is, then the more power the external will have.
The greater the external control, the greater will be the tendency of the internals to centralize power, to standardize and to formalize it within the organization.
Conversely, a strong internal power structure with a confident ideology will defend members from external interference, depending, of course, on the nature of the relationship.
If there is no clear focus of power (either external or internal) then internal conflict appears inevitable.
Organizational politics
In any group of individuals (a team, society, organization) in which the resources are scarce there will be political activities; individuals will compete individually and collectively for what they want.
Organizational politics involves those activities which attempt to acquire what we want in situations of uncertainty or disagreement about choices.
Power as we have described it is a capacity to influence.
In this sense it may remain dormant.
Politics is power in action.
In organizations with scarce resources political activity is inevitable and only the naive decry it.
Contrary to popular opinion it is one of the energy sources necessary to get things done.
Contextual factors which increase the level of political activity are organization size, disagreement over goals or unclear goals, different perceptions of the options, different information about the same  situation, the scarcity of resources and the need to allocate them, and major differences in the expectations and/or power bases of different individuals and groups.
People have to make choices; some goals will be achieved at the price of others.
So individuals and groups will play political games to position themselves to gain their preferred outcomes.
However, most significantly through these behavioural processes output is delivered; energy has been released and output produced.
In addition to the need for political action to achieve output, the most important role of politics is to introduce change; to break into the rationality of the structure and introduce new ways of doing things.
At the macro level, it is power and politics, not plans and order, which transform the tired firm into something dynamic.
Similarly, it is power and politics rather than science which leads us to change even the most minor system when that system ceases to serve its purpose.
Further, it is power and politics which enables those adept at both to get to the top of the hierarchy.
Once there they should have the capacity (if not the inclination) to change organizations to ensure their renewal and growth.
Managers' success in the political arena depends ultimately on their capacity to play the political games.
Three sets of skills have been identified by researchers as relevant to political games:
Diagnostic skills
Tactical skills
Interpersonal skills
DIAGNOSTIC SKILLS
These are the skills used to develop the database necessary for developing tactics.
Information search, articulateness, listening skills, wandering about, identifying information points, tuning into the informal structure, and networking are all part of this process.
Astute politicians do not go off half cocked: they test the water, collect their facts, identify the support systems, undermine the opposition's case, find the coalitions, understand the ‘influencers’ or the roles that carry weight.
Listening, observing and collecting information is a continuous and mostly face-to-face process.
Having collected data they structure it into concepts to give it meaning for others.
When their conceptualization fails them they seek new concepts, models, paradigms, frameworks.
TACTICAL SKILLS
These involve predicting the outcomes of different tactics and choosing those tactics likely to produce the desired results.
Outcomes can provide rapid feedback on the effectiveness of tactics.
Both diagnostic and tactical skills depend on what we have traditionally called political acumen — a combination of listening and observation skills, with a heightened capacity to predict likely behavioural outcomes.
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS
These determine the effectiveness of individuals in affecting others, i.e. their ability to influence others.
Power is used most effectively when it is used unobtrusively.
The greater the legitimacy of what the individual is trying to do, the easier the exercise of power.
Most of the time, therefore, managers try to make their use of power less obvious, more rational and more legitimate by sharing their expectations with others.
‘Win-win’ is preferable to ‘win-lose’in generating cooperative effort and effective organizations depend on cooperative effort rather than on fear of reprisal.
Social psychologists have identified a variety of styles of influence used by managers attempting to affect outcomes.
Obviously, these styles are not discrete but intermingle.
Usually these styles are presented as opposite ends of a continuum.
Hence, the following are popular presentations of extremes of styles of influence:
What these continua are created to indicate is that relevant styles of influence will vary with the situation.
This is not restricted to variation within a firm.
We also find variations between different nationalities and between different industries.
So, while the Western world has seen a major shift, for a variety of reasons, in preferred manager's styles away from autocracy towards a belief in more participative, reduced dependency styles in which individuals are treated as adults and empowered to act, there are other parts of the world where this would be considered  inappropriate because dominance and dependency are effective styles.
Similarly, some industries (newspapers, retailing, property) seem to need dominant authoritarian managers at the top while there are others in which the sharing of power appears essential to get the work done (publishing, consulting and some forms of manufacturing).
Studies of effective managers show that they are sensitive to the needs of a situation and modify their influencing styles accordingly.
The following are some of the tactics researchers have observed in effective managers:
Persuasion Use of logical arguments to persuade others.
Use of numerical argument to ‘prove’ the case.
The manager reveals both his method and the ends sought.
For example: ‘We have done a careful costing of the advantages and disadvantages of choosing product A or B and the returns for A are 15 per cent better than our best estimate for B. It is a clear-cut case: choose A.’
Manipulative persuasion/manipulation (Discussed earlier) where the method used and the ends sought become less overt.
For example: ‘I hear what you say.
But I think we should not rush this decision.
I will talk to our major clients in the industry to get a gut feel for their reactions to product B. We can then make the decision.’
Legitimate requests A request based on the manager's authority and right to know as prescribed by the firm's regulations.
For example: ‘Can you let me have the accounts departments breakdown of costs on A and B?’
Exchange tactics A request that includes an explicit or implicit promise to reward the person for the information or action.
For example: ‘If we choose A, Harry, that will nearly double your advertising budget.’
Pressure tactics Persistent, non-relenting demands plus threats that failure to comply could lead to negative consequences.
For example: I'm sorry to keep pressing you for an answer but we do need to make a decision if we are to avoid being the last in the market with this product: Is it to be A or B?’
Ingratiation Use of charm, private information and personal friendship to gain access or promises of support.
For example: ‘I don't want to disturb you during your lunch break, Harry, but could we have a little confidential chat about product B?’
Creative dependency Become the confidant, listen to the person's problems, avoid advice but create a dependency which can become addictive.
The rationale is ‘She needs my help.
She has no one to talk to’.
In a world of lonely people the demand is inexhaustible.
For example: ‘Why don't we go out and have a quiet chat over lunch tomorrow.
Somewhere we won't be disturbed.
You can tell me how your husband's job search is going.
I've thought about him a great deal and have a plan he might find useful.
Who knows, we might even get a chance to talk about product B.’
Pfeffer has noted some other political techniques people use to expand their power.
Selective use of objective criteria; the pretence to ‘science’ and the choice of criteria which support one's position.
Using the outside expert to legitimize decisions.
Controlling the agenda such that decisions can be brought forward or, at the other extreme, not arise at all.
(A related technique is to order the sequence of decisions on the agenda.
Items towards the beginning tend to get much more attention than later items.)
Formation of coalitions with insiders and/or outsiders who will support one's position.
Co-opting external people on a continuing basis in order to influence decision, e.g. members of committees of enquiry, task forces, outside consultants, non-executive directors.
Using committees internally to overcome restrictions on information and thereby arrive at a decision.
Filtering communication to preserve power
If gaining information is one skill, filtering what one has is another.
It is easiest to see this in attempts to improve one's chances of promotion.
Apart from data required for control, most upward communication in organizations can be categorized into the following groups:
We send up data about ourselves and our problems.
We send up data about others and their problems.
We comment on, or suggest refinements to, the procedures, policies and regulations (the structure).
We suggest strategies for current problems and what needs to be done.
As organizations increase in size, the necessity to predict and control the behaviour of the whole organization inevitably leads to more structure, more controls, more requests for information.
Further, the larger the system, the greater the struggle for power, influence and promotion.
Not unexpectedly, we all learn to filter out data which puts us in a bad light, and we learn to tell our superiors what they want to hear.
Studies of vertical filtering of information have found four frequently used methods for improving one's chances of success, i.e. promotion.
We put it in writing, sending written details up the hierarchy in case we have to prove we have fulfilled our role.
A multitude of memos circulate in organizations simply to justify our behaviours in the event of a breakdown.
If a breakdown does occur, we rush to our files to extract the relevant memo which shows that we did tell the boss what was happening — that is, we cover ourselves.
Because personal power is the promotion of self, we send positive data on ourselves up the hierarchy and forget to send the negative data — that is, we tell our superiors how good we are.
We send in negative data on our peers — those who are competing with us for more powerful positions.
The ‘but syndrome’ is common indicator of negative filtering.
It occurs all over the hierarchy, but is seen in its most blatant form at the second level.
This form of game-playing begins with praise of a peer, and ends with negative feedback on that peer.
Usually the negative feedback begins with ‘but’: e.g. ‘We were very lucky to get Harry fro the opposition because he's the top marketing person in the country — but he knows nothing about our products and still has a lot to learn’.
Or, even more shattering: ‘He means well’, the innuendo being ‘but he fails’.
We try to reduce the distance between ourselves and our boss by using first-person-plural pronouns, talking of what ‘we’(i.e. the boss and I) will do in the future —‘We could always write to head office, and ask them to let us have more data.
We could really make this place swing if only they gave us the data to work on, couldn't we?’
By implications the use of ‘we’ attaches the less powerful person to the more powerful, and power is equalized.
Self-promotion and ‘covering’ oneself occur in all large organizations.
The early symptoms of political games occur even in very small organizations but by 500 people nearly every political game that researchers have identified will be present.
By 10000 people politics is endemic.
The reverse also holds; the smaller the organization, the less prevalent the problems and generally the more constructive and productive the conflict.
The ugly side of politics
The effect of power games on organizational effectiveness can be damaging.
In a system where promotion (not money) is the most sought-after reward, the filtering of communication upwards through the hierarchy is inevitable.
This can lead to a vicious circle, in which important communication is filtered out by power-seekers so that the structure (which causes most of the problems) is reinforced in order to flush out the filtered information, thereby making the filtering worse.
It is only in flatter, smaller organizational units that we see a sharp decrease in both the game-playing and the filtering.
Ever since Machiavelli wrote The Prince and The Discourses in the sixteenth century he has been associated with the ugly side of political activity.
Tests have been devised to assess this characteristic in individuals.
Those who score highly overall on Machiavellian behaviour will be characterized by the use of guile and deceit in interpersonal relationships, by a cynical view of other people and by a lack of concern for conventional morality.
Consistent with these characteristics will be agreement with statements like the following:
The best way to handle people is to tell them what they want to hear.
Don't ever completely trust anyone else.
Flatter important people to get what you want.
Research has shown that so-called Machiavellians can be effective manipulators of other people.
It has also shown that they are most effective in situations of crisis because of their ability to initiate and control social interactions.
However, once the crisis passes they are likely to be less effective as most people want power to be shared, not a unilateral right.
We need to ask whether the interest in Machiavellian behaviour is detracting from the positive side of political activity.
Clearly, it is.
For every argument against political activity there is a counter-argument as well.
It is possible to reduce but not eliminate power differences between people in hierarchical organizations.
People differ in their interests and in their capacity to handle power and politics.
Further, the most powerful individuals or groups or functions are usually the most important in achieving the organization's objectives.
Finally, politics generates conflict, which in turn energizes individuals in organizations.
Without conflict organizations may well die, just as families and marriages die without conflict.
Constructive conflict is essential.
It is only when politics leads to  destructive conflict that we need to ask whether we should contain it.
Organizations are political systems; eliminate politics and you eliminate the organization.
Further, power is not rampant; there are stringent limits to its abuse.
LIMITS TO POWER
How much power should managers have?
As much as they need to get the job done.
However, effectiveness does depend on managers' ability to use the power they have to encourage others to join in.
Less reliance on power bases is found in managers who have the tactical and interpersonal skills to concentrate on the essential objectives.
Much of a manager's success depends on maintaining a reservoir of goodwill, on minimizing a reliance on authority and unilateral decisions.
If every step is a fight resolved with authority then this exhausts the available resources, including the patience and goodwill of those people who will have to implement what the manager intends.
There are, in our society, increasing limits on the concentration of power.
Certainly, concentrated wealth is in the hands of the few, and the separation of ownership and management has been excessively overstated; it is the upper and upper-middle classes who own and manage, if not together, then within a class.
However, two changes that have occurred in the power game have been the awakening of concentrated industrial or union power, which rested like a sleeping giant for nearly a century, and the emergence of consumer power.
The knowledge that collective power from organized unions, or the much less organized but media-influenced consumer power, can cripple an organization has, in itself, changed the way managers manage.
Finally, fewer and fewer subordinates will tolerate authoritarian power, at least in democratic societies.
Those who get to the top use interpersonal skills rather than force.
What else limits the concentration of power?
Organizational boundaries Power is rarely transferable across these.
Managing directors and union officers are powerful within their own organizations, but far less powerful in a court of law.
Humiliation of those in power We search diligently for some fault in them and, having found it, we broadcast our discovery through the instantly available and internationally linked media, sometimes with negligible supporting data.
This produces a strange contradiction — a  lack of respect for those with power, even though we still submissively respond to their commands.
Legal restrictions Restrictive-trade-practices legislation is only one of the multitude of legal restrictions on concentrated power.
Limits of time and energy Few people realize the time and effort involved in being a minister of state, a governor of a prison or a managing director of a business.
For most of the people in these positions, work is a seven-days-a-week activity.
Of course, most of them thrive on it, but many people are beginning to wonder if the rewards for having power, and being able to influence others, are worth the costs, especially in terms of family relationships.
Are wealth and power more important than love?
The individual's search for harmony Where power imbalances occur, the individual uses one or more of many checks to correct that imbalance.
We need no more examples of costly, destructive power conflicts (e.g. wars, bitter industrial action) to teach us negotiation is a better way.
Power exists only if others recognize a capacity We have had some interesting examples over recent years of power being unceremoniously withdrawn from politicians.
Similarly, in work organizations, people's willingness to endure a dictatorial boss or union organizer is diminishing.
Summary
Organizations are political systems in which power is the life blood.
Power is the capacity to affect others' behaviour with or without their consent.
Influence is the result of power — it is actual behaviour.
Politics is power in action.
Authority is the formal right to control resources.
There are three important sources of power in organizations: interpersonal, structural and cultural.
Interpersonal sources depend on the personality of the manager and on the power bases used.
These include expertise, interpersonal skills and positional power, and recognize the fact that power rests on the capacity of managers to induce others to confer power on them.
Structural power arises from the division of labour which, in turn, creates hierarchies, units, divisions and systems.
The power of any unit (position, function, division) rests on its centrality, its non-substitute-ability and its capacity to cope with situations of uncertainty.
Cultural power arises from the values and beliefs of the organization and from the assumption underlying those values.
The most powerful culture is that which reconciles the goals of the individual with those of  the collective.
In most work organizations this reconciliation occurs intermittently.
In religious organizations reconciliation can persist for long periods of time.
The outcome of power in organizations is politics.
Different styles of influence will be used by different people in different situations.
The most common styles are persuasion, manipulation, exchange tactics, dependency creation and insatiation.
Politics is essential to organizational survival.
Nevertheless, following Machiavelli's work in the sixteenth century, there is a widespread impression that politics are bad for organizations.
On the contrary, they are important to concentrate power such that changes might occur.
Moreover, there are statutory, personal and interpersonal limits to the power and manager can exercise.
References
Groups in organizations
Introduction
This chapter begins by looking at the formation of groups, and the emergence of roles, norms and control devices.
I then discuss how well groups perform and some of the risks involved in assigning work to groups.
This leads to the relationships between different groups, including groups from different cultures.
What is a group?
A group is any number of people who are able to interact with one another, are psychologically aware of each other , and who perceive and are perceived as being members of a team.
The number of people is usually smaller than ten, and most frequently smaller than six.
To a great extent, tasks determine group size in work organizations.
A group is more enduring and supportive than two people interacting socially but is looser or less structured than an organization.
Conversely, we can regard an organization as a series of coupled groups, so that the performance of that organization depends on the combination of diverse group performances.
At best this series of human modules, which we call the firm or the corporation, coheres for short periods as a united collective.
Most of the time the organization is no more than a collection of loosely coupled individuals and groups.
Types of groups
Individuals belong to a variety of groups so any classification is subject to the perceptions of the members involved.
What may seem to be a work group to an observer may be a friendship group to the members.
Nevertheless, in organizations it is useful to note that there are both formal and informal groups.
Formal groups are created as mechanisms within the formal structure of the firm.
That is, they are official and supported by positional power or authority.
Their functions are usually clearly specified, their membership restricted, their control over resources limited, often in writing.
Task forces, project teams, committees, boards, departmental or functional group meetings fall into this classification.
Informal groups are looser, more erratic in their behaviour and often much more fun.
Without the constraints of officialdom they are based on friendship, on gossip, on shared beliefs about how things should be done.
Because they're unofficial and therefore unprescribed they are where ideas are tested and creative solutions devised, and are essential to the success of the organization (see Chapter 7 for more details).
Content and process
In analysing group behaviour we need to distinguish between the task or what the group is doing (its content)and the interactions between members (the process).
Often it is the process which is more important in explaining group performance than the content, even though it will usually be the content that we assess in measuring its performance.
Group formation
When a group of individuals meets for the first time the process of group formation has begun.
The least structured group form is called a coalition.
Coalitions are temporary structures made up of a small group of individuals (usually two) sharing a common goal.
There is no other reason for their attraction to each other.
Once the goal is achieved, the coalition breaks and the group disbands.
So the marketing director enters a coalition with the research director to pressure the boss to allocate more resources to product design.
Once the objective is achieved, the coalition ends.
The mistake, of either party, is to assume that the coalition will continue for other issues.
Groups have multiple goals, are more enduring than a coalition and usually involve more members.
They develop through well researched stages regardless of whether they are formal or informal.
The task, time pressure and members' interests all have their effect on the four commonly cited stages in the process of group formation: forming, storming, norming, performing.
FORMING
At this stage members are focusing on defining goals and developing procedures for performing the task (content).
They are getting acquainted, sensing the position of others, testing the waters.
Feelings are suppressed; members look more secure than they are.
They are confused about what  is expected of them and of others, but is no real hostility; boundaries are being tested, not established.
STORMING
Positions are firing.
Conflicts emerge over the way the group is to proceed who will be responsible for what.
Competition over leadership roles surfaces.
Promotion of the self begins.
Some member a withdraw, turned off by the tension generated by the impending division of labour and the inevitable imbalance of power (discussed in Chapter 4).
The key to survival is to manage the conflict (the process), not to suppress it or withdraw from it.
Tensions must be released otherwise resentment will surface later in the group's development.
NORMING
Behaviours specific to the task (the objective or goal) evolve into sharing of information, acceptance of different opinions and positive attempts to reach mutually agreeable or compromise decisions.
Cooperation overrides competitions as group norms or behaviours codes develop around how the task is performed, what behaviours are acceptable and what are not, what sanctions will be used for deviants.
PERFORMING
This stage is marked by the sharing of honest communications and the development of a degree of trust among the members.
It is the best phase for problem-solving, when personal animosities are minimal.
Balance has occurred within the roles in the group.
Role allocations are accepted by role performers, and the group is enables to tackle the task.
Argument is subsequently minimal as members become aware of the inevitability of the decision they are to make.
Balance has been superseded by problem-solving as the focus of attention.
Decisions are made.
An effective work group is in operation.
These phases of group problem-solving should not be seen as a model to follow but as an analysis of what tends to happen.
The pattern may vary widely in specific groups.
For example, trust may not occur between the norming and performing phases at all .
If trust does not occur, however, that is when it is most likely to do so.
Similarly, conflict may not occur overtly, and after the deliberation phase (forming) the trust phase (norming) may lead straight to a solution (reinforcement of group membership).
Finally, if a group disbands and then reassembles it returns to the forming/storming phases.
Over time familiarity speeds the process from forming to performing.
A group needs time for the processes to develop to turn a number of individuals into a group, no matter how well they know each other.
Group norms
Work groups differ from free-forming groups outside employment in that they evolve over long periods of time.
Hence, they develop quite rigid codes of behaviour, or group norms, which explicitly or implicitly act to create conformity among group members.
Norms begin as our expectations; these then merge or converge with others' expectations to produce ‘rules’ about required behaviour.
Norms thus relate overtly to behaviour but covertly there is convergence of expectations, attitudes, beliefs and feelings among members of the group.
(If asked, individuals will deny this personal shift in expectations has occurred.)
The process of norm development in work groups is complex but we do know something about it:
Norms develop about the task, i.e. the work the people were hired to do.
Norms develop about non-formal goals of the group, e.g. sport or other types of informal relaxation, outsiders, other groups.
Norms develop about internal regulation within the group, about interactions, power, language and discipline.
Norms develop about opinions, attitudes and beliefs — about unions, management, non-members of the group, religion and territory.
Norms develop about physical appearance — work and non-work dress, use of safety clothing, lockers, etc.
Unlike groups in laboratory studies, the work group is not created and then disbanded permanently; it often survives over a long period of time.
Consequently, norm development occurs over very long periods, and often very old behaviour patterns are preserved long after they have ceased to be relevant.
When we join the group as a new member we may sense these norms and question their relevance but, if group membership is vital to our role acquisition, we will accept the irrelevant norm merely to establish our intention to conform and thereby hasten our acceptance  by the group.
This sharing of expectations about acceptable behaviour ensures conformity.
The degree to which you or I are willing to conform to group norms will depend on:
Our desire for the group to agree to our membership (acceptance).
Our wish to avoid causing displeasure and possibly inviting isolation or punishment (pleasure).
Our belief that the norm reflects our own view (congruence).
Our doubting our capacity to stand alone (isolation).
Our belief in the group's goals (agreement).
Organizations rely on conformity to both formal and informal group norms.
People's performances, including their dress and speech, can in this way be closely controlled.
Some of the norms are societal, that is, they arise from the culture of our society and are carried into organizations.
They relate to universally accepted behaviour patterns — salutations, manners, dress, etc.
Other norms are specific to that organization while yet others are specific to one work group.
Work-group norms are usually more subtle and less universal and relate to behaviour within a part of the organization.
However, the purpose of these norms is the same as that of societal or organizational norms — to reduce variability in behaviour and to produce conformity, dependability and predictability.
Research on conformity has shown that individuals with higher levels of ability conform less to group norms than those with lower levels of ability; individuals with strong relationship goals will identify with group norms more readily than those individuals for whom multiple, close relationships are not important; highly authoritarian individuals conform more than less authoritarian individuals; individuals who find it hard to ‘see the wood for the trees’ conform more readily than those who find it easy; and individuals with strong structure goals conform more willingly.
Norms provide the basis for the structure of any group.
Subsequently, these norms are elaborated into structured parts or roles which members play within the group.
If I want group members' approval, I will accept the dictates of the group about my role, even though I might not accept that influence in a one-to-one relationship.
I may agree to decisions which are quite contrary to my own standards.
I may modify my behaviour to conform to the expectations of the group, and I will do so in a much shorter time than I would in a one-to-one relationship.
What has happened to me in the group is that my own perceptions of myself and others have been modified by group norms, which may only be mine marginally.
However, the converse is also true.
Once I leave the group my behaviour will be different again.
Too frequently, managers forget the significance of a group as a source of power and influence on individuals.
For example, the manager may find it hard to understand how Harry (say), who proudly wears the company's 35 years' service badge, can walk out with his work group in an industrial dispute.
The error the manager makes is to try to correlate Harry's performance as an individual employee with his performance in a group — they are two entirely different performances.
Group members' perceptions of expected behaviour are concerned with bits of behaviour (‘Can I make jokes in this group?’), rather than with the behaviour as a continuing phenomenon (‘Do I have a sense of humour?’).
On these items of behaviour a structure for behaviour is developed, with norms as the foundations.
On top of norms, the group members develop expectations, implicitly or explicitly, about the role that each member is to play.
Through interpersonal process, the members establish their own psychological contracts (or scripts) with one another.
Group roles
Many behaviours will be performed by members within the group.
However, studies of groups have repeatedly found two behaviour patterns which recur:
Task-centred behaviour
Socio-emotional or maintenance behaviour
Task-centred behaviour is concentrated in the task-leader role.
This is a structuring, organizing, goal-setting and often dominating role.
It is generally occupied, at any one time, by one person, but it can sometimes be split between two people — a task manager and a task expert, where the manager does not have the expertise but acquires power through the capacity to get the task done.
The emergence of task-oriented behaviour in the group leads to a second pattern of behaviour — the socio-emotional or maintenance behaviour.
This is concerned with avoiding group disintegration through support, seeking consensus and resolving conflicts.
Like the task-leader role, this may be split among several people.
However, the degree to which the maintenance behaviour is absorbed by several people appears to depend on the strength of the task-oriented actor(s); that is, if the group is dominated by one person, then, to restore balance to the group, most other members, for reasons which are difficult to understand, may adopt a consensus-seeking, team-building posture.
The less dominant the task-centred actor(s), the less widely spread, or even the less clear, the behaviour of the maintenance actor(s).
However, sometimes the reverse holds — the less clear the task-oriented action(s), the clearer the socio-emotional role.
In most work groups, both roles emerge clearly.
They may be played by two people, or by more than two people; they may also be played by one person who performs both task and maintenance behaviours.
In their own way, and depending on the stresses within the group, the members will almost intuitively sort out a set of relationships which will provide both behaviour patterns and thereby establish a balance of power .
Balance occurs when the struggle for power between potential task-centred actors is no longer an issue — the task itself is the issue.
Performers of the task and maintenance behaviours find a level of equilibrium, in which case the ‘performing’ stage of group evolution has been reached.
If the member providing the task-centred behaviour leaves the group, e.g. to go on holiday, then the group members will restructure and the behaviour patterns will be reallocated.
The time taken for this balancing of behaviours and influence will depend on the group members, on their perceptions and expectations, on the task, and on the internal stresses.
In a work group, a new structure will emerge within one or two weeks.
When the original task-centred actor returns, he or she will probably try to get the role back and another week or two will have to pass before the group achieves equilibrium again.
Belbin has taken the analysis of group roles further and argues that up to nine roles can be identified in a work group.
Different combinations of these roles have been found to be more effective for certain tasks than others.
Let me list his categories:
Chairman/Coordinator:Focuses team on goals, manages interaction.
Shaper:Strongly task-oriented, full of energy, prevents inertia, extroverted.
Plant:Innovative, original thinker, creative.
Resource investigator:Extrovert, gathers information, networks, negotiates.
Monitor-evaluator:Evaluates conflicting ideas analytically, considers options carefully.
Team worker:Builds harmony, team spirit, maintenance-oriented.
Completer (Finisher):Picks up loose ends, checks details, ensures completion.
Implementer (Company worker):Does routine methodical jobs, directs others, works hard.
Technical specialist:Expert knowledge, experienced, professionalism.
Belbin's description of team roles has proved to be very useful, especially in creating teams for specific purposes.
For example, the composition of a design team will be different from the team created to implement that design.
My only reservation with his classification of roles is that it reflects a Western preoccupation with task behaviours.
In Far Eastern cultures there is an equal interest in the process — the role of the maintenance leaders.
(There are only two clear maintenance or socio-emotional roles in this list: chairman/  coordinator and team worker).
Group structure
Unless there is a high staff turnover, the structure of work groups in organizations is invariably clearer than that of friendship groups.
Parts for the actors are more finely delineated and other social roles are allocated — the comedian, the best drinker, the union link, the arbitrator, the encourager, the pacifier, etc.
Disturbing the group structure has, consequently, more repercussions than most managers realize.
The entire fabric and balance of power within the group may be shattered if someone is transferred or promoted.
Certainly, within time, group equilibrium or balance will return, but there are many occasions when the cost of the group's disequilibrium is greater than the cost of not removing that member.
In formal work groups, the structuring process is affected by the hierarchy of authority and the managerial behaviour of the boss.
However, just because a person is called, for example, ‘manager’, it does not mean that the task-leader role automatically goes with the title.
What it does mean is that, if the manager adopts a very warm socio-emotional managerial style, then an informal or unofficial task-leader role may emerge in the work group.
Moreover, the balance between the task and maintenance behaviours is central to the output of the whole section.
If the section works effectively, we may see the manager promoted and the unofficial task leader formally recognized and promoted to the position of manager.
This strategy assumes that a reciprocal rebalancing of power in the work' group will occur through the emergence of maintenance behaviours; in fact, a very different set of relationships may emerge, and not without some intra-group conflict.
How do people acquire task-centred power positions?
By the same power strategies discussed in Chapter 4 — visibility, muscle, expertise, etc.
And unlike temporary social groups, the work group has long periods  during which members can check the authenticity of the power bases.
For this reason the work group will make fewer mistakes in choosing informal leaders than will a temporary social group.
The emergence of the maintenance-centred (socio-emotional centred) behaviour pattern is more complex.
It appears to depend very much on the emergence, and the strength or dominance, of the task-centred member(s).
The more dominant the task leader the greater the number of actors who take up maintenance roles to produce social balance.
Similar patterns occur in formal relationships.
If the chief executive is authoritarian and dominant in managerial style, then the subordinates will move the group into balance by adopting less dominant, more consensus-seeking, maintenance-oriented behaviour patterns.
For this reason they are often seen to be weak; yet it is this very willingness of the subordinates to shift their own goals in order to preserve the harmony of the team that makes it possible for the group at the top of the hierarchy to perform at all.
The major disadvantage of this form of dictatorial power balance occurs with the death of the chief; which is usually followed by a long, painful period of restructuring whereby the balance is restored.
This sometimes means eliminating most of the original actors, and stretching down the hierarchy or even outside to discover a new chief who was not part of the original team.
(See pages 249–254 for further discussion of Balance.)
Group control of members
Informal friendship groups occur most often laterally in the hierarchy — peers, rather than bosses and subordinates, are friends.
It is true that, in very loose, open hierarchies, people in different hierarchical levels do form friendship groups, but this is still the exception rather than the rule.
The influence of the friendship group is greatest at the base of the hierarchy, where the search for relationships between members is strongest (see Chapter 1).
Members at the top of the hierarchy do have informal relationships, but there is little friendship involved; senior managers' informal relationships are based on convenience rather than affection.
Formal groups (e.g. committees, task forces, boards and teams) almost always cross hierarchical levels (boss/subordinate) and often cross functions (finance, marketing).
Here, relationships are prescribed formally rather than informally, thereby strengthening a manager's capacity to control  the behaviour of others.
However, in formal groups similar processes of control will emerge as in informal groups, even if there are other, formal techniques as well.
DEVIATION
When a deviation from expected behaviour occurs we can detect definite phases of the control process.
Phase 1: initial tolerance The deviation is noted by members of the group.
They may seek an explanation (‘Why are you doing that, Harry?’) or make excuses (‘She hasn't learnt the ropes yet).
Whatever the technique (and it may be total silence), other members of the group have registered the deviation and the implied message is ‘OK, we note the deviation.
Now let's be sensible and behave correctly’.
Phase 2: attempts to correct The members have noted the continued deviation from group norms and deliberately attempt to correct the behaviour (‘Don't keep doing that, ‘Put your clothes back on again', ‘You don't have to go home yet, ‘Have another drink’, etc.).
At this stage, members of the group are still tolerant but are signalling, verbally and non-verbally, that the deviation must cease.
Phase 3: verbal aggression Other group members are becoming more annoyed by the deviation.
Verbal messages become more hostile, more aggressive, and the threat of rejection may be offered (‘If you can't do it this way, don't do it at all' — fail and you must go elsewhere).
Verbal aggression is more likely to occur than physical aggression in groups whose members come from middle- or upper-income families.
Lower income groups use more physical aggression.
Phase 4: physical aggression As a control, this is limited by other group norms (e.g. no physical aggression).
It is more likely to be used on the factory floor than in the boardroom (where the process is often more subtle but no less damaging).
It is also more common in some cultures (e.g. Italy, France) than in others (Sweden, UK).
Phase 5: rejection ‘Get out.’
As soon as the individual is rejected (physically or psychologically), the group members will rebalance power and roles, eliminate the deviants contribution and, if necessary, adjust its norms.
Probably the most frequently used rejection is total silence.
In many cases, members of a group ignore all the niceties and reject the deviant immediately.
Or the group may start at Phase 2 and then go to Phase 5.
In other words, the phases are sequential but not necessarily consecutive.
The power of the peer group to control a deviant is known and used by both managers and union officials.
What is particularly different about work groups, as opposed to others, is that the norms and standards are central to the rewards members receive.
If a deviant decides to produce more than the group norm, then all members of the group are threatened.
Similarly, if the employees feel industrial action is warranted, they will not tolerate nonconformists, because nonconformists weaken the group's position.
Work groups are very much a case of one in, all in'.
Group cohesion
How powerful is a group in influencing the behaviour of its members?
This depends on such a multitude of variables (all of them tested empirically) that it warrants a book on its own.
To be brief, the power of a group is determined by the cohesion within the group.
Cohesion can be described as the sum of all the factors that influence members to remain in the group.
It is the strength of mutual attractiveness among the members.
Research studies have shown that the more cohesive the group the higher the levels of group productivity and member satisfaction.
Members experience less work-related stress and are better adjusted to life in the organization.
Indeed, the research evidence is so strong that it is now reflected in the high incidence of work teams, ‘away days’ for functional groups and courses in team-building.
So what does, in simple terms, contribute to cohesion?
How often the groups meet.
If work groups meet every day (as many do), they will represent the second most cohesive group in most people's lives — second only to the family.
The attractiveness of the group to its members, in terms of objectives, satisfactions and productivity.
The attractiveness of a group consists of the interpersonal attractiveness of members of the group for one another.
Members may be attracted because the group offers the opportunity for affiliation, recognition or security, or because the goals are significant to the individuals, or because they have expectations that the group will satisfy their personal goals and motives.
Group members reinforce the attractiveness of the group by incentives — offers of more fun, money, security, love or affiliation.
Research on job satisfaction has consistently shown that the degree of group cohesion is important in predicting the performance of that group, and productivity and satisfaction can be increased, and absenteeism decreased, simply by reinforcing group attractiveness and cohesion.
The emphasis given to the group's goals.
Members of informal groups in work organizations usually have vague group objectives, and are less cohesive and behave erratically.
Members of formal groups are usually very goal-oriented and groups are deliberately structured to achieve those goals.
The clearer the goals and the shorter the time in which they are to be achieved, then the greater the cohesion of the group.
Other influences on group power include the sort of people in the group (see Chapter 1 on relationship goals), the layout of the office or plant, the boss, the opportunities for interaction and the noise levels.
Clues to group power
Most laboratory studies of groups analyse the number of verbal signals, assuming that such signals indicate cohesion and structure.
This method is not very useful for work groups, especially the informal ones in organizations, as there may be very strong bonds between a group of people even though the verbal signals are few.
Often an informal group will eat lunch near a machine or other work station, even though a canteen is available.
In an entire lunch-hour, those same members may produce only half a dozen verbal transactions between them, yet a multitude of non-verbal signals binds them together in a group.
After work, at the pub, verbal interactions may increase rapidly.
It is this bond which the ‘achievers’ at the top of the hierarchy have great difficulty in understanding, mainly because of their obsession with constant verbal signals.
Highly career-motivated middle-class people fill silences with socially acceptable noises; people at the base of a hierarchy do not appear to need all this noise.
Formal goals also affect cohesiveness and hence group power.
Managers are assessed on productivity, but claiming productivity as the only goal of a group may be a mistake.
Each behavioural process within a group is the cause of subsequent outcomes, including productivity.
Holding only the final outcome to be significant denies the continuous shifts in members' goals, attitudes, satisfactions and interactions.
Interactions are continuous and ongoing, and it is the interactions now that are important for the cohesiveness of the group.
It is the social reward of cohesiveness in the group now which affects productivity, not the pursuit of productivity itself; productivity is merely the outcome of having a rewarding time in the group.
The means to productivity are group cohesiveness and group satisfaction.
Conversely, if productivity goals are achieved, this reinforces commitment and the feeling of group cohesiveness.
How well do groups perform?
This is a vital question.
Some groups are very decisive, very productive, very creative and very satisfying for their members.
Others are not.
As we design more and more committees, task forces, teams and production groups within organizations, we should remember that there are advantages' and disadvantages in using groups as decision-making devices.
Groups have been found to make ‘better’ decisions in some situations but not in all.
This may be because the group ‘averages’ its answers, which eliminates extreme positions.
Other advantages of groups as decision-making devices are:
The group has access to a greater variety of experiences and skills than does one person.
By ‘brainstorming’, groups can generate far more and better ideas than individuals working on their own.
A division of work or effort is possible.
Groups can generate more information on a problem.
Members can detect each other 's errors.
Being involved in the group decision can arouse an individual's motivation to perform.
On the other side of the argument, groups have also been found to make disastrous decisions.
Some of the reasons are:
The members are too alike (homogeneous).
The group fails to detect the skills and experiences of different members.
Too large a group (especially one with more than seven members) leads to restraints on participation.
Attention is focused on the problem only for short time-spans.
Tangential discussions are time-consuming.
The problem is too technical, complex and known only to a few.
Time is lost because of the social issues (processes) in the group.
Individuals working on their own concentrate on the task (content), not the task plus social interactions (content and process).
One member uses coercion, expertise or position to dominate the others, and conformity pressures are strong enough to eliminate constructive criticism.
Conjecture leads the group into irrelevancies and time is wasted.
Members are so heterogeneous that they could not communicate.
The group demonstrates what Janis refers to as ‘group think’—‘a deterioration of mental efficiency, reality testing and moral judgement that results from in-group pressures’.
GROUP THINK
Janis's concept of ‘group think’ refers to a gross distortion of decision-making by a group.
His research leads him to conclude that group think is characterized by:
The group's belief in its own intelligence: ‘That information doesn't fit our decision, so let's agree the information is wrong.’
The group's belief in its own invulnerability: ‘If we all work together we can't go wrong.’
The group's belief in its own morality: ‘We are doing this for the benefit of everyone.’
The group's belief in its own rationalizations: ‘We know the unions will agree.’
The group's belief in its own uncritical thinking: ‘Let's not go over it all again.
We have thoroughly examined the alternatives.’
The group's belief in its own unanimity in decisions: ‘We have agreed, haven't we, to go ahead?’
To these I might add my own observations on working with groups:
The group leader's belief that all members have expressed views and that the decision is a consensus of divergent views.
The group's concern for any answer, however bad, rather than no answer.
The group's failure to identify expertise among its members.
Janis argues that some of history's most horrific decisions have been made by groups.
To guard against bad group decisions, we can all watch for the characteristics given above.
However, drawing them to the attention of the group is likely to lead to instant denial.
A much more effective technique is to suggest to the group that it takes a break from the task.
This breaks the cohesion and may give individuals time to reconsider.
WHICH TASKS SHOULD BE GIVEN TO A GROUP?
Too often groups are selected for tasks with no forethought about benefit to the members or to the suitability of the task for a group.
So when you are putting the group together, consider the people and the task:
Choose a task capable of involving all members.
Give the group a concrete, not an abstract, task.
Clarify a definite beginning and end for the task, and make clear how the effectiveness of the decision will be assessed.
Choose people who can ‘get along’— balance is essential for performance.
Give the group sufficient autonomy to carry out the task.
Reward the group as a whole (rewarding individuals breaks the cohesion in the group).
Structure the task for the group to include at least:
— a precise statement of the objective(s)
— a precise statement on the method of presenting the group decision(s)
— time and cost limits.
Choose a task requiring a variety of skills and experience, not those of an expert (often an expert alone is much more competent than a group).
Choose a task which needs close coordination, through which people will learn from each other.
Restrict the size of the group to five or six (although the research data are conflicting on group size).
Select problems where the administrative cost and time or the social benefits support a group solution — that is, justify the choice of a group.
The more able the members, the better the decision.
The more aware the members are of group processes, the better the decision.
Cooperative groups are better problem-solvers than competitive ones.
Creative groups, where members choose one another, make better decisions.
Better decisions result when the task and maintenance leadership roles are filled in a way that leads to coordination, thus overcoming the slowness, tangential discussion, loss of focus and other inefficiencies of groups.
Numerous attempts have been made to improve the performance of groups.
Not all of these have been as successful as some of their proponents have claimed.
Brainstorming on creative tasks has been a major activity in the advertising business where it began in the 1930s.
People who use this technique to improve the performance of the group stick rigidly to the rules:
Group members' ideas must not be criticized.
Ideas must not be rejected, irrespective of how odd they are.
Quantity not quality of ideas is the aim.
Members should ‘hitch hike’ their ideas on to the ideas of others to generate new ideas.
While the technique (which combines content with process) has been well documented, the research on its effectiveness has been less than exciting.
A team of four individuals working together in a brainstorming session is likely to perform less well on the number of ideas generated than if the four individuals worked on their own.
Group brainstorming appears to inhibit creativity, not stimulate it.
In contrast, the synergy of four individuals working on a problem should give the group an advantage over the individuals working on their own.
In fact, the group rarely outperforms the best individual working on his or her own.
Synergy (that is, 2+2 = 5) is a vastly overstated belief of systems theorists.
If we add expertise as a variable, then the lone expert will far outperform the inexperienced group.
Despite these research findings all of us do spend time in groups and a variety of processes and procedures have been developed by researchers and consultants to improve the effectiveness of decision-making in groups.
Most of these techniques (such as the Nominal Group Technique) use structured processes to shift from group interaction to individual activity and back again, thereby avoiding some of the pitfalls of group think, etc.
But we do not need these sophisticated techniques to improve group effectiveness.
Any board, committee or task force can conduct a simple paper and pencil survey among its members to assess members' perceptions of group performance.
Group critiques are still rare, despite all the research on the problems of groups which do not assess their performance.
Like individuals, groups need feedback.
Conflict
CONFLICT WITHIN GROUPS
Just as groups depend on the allocation of roles (and power), so they depend also on the consequences of power — conflict/cooperation, trust/ mistrust, etc.
Conflict is inevitable.
It is also highly desirable and constructive in any social system, whether it be an organization, a group, a family or a friendship.
Constructive conflict energizes relationships; they might wither and die if we were ever able to eliminate conflict.
This is not to say that all conflict is constructive.
Destructive conflict is injurious to social systems, and we should aim to eliminate the negative forms of conflict which pervade many work organizations.
Intrapersonal conflict occurs in an individual where there are several  equally attractive options but only one may be chosen.
Interpersonal conflict occurs between two or more people when attitudes, motives, values, expectations or activities are incompatible and if those people perceive themselves to be in disagreement.
Constructive conflict can be very beneficial to a group.
For example, conflict may:
Introduce different solutions to the problem.
Clearly define the power relationships within the group.
Encourage creativity and brainstorming activity.
Focus on individual contributions rather than group decisions.
Bring emotive, non-rational arguments into the open.
Provide for catharsis — release of interdepartmental or interpersonal conflicts of long standing.
Conversely, if conflict is destructive, it may:
Prevent members from ‘seeing’ the task at all.
Dislocate the entire group and produce polarizations.
Subvert the objectives in favour of sub-goals.
Lead people to use defensive and blocking behaviour in their group.
Result in the disintegration of the entire group.
Stimulate win-lose conflicts, where reason is secondary to emotion.
It is difficult in analysing organizations to know when intra-group or inter-group conflict is destructive.
Sometimes, what seem to be very heated and destructive conflicts have very positive outcomes; for example, while a strike would normally be seen by managers and union members as expensive, destructive conflict for both sides, it can provide a focus for attention and an opportunity for catharsis.
Or at home, when there is an unresolved issue distorting a relationship, a good row can clear the air, releasing tension and allowing the couple to deal with their differences.
The release of tension in organizations is probably one of the most neglected areas of research.
All societies have social mechanisms for the release of tension, such as religious meetings, festivals and rituals.
Work organizations are only now beginning to appreciate the need for tension release, for creating regular opportunities to ‘let it all out’ at seminars, dinners, training courses, rituals, ceremonies, etc.
Most conflict in groups occurs because of differences among members over goals, attitudes or feelings.
The greater the involvement with those goals, attitudes and feelings, the more difficult it is to change people's perceptions and to resolve the conflict.
Personal goals and attitudes, often  about power, are at the root of most conflict, but they do not necessarily cause conflict.
Other factors, such as the task, the location of the meeting, the seating plan, the leadership roles and status hierarchies, are all influential in triggering or blocking the release of differences.
Loss of equilibrium or social balance within a group may occur because of a variety of behaviours which lead to communication blockages.
Some of these behaviours are more often destructive than constructive:
Restricting information A member of the group implies he or she knows the answer to a group problem, but is not telling.
Lying Deliberate distortion of the facts to preserve a position in the group.
Pairing Breaking into sub-groups rather than solving the conflict as a group coalition.
Put-downs (of others or of self)The put-down of others, through verbal or physical aggression, may maintain the structure of the group.
Put-downs of self may get sympathy and diffuse the opposition — the ‘poor me’ game.
Fight Win-lose conflicts which are difficult to resolve.
Flight Running away, sometimes actually leaving the group.
More frequently, ‘sulk’ behaviour, withdrawal (leaving the room, pretending to sleep, sitting back from the table, saying I'm not really interested in the question’).
Making noise Speaking to be heard rather than to contribute; often very fuzzy, undisciplined.
Common in training groups.
Expertise Stopping contrary views by ‘dropping’ data about your own expertise (‘When I was in Paris, the Minister was saying to me…’).
Using legal or scientific jargon to dazzle.
Suppressing emotions Rather than letting the emotional blockages out, the person demands logic, rationality (‘Let's not get emotional' or ‘Please, let's act like adults’).
This is unfortunate, as much of the blockage is emotional and should be expressed.
Changing the topic Changing the focus from one topic to another, or from one person to another.
There are many other variations on these tactics.
People learn to use the tactics which work for them.
Hence, the person who used the sulk response successfully in the past will continue to use it, because it worked.
All of us who work regularly in groups should try to identify our own defensive and constructive behaviour.
I have found that most people have  no idea how they behave in a group, and are upset when they watch their behaviour in groups on video replays.
And the closer to the top of the hierarchy, the more surprised they are — high achievers learn to achieve on their own and rarely work in groups.
However, we should not get conflict and defensive behaviour out of perspective.
If we need to beware of having too much conflict in a group, we need also to beware of the reverse.
Too much cooperation and agreement can produce a ‘love-in’ where completing the task becomes secondary to enjoying interpersonal processes.
And members of work organizations do need to produce something or complete a task.
The difficult questions for a manager are: How much conflict and how much cooperation?
How much love, how much discord?
How much process and how much content?
INTER-GROUP CONFLICT
One of the most frequent forms of conflict in organizations is inter-group conflict: sales versus production; personnel versus finance.
Much of the inter-group conflict occurs simply because we separate people into functions such as sales, production and personnel and create imbalances of power.
Another cause is the fact that very different people, with very different attitudes, goals and perceptions, are attracted to different functional groups.
The worst form of inter-group conflict is what is called a ‘win-lose’ conflict, in which the competing groups all seek to win and in which there can in fact be only one winner.
Where this occurs, destructive conflict is usually the outcome.
What happens in this situation has been well documented:
Each group becomes more cohesive, as members close ranks.
Each group alters the leadership roles to strengthen the task-oriented role at the expense of the maintenance role.
Each group becomes more structured, and demands more loyalty and assurance of solidarity.
Emotion, rather than reason, dictates group decisions.
In looking at its competitor, each group:
Distorts perceptions of the ‘enemy’.
Distorts perceptions of its own members, minimizing weaknesses within itself and concentrating on strengths.
Increases its hostility towards, and decreases interaction with, the enemy.
If one group does win the competition, that group remains cohesive, releasing tension through playful activities, and remains highly cooperative (although it may also become complacent).
The losing group tends to splinter: conflicts come to the surface; blame is allocated.
Of winner and loser, the loser group is likely to learn more from the experience, and to evaluate its performance for future activity.
Resolution of inter-group conflict
As much conflict is constructive, the goal of a manager is to use it and to allow it to be exorcised.
When conflict is dealt with openly, members are stimulated to seek solutions, to resolve differences, to be more searching and creative.
Unfortunately, most conflict in organizations is not confronted openly, but is ignored.
Managerial responses to inter-group conflict will be varied.
Some managers deny its existence (denial) or withdraw from it (withdrawal).
Others suppress it (suppression) by smoothing it over.
Still others use power and authority (dominance) to resolve it.
(And there are cultural differences as well: the English avoid confrontation; the Dutch thrive on it.)
Yet whatever the tendency, compromise through negotiation seems sensible whether we call it bargaining, negotiating or compromising.
But this style of resolution also has disadvantages.
Compromise is often seen to be weak and commitment to the decision reflects that view.
The most appealing strategy is integration or collaboration, by which groups in conflict modify their views and seek a third alternative.
However, integration is difficult unless the national culture supports integration (e.g. Japan) or the groups have previously worked to improve their effectiveness as groups.
The tactics for resolution are similar.
Identify superordinate goals.
Interchange group members.
Identify a common enemy (external threat).
Reward cooperation.
Involve a third party facilitator.
Most frequently a number of these tactics will be used simultaneously.
No single strategy or tactic will resolve such a complex phenomenon as inter-group conflict.
Team-building
A cohesive team is one in which the number and strength of mutual positive attitudes among the members far exceeds the number of negatives.
Mutual support, minimized status differences, collective problem-solving and fun are some of the overt behaviours we can observe in team cohesion.
Many characteristics of organizations work against teams.
Differences in status, promotion, salaries, perks, all divide rather than encourage teams.
Similarly, national cultures are very influential; it is much easier to create teams in the collective cultures (Sweden, Norway, Germany) than in the highly individualistic cultures (UK, France, US).
The most common team is the manager and his direct reports or subordinates.
However, other teams such as committees, task forces or project groups cut across functions and hierarchical levels to create teams for particular purposes.
In all cases the techniques for building teamwork are similar.
Clarify the goals.
Signal who are members.
Choose team tasks.
Build cohesion.
Secure agreement on the task.
Meet frequently.
Limit the time (1 or 2 hours); have a break.
Share language, jargon.
Identify an external threat: ‘we and them’.
Share materials, papers, experiences.
Add social activities to work activities.
Avoid political games, be the exemplar.
Managers of teams should examine their diaries of events and learn from most religions.
The world's dominant religions require members to worship at least once a week and to attend a major festival every three months.
By this process congregations are held together.
A manager's diary might reflect this well established pattern: regular meetings with the team and a major event every quarter.
International groups
Despite the rather weak research literature on differences in behaviours between people from different countries, most of the findings do support popular stereotypes.
So the English, American and French tendency for  individualistic solutions to problems does not fit well with the Japanese or Swedish concern for group solutions.
Similarly, the Scandinavian antipathy for power-hungry, dominant task leaders in groups fits poorly with the German tolerance of dominant power-holders as a means of getting things done.
Or the Italian love of individual recognition conflicts with the Calvinistic denial of self and interest in collective recognition in much of the Netherlands.
However, while we all have our national stereotypes, and they are invariably supported by research (see Hofstede), the underlying differences from one country to another and also within a country are much more subtle.
These differences arise from the basic assumptions of that culture (see Chapter 6).
For example, who is in control?
People (UK, France, Australia, America)?
Or nature (India, Thailand, Sri Lanka)?
Or is the objective the Confucian belief in our harmonization with nature (Korea, Vietnam, China, Japan)?
The customs of each country are manifestations of their essential beliefs, most of which are institutionalized in religions which do differ fundamentally.
For example: Is there a single god (Christianity, Islam)?
Or are there no gods in that sense, but a way of life (Confucianism)?
Or is there a variety of gods (Buddhism)?
Is what you do the vital issue (Hinduism, Islam, Buddhism)?
Or what you think (a Western philosophical tradition)?
Does the religion and/or local customs specify relationships with others in detail, including bosses (Confucianism)?
Or does it leave work relationships unspecified (Christianity)?
These very basic differences become manifest in groups.
For example, a belief in strength through superiority means that in Japanese groups ‘saving face’ is a major consideration in negotiations, whereas in east coast American groups, where everyone, at least in theory, has the same opportunity, this is less an issue and failure is rationalized (‘So we blew it’).
In South East Asian or Middle Eastern groups the concept of leaderless groups is absurd (if for different reasons) but this is not so in collective cultures (Norway, Finland, Denmark) where a leader can be seen as a facilitator not as the final word.
Hence, loosely structured group meetings may be sensible in Copenhagen but would be inappropriate in Dubai or Singapore.
Finally, if the future of the firm is all predetermined and controlled by nature (or the gods) then what is the point in deciding strategy?
There are even differences between cultures in the development of task and maintenance behaviours, even though the actual emergence of these roles does appear to be universal.
For example, in a study of female managers from different cultures, Japanese managers, displaying maintenance behaviours in groups, were more likely to teach new skills, to write  personal notes to group members and to discuss people issues than would British managers.
They were also more likely in task behaviours to use social events to get things done and to check the quality of group output than would American managers.
Hofstede's recent book proposes that the Far East Manager is much more concerned with a long time horizon for the team than is the European or American manager.
It is difficult to generalize for any single group from different cultures.
Respect and tolerance for differences and the humility to accept that their way may be better are good common-sense guidelines.
It is those individuals with a conviction that their way is best and the others had better learn it fast that cause so much distress and wasted time when groups of people from different cultural backgrounds meet.
Give and take is essential for success.
You as a group member
As all of us spend time in groups we should ask what we can do to improve group effectiveness.
Two important questions we can all ask ourselves are:
What contribution do I make to the group task (the content)?
What contribution do I make to the group interaction (the process)?
Summary
All of us spend time in groups.
Some are official and formal, others informal.
Yet the same characteristics can be found in both.
The least stable group is a coalition which exists to achieve a specific end.
More stable groups have multiple goals and review and renew their goals, giving them greater permanency.
Two important variables have been identified in looking at group behaviour: the social interaction of members (the process) and the group's task (content).
The process of group formation can be analysed through tour stages: forming, storming, norming and performing.
Norms emerge to control the behaviour of members.
Similarly, roles and structures will be differentiated.
A minimal analysis of leadership roles produces two vital roles: a task-oriented leader role and a socio-emotional or maintenance leader role.
Group balance occurs when both roles have emerged.
We can take this analysis further and use Belbin's nine roles to suggest what combinations of actors would produce the most effective groups in  different contexts with different tasks.
Controls over the members of the group develop to deal with any deviation.
Tolerance of deviation can become strained and predictable steps will be taken by the other members to correct that deviation.
The final sanction is rejection of the deviant.
Cohesion within the group depends on the centrality of the goals to the members, the motives/goals of the individual members, and the frequency of meeting.
Cohesion has been found to correlate positively with group productivity and member satisfaction.
The performance of groups as decision-takers or problem-solvers has been very mixed.
Some of history's worst decisions have been group decisions.
There are advantages and disadvantages in work groups.
Selecting the task and the members are important variables in predicting group effectiveness.
Many of the popular techniques to improve group performance (brainstorming) have been disappointing in research studies.
Given the number of groups in any organization, it is inevitable that conflicts will develop.
Some of this conflict is productive.
Other forms of inter-group conflict are destructive.
Managerial responses to destructive conflict vary greatly.
Integration and collaboration are more effective ways to resolve this form of conflict.
Despite the problems with groups they remain a major fact of life in all organizations.
The chapter ends with some suggestions for strengthening teams through team-building as a way to maximize the clear advantages of team cohesion and minimize the regressive behaviours common in groups especially those that arise from cross-cultural differences.
References