

Foundations of Normativism
THE foundations of the normativist style in public law are to be found in the political ideologies of conservatism and liberalism.
These are strange bedfellows.
Conservativism as a form of thought is traditionalist, is primarily concerned with the issue of authority and views the individual organically, as part of a social order.
Liberalism is a rationalistic theory which has little regard for the past, is primarily concerned with liberty and is constructed on the assumption of the autonomy of the individual.
Despite such important differences, these two political ideologies nevertheless share certain affinities with respect to their visions of law and government.
It is this common core of shared understanding about law and government that provides us with an insight into the normativist style in public law.
In order to reveal these foundations we must therefore examine the main tenets of conservative and liberal political thought.
Since there is no strict school nor formula of belief that we may label conservatism or liberalism, an insight into the character of these political ideologies is sought through an examination of particular theorists.
This approach presents us with a particular problem since we must ensure that the representative chosen provides us with a good insight into that political theory.
However, this method also has certain advantages.
By choosing to study one representative, for example, we might obtain a more acute insight into the attempt to present the theory as a coherent whole; that is , we may be able to re-create in a more sympathetic fashion the sense of what connects with what.
By studying one thinker who has contributed much to the development of a certain type of political thought we might, as a result, avoid the problem of simply re-creating mythologies.
The representatives — Michael Oakeshott on conservatism and F. A. Hayek on liberalism — are chosen because they seem to be the most insightful of the modern theorists on the issues which are central to our concerns.
THE CONSERVATIVE DIMENSION
Oakeshott and political thought
Although existing mainly in the form of essays, Michael Oakeshott's work nevertheless constitutes a systematic theory of human conduct and politics.
Some would argue that his voice is unique and denies easy classification; he is ‘a traditionalist with few traditional beliefs, an ‘idealist’ who is more sceptical than many positivists, a lover of liberty who repudiates liberalism, an individualist who prefers Hegel to Locke'.
I Nevertheless, although shedding much of the metaphysical or religious foundations of traditional conservative thought, Oakeshott's work can be seen as an attempt to portray a systematic and authentic account of conservative political thought in the contemporary world.
Oakeshott's first book, Experience and its Modes, was an exploration of the idea of philosophy.
While a formal study of the nature and tasks of philosophy, this book is particularly interesting because it projects a theory of knowledge which subsequently provided the foundation for his studies of politics.
Many of these essays on politics are collected together in Rationalism and Politics (1962).
It is only much later, in On Human Conduct (1975), that Oakeshott provided us with a comprehensive account of his views on government and law.
Nevertheless, despite this work spanning almost half a century, it can be understood as forming a coherent and systematic theory.
His work, therefore, is especially valuable for our purpose.
While Oakeshott addresses basic questions concerning politics, government, and law, these are rooted in a particular theory of knowledge and human conduct.
It is perhaps because of Oakeshott's philosophical approach to his subject that we are able, through the study of his thought, more clearly to discern both the roots of conservative political thought and its links with a particular approach to the issues of public law.
Epistemological foundations of political thought
Much of Oakeshott's writing on politics takes the form of a critique of Rationalism in post-Renaissance political thought.
Rationalist politics, argues Oakeshott, is the enemy of the  traditional, the customary and the habitual.
The Rationalist views the mind as a finely tempered, neutral instrument and never doubts the authority and power of reason.
Political activity consists in bringing ‘the social, political, legal and institutional inheritance of his society before the tribunal of his intellect; the rest is rational administration’.
Politics thus becomes a matter of solving problems in the manner of an engineer by the application of the appropriate technique; it is the ‘politics of felt need’, the ‘politics of perfection’, and the ‘politics of uniformity’.
In order to understand the basis of Oakeshott's critique of Rationalism in politics we must appreciate its epistemological roots.
Oakeshott's analysis has its source in an Hegelian epistemology which enters English philosophy through the work of F. H. Bradley and Bernard Bosanquet.
This Hegelian approach rejects a strict separation between the universal and the particular and it therefore challenges the Cartesian opposition between knowledge and belief.
The Hegelian method postulates the idea of the ‘concrete universal’.
This concrete universal unites universality and particularity and asserts the primacy of experience.
Experience is the only reality.
Working within this Hegelian framework Oakeshott also suggests that experience may be viewed from limited standpoints or ‘modes’.
These epistemological questions are examined in his first book.
Oakeshott's objective in Experience and its Modes is to clarify the nature of philosophy.
His method is to distinguish philosophy, which he equates with experience, from the various modes of experience.
According to Oakeshott, the criterion of experience is the achievement of an absolutely coherent world of experience.
Coherence rather than correspondence is, therefore, the criterion of truth and reality.
And whenever experience is pursued without hindrance it is called philosophy.
While we seek the achievement of a coherent world of experience, we might, nevertheless, at any given moment construct a ‘mode’.
These modes are abstractions; they amount to the organization of the whole of experience from a partial and defective point of view.
Oakeshott examines the most important modes of experience, which he identifies as science, history, and practice, in order to  show how their methods are partial and defective and therefore do not take us nearer the overall coherence of the world of experience which it is the objective of philosophy to pursue.
Oakeshott suggests that each mode of experience constitutes a self-contradiction since the aim it pursues contradicts the criterion of coherence it implicitly acknowledges.
Philosophy, by contrast, does not elaborate a mode of experience but rather requires its surrender.
In Experience and its Modes Oakeshott seeks to demonstrate this by examining history, science, and practice.
In relation to history, for example, he argues that history is a world of thought or ideas and not a world of fact since nothing is simply ‘given’.
It is constructed rather than discovered by the historian.
The only history we have is that which is made by historians.
There is no history independent of experience; the course of events as such is past and is incapable of entering present experience.
Historical experience is partial because of the essential arbitrariness involved in distinguishing one historical event from another.
This defect, which history cannot ever overcome, ultimately renders it defective.
When considering science, Oakeshott's aim is slightly different.
The idea that science is a product of thought, a world of experience rather than pure fact, is not really controversial.
The key issue which Oakeshott addresses in relation to science is the belief that science is experience; that is, the belief that the methods of science are fitted to a reality which exists outside scientific thought.
His target of attack here is positivism, which we can understand as the identification of natural science with knowledge itself.
Oakeshott argues that the positivist fails to identify the essentially abstract character of science as a mode of experience.
He argues that science moves within a world of ideas.
It is the world conceived in terms of quantity.
We do not in scientific experience move from an external world of things to an abstract world of ideas; we always move within a single world of quantitative ideas.
It is the world conceived from an abstract and limited standpoint; the world conceived in terms of measurement.
Science ultimately is self-contradictory precisely because, although it begins with a supposal about reality, it also depends upon a concrete reality; and once scientists admit the necessarily hypothetical character of that knowledge, they cease to be scientists.
Science, then, is not the whole of experience but only an abstract mode of experience.
Oakeshott finally considers the world of practical experience.
He considers the practical, the orientation to action, to be our most familiar mood.
Here he challenges the notion that practice is activity and not thought.
His argument is not simply that action is preceded by thought.
Action is a form of thought.
This does not mean that action is reflective or self-conscious.
But nothing is simply given and immediate.
Everything we do belongs to a world of meaning.
Nothing escapes the criterion of experience.
Practice implies a world of fact and is concerned with the alteration of ‘what is’ to make it conform with an unrealized idea, a ‘to be’.
It is important to recognize, however, that this world of fact is presupposed.
Furthermore, because practice, like any other mode of experience, pursues coherence the ‘to be’ is more coherent than ‘what is’.
Coherence, however, must be understood in terms of value, of ‘what ought to be’.
But this discrepancy between ‘is’ and ‘ought’can never be resolved.
Every practical success is partial since a new problem always emerges demanding a new resolution.
If the discrepancy between ‘is’ and ‘ought’were ever finally resolved in effect the world of practical experience would be destroyed.
Practice, like all other abstract modes of experience, is ultimately self-contradictory.
As mentioned, Oakeshott's objective here is to identify the nature of philosophy.
In Oakeshott's conception philosophy is a radical undertaking; it requires the renunciation of anything less than an absolutely coherent world of experience.
It is an activity that must be distinguished from the various abstract modes of experience.
Philosophy can make no relevant criticism of these modes; philosophy is, for example, an escape from practical living, a refuge from life.
At this stage the reader may be left wondering about the relevance of all this.
It should be emphasized that this rather high-flown detour from our primary thrust in this book has not been made in order to identify the nature of philosophy.
Its main objective is to understand Oakeshott's idea of the modes of experience.
The idea of modes, for example, helps us to appreciate the limitations of a scientific approach to the practical matters of  law and politics.
In particular, Oakeshott's conception provides us with an insightful critique of Dicey's method in Law of the Constitution .
Oakeshott, for example, indicates that the only relevant criticism within a mode is by the methods of that mode.
By invoking the idea of modes, then, we obtain a much sharper distinction between the purposes of the historian and the lawyer than Dicey outlines.
And if the only relevant criticism of the practical experience of law is that of life then we can clearly identify the limitations of seeking to evaluate through the prism of science.
Practical truth is the truth we can live by and act upon.
There is, however, also a more specific reason for considering Oakeshott's modes of experience.
Without understanding this philosophical background it is difficult to appreciate the distinctiveness of Oakeshott's critique of rationalism.
According to Oakeshott the ‘hidden spring’ of rationalism is a doctrine about human knowledge.
In order to clarify this Oakeshott distinguishes between two sorts of knowledge, which he calls technical and practical knowledge.
Technical (or scientific) knowledge is susceptible of precise formulation.
It is the sort of knowledge that may be laid down in rules and can be learned from books.
The technique of cookery is contained in cookery books and the technique of discovery in natural science may be found in the rules of research, observation and verification.
Practical (or traditional) knowledge, however, is not susceptible of formulation of this kind.
It is ‘know how’ which is often expressed in the customary or traditional way of doing things.
No one, for example , supposes that the knowledge that belongs to a good cook is confined to what is or may be written down in the cookery book.
This type of knowledge can neither be taught nor learned.
It exists only in use and may be imparted and acquired through apprenticeship and practice.
Oakeshott argues that these two sorts of knowledge, distinguishable but inseparable, are the twin components of knowledge involved in every concrete human activity.
The error of Rationalism lies in its attempt to reduce the complexity of experience to rules, to technical knowledge.
‘The cookery book’ Oakeshott writes, ‘is not an independently generated beginning from which cooking can spring; it is nothing more than an abstract of somebody's knowledge of how to cook: it is the stepchild, not the parent of the  activity.’
The rules are internal to the practices.
We need something else — some notion of judgment which emerges from practical experience — in order to understand how and when to apply (and modify) the technical rules.
Rationalism in politics
Having considered the various modes of experience (including science and practice) and the different sorts of knowledge involved in concrete human activity, we may now address Oakeshott's argument about the emergence of Rationalism in politics.
His argument is essentially that Rationalist politics developed as a result of the disintegration of traditional polities.
The new rulers and the newly formed political societies of the post-Renaissance period lacked political experience.
This was fertile ground for inculcating the view of politics as technique.
Government comes to be seen as a matter of administration rather than rule and the ideologies of Machiavelli, Locke, Bentham, and Marx provide us with the modern cribs to politics; a political training in default of a political education.
Initially, these cribs were designed to instruct new rulers or new ruling classes.
With the founding of new societies such as the United States, however, the entire political society is founded on a Rationalist politics of abstract principle.
Rationalism, then, is born of political inexperience.
The consequence is expressed by Oakeshott thus:
Like a foreigner or a man out of his social class, he [the Rationalist]is bewildered by a tradition and habit of behaviour of which he knows only the surface; a butler or an observant house-maid has the advantage of him.
And he conceives a contempt for what he does not understand; habit and custom appear bad in themselves, a kind of nescience of behaviour.
And by some strange self-deception, he attributes to tradition (which, of course, is pre-eminently fluid) the rigidity and fixity of character which in fact belongs to ideological politics.
Consequently, the Rationalist is a dangerous and expensive character to have in control of affairs, and he does most damage, not when he fails to master the situation (his politics, of course, are always in terms of mastering situations and surmounting crises), but when he appears to be successful; for the price we pay for each of his apparent successes is a firmer hold of the intellectual fashion of Rationalism upon the whole life of society.
Rationalism, then, has its roots, not in the rise of science or the application of scientific methods to non-scientific phenomena, but with a misunderstanding of reason and the mistaken identification of knowledge with technique.
Rationality, as distinguished from Rationalism, is considered by Oakeshott as ‘faithfulness to the knowledge we have of how to conduct the specific activity we are engaged in’.
This faithfulness does not, however, suggest that there is nothing more to be achieved in activity.
Our knowledge is never fixed and finished but is fluid and our objective in activity is to enhance its coherence.
But what is the activity of politics?
For Oakeshott, politics is ‘the activity of attending to the arrangements of a set of people whom chance or choice have brought together’.
The activity ‘springs neither from instant desires, nor from general principles, but from the existing  behaviours themselves’.
A political ideology, then, should be viewed as an abridgement of a particular tradition.
In itself there is no harm in an abridgement; it is possible ‘that the distorting mirror of an ideology will reveal important hidden passages in the tradition, as a caricature reveals the  potentialities of a face’.
But it is dangerous insofar as the ideology may become a substitute for the tradition — the servant become the master — because politics involves ‘the pursuit, not of a dream, or of a general principle, but of an intimation’.
The emphasis here is on politics as a tradition of behaviour.
Such a tradition of behaviour ‘is neither fixed nor finished; it has no changeless centre to which understanding can anchor itself; there is no sovereign purpose to be perceived or invariable direction to be detected; there is no model to be copied, idea to be realised, or rule to be followed’.
‘In political activity’, writes Oakeshott, ‘men sail a boundless and bottomless sea; there is neither harbour for shelter nor floor for anchorage, neither starting-place nor appointed destination.
The enterprise is to keep afloat on an even keel.’
But this does not mean that the tradition of behaviour is arbitrary and without identity.
The idea that provides it with cohesion is a ‘principle of continuity : authority is diffused between past, present and future; between the old, the new and what is to come.
It is  steady because, though it moves, it is never wholly in motion; and though it is tranquil, it is never wholly at rest.
…Everything is temporary, but nothing is arbitrary.’
Government and law
Oakeshott's analysis in his essays collected in Rationalism in Politics provides us with an insight into a conservative approach to modern politics.
The implications for our understanding of the nature of government and law are not presented in a systematic fashion until On Human Conduct .
In order to situate those views we must begin with Oakeshott's account of the nature of human conduct.
Oakeshott suggests that human conduct, which should be understood as reflective consciousness, is structured in terms of‘practices’.
A practice is ‘a set of considerations, manners, uses, observances, customs, standards, canons, maxims, principles, rules, and offices specifying useful procedures or denoting obligations or duties which relate to human actions and utterances’.
Oakeshott identifies two sorts of practices.
Practices, he says, may be classified as either ‘prudential’ or ‘moral’.
A prudential practice is instrumental in nature, being designed to achieve a specific substantive purpose.
A moral practice, on the other hand, is not instrumental to the achievement of any substantive purpose; it is a practice without extrinsic purpose.
A railway timetable provides a good and simple example of a prudential practice.
Speakers of a common language, by contrast, are bound together by a moral practice.
A moral practice, Oakeshott suggests, is like a language ‘in being an instrument of understanding and a medium of intercourse, in having a vocabulary and syntax of its own, and in being spoken well or ill’.
Human associations, then, can be viewed as being structured in terms of either prudential or moral practices.
Oakeshott calls an association formed of prudential practices an enterprise or transactional association.
This may be contrasted with a moral or rule-based association which is not held together by a common purpose but merely by the authority of common practices.
Members of an enterprise association are joined in seeking a common substantive satisfaction, whether it be profit maximization as in the case of a  company or a change in human behaviour as in the case of the Anti-Bloodsports League.
Enterprise associations may have constitutions, officers, meetings to determine policy, and so on.
But such rules and practices are merely ‘the prudential disposition of the available resources, instrumental to the pursuit of the common purpose and desirable in terms of their utility, which in itself lies in their uninterrupted functionality’.
The character of this mode of association is encapsulated in the notions of purpose, plan, policy, and power.
By way of contrast members of a moral or rule-based association share nothing other than their recognition of the authority of those practices; sharers of a common language, for example, may say what they like so long as they comply with the canons of that language.
Moral association is a human relationship based on ‘the mutual recognition of certain conditions which not only specify right and wrong in conduct, but are prescriptions of obligations’.
The significance of this analysis lies in the fact that Oakeshott believes that ‘civil association’ is a form of moral association.
Civil association must be viewed essentially in terms of law and of the constitutional offices of legislative, executive, and adjudicative rule.
For Oakeshott the two most basic activities of civil association are law-making and ruling.
The office of the legislature is sovereign and is not bound by the sanction of any superior authority, any constitutive purpose, or the approval of subjects.
The ‘apparatus of rule’ consists of adjudication and administering and enforcing the law.
Citizens have an obligation to obey law by virtue of the fact that it is made in accordance with established procedures.
This system of conditions Oakeshott calls respublica .
Respublica does not define or describe a common substantive purpose.
It corresponds to Hobbes's idea of civitas insofar as it entails a sovereign right to make law, an obligation on citizens to obey law, and views civil liberty as based essentially on the subject having the rights both to have the laws enforced and to act without restraint in situations governed by the ‘circumstantial silence of the law’.
Oakeshott does not, however, adopt the Hobbesian idiom  of social contract.
Respublica derives its authority from the continuous acknowledgement of citizens and this lies in the recognition of their general obligation to obey law rather than in their response to specific precepts.
To recognize a rule as a rule is not to recognize it in terms of approval or disapproval.
We recognize it in terms of its authority and we recognize subscription to it as an obligation.
The authority of respublica is the product of history.
It has nothing to do with the utility, justice or rationality of the conditions of respublica .
But what of law within respublica ?
According to Hobbes, law is a command, the expression of the will of the sovereign.
No law can be unjust within his scheme since it is only with the establishment of law that one can  distinguish between right and wrong.
Oakeshott's view of law has certain similarities, but he does not adopt the command theory of law.
In order to appreciate Oakeshott's position we must draw a distinction between lex , a rule understood in terms of its authenticity, and jus , a rule recognized by the rightness of what it prescribes.
Oakeshott argues that legal validity is a matter of authenticity rather than justice, whether justice is viewed in terms of intrinsic rationality, utility, or conformity to some fundamental law.
The basic requirements of the rule of law, therefore, are merely that a system of law, understood as lex , exists as a result of the establishment of legislative, executive and judicial offices.
Law is obligatory because it is authoritative.
Oakeshott, however, also contends that these offices are subject to the morality inherent in the rule of law; what may be termed the jus of lex .
These are the conditions which distinguish a legal order: ‘rules not secret or retrospective, no obligations save those imposed by law, all associates equally and without exception subject to the obligations imposed by law.’
These conditions also entail an independent judiciary which performs a particular type of deliberative role which Oakeshott calls ‘an exercise in retrospective casuistry’.
That is, adjudication is deliberative rather than deductive; it is concerned with the meaning of lex in a contingent situation and ‘meanings are never deduced or found but are always attributed or given’.
Nevertheless, adjudication must not be understood as the arbitrary exercise of the subjective will of the  judge, nor a resolution in terms of social policy nor ‘the common purpose or interest’ of civil association.
In adjudicating, a meaning is attributed to a rule of law which cannot be said to be correct or incorrect.
The conditions to be satisfied are simply that the meaning ‘must be one which lex will tolerate and one which dispels the uncertainty in such a manner as to settle the dispute without immediately provoking further controversy’.
And the jus of lex may be understood in terms of faithfulness to the formal principles inherent in the character of lex .
In Oakeshott's account of the ideal character of civil association, his views on the nature of law and government are rendered explicit.
The civil condition is a moral or non-instrumental practice which is not concerned with substantive considerations.
In these passages we may, in particular, discern Oakeshott's views on the relationship between freedom and authority.
We see, for example, his debt to Hobbes, who placed great emphasis on the idea of authority and sought to detach it from the idea of consent.
We can understand what Oakeshott meant when he stated that ‘Hobbes is not an absolutist precisely because he is an authoritarian’.
Finally, we can see that Oakeshott, while rejecting natural law as a criterion by which to determine the justice of law nevertheless does not accept a purely formal positivist account of law.
Oakeshott recognizes a morality inherent in the rule of law and suggests that to deliberate the jus of lex involves not deduction but a particular kind of moral consideration; that the prescriptions of law ‘should not conflict with a prevailing educated moral sensibility’ of a people.
The State
According to Oakeshott, civil association must be understood as a form of moral association.
Civil association is comprehensive, compulsory, and exclusive since citizens are subject to one sovereign who has authority over all within that jurisdiction and whose laws are obligatory.
It is a rule-articulated association which leaves its citizens free to pursue their own interests; civil association is not constituted for any common purpose.
The key to civil association as a moral association is to be found in the office of rule and the  nature of the rule of law.
Civil association, however, is not sustained by a universal moral reason.
But neither is it a form of enterprise association.
If it were, it would not be an association of equal citizens but of members with differing status; subjects would not be free to pursue their own purposes but would be required to perform particular roles; government would be a matter of management rather than rule; and government would also be provisional rather than unconditional and non-retractable.
The authority of civil association is an endowment which is not traceable to any particular source and which lies only in ‘continuous acknowledgement’ based not on acts of obedience ‘but in the continuous recognition of the obligation to subscribe to its prescriptions because it has a certain shape’.
Oakeshott here is identifying the ideal character of civil association.
In the final essay in On Human Conduct , however, he turns his attention to the question of the place which this ideal character occupies as a practical engagement in history.
That is, he addresses the question of the state.
Oakeshott traces the emergence of the modern state from the transformation of feudal relations into an association defined by law; in other words, through the transformation of a ‘lordly proprietor of a domain' into a single, inalienable sovereign ruler occupying an office of authority.
He argues that our views on the nature of the modern state have been polarized between two modes of identification.
First, there is the conception of the state as societas .
The idea of the state as societas corresponds to civil association in that it provides a vision of the state as a non-purposive, rule-based institution.
This conception of the state underpins the work of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, and Montesquieu.
Secondly, some theorists — including Bacon, Fourier, Marx, and the Webbs — have formed a view of the state as universitas .
Universitas may be identified with enterprise association since it embodies the idea of a managerial state constituted in the pursuit of a set of purposes.
Oakeshott suggests that the state ‘may perhaps be understood as an unresolved tension between the two irreconcilable dispositions  represented by the words societas and universitas ’.
This tension, he continues, ‘has imposed a particular ambivalence upon all the institutions of a modern state and a specific ambiguity upon its vocabulary of discourse: the muddle in which we now live where ‘law’, ‘ruling’, ‘politics’, etc., each have two discrepant meanings'.
Oakeshott believes that this tension ‘is central to the understanding of a modern European state and office of its government’.
Thus, the issue is not whether the state is an association defined in terms of law, but whether this law is instrumental or non-instrumental.
The issue is not whether or not a government is sovereign but whether that government is the custodian of a system of non-instrumental rules or is concerned with the management of a common purpose.
Oakeshott argues that in modern times the conception of the state as universitas has taken hold, primarily as a result of the extension of the executive apparatus of civil rule.
He suggests that this conception of the state, together with the emergence of Rationalism in politics, has subverted the moral integrity of civil association.
In modern times, this has culminated in the emergence of the ‘Servile State’ in which the state is viewed as a corporate productive enterprise, Parliament has been reduced to a market in which private interests clamour for awards, and civil law has been displaced by the administration of instrumental rules and orders.
Oakeshott and conservatism
Where does Oakeshott stand in relation to conservative thought?
Consideration of this question requires us first to examine what is generally understood by conservatism.
Following Samuel Huntington, we can begin to assess this question by identifying three broad and conflicting conceptions of conservatism.
First, there is the aristocratic theory which defines conservatism as ‘the ideology of a specific and unique historical movement: the reaction of the feudal-aristocratic-agrarian classes to the French Revolution, liberalism, and to the rise of the bourgeoisie at the end of the eighteenth century and during the first half of the nineteenth century’.
This conception views conservatism as a historically  specific movement associated with feudalism and the landed interest and opposed to industrialism, democracy, and individualism.
Secondly, there is a situational conception of conservatism.
This conception arises out of a ‘distinct but recurring type of historical situation in which a fundamental challenge is directed at established institutions and in which the supporters of those institutions employ conservative ideology in their defense’.
The essence of this conception is the ‘passionate affirmation of the value of existing institutions’.
Thirdly, there is an autonomous definition of conservatism in which conservatism is not necessarily connected to any economic group and is not rooted in a particular historical configuration.
Under this conception conservatism is an autonomous system of ideas defined in terms of universal values such as justice, order, balance, and moderation.
Huntington argues that, despite the different focus adopted by these three conceptions, they all basically agree as to the content of conservatism as an ideology.
That common content, Huntington argues, is found in the basic elements of Edmund Burke's thought.
These basic elements are as follows:
1.
Human beings are religious creatures and religion is the foundation of civil society.
2.
Society is the natural, organic product of slow historical growth.
3.
Humans are creatures of instinct and emotion as well as reason.
Prudence, prejudice, experience, and habit are better guides than logic, abstractions, and metaphysics.
Truth exists not in universal propositions but in concrete experience.
4.
The community is superior to the individual.
Rights derive from duties.
5.
Social organization is complex and always includes a variety of classes, orders and groups.
Individuals, except in an ultimate moral sense, are unequal.
6.
A presumption exists in favour of any settled scheme of government against any untried project.
Huntington's argument is that the theory of conservatism to be preferred is that which most adequately and completely explains Burke's ideology.
He goes on to argue that the situational theory, the defence of established institutions, most closely meets these criteria.
While Huntington has identified much of what is generally understood as conservative thought there is one aspect, which is of particular importance for our task, which he seems to underemphasize.
This aspect is brought out by Robert Eccleshall who suggests that ‘the function of conservative ideology is to obscure the nature of power relationships by presenting them as permanent and desirable features of human life’.
Eccleshall points to the fact that Burke traced the horrors of revolutionary France to an unveiling of illusions:
But the age of chivalry is gone.
That of sophisters, economists, and calculators, has succeeded…
All the pleasing illusions, which made power gentle and obedience liberal, which harmonised the different shades of life…are to be dissolved by this new conquering empire of light and reason.
All the decent drapery of life is to be rudely torn off.
This theme of the mystification of power is a distinctive hallmark of conservatism.
We can see the importance of the theme in Bagehot's analysis of the constitution where he distinguishes between the ‘dignified’ and the ‘efficient’functions of the constitution.
And we see it also in the myth of the ancient constitution founded on the immemorial, artificial reason of the common law.
This mystifying theme is particularly important in distinguishing conservatism from liberalism.
Some aspects of the mainstream conservative themes can be seen reflected in Oakeshott's work.
Oakeshott's distinction between technical and practical knowledge, for example, in certain respects parallels Burke's distinction between speculative reason and practical reason.
Many have thus latched on to Oakeshott's use of tradition to identify him as a Burkean conservative.
When, however, one examines Oakeshott's political writing in the context of his philosophical work it is clear that his notion of tradition is different from that of Burke.
In Paul Franco's words:
Oakeshott's notion of tradition arises out of a genuinely philosophical analysis of human activity and in no way presupposes (as I think Burke's appeal to tradition does) a belief in the wisdom or rationality of history.
…Oakeshott's conservatism does not appeal to any sort of metaphysical or religious beliefs for sanction or support; nor does it hark back to a more integrated and traditional form of society.
While we have examined Oakeshott as a conservative thinker therefore we must be careful to distinguish him from the religious conservatism of Burke and from the mainstream forms of conservatism which Huntington identified in the aristocratic and situational theories as ideological defences of the ancien régime or of established institutions.
In Huntington's scheme Oakeshott's theory is an attempt to develop an autonomous or philosophical theory of conservatism.
This may be particularly important when we come to assess the relationships between the normativist style in public law and the political theory of conservatism.
The value of Oakeshott's political theory
In Chapter 2 I suggested that the approach to be adopted in this book was interpretative, empirical, critical, and historical.
Oakeshott's political theory is both hermeneutical and historical and, on that basis, is likely to provide much of value to our exercise.
Oakeshott's theory in fact draws on both Hegel and Hobbes to provide an analysis of politics, law, and the state.
From Hegel he derives his basic manner of thinking, asserting the primacy of experience.
From Hobbes, whose Leviathan he describes as ‘the greatest…masterpiece of political philosophy written in the English language’, he inherits the authoritarian aspects of his theory, the outlines of his distinction between state and society, and the rejection of the view that civil association must derive its authority from the inherent justice of some ‘higher’ law or a set of fundamental values.
We see the importance of Hobbes for Oakeshott when we appreciate Hobbes's achievement in effectively rejecting rationalism with his replacement of reason by will as the foundation of political authority.
For Hobbes, legitimate authority derived only from an act of will by the person under an obligation.
Although individual  consent was of central importance to Hobbes, he did not believe that the authority of law rested on the fact that it promoted a desirable objective or that it reflected a profound truth.
Rather, the authority of law rested solely on the fact that it was promulgated by the authorized ruler.
And for Hobbes the idea of the sovereignty of the ruler was paramount.
Oakeshott rejects the view that the Hobbesian conception of sovereignty entails absolutism or despotism; it is simply a logical necessity.
For Oakeshott, modern collectivism is not to be traced to Hobbesian authoritarianism.
It is rather to be traced to the survival of feudal notions of lordship.
Of particular importance for our purposes is Oakeshott's attempt to reconcile Hobbesian principles, which are closely associated with utilitarianism and legal positivism, with his conception of law.
Oakeshott's political theory may in fact be viewed as an ambitious attempt to provide a framework in which H. L. A. Hart's normative version of legal positivism may be synthesized with Lon Fuller's analysis of the internal morality of law.
This attempt may be seen primarily in Oakeshott's account of how the apparatus of rule acquires authority and in his view that the relationship between state and society is shaped by the intrinsic moral character of law.
Oakeshott does not agree with Hart's views either about the need for a ‘minimum content of natural law’ or that there can be a single ultimate rule of recognition in the sense of an unconditional and unquestionable norm from which all others derive their authority.
For Oakeshott the authority of respublica does not arise from the mere existence of a rule of recognition.
But neither does it depend on some higher authority or a social contract.
Its authority is subscribed to in conduct.
It is in this way that Oakeshott shows that governmental authority is distinguishable from the mere possession of superior power by the State.
This insightful analysis is, nevertheless, not without its difficulties.
Oakeshott's rejection of any attempts to found civil association on  a legitimizing principle is a critical aspect of his theory.
It is essential not only to the establishment of unconditional authority but also because the lack of any foundational purpose lies at the heart of his distinction between civil and enterprise association.
But, having constituted a sovereign office of legislature, he does not follow Hobbes in holding that the authority of law rests solely on authorization.
The authority of law is, as we have seen, provided by what Oakeshott called the jus of lex .
It is, however, unclear how the rule of law qualification is established.
Oakeshott recognizes that the ‘most difficult feature of the civil condition to identify and get into place has been the law’.
His attempt to achieve this by incorporating an intrinsic moral quality into the concept of lex , however, is not entirely convincing.
He states:
What this mode of association requires for determining the jus of a law is not a set of abstract criteria but an appropriately argumentative form of discourse in which to deliberate the matter; that is, a form of moral discourse, not concerned generally with right and wrong in conduct, but focused narrowly upon the kind of conditional obligations a law may impose, undistracted by prudential and consequential considerations, and insulated from the spurious claims of conscientious objectors, of minorities for exceptional treatment and, so far as may be, from current moral idiocies.
Earlier in his essay on the rule of law Oakeshott had suggested that to deliberate the jus of lex is ‘to invoke a particular kind of moral consideration:…the negative and limited consideration that the prescriptions of law should not conflict with a prevailing educated moral sensibility capable of distinguishing between the conditions of ‘virtue’, the conditions of moral association (’ good conduct’), and those which are of such a kind that they should be imposed by law (’justice’) '.
What this requires in practice, however, remains ambiguous.
Ambiguity is also a feature of Oakeshott's discussion of the nature of civil association.
Is there in fact such a clear distinction to be maintained between civil association or societas and enterprise association or universitas ?
Oakeshott recognizes that these are ideal characters and that the character of the modern European state is essentially ambivalent.
But he warns that the ideas of civil association and enterprise association cannot be understood as  complementary characteristics; they each stand for an independent, self-sustaining mode of association.
Critics, however, have argued that it is difficult to envisage any conception of a state which does not incorporate a purposive quality.
One prime responsibility of all states is the conduct of foreign policy.
Yet this seems to be a purposive activity.
If this argument is correct then the critical distinction between civil and enterprise association would appear not to be a qualitative distinction but merely one of degree.
However, once this is conceded the basis of Oakeshott's theory is challenged since he views these two forms of association as categorially distinct moral conditions and as shaping two wholly different manners of government and two profoundly different characters of human identity.
Some have gone even further to suggest that, since people are purposive beings, all practices, including moral practices, are purposive in nature: ‘a practice without a point is an empty ritual’.
This seems to take the issue too far since Oakeshott clearly has in mind a sense of purpose which imposes a relatively specific objective on individuals.
The rules of the road, for example, have a purpose since they are designed to prevent collisions.
But they do not impose specific destinations on drivers.
Rather they are considerations which should be taken into account by drivers in seeking to pursue their own destinations.
Nevertheless the distinction is not straightforward.
There is a further category of difficulty with Oakeshott's theory.
This concerns the idea that politics is rooted in a tradition of behaviour.
This idea of the centrality of tradition raises three issues.
First, we need to ask: whose tradition? which society?
Is it the collegiate world of the Oxbridge common room?
Or the society constituted by the class that traditionally was born to rule?
Perhaps it is English society in general?
Or even the whole of Britain, including England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland?
Even if we can identify the relevant society, we also need to be able to identify the content of that political tradition.
Secondly, and bearing in mind the ambiguity of the distinction between the two forms of association, we must ask whether the political tradition of twentieth-century Britain is similarly deserving of respect.
In modern Britain the State is generally acknowledged to have kept the peace and retained the allegiance of its citizens during a period of great social change.
We might therefore ask whether, even within the framework of Oakeshott's thought, this should be considered an achievement of great importance — not simply prudentially but also morally.
Finally, one major gap in Oakeshott's theory is that it says nothing about the fundamental issue of how societas may be reconstituted in the modern age.
Without this, Oakeshott's views might be felt only to betray ‘a tone of sentimental nostalgia for the pre-industrial age in which the ideals of societas were understood to have had social and political correlatives in some objective form of social life’.
These criticisms of Oakeshott's conception of tradition should not be ignored.
But it is important to recognize, as has been mentioned, that Oakeshott does not adopt the Burkean idea of tradition as providing stability and sees tradition as a contingent, fluid process.
Within Oakeshott's philosophical notion of tradition there are ambiguities, conflicts, and choice.
Furthermore, Oakeshott's notion of tradition does contain within it — in the idea of coherence — criteria of self-reflection.
As Oakeshott puts it: ‘A tradition of behaviour is not a groove within which we are destined to grind out our helpless and unsatisfying lives’.
It is important to consider these ambiguities in Oakeshott's theory and the criticisms that are made of his theory.
Such points, nevertheless, should not detract from the overall value of his political theory.
Oakeshott's theory in general provides us with profound insights not only into the nature of government and law, but more especially in helping us to make sense of the British constitution.
THE LIBERAL DIMENSION
The other major intellectual source of the normativist style in public law is liberalism.
The values of classical liberalism assert the dignity of the individual, the primacy of individual freedom, the virtues of markets, and the requirement of limited government operating under the rule of law.
While Oakeshott can be viewed as having embraced certain tenets of a liberal philosophy he is highly critical of the rationalistic and atomistic nature of liberal thought.
In the work of F. A. Hayek, however, liberal values are articulated and defended within an intellectual framework which qualifies the rationalism and atomism of classical liberalism.
This makes Hayek's work particularly useful for the purpose of laying bare the ideological foundations of the normativist style.
Hayek and political thought
Friedrich von Hayek's early career was devoted entirely to economic theory.
Although born and educated in Vienna in 1931 he was appointed Tooke Professor of Economic Science in London University where he remained until accepting a Chair of Social and Moral Sciences at the University of Chicago in 1950.
During the 1920s and 1930s Hayek's economic theory can be understood as an attempt to construct a theory of money, capital, prices, and production to rival that of Keynes.
By the time of the depression years of the mid-1930s, however, Keynesian theories were triumphant both politically and in the universities.
Hayek nevertheless continued with these themes in the post-war period; in particular, a critique of socialist economic planning provided a major theme in his post-war work.
Through his technical economic theories Hayek gradually began to draw more general theoretical conclusions.
He explained his interest in moral, political, and legal issues as that of ‘an economist who discovered that if he was to draw from his technical knowledge conclusions relevant to the public issues of our time, he had to make up his mind on many questions to which economics  did not supply an answer’.
During the post-war period Hayek has drawn out some of the assumptions underpinning his economic theorizing and developed them into a general theory of society.
The keystone of his work not only in economics but also in political and legal theory is the idea of ‘spontaneous order’.
This concept views human society as being equipped with an internal gyroscope which establishes a natural ordering mechanism in society.
The notion of spontaneous order was first developed by Hayek in relation to markets.
But he later applied this insight to the central issues of political and legal theory.
These views, laid out primarily in The Constitution of Liberty and his three-volume work,Law, Legislation and Liberty , provide us with a powerful insight into the liberal theory of government and law.
Epistemological foundations of Hayek's thought
Hayek's epistemological views have certain similarities to those of Oakeshott.
Hayek accepts the primacy of practice in the construction of human knowledge.
It is this epistemological belief which provides the foundation for his concept of ‘spontaneous order’.
Hayek formulated this concept essentially as a result of his inquiries into the nature of order in society.
He distinguishes between two different types of order, which he calls taxis and cosmos .
Taxis refers to the kind of order which is made and which is imposed from without; it is the order of an organization.
The vision of social order which results from taxis rests on ‘a relation of command and obedience, or a hierarchical structure of the whole of society in which the will of superiors, and ultimately of some single supreme authority, determines what each individual must do’.
Cosmos refers to the kind of order which is grown and which results from an equilibrium set up from within.
Cosmos is spontaneous order.
Social order from the perspective of cosmos is based on ‘the discovery that there exist orderly structures which are  the product of the action of many men but are not the result of human design’.
Hayek argues that the belief that social order is based on taxis is the result of the growth of ‘constructivist rationalism’.
Constructivist rationalism, which Hayek associates with the thought of Descartes, Hobbes, Rousseau, and Bentham, is founded on a belief that social institutions are, or ought to be, the product of deliberate design.
The errors of constructivist rationalism stem from the belief that reason alone enables human beings to construct society anew.
Hayek points to the fact that many social institutions which are essential to the successful pursuit of our aims are the result of customs, habits, and practices which are not the product of design or invention and which, although they govern thought and action, are often not brought to consciousness.
Further, Hayek argues that constructivist rationalists are guilty of ‘the synoptic delusion’; that is, the belief that all relevant social facts are capable of being known to some one mind, and that it is possible to construct from this knowledge of the particulars a desirable social order.
Spontaneous social orders, by contrast, are evolutionary in nature and are not the product of rational design.
Hayek gives as examples of spontaneous social orders the growth of language, morals, law, and markets.
Since such orders are not the product of a directing intelligence they cannot be said to have a particular purpose.
Furthermore, participants in such orders may utilize and develop a heritage of knowledge which they may never be capable of grasping as a whole.
Take as an example the formation of market exchange relations.
Hayek argues that these are self-generating structures which have a tendency to equilibrium.
Markets are thus superior mechanisms to central planning systems because they have in-built discovery procedures through the ability of the pricing system to register preferences.
Planning systems, by contrast, are defective precisely because they are based on the synoptic delusion.
Hayek believes that all spontaneous social orders have these knowledge-bearing or information-carrying characteristics; that is, precisely the characteristics which Adam Smith had in mind when he referred to the ‘invisible hand’ of the market.
Finally, spontaneous orders are superior insofar as the Darwinian principle of natural selection applies to them.
Since they are the products of continuous evolution, the practices which survive are those which enhance the reproductive fitness of those groups.
We can see certain similarities between Hayek's approach and the conservative philosophy of Oakeshott.
Oakeshott's attack on rationalism, which incidentally included an attack on the doctrinal nature of Hayek's The Road to Serfdom , is transformed by Hayek — who utilizes Popper's distinction between a naive and a critical rationalism — into an attack on constructivist rationalism.
By deflecting Oakeshott's arguments into a critique of constructivist rationalism Hayek seeks to maintain a rationalist approach which may avoid many of Oakeshott's criticisms.
Hayek wishes to do so because he is not simply a traditionalist and is seeking to harness his insights to the task of providing a modern, rational reconstruction of liberalism.
Through his use of the concept of ‘spontaneous order’ Hayek avoids an extreme atomistic individualism, often associated with classical liberalism, since the concept of spontaneous order recognizes the existence of an order in society which is formed by the social matrix.
Furthermore, Hayek's concept of ‘spontaneous order’ has much in common with Oakeshott's idea of ‘moral association’.
But there remain important differences.
Hayek, for example, tends to trace the problems of constructivist rationalism to the rise in authority of the natural sciences and hence takes the form of a critique of ‘scientism’.
Oakeshott, however, considers this conception of ‘scientism’ to be mistaken since, as we have seen, he does not take the view that science is a separate kind of experience.
The error of rationalism, in Oakeshott's argument, does not arise from the application of scientific methods to non-scientific material, but rather results from a mistaken understanding of the nature of reason.
Perhaps more importantly, however, Hayek's concept of spontaneous order is inextricably linked to the  notion of personal liberty.
This may be seen most clearly in his views on law and government.
Law and government
For Hayek, law consists of rules of just conduct; that is, of ‘purpose-independent rules which govern the conduct of individuals towards each other , are intended to apply to an unknown number of further instances and, by defining a protected domain of each, enable an order of actions to form itself wherein the individuals can make feasible plans’ Hayek suggests that law is coeval with society.
It therefore precedes the emergence of the State and is certainly not the creation of a governing authority.
Hayek argues that ‘an order of the complexity of modern society can be designed neither as a whole, nor by shaping each part separately without regard to the rest, but only by consistently adhering to certain principles throughout a process of evolution’.
This form of law, called nomos , is the law of liberty.
Nomos is essentially the product of spontaneous growth.
It is perhaps most clearly reflected in the continuous, adaptive processes of the common law.
Although this idea of law as a general, abstract, and non-purposive body of rules may be equated with the idea of common law, Hayek does recognize that, even with a system compatible with the ideals of nomos , there is a role for legislation.
While judges can continually work to improve the system, legislative intervention will occasionally be necessary, either to extricate the law from the dead ends to which gradual evolution may occasionally lead, or to deal with altogether new problems.
Legislation, however, is a dangerous invention: ‘It gave into the hands of men an instrument of great power which they needed to achieve some good, but which they have not yet learned so to control that it may not produce great evil’.
One of the errors attributable to constructivist rationalism has been to view law as a prescription posited by authority; that is, of equating law with legislation.
This view of the nature of law Hayek calls thesis .
With the emergence of thesis the idea of law, which in the sense of nomos was viewed as a constraint on power, is transformed into an instrument for the use of power.
Hayek views the growing dominance of the conception of law as thesis as posing a grave threat to liberty.
This dominance in modern  times is attributed by Hayek to the success of the Philosophical Radicals of the nineteenth century in replacing the ideal of government under law with the ideal of a government controlled by a popular assembly and free to take any action of which that assembly approved.
As a result, ‘governmental assemblies, whose chief activities were of the kind which ought to be limited by law, became able to command whatever they pleased simply by calling their commands ‘law’ '.
This conception of law as thesis is therefore a product of constructivist rationalism: it is born of the belief that law is the result of human design; that order in society is founded on the conception of law as taxis ; and that the political authority is capable of acquiring all the knowledge it needs in order to exercise its absolutist powers wisely.
Conservatism or liberalism?
There are clear parallels between Hayek the economist, concerned with the analysis of market and command economic systems, and Hayek the political theorist, attentive to the conditions of order and freedom in society.
Just as markets, with their knowledge-gathering characteristics, are inherently superior to centralized planning systems so also is the common law, with its ability to respond to changing circumstances, more likely to maintain order and freedom than a central legislature responding to the concerns of transient majorities.
We may also discern close similarities between Hayek and Oakeshott on law and government.
The views of both theorists seem to be based on the distinction between a law-governed nomocratic social order and a purpose-governed teleocractic order.
So wherein lies the difference between conservatism and liberalism?
Some insight may be gleaned by comparing Oakeshott's ‘On being Conservative’ with Hayek's ‘Why I am not a Conservative’.
In the former essay Oakeshott reiterates his belief that the business of government is simply to rule.
This involves the specific and limited activity of establishing and enforcing general rules of conduct which enable people to pursue their activities with the minimum degree of frustration.
Oakeshott recognizes that this  sentiment may be shared by liberals.
Liberals, however, quite unnecessarily seek to justify this sentiment by appealing to highfalutin metaphysical beliefs such as the belief that private property is a natural right or that freedom of choice is an absolute value.
According to Oakeshott, something less pretentious will do; viz., ‘that we are not children in statu pupillari but adults who do not consider themselves under any obligation to justify their preference for making their own choices’.
Oakeshott here is in effect emphasizing the conservative distrust of abstract ideas and theories; conservatism ‘is not a creed or doctrine, but a disposition’.
It is on this specific point that we see the basis of disagreement.
Hayek argues that a consequence of their distrust of abstract theories is that conservatives are unable to offer any alternative to the direction in which social forces are moving; they look to the past rather than the future.
Furthermore, because of this distrust of abstraction the conservative ‘neither understands those spontaneous forces on which a policy of freedom relies nor possesses a basis for formulating principles of policy’.
Hayek, for example, believes that conservatives deceive themselves when they blame the evils of our time on democracy.
Democracy and unlimited government may be connected.
However, it is not democracy but unlimited government that is objectionable.
‘It is not who governs,’ contends Hayek, ‘but what government is entitled to do that seems to me the essential problem.’
It is on the basis of these distinctions that Hayek seeks to avoid certain criticisms that have been applied to Oakeshott.
As we have seen, in taking the philosophical approach which he does, it is not clear precisely how, having established the existence of a sovereign office of legislature, Oakeshott seeks to establish the rule of law qualification on the exercise of this power.
Similarly, having identified the ideal characters of societas and universitas and recognized the existence of both modes in the history of the European state, it is not clear precisely why Oakeshott comes down in favour of societas .
By contrast, Hayek justifies the moral superiority of societas by taking a clear ideological line in which the idea of liberty is established as the predominant value in his philosophy.
Furthermore by taking an ideological rather than merely a dispositive approach he is able to lay down principles for the reconstruction of societas in the modern age.
It is to this exercise that we now turn.
The liberal ideal of constitutionalism
In The Constitution of Liberty Hayek aims ‘to picture an ideal, to show how it can be achieved, and to explain what its realization would mean in practice’.
As the title itself indicates, that ideal is liberty.
Liberty for Hayek has a specific meaning.
It means simply freedom from coercion by others and it is achieved when a sphere of private autonomy is created.
This idea of liberty is not a natural condition but is created and preserved by the ‘rule of law’.
At the core of the constitution of liberty, then, lies the concept of the rule of law.
Hayek makes this plain when he states that ‘freedom under the law…is the chief concern of this book’.
In The Road to Serfdom Hayek wrote: ‘Nothing distinguishes more clearly conditions in a free country from those in a country under arbitrary government than the observance in the former of the great principles known as the Rule of Law.’
Recognizing that that concept can carry a broad range of meanings Hayek, in The Constitution of Liberty , seeks to explicate these principles.
For Hayek the rule of law is a meta-legal doctrine or a political ideal which serves to impose a limitation on all legislation.
Formally it requires, first, that laws be general and abstract rules; that is, that they are addressed to all as contrasted to specific commands to specific persons.
The chief safeguard for freedom here is that these rules apply to the governors as well as the governed.
Secondly, this concept requires that laws be known and certain.
Hayek argues that this requirement is particularly important for economic activity.
He doubts ‘whether the significance which the certainty of the law has for the smooth and efficient working of economic life can be exaggerated’ and suggests that ‘there is probably no single factor which has contributed to the greater prosperity of the Western world compared with the Orient than the relative certainty  of the law which in the West had early been achieved’.
A third requirement is that these general rules be complemented by the equality of all before the law.
This is liberalism's concession to democracy: ‘Equality of the general rules of law and conduct…is the only kind of quality conducive to liberty and the only equality which we can secure without destroying liberty’.
These requirements of generality, certainty, and equality of law are vital for the protection of liberty.
But in addition to the political ideal of the rule of law Hayek also recognizes the need for a set of principles of institutional design to ensure that the power of the state could not be exercised in such a way as to compromise individual liberty.
He argues the need for: a written constitution which is compatible with the rule of law; the separation of legislative, executive, and judicial power so that a system of checks and balances will be in place; a bicameral legislature, to provide an additional check; a federal system of government to protect against big, centralized government; a bill of rights which will protect a sphere of private autonomy; judicial review to ensure an effective mechanism of protection; and specific limitations on legislative and administrative discretion.
In Law, Legislation and Liberty Hayek went even further and suggested that, since legislation proper ‘should not be governed by interests but by opinion’, what is required ‘is an assembly of men and women elected at a relatively mature age for fairly long periods, such as fifteen years’.
Hayek is thus not content to leave the protection of liberty to the nobility of spirit of rulers.
His general objective in The Constitution of Liberty was ‘to restate…the traditional doctrine of liberal constitutionalism’.
As we have seen, the realization of this objective requires that a broad variety of mechanisms are institutionalized so as to ensure that the business of government is conducted in accordance with the rule of law.
Hayek's theory therefore offers both a critique of contemporary arrangements and a programme for realizing an alternative vision.
Hayek and liberalism
The value of Hayek's work as a representative theory of liberalism lies for us in its rigour and its comprehensiveness and in the fact that it is acutely aware of the importance of law.
Furthermore, although Hayek's is a particular theory within the tradition of liberalism, the key themes which pervade his work — the supreme principle of liberty, the character of state power, and the relationship between the individual and the state — are themes which are central to the tenets of liberalism.
In addition, despite the various differences amongst liberal theories, there is one theme of particular importance for our project on which many liberal theories seem agreed.
This is the notion that, in order to protect the supremacy of the liberal conception of liberty, law must be non-purposive in character and must maintain neutrality with respect to different conceptions of the good life.
During the last 20 years major contributions have been made to liberal political philosophy.
The most widely acclaimed of these has been John Rawls's A Theory of Justice , which was published in 1971 and rapidly assumed the status of a contemporary classic.
Indeed it was this book more than any other which caused Laslett to retract his statement of 1956 that ‘political philosophy is dead’
In A Theory of Justice Rawls seeks a method for rationally determining the principles of justice.
He argues that the principles of justice are those which would be chosen by a rational agent situated behind a ‘veil of ignorance’.
The veil of ignorance operates so that the agent will not know his or her natural endowments, social situation, or conception of the good.
Rawls argues that agents in this situation, which he calls ‘the original position’, will agree two fundamental principles of justice.
These principles, in order of priority, are, first, that each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for all and, secondly, that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both (a ) to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged and (b ) attached to offices and positions open to all  under conditions of fair equality of opportunity.
In the second part of his book, Rawls seeks to place flesh on these abstract principles by examining the basic structure of society that ideally satisfies them.
The answer he arrives at is a ‘constitutional democracy’ which comprises a government which preserves equal basic liberties and promotes equality of opportunity and an economic system based on a market mechanism.
Rawls's work reaches somewhat different conclusions concerning justice and equality to that of Hayek.
Following the work of Rawls, however, there has been a profusion of important contributions to liberal political philosophy.
Theorists such as Nozick, Dworkin, and Ackerman have all addressed major issues of equality, rights, and justice and do not necessarily agree with Rawls's work.
Nozick, for example, formulates an entitlement theory of justice, in which a person's property holdings are just if they are acquired through some just act of original acquisition or by some just transfer.
From these principles he argues that the only form of the state which can be morally justified is a minimal state which is limited to the protection of citizens against force, theft, and fraud and to the enforcement of contracts.
Nozick argues that any more extensive state, such as one which seeks justice through redistribution or prohibits certain activities for people's own good, will violate persons' rights and is morally unjustified.
These conclusions thus accord more with Hayek's views on distributive justice than with those of Rawls.
Much of this recent literature has spawned a mass of critical commentary.
Such studies have been carried out both from within liberal premises and from various critics of liberalism.
I do  not wish to underestimate the genuine differences which exist between writers such as Hayek and Dworkin, and Rawls and Nozick.
What is interesting for our purposes, however, is to highlight those factors that provide a common thread within this body of work and which serves to identify the writers as working within a tradition of liberalism.
There is, for example, an important dimension which theories as apparently divergent as those of Rawls and Nozick share in common ; namely, their method.
Both theories are exercises in analytical moral philosophy which aspire to provide rational principles to support particular conceptions of just social arrangements.
Both seek to argue logically from certain abstract premisses.
Rawls constructs his model so as to argue for the primacy of an equality of needs.
Nozick develops a model which enables him to make primary a principle with respect to entitlement.
Once the major premisses have been established the principles fall into place.
The main point, however, is not simply that the premisses are largely matters of choice.
What is particularly interesting is the similarity in the method which they use to justify their principles.
The method used is highly formal, abstract and individualistic.
MacIntyre brings out its individualism thus:
It is…clear that for both Nozick and Rawls a society is composed of individuals, each with his or her own interest, who then come together and formulate common rules of life.
…Individuals are thus in both accounts primary and society secondary, and the identification of individual interests is prior to, and independent of, the construction of any moral or social bonds between them.
This conception of the individual as autonomous and as existing prior to, and separate from, society is a common characteristic of liberal theories.
It also tends to influence the shape of other aspects of the theory.
When models are constructed from such premisses, for example, there is a tendency to view government as a restrictive and even as a repressive agency.
Such models also share an essentially procedural conception of justice and view the primary function of the state as that of securing a framework of law through which individuals may pursue their own particular goals.
In the work of Hayek and Nozick the limited role of the state as umpire is quite explicit.
In Rawls it can be seen from his model of ‘pure procedural justice’ and the assertion of an equal right to liberty as the primary principle.
And in Dworkin it is evident in his views that ‘government must be neutral on what might be called the question of the good life…[and]political decisions must be, so far as possible, independent of any particular conception of the good life, or of what gives value to life’.
What unites such theorists, then, is their conception of the individual, the assertion of a particular conception of liberty as the supreme principle, a set of broadly shared attitudes on the character of state power and the relationship between the individual and the state, and an understanding that law should be non-purposive in character.
The most basic criticism of this common liberal method is generally to be found in the view that humans are social beings who cannot be abstracted from a particular social and historical context in the manner that such theories propose.
In the words of F. H. Bradley — someone who held views similar in many respects to Oakeshott — if we abstract those features which result from social context the exercise becomes ‘a theoretical attempt to isolate what cannot be isolated’.
This is the view that is echoed by the communitarian critics who argue that the agency of reflection of liberal theories is that of the ‘unencumbered self’ and that this model fails to appreciate the constitutive character of the self.
Finally, we should not leave the discussion of Hayek and Liberalism without noting certain recent developments in liberal  theories which are particularly directed to the analysis of government and law and which, to some extent, derive their inspiration from Hayek's pioneering work.
I am referring here to the recent growth in economic analysis of politics and law.
An influential strand in the economic analysis of law seeks to transmit a particular message.
This message is presented in a slightly different manner by different writers.
In its most general and powerful form, however, the message is that, despite differences in vocabulary, detail, and specific subject-matter, there is an underlying unity to the various fields of the common law.
This unifying character is to be found in the method of the common law.
The common law method is such, it is argued, that there is a natural tendency for common law rules to produce efficient solutions to disputes.
Through this type of literature, generally based on the Chicago school of economics, we find the utilization of economic methodologies in support of Hayek's basic point about the common law as a spontaneous order.
Developments in the economic analysis of politics have perhaps had an even greater general significance than contributions to the economic analysis of law.
These developments have taken a specific form through the theory of ‘public choice’.
Public choice theory arose from the fact that, although many welfare economists were concerned to examine the phenomenon of ‘market failure’, very few economists seemed to show an interest in applying their techniques to institutions other than the market; and, in particular, to political institutions.
Public choice theory seeks to undertake this task.
The theory challenges the assumption of orthodox welfare economics that the existence of market failure is sufficient reason for governmental intervention.
It does so by applying assumptions about the utility maximizing behaviour of individuals to the arena of governmental decision-making and, as a result, challenges the assumption that government will act efficiently and in the public interest.
Public choice theory has developed both analytical and constructive dimensions.
The analytical dimension provides us with theories of bureaucracy and politics.
The theory of bureaucracy argues that  bureaucracies have an in-built expansionary motivation which will result in operational  inefficiencies .
The theory of politics argues, on the supply side, that political parties, in bidding for support, end up by promising more than they can deliver and that, on the demand side, this leads to inflated expectations since the electorate have incentives to vote for increased services because they do not pay for them directly and because there may be little correlation between tax payments and government benefits.
This analytical dimension of public choice theory therefore seeks to demonstrate that ‘governmental failure’ exists on a major scale.
This is where the constructive dimension comes in.
The constructive dimension argues that, in order to remedy government failure, it is essential to reform the framework of rules within which the business of politics is conducted.
There has therefore emerged, within the framework of public choice, a theory arguing specifically for the establishment of constitutional limits to the scope of governmental action.
The economic agenda of constitutional design has been called ‘constitutional political economy’.
What is interesting to note about both the theory of public choice and Chicago School economic analysis of law is that their analyses, although wrapped up in the analytical apparatus of modern economics, reach more or less identical conclusions to Hayek.
Nevertheless, these economic theories of politics and law are a significant contribution to the understanding of liberal theories.
In addition to reinforcing our general conceptions concerning the underpinnings of liberalism, economic theories, which are based on the assumption of ‘rational economic man’, highlight especially the notion of human beings as self-regarding creatures which underpins liberal theories in general.
These economic theories are also significant because ultimately they are founded on the objective of developing a new science of politics.
They can therefore be viewed as an attempt to translate the methodological rigours of economic science to the sphere of political behaviour in which, as we have  seen, the attempt to develop a scientific approach has not been entirely successful.
Tensions within liberalism
Classical liberalism has been subjected to severe criticism both from conservatives and communitarians.
Such criticisms generally take the form of a challenge to the moral status of liberal theory.
The conservative critique along such lines argues that liberalism is morally bankrupt.
Liberals advocate the promotion of a free rather than a just society, based on the argument that, while we know what freedom is, we have no generally accepted notion of justice.
But conservatives claim that this sort of argument leads to the destruction of the moral foundations on which the social order is built: ‘men cannot for long tolerate a sense of spiritual meaningless in their individual lives, so they cannot for long accept a society in which power, privilege, and property are not distributed according to some morally meaningful criteria’.
The conservative critique thus argues that the type of order which liberalism envisages ‘tends to produce a sort of mindless hedonism which renders it defenceless against more vital tyrannies’.
The communitarian variant of this type of criticism is related.
It suggests that the attempt to impose a neutral character on the liberal state and to purge its law of any substantive content can only serve to erode those moral and religious foundations which are essential for the survival of liberalism.
There is, however, a more basic criticism of liberal theories.
This criticism challenges the view of human nature and the human condition constructed by liberal theories.
Liberal theories, it is suggested, start with the assumption of the priority of the individual over society and in particular the assertion of the primacy of individual rights.
Such liberal theories tend then to adopt some variant of social contract theory or at least have  inherited a vision of society in which an instrumental view of society — society as constructed by individuals for the fulfilment of essentially individual ends — is adopted.
This view is generally called ‘atomism’.
Atomistic theories have been challenged by alternative theories which project a rather different view of human nature.
This alternative view claims that individuals can only develop their characteristically human capacities within society and that ‘living in society is a necessary condition of the development of rationality…or of becoming a moral agent in the full sense of the term, or of becoming a fully responsible, autonomous being’.
Social theories thus argue that freedom requires an understanding of the self and our self-understanding or identity can only be understood in relation to the practices of our society.
Charles Taylor expresses it thus:
The free individual…cannot…be concerned purely with his individual choices and the associations formed from such choices to the neglect of the matrix in which such choices can be open or closed, rich or meagre.
It is important to him that certain activities and institutions flourish in society.
It is even of importance to him what the moral tone of the whole society is — shocking as it may seem to libertarians to raise this issue — because freedom and individual diversity can only flourish in a society where there is a general recognition of their worth.
They are threatened by the spread of bigotry, but also by other conceptions of life — for example, those which look on originality, innovation, and diversity as luxuries which society can ill afford given the need for efficiency, productivity, or growth, or those which in a host of other ways depreciate freedom.
These criticisms provide basic challenges not only to the classical liberalism of Hobbes and Locke but also to the more recent theories we have examined.
Hayek, however, constructs his theory in such a manner as to render such criticisms difficult to sustain.
As we have seen, Hayek criticizes Oakeshott's traditionalism on the ground that it does not provide a framework for critical evaluation of social evolution.
But Hayek also roots his theory in social evolutionary ideas.
In so doing he is generally able to avoid criticisms laid against classical liberalism concerning both its  atomistic conception of the human condition and the moral status of the theory.
Nevertheless, although he may evade these basic criticisms of classical liberalism, Hayek, by rooting his liberal theory in an evolutionary framework, encounters a different problem.
Is he able to construct a coherent theory?
There is undoubtedly a basic tension which permeates Hayek's liberal philosophy.
This tension concerns the nature of the relationship envisaged in Hayek's theory between reason and tradition.
Certain aspects of Hayek's theory, such as his model constitution, seem essentially constructivist in nature, whereas other aspects stress the link between tradition and progress.
What his theory does not clearly specify is the method for determining the extent to which we observe cultural evolutionary achievements and the circumstances in which interference through institutional design is justified.
Indeed, some have argued that the ‘traditionalism of his general philosophy is so strong that it virtually disables him from that critical rationalism which is essential for the appraisal of particular traditions’.
If correct, such criticisms suggest that Hayek, although circumventing the criticisms of classical liberalism, fails to maintain a coherent position.
At the very least, the ambiguity of this method suggests that Hayek's evolutionary account of the development of law is value-laden.
The theory of spontaneous social order, for example, has no necessary connection with the promotion of individual liberty in the sense that Hayek envisages.
Hayek thus seems open to the criticism that he skews his account of moral and social development in order to render it harmonious with his ideological preference for a particular conception of liberty.
THE CHARACTER OF NORMATIVISM
This examination of the political theories of conservatism and liberalism may help us to appreciate the foundations of the normativist style in public law.
From Oakeshott we can perhaps  better appreciate the concepts of authority, liberty, and law which pervade normativist thought.
Through the distinctions he makes between civil association and enterprise association and between the state conceived of as societas and universitas we can begin to understand the intellectual foundations of the tension within normativist thought between law and administrative power.
More generally, his theory provides us with a remarkable insight into the nature of the British constitution; the entire thrust of Oakeshott's work can be interpreted as laying down a view of the world in which the British constitution with its conventions, understandings, and practices which have evolved through a slow historical process actually makes sense.
Seen in this light we can also discern distinct parallels between the thrust of Oakeshott's work and the idea of the common law mind.
From Hayek we see stated in forthright fashion the importance in normativist thought of the dignity of the individual and the primacy of individual freedom.
We see also the clear link between the protection and promotion of those values and the normativist conception of law as a set of general, abstract, and purpose-independent rules.
And from these connections we can begin to appreciate the significance which the idea of limited government under the rule of law plays in normativism.
There are, nevertheless, tensions between the conservative and liberal variants of the normativist style which are revealed by this study.
These tensions can be detected at various levels.
They can be seen in the centrality of the notion of traditions of behaviour in conservative thought as contrasted with (pace Hayek) the more rationalistic temperament of liberalism.
They can be seen in the importance to conservatives of the notion of authority, a notion which in liberal thought is presented less positively and often as a potential threat to liberty.
We see that the conservative is more likely to place his or her trust in the virtue and nobility of spirit of our rulers, whereas liberals, starting from the assumption that individuals are primarily motivated by self-interest, are anxious to formalize a body of principles and rules which are specifically designed to preserve individual liberty.
As we shall see later, such tensions are of importance.
Nevertheless, they should properly be viewed as tensions within the normativist style in public law.
Because, despite such tensions, there    are common themes within conservative and liberal thought on matters which are of central importance to the normativist style.
There are a number of matters to which attention might be drawn.
The overlap between Oakeshott and Hayek on the critique of rationalism, for example, sets the scene for setting limits on the ability of government sensibly to re-order society.
The parallels on organizational forms or modes of association — Oakeshott's distinction between moral and enterprise association as compared with Hayek's between cosmos and taxis — shapes the normativist understanding of the appropriate relationship between common law and statute law.
The distinction which each of these writers make between forms of the state provide the normativist with a justification for viewing the positive state as a degenerate form.
And finally the distinction which each writer makes between forms of law provides normativism with a distinct conception of law which may be used to identify degenerate forms of law.
These distinctions, highlighted in Fig. 1, may be called the dualisms of normativism and occupy a central place in normativist thought.
Fig.1:The Dualisms of Normativism
Foundations of Functionalism
THERE are certain problems in seeking to identify the intellectual foundations of the functionalist style in public law with a particular political ideology.
It is clear that, if normativist style has its roots in conservatism and liberalism, similarly one may say that the functionalist style has a certain affinity with a political theory of socialism.
That statement must be qualified, however, if for no other reason than that there is no one theory of socialism to which the main adherents of a functionalist style would subscribe.
It may therefore be more accurate to identify the functionalist style with those who adopt a collectivist social ontology.
As a result, the foundations of functionalism may best be revealed by examining intellectual orientations rather than, in a strict sense, a political ideology.
This is the method which I shall adopt.
The three primary intellectual influences on the functionalist style which we shall examine are those of sociological positivism, evolutionary social theory, and pragmatism in philosophy.
Sociological positivism emerged mainly in the nineteenth century and particularly flourished in the French intellectual tradition.
The aim of this school has been to pursue the attempt to elevate the study of social phenomena to the positive or scientific state.
The emphasis has been on establishing laws governing these phenomena and creating a predictive science of social facts.
In order to assess its influence we will consider the work of Auguste Comte and Emile Durkheim, as leading exponents of the tradition, and will also examine the application of their theories to the questions of government and law by considering the work of Leon Duguit.
The second influence we shall examine is the British attempt in the latter half of the nineteenth century to reconcile a tension between the romantic-historical and the positivist approaches to society by developing theories of social evolution.
Although almost entirely forgotten now, during the late nineteenth century Herbert  Spencer was pre-eminent in this field.
Spencer's organicist theories were pressed in the cause of libertarianism.
Much of Spencer's rationalist, evolutionary spirit, however, was adopted by, and adapted to, the cause of a collectivist orientation in such forms as Fabianism and New Liberalism.
After considering Spencer's work, the nature and significance of this movement for the shaping of the functionalist style will therefore be examined.
Finally, we will examine pragmatism which, particularly under the inspiration of C. S. Pierce, William James, and John Dewey, was very influential in the United States around the turn of the century.
This pragmatic movement in philosophy also had a significant impact on the social theory of the time.
We will consider in particular its impact on legal thought, primarily through the emergence, in the early decades of this century, of the American legal realist movement.
At first glance, these various theories appear strikingly different in terms of their methods and objectives.
Nevertheless, I shall argue that each theme has played an important role in shaping the functionalist style in public law.
It is also suggested that, provided we plunge below the surface of these theories, certain important links between them may be revealed.
Although all these theories flourished during the latter half of the nineteenth century and the early decades of the twentieth, the links between them are not simply the product of historical circumstance.
The most important links are political.
For, while these theories pursued distinctive concerns, ideas drawn from each of them have been blended by political theorists to create an identifiable body of ideas with certain distinctive characteristics.
The ideas were in effect harnessed to what may be called a theory of progressivism; that is, a belief which embraced socialism as an ideal but which argued that, with the coming of democracy, socialism could be achieved through a process of gradual evolution from the old order to the new.
Thus, while there may be no one theory of socialism to which adherents of the functionalist style subscribe, the general thrust was in favour of a democratic evolutionary progress towards a socialist ideal.
SOCIOLOGICAL POSITIVISM
The tradition of sociological positivism is conditioned by the growth of modern science and the spread of the rationalist outlook.
The starting point for investigation may be taken to be the eighteenth-century revolutionary movements which gave impetus to beliefs that social progress was possible and that social organization could be reconstructed in accordance with rational principles.
From this impetus various theories were proposed which sought to apply the empirical method of the natural sciences to the study of society.
Sociological positivism was one such method.
The founder of this method, which thrived in the nineteenth century, was Auguste Comte.l We will first consider the nature of Comte's thought and then examine its development by Durkheim.
Finally, through an examination of the work of Leon Duguit, we will assess the contribution which sociological positivism may have for an understanding of government and law.
Comte's thought
The general objective of Comte's work was to establish a set of relations between the sciences.
In part, these relationships were secured by appeal to the historical method.
Comte argued that human thought passes through three stages: the theological, the metaphysical, and the positive.
The theological stage he associated with militarism, the metaphysical with juristic thought, and the positive stage with industrialism.
The specific task which Comte set himself was to develop a positive philosophy.
Comte's method was empirical.
All reflections must be derived from experience; that is, from observation and from facts.
According to Comte the different orders of experience each have their own laws.
He identified six fundamental sciences: mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, biology, sociology.
These sciences, he argued, had developed in historical progression.
Furthermore, the movement from one to another can be viewed as a movement from the abstract to the concrete.
Although the laws governing the different orders are not strictly reducible to each other, Comte felt that the basis for sociology could be found in biology, the science preceding it in the hierarchy.
He argued that the time was now ripe for the application of the positivist method to social phenomena and for the establishment of sociology, a term he seems to have invented.
Comte argued that human behaviour is governed not primarily by the intellect but by the instincts and emotions.
The intellect merely helps us choose the means by which we may best achieve ends dictated by our instincts.
Among these instincts the egoistic, or self-regarding, are more powerful than the social, or other-regarding.
However, although it is the egoistic instincts which force us to work, to acquire knowledge and to co-operate, eventually the altruistic instincts, strengthened by the power of the intellect, gain ground.
For Comte the fundamental law of human evolution consists in the ‘growing ascendancy of our humanity over our animality, brought about by a double process, namely the increase of power of the intellect over the instincts and of the other-regarding instincts over the self-regarding’.
This evolutionary development was not the result of the growing significance of natural rights doctrines.
Such ideas as natural rights belong to the metaphysical age and progress is to be found in positive laws.
For Comte, this evolutionary movement lay in the growing division of labour in society.
This division of labour was itself the product of the growing complexity of the social organism.
It is the growing division of labour which reflects the scale of interdependencies in society and causes us to recognize that people are engaged in a common enterprise.
Consequently, Comte believed that both the necessity of government and its functions may be deduced from the principle of the division of labour.
The specialization of functions has a dispersive effect and a primary function of government becomes that of securing co-ordination amongst the parts.
Comte's work had a significant impact in Britain.
His Course of Positive Philosophy was translated by Harriet Martineau who in 1853 commented that:
We are living in a remarkable time, when the conflict of opinions renders a firm foundation of knowledge indispensable…
The supreme dread of everyone who cares for the good of the nation or race is that men should be adrift for want of anchorage for their convictions…
The work of M. Comte is unquestionably the greatest single effort that has been made to obviate this kind of danger.
J. S. Mill, although critical of aspects of Comte's work and, in particular the French mania for system which Comte exemplified, nevertheless found Comte's empirical method, his historical approach and his conception of the hierarchy of the sciences, highly attractive.
The contribution of Durkheim
The positive approach of Comte was developed by Emile Durkheim who adopted Comte's empirical and rationalist methods and fashioned them into an approach which provides a major foundation for the study of sociology today.
Durkheim was particularly concerned with the issue of order in society.
How was social cohesion possible?
Durkheim sought to provide an answer to this question by demonstrating that society forms an integrated unity similar to that of living organisms.
He suggested that the main cause of social differentiation was the increase in population density.
While these changes had caused pressures, consensus was still possible.
The source of consensus was to be found in the division of labour, which was the pre-eminent fact of social solidarity.
Durkheim was especially concerned to try to measure changes in the basis of social solidarity.
However, because the moral phenomena which lay at the roots of social solidarity could not directly be measured, Durkheim identified law as an external and visible index of changes in invisible moral phenomena.
Different forms of law, it was argued, reflect different bases for social solidarity.
Durkheim then sought to show that the movement from repressive to restitutive forms of law, from those based on penal sanctions to those aimed at restoration of relations before the law was violated, was indicative of a transition from a society based on ‘mechanical solidarity’, or shared values, to a society founded on ‘organic solidarity’, or functional interdependence.
Durkheim recognized that in modern societies social solidarity was no longer based on widely shared social values and that government and law had important functions to perform in organizing the ‘collective conscience’ of the new order and acting as an integrative mechanism respectively.
The function of the state  was to plan the social environment so that individuals could more fully realize themselves.
But this function could not be achieved by the state directly since it was too remote.
Durkheim felt that these tasks should be performed by groups — such as professions and other occupational groups — which intermediated between the individual and the state.
He expressed the hope that these corporate bodies would not only take on responsibilities for regulating economic activity but would also form a moral community for their members.
Durkheim's identification of the fact of social solidarity captured the spirit of his times.
This theme was a particularly influential one in French political thought during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
It is this idea of social solidarity that provided Leon Duguit with the basis of his theory of law and it is to his work that we now turn.
Duguit on government and law
Leon Duguit worked as a Professor of Law at the University of Bordeaux between 1886 and 1928.
His work, the main fruits of which are to be found in his book,Law in the Modern State , aimed to construct a science of public law entirely on empirical foundations.
By eliminating all theological and metaphysical elements from his work, he sought to challenge the prevailing constitutional orthodoxy which was founded on the natural rights of the citizen and the inalienable sovereignty of the state.
Here we may recognize Comte's influence in distinguishing the metaphysical stage associated with juristic thought from the stage of industrialism characterized by the rise of positivist thought.
Duguit then founded the bedrock of his theory on the fact of social interdependence, and here we may discern the influence of Durkheim.
That people are born free and equal is an a priori assumption, argued Duguit, whereas it is an incontestable fact that they were born as members of a collectivity.
Duguit believed that the rights and duties of rulers and ruled could be founded on this fundamental fact.
Since people  were unable to exist outside society they were required, as a matter of prudence, to work for its preservation.
This was the source of the basic duty to work for the preservation of social solidarity.
It was from this basic duty that all rights were derived.
In adopting this positivist approach, Duguit thus rejected the metaphysical ideas of sovereignty and the personality of the state as legitimating principles.
In seeking a legitimatory principle he embraced a functional approach.
Duguit took the view that the state was simply an apparatus for performing certain functions.
Consequently, the concept of sovereignty was replaced with that of ‘public service’; the state exists merely to perform certain tasks which are necessary for the preservation and promotion of social solidarity.
This view of the state, together with the basic duty of working to preserve social solidarity, provides us with the essence of Duguit's approach.
The basic duty provides us with the fundamental rule of conduct which may be called the rule of law; viz., that we must not only not injure, but must also work to promote, social solidarity.
From this approach, it can be seen that Duguit felt that, in general, citizens must, as a matter of fact, obey the state.
The basic limitation on the obligation to obey the state arose from the fundamental purpose of the state.
If the state acts in a manner not designed to promote social solidarity then, Duguit argued, this must be resisted.
This follows from the fact that, having rejected the idea of the personality of the state, there can be no fundamental difference between rulers and ruled with respect to the rule of law; all are equally bound by it.
Finally, it is evident that Duguit's theory of law is far removed from those theories which are built on the assumption of the priority of individual rights.
Duguit's theory is based on the fact that rights are derived from duties.
Rights are therefore determined on a functional basis since there can be no liberty or property rights beyond those that contribute to maintenance of social solidarity.
For Duguit, then, the state must be viewed simply as a group of people issuing orders to others.
Nevertheless, with the growth in the size and power of the public service state he recognized the dangers of subordination.
Duguit advocated two main solutions to this problem.
First, he proposed that, since the functions of the state  were such that it was no longer possible to impose a unified direction of society from the centre, there was a need for a territorial decentralization of power.
Secondly, he suggested that the values of liberty and solidarity could be integrated through the promotion of associational and interest groups.
Through such processes, it was felt, the basis of public law was no longer to be rooted in command but rather in organization .
The French tradition of sociological positivism
In the French tradition of sociological positivism we are presented with an analysis which is empirical, positivist, and evolutionary and in which government and law lose their towering metaphysical status and become functional elements within a social organism.
That the orientation is rather different from the intellectual influences on the normativist style is fairly clear.
In normativist language the style of sociological positivism is that of constructivist rationalism.
But from the perspective of positivism things look different.
Comte suggested that a society's political institutions provide an indication of the stage which has been attained by civilization.
He would presumably have argued that the conservative variant of the normativist style lies in the theological stage of society, and the liberal variant is rooted in the metaphysical stage.
From the Comtean perspective the functionalist style in public law should be viewed as a product of the scientific era.
The main criticism of sociological positivism is founded on the vagueness of the central concepts of the theory.
The central idea of social solidarity, for example, is never clearly defined and is simply accepted as the foundation of the theory.
By some mysterious process we simply awaken to the fact of interdependence and the ‘ineluctable solidarity of things’.
In this way, sociological positivism is founded on a collectivist ideology in much the same  way as liberalism is based on an individualist ideology.
Consequently, sociological positivism can be criticized for giving the impression of setting out to demonstrate scientifically the truth of an approach which seemed already to have been assumed in the way the terms were defined.
EVOLUTIONARY SOCIAL THEORY
Sociological positivism struck a resonant note in nineteenth-century Britain primarily because of its anti-metaphysical approach.
As such it had an affinity both with utilitarianism and legal positivism.
Utilitarianism substituted pleasure and pain for the attribution of natural rights in citizens and, through the felicific calculus, sought to place morals and politics on an empirical foundation.
And, as we have seen, utilitarianism was closely associated with legal positivism.
The empirical method is seen most clearly in the work of John Austin who, in producing a science of positive law in terms of commands, sanctions, and habits, attempted to provide an explanation of law entirely in non-normative terminology.
But positivism and utilitarianism, being nominalist and individualist in character, did not attempt to address directly the basic question of how order in society is achieved and maintained.
These theories were based on the idea of the rational individual with certain desires rationally fitting means to ends, the ends themselves not being susceptible of rational calculation.
Bentham's criticisms of social contract theory had been accepted but nothing was put in its place.
For the utilitarian, apparently, it was enough to demonstrate the advantages offered by the social order.
This might satisfy the legal practitioner or practical reformer but could not be sufficient for the political theorist for whom the issue of order is of central importance.
The existence of this gap may help us to explain the links between legal positivism, utilitarianism, and the influence of French sociological positivism.
It may, for example, account for J. S. Mill's  interest in Comte.
But the existence of this gap also suggests one reason for the influence on the functionalist style in public law of a domestic form of evolutionary social theory which is not an obvious bedfellow of utilitarianism.
This is the theory of social evolution which flourished in the nineteenth century from the stimulus of Darwin's Origin of Species and which is most closely associated with Herbert Spencer.
Spencer and evolutionary theory
Herbert Spencer pursued a literary and journalistic career throughout the latter half of the nineteenth century and also found time to write books on such subjects as The Proper Sphere of Government ,Social Statics ,First Principles ,Man Versus the State ,Principles of Ethics , and many others besides.
His approach was positivist and rationalist and his general objective was to lay down a theory of social evolution.
His influence throughout this period was extensive, not only in Britain but also in North America.
Spencer believed that social evolution was part  of the processes of evolution at large and that societal arrangements were the outcome of natural causes.
His theories linked the idea of progress with advances in technological knowledge and, by showing how progress follows natural laws, he sought to place the development of political organization on a scientific footing.
He argued that there is an inexorable tendency towards the differentiation of things and that, as a result, societies become more differentiated.
This, he argued, was conducive to liberty.
In industrial society free action flourishes and diversity of opinion is tolerated.
Spencer's ideological orientation was therefore libertarian: societies evolve from homogeneity to heterogeneity; industrial society is highly differentiated and its government exhibits limitation of scope and diffusion of authority; as civilization advances, so does government decay.
Spencer propounded the law of equal freedom which was not unlike the first of Rawls's principles of justice: ‘Every man is free to do that which he wills provided he infringes not the equal freedom of any other man.’
Unlike Rawls, however, this principle of liberty is not tempered by any principle of justice which recognizes a principle of equality.
It will come as no surprise to discover, then, that Spencer was highly critical of statutory intervention, arguing that it stifled liberty and led to rigidity and uniformity: ‘Society, a living growing organism, placed within apparatuses of dead, rigid, mechanical formulas, cannot fail to be hampered and pinched.’
If Spencer is taken as the model it seems clear that Victorian evolutionary social theory was far from being collectivist in its orientation.
Further, if we include Maine amongst the evolutionists then it is also a tradition which was antagonistic to an Austinian, positivistic conception of law.
Yet, despite Maine's hostility both to utilitarianism and legal positivism, J. S. Mill was an early admirer of Maine's work.
Furthermore, Mill thought Spencer ‘one of the most vigorous as well as boldest thinkers that English speculation has yet produced, full of the true scientific spirit’.
These views are significant for our purpose because Mill played a pivotal role in British nineteenth-century thought.
In Barker's words, ‘it is Mill who serves, in the years between 1848 and 1880, as the bridge from laissez-faire to the idea of social readjustment by the State, and from political Radicalism to economic Socialism’.
When, after 1880, we began to see emerging new philosophies to provide the intellectual underpinning for the foundations of the welfare state that were being laid between 1880 and 1914, Mill might have supplied the economic doctrine, but the conceptions of order and progress utilized the methods, if not the ideologies, of the social evolutionists.
Harnessing the evolutionists' methods while jettisoning their ideologies was scarcely a difficult exercise since the libertarian theory patently did not hold together.
Spencer's argument was that although societies become more differentiated and heterogeneous this tends, not to chaos, but new forms of equilibrium.
This argument, however, seemed to defy the second law of thermodynamics which suggests that energy tends to become dissipated and order to dissolve.
The ambiguities and contradictions in Spencer's theory gradually became apparent and, as Hawthorn comments: ‘Towards the end of the century he became in England a living monument to vanished assumptions.’
It was left to the newer ideologies, in particular Fabianism and New Liberalism, to utilize the evolutionary method to different effect.
Fabianism
The Fabian Society, founded in 1884, is committed to what Sidney Webb once called ‘the inevitability of gradualism’.
The Fabians did not accept that under capitalism the necessary contradictions would manifest themselves in a growing class struggle.
They believed in the prospect of a gradual and constitutionally achieved transition to socialism.
The Fabians were particularly influential during the first forty or so years of their history, a period in which the leading lights were the Webbs, G. B. Shaw, Graham Wallas, and H. G. Wells and, less consistently, Bertrand Russell, G. D. H. Cole, Harold Laski, and R. H. Tawney.
It was, however, Sidney and Beatrice Webb — a remarkable partnership between a natural bureaucrat and a natural aristocrat — who  provided the Fabians with their centre of gravity.
In addition to their work for the Fabian Society and the Labour party, and the prodigious nature of their social inquiry work, they were responsible for founding — as institutional outlets for their ideas — the London School of Economics in 1895 and the New Statesman in 1913.
In effect the Fabians sought to weld the methods of both utilitarianism and evolutionary theory to a collectivist ideology.
First, they exploited the ambivalence of utilitarianism.
Benthamism seemed to provide no basis for determining whether the principle of utility aimed to maximize an individual's happiness or the happiness of all.
In effect, the Fabians skewed utilitarianism in favour of the principle of social solidarity.
One consequence was that, while Bentham was concerned with legal and constitutional reform, the Fabians were more interested in social and economic reform; and specifically with the social control of socially created values.
Secondly, the Fabians pressed evolutionary theory in service of a collectivist ideal.
Behind both the economics and politics of Fabianism lay an organic theory of society and the view that progress is tied to advances in technical knowledge.
The most direct link between the Fabians and Spencer is Beatrice Webb, who was brought up under his tutelage, absorbed his scientific method of viewing ‘all social institutions exactly as if they were plants or animals — things that could be observed, classified and explained’, but who eventually shook herself ‘completely free from laisser-faire bias’.
The Fabians inherited both the positive scientific spirit and a conception that progress follows natural laws from the evolutionists, but they adapted it to French sociological positivism based on the principle of social solidarity.
Consider, for example, Kloppenberg's assessment of Sidney Webb: ‘Although he passed through a Comtean phase that permanently altered his perspective from liberal individualism to organic collectivism, he had shed the positivist's confidence in ultimate certainties as inconsistent with  empiricism and democracy by the time he proclaimed himself a socialist in 1886.’
Certainly the empiricist strain runs deeply through the work of the Fabians.
Scientific analysis of society was considered an essential preliminary to the effective reform of social and political arrangements.
For Fabianism, the emergence of democracy which was taking place in the political sphere had to be accompanied by the spread of socialism in the economic sphere.
The policies of the Fabians were described by Beatrice Webb during the 1890s as ‘essentially collective ownership wherever practicable; collective regulation everywhere else; collective provision according to need for all the impotent and sufferers; and collective taxation in proportion to wealth’.
The State, albeit in an anti-metaphysical sense, was thus viewed as being of central importance.
Through its control and regulatory functions it was viewed as the primary mechanism for transforming the anarchic tendencies of individualism to the collective good.
A variety of models were suggested for the forms which these political institutions might take.
But running through all these was the belief that an advanced state could not be run without a bureaucracy.
The complexity of the issues meant that these matters could not be dealt with by popular vote.
Nor could they be formulated by the amateur civil servant.
What was required in order to achieve a more efficient and expert government in ‘a highly differentiated and systematically co-ordinated social order’ was a professionalized administrative elite.
The Fabians, then, were pioneers of social engineering or what might be termed ‘evolutionary rationalism’.
Their vision was of a functionally differentiated society in which ‘the individual is now created by the social organism of which he forms a part’ and in which a state, founded on democracy tempered by respect for the expert, is required to co-ordinate the social order.
This is the society  which Graham Wallas, adapting the term from Durkheim, labelled ‘the great society’.
The Fabians recognized the dangers that lay in the establishment of a powerful centralized bureaucracy.
The answers they provided took both institutional and ethical forms.
The institutional response was — in common with Duguit — to suggest that there should be a broad territorial diffusion of power.
Sidney Webb, for example, highlighted ‘the important part to be played in the Socialist State by its various democratically organised and practically autonomous Local Governing Bodies’.
The ethical response was provided by Graham Wallas who recognized that, in order to prevent the all-powerful state from becoming the servile state, the development of a strong public service ethic was fundamental.
Here, however, Wallas highlighted a particular weakness within Fabianism.
Their vision expected the civil service ‘to know more and do less than any other body in public life.
…It is to be competent where those who control cannot be competent, yet it is not to control.
It is to enable those who do not know and cannot know enough for policy-making to make policy, yet it is to have no policies of its own.’
That particular weakness also serves to reflect a more basic tension within the Fabian model of evolutionary rationalism.
This tension is that between elitism and egalitarianism.
It is concisely expressed by Kloppenberg: ‘Did the Webbs want ethical regeneration or institutional efficiency?
Did they want a democratic society or a society organized by experts?
In short, did they want to reform Great Britain or run it?’
New liberalism
Both the strength and limitation of Fabianism is to be found in its tendency to examine the benefits of collectivism in terms of economic efficiency.
There was, however, also an ethical strain to the progressive ideas of this period.
This dimension to progressive thought was well brought out by the school of ‘New Liberalism’ which was associated in particular with T. H. Green and L. T. Hobhouse.
The thought of ‘New Liberalism’ was shaped by the fact that during the period 1880–1914 a great deal of interventionist legislation had been enacted, much of which had been the responsibility of Liberal governments.
Yet this wave of social legislation could not easily be reconciled with the tenets of classical liberalism.
Was not this type of legislation a threat to freedom?
It was within this milieu that the thinkers of New Liberalism sought to develop a self-consciously modernist philosophy.
This movement was inspired by philosophical Idealism.
It therefore rejected empiricism and was particularly critical of utilitarianism.
The British Idealist thinkers who shaped the New Liberalism of the period nevertheless otherwise shared many of its roots with the Fabians.
In the words of Vincent and Plant:
These thinkers, including Sir Henry Jones, Bernard Bosanquet, D. G. Ritchie, William Wallace, E. Caird, and Lord Haldane, fundamentally changed the conception of the role of the state within the Liberal tradition of political thought.
They developed a theory of the state which was a long way removed from the rational calculative tendencies of utilitarianism and provided a justification for the role of the state in the spheres of economic life and welfare which went beyond what has usually been countenanced within Liberalism, whether based on utilitarianism or Lockean theory.
The Idealists achieved this by means of a complex theory which gave the state a particular moral significance.
They saw the role of the state not merely as a set of instrumentalities for securing material welfare but as the focus of a sense of community and citizenship, an institution in which a good common to all classes and recognizable to all interest groups could be articulated.
The purpose of the state was to promote the good life of its citizens and to develop the moral nature of man.
Green was the pivotal figure in the movement.
He viewed society not as an aggregate of isolated atoms but as an organism for the realization of common purposes.
From this starting point he developed a theory of the common good and of human freedom which could be coupled to the collectivist tendencies of the age.
The foundation of this approach was a positive conception of liberty; freedom as an actual capacity for doing or enjoying something rather than simply the absence of external constraint:
When we speak of freedom, we…do not mean merely freedom from restraint or compulsion.
We do not mean merely freedom to do as we like irrespectively of what it is that we like.
We do not mean a freedom that can be enjoyed by one man or one set of men at the cost of a loss of freedom to others.
When we speak of freedom as something to be highly prized, we mean a positive power or capacity for doing or enjoying something worth doing, and that, too, something that we do or enjoy in common with others.
This notion of freedom is positive in the sense that it is directly related to self-realization.
The objective is to transform instincts and desires in such a way that they can be fitted to the overall goals of a person's deliberative life.
That is, liberty should not be viewed as the absence of compulsion but as the empowerment of all members of society to make the best of themselves.
This notion of freedom is also evolutionary.
What Green in effect was arguing is that, since Liberals had won the battle for civil and parliamentary freedom and for freedom of trade, the challenge now was that of self-realization.
And, to render this possible, it was essential for the state to provide a basic platform of entitlements.
This sentiment was succinctly stated by Herbert Samuel:
[L]iberty was not a matter only of national independence, or of constitutional democracy, or of freedom of thought and religion…
[T]here could be no true liberty if a man was confined and oppressed by  poverty, by excessive hours of labour, by insecurity of livelihood…
To be truly free he must be liberated from these things also.
In many cases, it was only the power of law that could effect this.
More law might often mean more liberty.
From this foundation, the New Liberalism developed distinctive views on the idea of citizenship and on the positive functions of the state.
The movement also contributed illuminating insights into such matters as governing institutions and rights and duties.
Institutions are viewed as expressions of collective purposes which maintain vitality so long as they are able to maintain a clear sense of purpose.
People are viewed as having a ‘station’ or ‘groove’in society; notions which imply a distinctive balance between rights and duties inherent in an individual's social role or function.
Further, rights are rooted in society; contrary to the beliefs of classical liberalism, the idea of rights existing prior to, or apart from , society was regarded as nonsensical.
Finally, some looked to the ‘increasing ordering of economic organisation by the conscience of the community, and a great extension of public control in the use of private property and in industrial relations’.
Many of these themes run through Green's Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation .
In these lectures his purpose ‘is to consider the moral function or object served by law, or by the system of rights and obligations which the state enforces’.
Although built on customs and habits, institutions were nevertheless the repositories of ideas of the common good; the challenge was to avoid institutional sclerosis by ensuring that they continued to meet contemporary needs.
The function of law, then, was to provide the conditions for the development of our capacities and powers towards the moral end of self-realization.
And the capacity of institutions to achieve this end was the criterion of their moral development and progress.
Civic institutions were therefore the public expression of private morality.
Similar themes can be seen in the work of writers such as Bosanquet and Hobhouse.
Bosanquet's book,The Philosophical  Theory of the State , was, for example, designed to challenge the individualism of such thinkers as Bentham, Mill, and Spencer who posit a basic antagonism between the individual and the state.
Bosanquet argues that such individualism is based on a false understanding of the self.
The true self must be understood as engaging in the world in a specific way as part of a community.
Hobhouse wrote The Metaphysical Theory of the State specifically to criticize Bosanquet's idealist theory on the ground that it provided too expansive a role for the state.
This, however, has been felt to be rather ironical since, although he is critical of idealism and maintains a formal commitment to empirical rationalism, it is Hobhouse who in fact calls for the greater degree of state intervention.
Hobhouse ‘presented a kind of fusion of Spencer and Green’ insofar as he believed in the scientific importance of the idea of evolution but felt that the most highly evolved society is one ‘in which the efforts of its members are most completely coordinated to common ends, in which discord is most fully subdued to harmony.’
Within this process Hobhouse recognized the importance of Green's positive conception of liberty: ‘liberty without equality is a name of noble sound and squalid result’.
Hobhouse's evolutionary method was, however, also reminiscent of Comte since he argued that it was the growing domination of mind over the conditions of life that enables us to appreciate the importance of the collective framework of society.
The result was a ‘rather unusual derivation of idealist conclusions from empiricist premises’.
Evolutionary theory and collectivism
As we have seen, during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century there were influential strands of opinion which harnessed an evolutionary approach to a collectivist objective.
Our concern here is not to try to disentangle New Liberalism from Fabian  socialist thought.
Some of these differences were rooted in the extent to which the writers embraced positivism or Idealism.
But, more important than their differences for our purposes is the fact that these movements shared many basic principles and common objectives.
When, for example, Sidney Webb talked of a ‘fourfold path of collective administration of public services, collective regulation of private industry, collective taxation of unearned income, and collective provision for the dependent sections of the community’ as being the pathway to socialism, he outlined a programme with which many New Liberals in practice agreed.
Furthermore, Webb himself indicated that ‘much of what is claimed as the progress of socialism might be equally well described as a merely empirical development from the principles of Canning, Peel, Bentham and Gladstone’.
But what, in particular, these movements had in common was an evolutionary or organicist method.
During the latter half of the nineteenth century the emphasis in social and political thought shifted from an atomistic to an organic conception of society.
This shift primarily reflects the influence of the processes of scientific discovery on the social thought of the period.
And here the Darwin theory of evolution was most influential.
The influence of Darwinian theory on Victorian social thought is often thought of in terms of‘the survival of the fittest’ and the notions of struggle and competition which became known as ‘Social Darwinism’.
But it is evident that its influence was much more broad-ranging.
What in effect happened after 1880 was that the biological approaches of those such as Darwin and Spencer were transformed by Fabians and New Liberals.
This essentially came about by positing a correlation between ethics and evolution and harnessing an evolutionary approach in service of a collectivist ideal.
It is this attempt by Fabians and New Liberals to conjoin ethical and evolutionary considerations that led to the most sustained criticism of their theories.
Such criticisms are perhaps most clearly and tersely summed up in Hawthorn's assessment of Hobhouse:
Hobhouse's theory was…a bricolage .
Out of the morally serious upper middle-class English air he took empiricism and Idealism, the assumption of pre-determined progress and a belief in benevolent intervention, the general English notions of biological evolution and a Comtean conviction in positive altruism and put them together in the service of a liberal socialist ideal.
These criticisms of Hobhouse might, with little modification, also be applied to the general movements we have examined.
Certainly Hobhouse can be taken as a representative figure since, in addition to being a leading light of New Liberalism, he also held the first Chair of Sociology to be established in Britain — at the London School of Economics, which was founded by the Webbs.
New Liberalism and Fabianism were not the only movements of socialist thought which were influential during this period.
One should, for example, mention guild socialism which was much more concerned than Fabianism about the problems of establishing a strong, centralized bureaucracy and which promoted a pluralist theory of the state.
But many of the ideas of guild socialism also ran within channels which have already been discussed; the guild socialist's conception of the state, for example, shared certain similarities with the views of Duguit.
Certainly, the theories developed in the period between 1880 and 1914 have had a very important influence on twentieth-century British social democratic thought.
And within this period, despite the tension between an empiricist and an idealist temperament, the dominant theme was that of evolution.
PRAGMATISM
The final influence on the functionalist style of public law to consider is that of pragmatism.
The philosophy of pragmatism flourished in the United States at roughly the same period that the social movements of Fabianism and New Liberalism emerged in Britain.
Its influence in the United States was largely the result of the work of C. S. Peirce, William James, and John Dewey who, by challenging the prevailing conceptions of knowledge, tried to redirect the course of philosophy.
Pragmatism may appropriately be referred to as a via media between, on the one hand, an empiricism and positivism that may lead to inhumanism and, on the other, a rationalistic Idealism that may become out of touch with contemporary realities.
When viewed in this light its theoretical position and its influence in relation to the social movements of Fabianism and New Liberalism may be revealed.
Pragmatism can be viewed as appealing to many who located themselves at the convergence between liberalism and socialism, since it sought to temper and transcend the positivism and empiricism associated with Fabianism and the idealism identified with New Liberalism.
Pragmatism sought to force philosophers to confront doubt.
The pragmatist's solution to many of the problems of philosophy is simply that of not providing any systematic solution at all.
Pragmatism is essentially a method of settling philosophical disputes by tracing their practical consequences.
This may be viewed as an empiricist attitude but, according to William James, pragmatism represents empiricism ‘both in a more radical and in a less objectionable form than it has ever yet assumed’.
The pragmatist, continues James, ‘turns away from abstraction and insufficiency, from verbal solutions, from bad a priori reasons, from fixed principles, closed systems, and pretended absolutes and origins.
He turns towards concreteness and adequacy, towards facts, towards action and towards power’.
With pragmatism  truth and usefulness become fused: ‘ideas…become true just in so far as they help us to get into satisfactory relations with other parts of our experience.’
Beyond empiricist epistemology
Pragmatism may be viewed as a critique of an empiricist epistemology, which is based on the Cartesian distinction between mind and matter.
Pragmatism rejects the conventional dualisms between mind and body and subject and object and articulates a view of truth as being grounded in human experience.
The philosophers of pragmatism resisted the idea that experience could be frozen at a particular moment in time and analysed in chunks.
James emphasized the essential quality of continuity of experience; it is a stream of thought or consciousness.
Dewey challenged the idea that experience was exclusively concerned with knowledge:
In the orthodox view, experience is regarded as a knowledge-affair.
But to eyes not looking through ancient spectacles, it assuredly appears as an affair of the intercourse of a living being with its physical and social environment.
Dewey here accentuates the idea that experience is relational, that it is not exclusively private and subjective.
This point is further reinforced by Peirce who argued that all language, all inquiry and all knowledge is essentially social in character.
On this aspect of Peirce's work Bernstein comments:
The alternative paradigm of inquiry or knowledge that Peirce…develop[s]…is a view of inquiry as a self-corrective process which has no beginning or end points and in which any claim is subject to further rational criticism…
Our claims to knowledge are legitimised not by their origins…but rather by the norms and rules of inquiry itself.
These very norms, rules and standards are themselves open to rational criticism.
The fallibility of all knowledge is not a sign of its deficiency but rather an essential characteristic of knowledge, for every knowledge claim is part of a  system of signs that is open to further interpretation and has consequences that are to be publicly tested and confirmed.
…This shift of orientation from the foundation paradigm to that of inquiry as a continuous self-corrective process requires us to rethink almost every fundamental issue in philosophy.
The pragmatists thus argue that all knowledge is hypothetical and fallible; that the meaning of concepts must be rooted in their social context; that we should focus on the consequences rather than the origins of knowledge; that all distinctions and boundaries to inquiry are relative to the stage of development of the inquiry; and that the standards or norms of inquiry are developed as part of the process of inquiry.
Pragmatism challenges the dominance in philosophy of the idea of the ‘mental eye’; of the idea of analysing perception and knowledge in terms of the model of mental seeing.
In its place pragmatism poses the analogy of the craftsman who is involved in making or doing, not by reference to some ideal model, but in accordance with the cumulative product of experience.
The work of Dewey
Within political theory the work of John Dewey has been particularly influential.
Dewey's thought was mainly influenced by Hegel, although his appreciation of the organic unity of life also caused him to be attracted to the lessons of Darwinian biology.
Dewey rejected the fundamental dualisms of philosophy.
He argued that thought does not arise out of abstract logical puzzles but from specific problems which we encounter in practice.
He thus suggested that ideas should be viewed not as mirrors of reality but plans of action.
Theory could only be completed in practice and, as a result, Dewey argued that philosophy must abandon abstract metaphysics and apply itself to social engineering.
In the political sphere Dewey maintained an organic rather than an atomistic conception of society.
As we have seen, ‘this notion of society as a organism, whether derived from Hegelian, Comtean, or  Darwinian insights, dominated late nineteenth-century thought’ and Dewey was therefore in keeping with the spirit of his times.
But Dewey and the pragmatists, unlike others, drew from the notion of the organic character of life the idea of the inherently social character of knowledge.
Social relations lay at the heart of lived experience.
Following James, Dewey's conception of ethics was similarly social; he viewed ethics as an instrumental method of inquiry and believed that the workability of moral precepts must be validated by the community over time.
Furthermore, since ethics is an empirical and historical discipline and since it is only in a democracy that all citizens participate equally, Dewey argued that the realization of each individual's ethical potential can only occur within a democracy.
The idea of democracy played a critical role in Dewey's philosophy.
For Dewey democracy was to be understood not only in political but also in social and economic terms; as a way of life and as a moral ideal and not simply as a form of government.
In order to realize this objective Dewey felt that a fundamental reconstruction of social institutions was required.
He recognized that this task was scarcely straightforward, particularly since many of the forces of contemporary society seemed to be dehumanizing and threatened the vitality of aesthetic life.
In seeking to counteract these forces Dewey especially emphasized the potential importance of the educative role of social institutions.
The American legal realist movement
This pragmatic shift in philosophy may be seen as part of a broader ‘revolt against formalism’ in the USA.
As such it has been identified as part of a general movement towards scientific naturalism in American thought and is associated with the behaviourist turn taken in political science and, in the study of law, with the legal realist movement which flourished in the inter-war period.
What precisely the legal realist movement stood for is a matter of some dispute.
It is easier to state what the movement was against.
Thus, realism may most readily be viewed as a reaction to the attempt to construct a formal science of law founded on what may be termed the case method; that is, the assumption that, by close examination of past judicial decisions, the basic principles of law could be deduced.
The case method had become adopted as the dominant method of legal study in the elite American law schools in the period up to the First World War.
In positive terms, Roscoe Pound tried at an early stage to provide a concise, if rather general, statement of what realism stood for:
Jurisprudence is the last in the march of the sciences away from the method of deduction from predetermined conceptions.
The sociological movement in jurisprudence, the movement for pragmatism as a philosophy of law, the movement for the adjustment of principles and doctrines to the human conditions they are to govern rather than to assumed first principles, the movement for putting the human factor in the central place and relegating logic to its true position as an instrument, has scarcely shown itself as yet in America.
It is worthy of note that Pound then added that: ‘Perhaps the dissenting opinion of Mr Justice Holmes [in Lochner v.
New York ]is the best exposition of it we have.’
Furthermore, it remains something of a puzzle that, when this movement did flourish during the 1920s and 1930s, Pound went out of his way to distance himself from it.
Law, the realists argued, was not a matter of abstract logic but a practical exercise in social engineering.
Since law should be viewed basically as an instrument for realizing certain practical objectives many felt that a genuine scientific study of law must examine its functioning through the experimental methods of the social sciences.
But some in the movement were uneasy about viewing realism primarily as an appeal to a social scientific approach to law.
This group preferred to focus their work on the myth of legal certainty and to challenge the idea of legal formalism by undermining the conception of the judicial process implicit in the case method.
Both aspects of the legal realist movement seem to have been influenced by pragmatism.
The gist of the critique of legal formalism had, in all its essentials, already been presented by James and Dewey.
In 1891, in an essay called ‘The moral philosopher and the moral life’, William James had set out the essence of the realist's case.
James argued here that abstract rules provide us with only limited assistance in arriving at moral decisions because ‘every real dilemma is in literal strictness a unique situation’.
The reason for this, continued James, is that ‘the exact combination of ideals realized and ideals disappointed which each decision creates is always a universe without precedent, and for which no adequate previous rule exists’.
As James graphically put it, in every moral decision ‘some part of the ideal is butchered’ It does not require a great deal of insight to appreciate the significance of James's theory for the judicial process.
Similar messages can readily be derived from Dewey's work.
In an essay published in 1915, for example, Dewey examined the nature of practical judgment, which he defined ‘a judgment respecting the future termination of an incomplete and in so far indeterminate situation’.
Dewey then identified the characteristics of practical judgments in terms of their tentative and hypothetical character and suggested that we may often misjudge what is to be done either because we have overlooked relevant facts or misinterpreted them or because we have misjudged the best course of action to be followed.
In essays of this sort the  pragmatist's conception of practical judgment captures the essence of the legal realist's criticism of legal formalism.
The influence of pragmatism on the realist's call for a social scientific approach to the study of law can also be readily detected since a basic tenet of pragmatism was to view practical judgment as an instrumental method of inquiry which was validated by society.
From this perspective law should be viewed as an instrument for meeting certain social goals.
When so viewed, what becomes necessary is a study of how best those goals might, through law, be realized.
When viewed in this light Robert Summers's thesis that the legal realist movement should best be seen as part of a tradition of ‘pragmatic instrumentalism’ in American jurisprudence seems basically correct.
By the late 1930s the legal realist movement seemed to have lost its way.
One reason for this may be that it was overtaken — and, perhaps, undermined — by political developments.
Roosevelt's New Deal programme was an exercise in regulatory government and led to a major growth in regulation by administrative agencies.
The realists, insofar as they advocated training and expertise in the specialized areas of law, generally supported this programme and a number of prominent realists left law schools to work for Roosevelt in Washington.
But realism itself never developed an adequate theorization of regulatory law; the public law dimension to its theory was largely missing.
As the political culture changed so, it seemed, did the power of their critique.
There is a final point about realism which, given the nature of our exercise, needs to be mentioned.
Realism directed its challenge to the attempt to construct an autonomous science of law which was rooted in legal positivism.
In its place, realism posited a predictive science of law rooted in the experimental methods of social science.
These methods, however, seemed to be largely based on positivist conceptions of social science.
In the light of our discussion in Chapter 2, it could be argued that in so doing they failed to get to the root of the problem.
The value of pragmatism
Pragmatism may be viewed as the philosophy of the new world of interdependence.
Philosophy, so this argument goes, had taken  the wrong step with Cartesian dualisms.
The key task of pragmatism was therefore to root philosophy within a social world in which ideas can be validated only in practice.
The pragmatists, and Dewey in particular, have been criticized for being overly optimistic about the power of creative intelligence to reconstruct social institutions through a programme of educational reform.
Pragmatism here underestimated the strength of the social and economic forces that might work to distort and undermine this ideal.
Dewey's response to such criticism, I suspect, would have been that he was certainly not naive about the nature of those forces but that, if there is to be hope for humanity, there is no alternative but to be optimistic.
In general, the philosophy of pragmatism appears to have a particular value for the functionalist style in public law, which may be seen most clearly in pragmatism's rejection of a systematic and comprehensive philosophy.
The value of this approach became most evident in the period after the First World War, which many regard as marking the terminus of the era of belief in continuous evolutionary progress of human society.
By embracing pragmatism, functionalists felt they could adopt a legal method without necessarily absorbing the more optimistic beliefs of the evolutionists about the inevitability of progress.
This was especially the case when pragmatism was conjoined to a legal positivist outlook.
From this perspective, legal realism may be viewed as a continuation, albeit in a non-systematic fashion, of John Austin's project of producing an entirely non-normative account of law.
THE CHARACTER OF FUNCTIONALISM
The foundations of the functionalist style in public law are to be found in the intellectual movements of sociological positivism, evolutionary theory, and pragmatism which flourished in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
That this functionalist style contains different orientations should be clear from the differences in approach and nuance between these movements.
There is, for example, a distinct positivist and empiricist strain which emerges in the functionalist style and whose roots can be seen in sociological positivism, the Fabian aspects of evolutionary theory, and that interpretation of pragmatism which views the  application of the methods of pragmatic instrumentalism to the judicial role as a continuation of Austin's positivist project.
On the other hand an Idealist and more rationalistic strain of the functionalist style also exists.
This version of functionalism connects with the movement of New Liberalism and highlights the Hegelian aspects of pragmatism associated, in particular, with Dewey.
There are therefore different aspects of the functionalist style which can most readily be seen as tensions between empiricism and rationalism or positivism and idealism.
These tensions took specific political form in the tensions between Fabianism and New Liberalism; the former being essentially a movement founded on ideas of organization and efficiency and the latter projecting a specific moral dimension as an emancipatory movement.
Such tensions can emerge in a variety of forms.
One specific historical illustration can be seen in the famous Report of the Royal Commission on the Poor Law in 1909.
The Royal Commission was split on the subject and the Majority and Minority Reports embody two different social theories of poverty.
The Majority Report, of which Helen Bosanquet was a signatory, encapsulated the ideas of New Liberalism whereas the Minority Report, signed by Beatrice Webb, represented the views of the Fabians.
Despite such differences and tensions, it is nevertheless suggested that these are best viewed as variations within the functionalist style of public law thought.
This functionalist style views law not as a phenomenon which exists on an altogether different plane to government but rather as an instrument which is part of the apparatus of government.
Functionalism in public law views this apparatus of government as serving to promote a distinct set of purposes.
These purposes are those most readily associated with the objectives of the positive state which emerged towards the end of the nineteenth century and which are summed up in the idea of government as institution which promotes progressive evolutionary change.
Consequently, the functionalist approach tends to be built on an organicist conception of society, generally embraces a positive conception of liberty, and looks on democracy as an achievement of great moral as well as evolutionary importance.
These characteristic ideas of functionalism are found running throughout the theories of sociological positivism, evolutionary social theories, and pragmatism.
Since ideals from these intellectual movements also filtered into the political movements for social democracy or evolutionary socialism it is not surprising that the functionalist style is closely associated with a socialist tendency.
Here we can discern some lines of connection between philosophy and politics, between thought and life.
Thus, the functionalist style tends to incorporate an empiricist rather than a metaphysical view of law.
It is less concerned with what law is than with what law does .
But this philosophical disposition also tends to be harnessed to a political orientation which seeks to democratize political institutions and is supportive of reforms pioneered through social legislation.
Pragmatism has been an especially important influence on the functionalist style.
Its practical orientation makes its message more accessible for lawyers.
But its influence is attributable to more than its accessibility.
What perhaps is most important is its attempt, as its  proponents themselves viewed it, to chart a middle course between empiricism and rationalism, and between positivism and idealism.
Pragmatism thus has many continuities with the positivist and evolutionary theories which have influenced the functionalist style in public law.
These connections can be woven at many different levels.
John Stuart Mill, for example, emerges as a critically important link throughout these movements.
Mill, rooted in positivism and utilitarianism, seemed to be converted in his later years to the socialist cause.
His influence can clearly be seen in both Fabianism, where his analysis of the unearned increment reached a receptive audience, and New Liberalism, which developed his later concerns about distributive justice.
Mill's influence on pragmatism is also evident.
William James, for example, dedicated Pragmatism to J. S. Mill ‘from whom I first learned the pragmatic openness of mind and whom my fancy likes to picture as our leader’.
Connections of this nature could be woven many times over.
T. H. Green's emphasis on the centrality of experience exerted a  profound influence on both James and Dewey.
Hobhouse's views on epistemology were heavily influenced by James.
And it has even been argued that the pragmatists simply ‘extended Spencer to argue that, since all human activity could be interpreted as the outcome of the instinct for survival, so therefore could thinking be’.
A major conduit for the translation of many of these ideas into legal thought was Oliver Wendell Holmes.
In addition to being well versed in organicist theories, during the 1870s Holmes was, along with Peirce and James, a member of ‘The Metaphysical Club’.
Holmes can be viewed as the grandfather of the American legal realist movement; his statement that ‘the life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience’ has, for example, become one of the most celebrated legal aphorisms of recent times.
Running alongside these personal connections, however, were material changes affecting these societies during the late nineteenth century.
In Kloppenberg's words:
After 1870 industrialization and urbanization entered a new phase, which economic historians have designated the second industrial revolution to distinguish it from the coming of industry to Britain over a century earlier.
This second wave struck more rapidly and spread more broadly than its predecessor.
By 1920 the United States, Germany, and France had joined Britain as substantially industrialized nations…
During these years the economies of all four nations evolved in different ways from the comparative chaos of entrepreneurial capitalism to the more advanced stage of organized capitalism.
…American and European societies became increasingly interdependent, by which I mean that complex urban-industrial societies involved individuals in  unprecedentedly complex patterns of relations extending beyond personal and community ties to distant bonds no less real because of their obscurity.…
The industrialized and urbanized mode of life involved the replacement of magic and mystery by precisely calculable and strictly functional procedures, a less obvious but equally pervasive fact of modern life.
The changes, which were taking place in the economy and society during the period of formative influence on the functionalist style, provide us with a further dimension to consider.
The functionalist style can be viewed as an attempt to develop a legal style compatible with the technically orientated, interdependent, and functionally ordered society which was emerging.
From this perspective we can see a direct contrast with the normativist style.
When considering the character of the normativist style, we identified a characteristic tendency of normativism to construct a set of dualisms, particularly between types of order, forms of the state, and conceptions of law.
The objective in doing so is to identify their ‘true’ nature or ideal character and distinguish or highlight the corrupt forms which have entered modern political consciousness as a result of rationalistic errors.
Within that normativist framework the functionalist style in public law is to be identified with that side of the dualist divide that is associated with error, distortion, and corruption.
From the functionalist perspective, however, these dualisms are artificial; and recall here the fact that a powerful theme in pragmatism is to reject all dualistic thinking.
Furthermore, from the functionalist perspective, the normativist style must be seen as a nostalgic response to these facets of modern society.
The rationalization of modern life, suggest those who adopt the functionalist style, must be directly confronted.
They reject the normativist criticism that they are ‘constructivist rationalists’ whose views are founded on the ‘synoptic delusion’.
‘There are many ‘collectivists’ ', argued Ginsberg, ‘who are well aware of the limitations of our knowledge and of the difficulties that hinder the growth of an enlightened common will.
Humility of spirit is no monopoly of the individualists, nor is the hubris of the specialist confined to the collectivists’.
Indeed, some would go further and criticize the liberal variant of normativism on the ground that that doctrine is based on what might be called ‘the Rationalist Fallacy’ in political thinking; that human beings act on rational motives.
By contrast, they argue, the functionalist style is rooted in the rejection of such metaphysical assumptions and in the application of the scientific method to the problems of politics, government, and law.
Traditions of Public Law Thought
MY argument has been that the positions adopted within public law by commentators, advocates, and judges are rooted in certain categories of thought.
I have identified the main styles of public law thought, which I call normativism and functionalism, in an ideal-typical form.l In this form these styles are inventions; they are constructed to permit us to obtain initial insights into the dominant categories of public law thought.
As I suggested, these styles are fluid and that, within them, certain tensions may be evident.
In order to understand them better we therefore need to examine their influence; and this process of investigation also leads to elaboration.
I have first tried to show how their origins are to be found in certain political ideologies.
Through this exercise we may obtain an insight into the richness of these styles.
In addition to appreciating their complexity, however, we have also seen something of their internal tensions.
This is hardly surprising since these styles are not fixed and intractable.
Their various facets are constantly being adapted in the light of changing circumstances and requirements.
Having examined the foundations of these styles of public law thought, we should now seek to test our understanding of them by reference to our experience of the subject.
The two dominant styles of public law thought which have been identified in ideal-typical form may be viewed as models.
They should be thought of as models rather than theories because they are orientated to action and to practice.
These models are constructions which are aimed directly at influencing the development of law.
The question is: can we detect their influence in our traditions of public law?
Are these categories of thought manifest in the languages of advocacy and judgment within public law?
THE DOMINANT TRADITION IN PUBLIC LAW
On this issue, my contention is that the dominant tradition of public law thought is to be found in a conservative variant of the normativist style.
We have already seen many of its characteristics in considering approaches to the study of public law.
It may be found in formalism and the analytical method in public law and in the belief that public law is concerned with the ‘order of things’.
And we have explored its ideological roots through an examination of the political philosophy of Michael Oakeshott.
This conservative variant of normativism has, I believe, provided both the authoritative framework for determining the boundaries of the subject and supplied the basic language through which we reflect on issues raised within the subject.
Its status is such that those who work within this dominant tradition have generally felt able to get on with their work without having to reflect on its theoretical foundations.
This normativist approach sets the principal agenda for, and method of, inquiry.
Indeed, it could be argued that it is only problems which are set within this framework that are viewed by the legal community as being properly legal.
Other approaches are marginalized as being ‘theoretical’(that is, not sufficiently practical) or perhaps more properly the concern of another discipline.
The dominant tradition of conservative normativism has, during this century, come to operate hierarchically, defensively, and complacently.
Having become established, people tend to work within the tradition for reasons which are never properly articulated.
Indeed, it is through this sort of process that public law comes to be seen as concerned with ‘the order of things’.
The tradition is then perpetuated through the standard textbooks and is transmitted in teaching by asking students to ‘do it my way’.
In these respects there are some similarities between the way in which Kuhn views the paradigm of ‘normal science’ operating in the natural sciences and the way in which this dominant tradition has been established in public law.
We must now turn to examine the making and shaping of this dominant tradition of conservative normativism in British public law.
DICEY'S THEORY OF PUBLIC LAW
We begin with A. V. Dicey, Vinerian Professor of English Law at Oxford University between 1882 and 1909.
Dicey lived during a period of great political and economic change, a period in which the range and the functions of government expanded greatly and in which legislation was used explicitly as a method of changing social conditions.
As we have seen, Dicey recognized that, in this social context, the function of the academic lawyer could not be simply to venerate the ancient constitution.
Rather, the duty of the constitutional lawyer must be to analyse the legal foundations of the British constitution in a methodical manner.
‘We are compelled’, wrote Dicey, ‘to search for the guidance of first principles.’
Dicey is generally regarded as the high priest of orthodox constitutional theory.
Both the form and the substance of his approach rapidly assumed an authoritative status and have played a major role in shaping the dominant tradition.
In part, this achievement was because of Dicey's role as a codifier and purveyor of the analytical method.
During the 1930s, for example, Sir Ivor Jennings readily acknowledged that Dicey was ‘the first to apply the juridical method to English public law’.
The method has become so ensconced in public law thought that today we seem incapable of recognizing any work which predates Dicey; it is as though he invented the subject.
But Dicey's influence is not confined to his  method.
His theory of public law was also influenced by a particular outlook or political ideology.
As Keeton acknowledges, Dicey ‘inherited an outlook upon the constitution which owed something to Burke, Blackstone and Bagehot, and which saw in the English system the climax of political achievement’.
It is this combination of method and values that underpins conservative normativism.
Dicey is important precisely because he expressed both the form and substance of normativism in a clear and simple manner.
In Keeton's words, ‘it was left to Dicey to formulate in general principles the assumptions on which political association was founded’.
Sovereignty, democracy, and law
Dicey identified three guiding principles which underpinned the British constitution: the legislative sovereignty of Parliament; the universal rule throughout the constitution of ordinary law; and the role which constitutional conventions play in the ordering of the constitution.
His objective in the Law of the Constitution was to explain these principles and to illustrate their interlocking nature.
Dicey considered the sovereignty of Parliament, from a legal point of view, to be ‘the dominant characteristic of our political institutions’.
This doctrine requires some explanation.
First, Parliament ‘in the mouth of a lawyer’ means ‘the King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons; these three bodies acting together may be aptly described as the ‘King in Parliament’, and constitute Parliament'.
It is only when thus defined that Parliament ‘has, under the English constitution, the right to make or unmake any law whatsoever; and, further, that no person or body is recognised…as having the right to override or set aside the legislation of Parliament’.
Dicey's identification of sovereignty as a basic principle is based in part on the work of earlier writers and in part on the use of historical examples to demonstrate both the breadth of Parliament's authority and the absence of any competing legislative authority.
His method is therefore essentially empirical.
He was not particularly concerned with ‘speculative difficulties of placing any limits  whatever on sovereignty’.
So far as Dicey was concerned Parliamentary sovereignty was ‘a legal fact’ and his purpose was to demonstrate that ‘Parliament does constitute such a supreme legislative authority or sovereign power as, according to Austin and other jurists, must exist in every civilised state.’
Dicey's outlook thus seems positivist and his concept of sovereignty seems absolutist and authoritarian.
That, however, would not be an entirely faithful reading.
To appreciate why we must understand that Dicey's theory was tempered both by his conception of democracy and by the adoption of a normativist conception of law.
In order to appreciate the significance of Dicey's views on democracy we should recall, in particular, the fact that political opinion during the last decades of the nineteenth century was dominated by a concern with the rise of democracy.
In 1885 Sir Henry Maine echoed the conservative dissent:
The delusion that democracy…is a progressive form of government, lies deep within the convictions of a particular political school; but there can be no delusion grosser…
All that has made England famous and all that has made England wealthy, has been the work of minorities, sometimes very small ones.
It seems to me quite certain that, if for four centuries there had been a very widely extended franchise and a very large elected body in this country, there would have been no reformation of religion, no change of dynasty, no toleration of Dissent, not even an accurate Calendar.
The threshing-machine, the power-loom, the spinning-jenny, and possibly the steam-engine, would have been prohibited.
…[W]e may say generally that the gradual establishment of the masses in power is the blackest omen for all legislation founded on scientific opinion, which requires tension of mind to understand it, and self-denial to submit to it.
In Sir Ernest Barker's words, Maine ‘was the tragic voice, sonorous behind the mask of Cassandra, which uttered the feelings that had gathered since the extension of the suffrage in 1867’.
Spencer similarly was sceptical and argued that the doctrine of the divine right of kings would be replaced by the divine right of  Parliament as the new superstition.
Even Bagehot was uneasy about the ‘leap in the dark’ made in 1867:
[O]ur statesmen have the greatest opportunities they have had for many years, and likewise the greatest duty.
They have to guide the new voters in the exercise of the franchise; to guide them quietly, and without saying what they are doing, but still to guide them.
…They settle the conversation of mankind.
…The common ordinary mind is quite unfit to fix for itself what political question it shall attend to; it is as much as it can do to judge decently of the questions which drift down to it, and are brought before it…
And in settling what these questions shall be, statesmen have now especially a great responsibility if they raise questions which will excite the lower orders of mankind; if they raise questions on which the interest of those orders is not identical with, or is antagonistic to, the whole interest of the State, they will have done the greatest harm they can do.
…Just when it is desirable that ignorant men, new to politics, should have good issues, and only good issues, put before them, these statesmen will have suggested bad issues.
They will have suggested topics which will bind the poor as a class together; topics which will excite them against the rich; topics the discussion of which in the only form in which that discussion reaches the ear will be to make them think that some new law can make them comfortable…— that Government has at its disposal an inexhaustible fund out of which it can give to those who now want without also creating elsewhere other and greater wants.
Bagehot, then, was anxious for the education of the new political class and was greatly concerned whether our system of government, which was possible ‘because England was a deferential country’, could survive the change.
Dicey, however, was not quite so pessimistic.
He certainly feared ‘class legislation’ and he recognized the tendency of social legislation to destroy the moral fibre of the nation.
But he took a more optimistic view than Bagehot and  believed that constitutionalism could be maintained by the British practice of ‘democracy tempered by snobbishness’.
The other constraint on the absolutist interpretation of the sovereignty concept arose from Dicey's normativist conception of law.
Dicey felt that ‘a real limit to the exercise of sovereignty is imposed not by the laws of man but by the nature of things’.
He believed that liberty was best preserved by maintaining the balance implicit in the guiding legal principles of the constitution.
Consequently, while Parliamentary sovereignty is ‘an instrument well adapted for the establishment of democratic despotism’, on a true understanding of the interlocking nature of the concept of sovereignty with the principles of the rule of law it is conducive to the promotion of liberty.
This is because, first, ‘the sovereignty of Parliament, as contrasted with other forms of sovereign power, favours the supremacy of law’ and, secondly, ‘the predominance of rigid legality throughout our institutions evokes the exercise, and thus increases the authority of Parliamentary sovereignty’.
Parliamentary sovereignty was felt to be compatible with the rule of law primarily because ‘the commands of Parliament…can be uttered only through the combined actions of its three constituent parts’ and that, ‘unlike a sovereign monarch who is not only a legislator but a ruler, that is, head of the executive government, has never hitherto been able to use the powers of the government as a means of interfering with the regular course of law’.
The rule of law upholds Parliamentary sovereignty because the ‘rigidity of the law constantly hampers…the action of the executive, and…the government can escape only by obtaining from Parliament the discretionary authority which is denied to the Crown by the law of the land’
Dicey's formulation of the idea of the ‘rule of law’, while evoking the idea of Parliament and the courts as being the true fountains of law within the British constitution, is not without its ambiguities.
He felt that the concept had three meanings.
First, the ‘absolute supremacy…of regular law as opposed to the influence of arbitrary power’.
Secondly, it meant equality before the law, or ‘the equal subjection of all classes to the ordinary law of the land  administered by the ordinary Law Courts’.
Finally, the concept was a formula for expressing the fact that, in our system, ‘the principles of private law have…been by the action of the Courts and Parliament so extended as to determine the position of the Crown and of its servants’.
That is, ‘the constitution is the result of the ordinary law of the land’ and that ‘the law of the constitution…[is]not the source but the consequence of the rights of individuals’.
Running throughout these meanings there endures a normativist conception of law.
Within the first meaning we see a conception of law founded on general rules; an idea that Dicey had signalled earlier with his references to ‘rigid legality’.
The second meaning appeals to a principle of universality.
And the third constitutes an expression of the common law tradition.
Also implicit within, but fundamental to, Dicey's conceptual structure is the idea of the separation of powers.
The principle of the separation of powers is, for example, clearly evident in his views on administrative law.
By administrative law Dicey meant a special body of rules, institutions and procedures which, as with the French system of droit administratif , is established to determine the rights, powers, liabilities, and immunities of public officials and of private individuals in their dealings with public bodies.
He regarded this system as inimical to the rule of law for a number of reasons: first, because it undermined the principles of equality and universality of law; secondly, because it placed the State in a privileged position and would therefore threaten the historic achievement of bringing the Crown under law; and, thirdly, insofar as it resulted in the establishment of special courts, it infringed the principle of the separation of judicial and ministerial powers.
The idea of the separation of powers also seems to influence Dicey's belief that Parliamentary sovereignty favours the supremacy of law.
The idea here is that Parliament will set the framework of general rules for society, the executive will govern within those rules and an independent judiciary will resolve disputes over the meaning of those rules and will, in particular, keep the executive within the boundaries of law.
We see here the importance of Parliament as an expression of ‘self-correcting democracy’.
Dicey's theory thus seems constructed on the idea of balances within parliamentary mechanisms.
Here we may discern a connection  with the Whig imagery of balance which dominated constitutional writing a century earlier.
But, like Millar, Dicey's idea of balance is not that of a balance between the different estates; it is a balance within Parliament which ultimately reflects a balance in society in general.
This vision is particularly evident in Dicey's views on the role of conventions.
Dicey maintained that conventions are mainly rules governing the exercise of the Crown's prerogative powers and privileges of the Houses of Parliament.
These conventional rules all have one ultimate object: ‘Their end is to secure that Parliament, or the Cabinet which is indirectly appointed by Parliament, shall in the long run give effect to the will of the power which in modern England is the true political sovereign of the State — the majority of electors or…the nation.’
Continuity and change within Dicey's theory
I have stressed the view that Dicey's importance can be traced to his role both in codifying certain ideas and in adapting the analytical method to public law.
We may now assess the significance of his role by examining the themes of continuity and change in relation to his twin principles of Parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law.
There is an important strand in English thought, which is traceable to Hobbes's idea of civitas , and which believes that the only way to preserve society is by acknowledging a perpetual sovereign power.
This is a political idea and it is one which we have seen expressed in a contemporary form in Oakeshott's idea of respublica .
Dicey does not, apparently, endorse this view since, as a result of his analytical method, he makes a formal distinction between a political and legal concept of sovereignty.
There is, however, a major difficulty with this distinction.
One crucial characteristic of sovereignty is that it is apparently indivisible.
Either the Queen-in-Parliament is sovereign or the sovereign electorate delegates its power to that body.
If the delegation is absolute and unconditional then the electorate cannot be sovereign; if it delegates its power on trust then Parliament cannot be sovereign.
This formal distinction does not therefore seem  convincing.
If then, as I have already suggested we must, we challenge the formal distinctions of the analytical method, Dicey can be seen as being deeply rooted within this tradition of thought.
I have already mentioned that Dicey finds support for the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty in the work of earlier writers.
Amongst these writers Blackstone is undoubtedly pre-eminent.
On the power and jurisdiction of Parliament, Blackstone had this to say:
It hath sovereign and uncontrollable authority in making, conforming enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing, reviving, and expounding of laws, concerning matters of all possible denominations, ecclesiastical or temporal, civil, military, or criminal: this being the place where that absolute despotic power, which must in all governments reside somewhere, is entrusted by the constitution of these kingdoms.
…It can, in short, do everything that is not naturally impossible; and therefore some have not scrupled to call its power, by a figure rather too bold, the omnipotence of Parliament.
True it is, that what the Parliament doth, no authority upon earth can undo.
So that it is a matter most essential to the liberties of this kingdom, that such members be delegated to this important trust, as are most eminent for their probity, their fortitude, and their knowledge; for it was a known apophthegm of the great lord treasurer Burleigh, ‘that England could never be ruined but by a Parliament’…
To the same purpose the president Montesquieu, though I trust too hastily, presages; that as Rome, Sparta, and Carthage have lost their liberty and perished, so the constitution of England will in time lose its liberty, will perish: it will perish whenever the legislative power shall become more corrupt than the executive.
The first half of this quotation is well known to lawyers and is often quoted.
When the fuller text is consulted, however, it seems evident that Blackstone himself makes no clear distinction between political and legal ideas of sovereignty.
Blackstone's idea of sovereignty addresses both the legal idea of the unlimited legislative power of the Queen-in-Parliament and the political idea of vesting absolute power in a single institution.
Blackstone should be viewed as working within this Hobbesian tradition.
Similarly with Dicey.
When his general writing is examined it is clear that, notwithstanding the analytical distinction he makes in  Law of the Constitution, Dicey worked within this tradition.
Dicey's position on this question is seen most clearly in his attitude to federalism.
In 1915 Dicey wrote that although federalism possessed a ‘vague, and therefore the strong and imaginative, charm’ there is ‘good reason to fear that the federalisation of the United Kingdom, stimulating as it would the disruptive force of local nationalism, might well arouse a feeling of divided allegiance’.
Dicey argued, not only that belief in the inherent excellence of federalism was a ‘delusion’, but that it also ran against the grain of English history:
Federalism, as the dissolution of the United Kingdom, is absolutely foreign to the historical and, so to speak, instinctive policy of English constitutionalists.
Each successive generation from the reign of Edward I. onwards has laboured to produce that complete political unity which is represented by the absolute sovereignty of the Parliament now sitting at Westminster.
…To every foreign country, whether it were numbered among our allies or among our rivals, the federalisation of Great Britain would be treated as a proof of the declining power alike of England and of the British Empire.
I do not consider that Dicey's beliefs on the nature of political authority can be, or should be, divorced from his conception of legal sovereignty.
In Bernard Crick's words ‘the legal doctrine of sovereignty…was almost consciously confused with the empirical, pseudo-historical doctrine: that political stability, indeed law and order themselves, depended on parliamentary sovereignty’.
From this perspective Dicey's views on sovereignty are on all fours with Oakeshott's.
Both are elaborations of conservative normativism.
Dicey's views on the rule of law also merit detailed scrutiny.
The contemporary difficulty has been well expressed by Judith Shklar who suggests that:
It would not be difficult to show that the phrase ‘the Rule of Law’ has become meaningless thanks to ideological abuse and general over-use.
It may well have become just another one of those self-congratulatory rhetorical devices that grace the public utterances of Anglo-American  politicians.
No intellectual effort need therefore be wasted on this bit of ruling-class chatter.
Despite having certain sympathies with that view, Shklar dismisses her initial inclinations.
She recognizes that historically the concept has had a significant place in the vocabulary of political theory and notes that legal theorists continue to invoke the concept and argue about its meaning.
She therefore engages in a diagnostic experiment of identifying historically distinct meanings of the concept in order to use them as a measure against contemporary political usage.
Shklar argues that the rule of law originally had two quite distinct meanings.
We might refer to these as the ancient and modern conceptions.
The ancient conception, which Shklar attributes to Aristotle, is the ‘rule of reason’.
In this conception the single most important condition for the rule of law is the character of those who engage in legal judgments:
Justice is the constant disposition to act fairly and lawfully…
It is part of such a character to reason syllogistically and to do so his passions must be silent.
In the course of forensic argument distorted syllogisms will of course be urged upon those who judge.
That indeed is the nature of persuasive reasoning, but those who judge, be they few or many, must go beyond it to reason their way to a logically necessary conclusion.
To achieve that they must understand exactly just how forensic rhetoric and persuasive reasoning work, while their own ratiocination is free from irrational imperfections.
For that a settled ethical character is as necessary as is intelligence itself.
Within this conception those called upon to exercise legal judgment must be able to recognize the claims of others as if they were their own.
On the shoulders of this group rests the responsibility for preserving the basic standards of the polity.
On such character depends the security of society.
Although this conception seems to focus on courts, where ‘justice is activated into legality’, its impact is more wide-ranging:
[I]n the structure of the politics the presence of men with such a mind-set, most usually middle-class moderates, has the effect of inhibiting the self-destructive proclivities that tend to afflict most regimes.
The rule of reason depends decidedly on the capacity of the sane to persuade others to practise some degree of self restraint and to maintain the legal order that best fits the ethical structure of the polity.
By way of contrast, the modern conception of the rule of law, which Shklar attributes to Montesquieu, is not so much the rule of reason as a set of institutional constraints.
It is a principle of limited government based on the ideas that what was required was ‘a properly equilibrated political system in which power was checked by power in such a way that neither the violent urges of kings, nor the arbitrariness of legislatures could impinge directly upon the individual’.
The modern conception is therefore closely associated with the idea of the separation of powers and the principle that public officials should not violate a private sphere of conduct.
There are basic differences between the ancient and modern conceptions.
The ancient conception has enormous ethical and intellectual scope but applies to only a few people; the modern conception concerns a limited number of protective arrangements which concern every member of society.
The modern conception is built on a principle of equality before the law; the ancient conception is entirely compatible with a slave society.
The key question we need to address is whether Dicey's notion is rooted in an ancient or modern conception of the rule of law.
Shklar regards Dicey's work as constituting the most influential restatement of the rule of law since the eighteenth century.
She therefore considers it most unfortunate that his statement amounted to an ‘outburst of Anglo-Saxon parochialism’.
By this she meant, first, that Dicey began by finding the rule of law inherent in the remote English past, in the depth of the early Middle Ages.
He therefore ascribed its validity to its antiquity; on its having grown, rather than being constructed as in the written constitutions of continental Europe.
And, secondly, she points to the importance to Dicey of the idea that all cases were judged by the same body of people, following a single body of rules.
It was through this process that Dicey felt that England had escaped the threat to liberty presented by administrative law.
Shklar argues that, with Dicey, the concept was ‘both trivialized as the peculiar patrimony of one and only one national order, and formalized, by the insistence that only one set of inherited procedures and court practices could sustain  it’ Dicey thus suggested that, rather than the purposes of juridical rigour, it was the forms that were significant for freedom.
Shklar is undoubtedly accurate in her general assessment.
What I should like to highlight, however, is the fact that, notwithstanding Dicey's formalism, his theory is suffused with the ideas of the ancient conception of the rule of law.
Aspects of Dicey's concept of the rule of law, such as the principle of equality before the law, undoubtedly reflect the modern conception.
But I think that contemporary interpretations of Dicey as a positivist who was concerned to freeze late nineteenth century political principles obscures more than it illuminates.
In putting this case we should first recollect the third pillar in Dicey's concept of the rule of law.
This pillar, which constituted a defence of the common law tradition, seems to be firmly rooted in the ancient conception, for the rather simple reason that this conception of the rule of law is clearly reflected in the common law tradition itself.
This tradition of the common law mind and the doctrine of the ancient constitution has already been examined.
When considering these ideas we saw, in Sir Edward Coke's idea of the law as ‘the golden metwand’ and his articulation of the ‘artificial reason’of the common law, as clear an expression of the ancient conception of the rule of law as one could expect to find.
Coke's juridical ideas lived on through Hale and Mansfield and his political ideas filter through the work of Blackstone and Burke.
Notwithstanding Dicey's curt rejection of the vulgar Whig idea of the ancient constitution, I believe that it is through the influence of this tradition on Dicey that we are able to make sense of his thought.
We may most easily reveal the power of these influences on Dicey's thought by posing what from a contemporary perspective seems to be a major difficulty with Dicey's theory: how do we reconcile the twin principles of parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law?
How can an absolutist doctrine of sovereignty rest in harmony with the idea of the rule of law?
From the standpoint of mainstream contemporary jurisprudence the issue seems irreconcilable.
The issue seems resonant of the classic Hart-Fuller debate in which — to re-interpret — Hart posits sovereignty as the criterion of  identity of law against Fuller's conception of the rule of law as embodying the essence of law.
Dicey, however, believed that, on a true appreciation of the constitution, the principles should be viewed as being complementary.
I have already tried to explain his views by reference to his ideas about democracy and law.
Here we might examine another layer of the onion.
My argument is that this harmonious interpretation can be fully understood only by interpreting Dicey's entire theory in the light of the ancient conception of the rule of law.
The primary stumbling block is the concept of sovereignty.
On this issue we might first note that Dicey, in seeking the support of earlier writers for his conception of sovereignty, refers mainly to Coke, Hale, and Blackstone.
The significance of this lies not only in the fact that these are all writers who themselves adopted the ancient conception of the rule of law.
It also rests on their shared view of Parliament as ‘the highest and greatest court over which none other can have jurisdiction in the kingdom’.
That is, Parliament was seen as a vital element in a juridical order which was permeated with the cultural values of the ancient conception of the rule of law.
At this point we must remind ourselves that Shklar includes as part of this ancient conception the idea of ‘middle-class moderates’ within the structure of politics who are able to persuade others to practise self-restraint and maintain a legal order that best fits the ethical structure of the polity.
This is precisely how Dicey viewed Parliament and expected it to act.
Keeton, for example, suggests that Dicey felt that Parliament was in no danger of abusing its powers ‘because it was a combination of diverse elements, linked together by an intricate system of ‘checks and balances’…and also because Englishmen possessed, to a markedly greater degree than other peoples, a mysterious political instinct'.
Gladstone may have been slightly closer to the mark in suggesting that the public schools were part of the constitution.
From this perspective, the discord between Dicey and Maine seems rooted in a  disagreement on the possibility of educating the new political class in the culture of the constitution.
Dicey should not, I believe, be viewed primarily in a modern light as a legal positivist.
In codifying the British constitution he attempted, whether consciously or not, to blend the languages of ancient and modern: tradition and reason; artificial reason and will; Coke and Hobbes; the modern institutional forms and the culture of the ancient constitution.
In that sense he expressed the anxiety of Victorians who were ‘wandering between two worlds, one dead, the other powerless to be born’.
The frailty of Dicey's theory
In 1914, just after the commencement of the First World War that many have suggested marked the beginning of the end of the old order in British society, Dicey wrote an extended introduction to the eighth edition of Law of the Constitution .
In this — his last — introduction Dicey sought to ‘compare our constitution as it stood and worked in 1884 with the constitution as it now stands in 1914’ His views are illuminating.
Dicey felt, first, that during the previous 40 years ‘faith in parliamentary government has suffered an extraordinary decline’.
The main reason why this is so is that ‘our English [sic]executive is, as a general rule, becoming more and more the representative of a party rather than the guide of the country’.
New political conventions have arisen to meet the wants of a new time, the general tendency of which has been ‘to increase the power of any party which possesses a parliamentary majority’ and ‘to place the control of legislation, and indeed the whole government of the country, in the hands of the Cabinet’.
Dicey thus identifies the growth in power of the party machine as the source of the problem: ‘Coalitions, log-rolling, and parliamentary intrigue are in England diminishing the moral and political faith in the House of Commons.’
In passages which resonate with the spirit of Bagehot, ‘a man of genius’, Dicey argues that the ‘rule of a party cannot be permanently identified with the authority of the nation or with the dictates of patriotism’ and that ‘while popular government may be under wise leadership a good machine for simply destroying existing evils, it may turn out a very poor instrument for the construction of new institutions or the realisation of new ideals’The limitations in practice of his belief in ‘democracy tempered by snobbishness’are finally conceded:
The time has come when the fact ought to be generally admitted that the amount of government…which is necessary to the welfare or even to the existence of a civilised community, cannot permanently co-exist with the effective belief that deference to public opinion is in all cases the sole or the necessary basis of a democracy.
The distrust which Dicey felt concerning this tendency of party government to destroy the balance of parliamentary institutions caused him to advocate the use of various institutional control devices.
He did not openly support the maintenance of the power of the House of Lords to veto legislation but he seemed to do so implicitly since he expressed concern that the authority of the Lords had been ‘gravely diminished’ He did, however, explicitly propose the introduction of proportional representation arguing that it ‘may sometimes secure a hearing in the House of Commons for opinions which, though containing a good deal of truth, command little or comparatively little popularity’.
Dicey also recommended the use of the referendum, on the ground that it ‘may diminish the admitted and increasing evil of our party system’.
Dicey's concerns in 1914 also extended to apprehension about the principle of the rule of law:
The ancient veneration for the rule of law has in England suffered during the last thirty years a marked decline.
The truth of this assertion is proved by actual legislation, by the existence among some classes of a certain  distrust both of the law and the judges, and by a marked tendency towards the use of lawless methods for the attainment of social or political ends.
The reference here to distrust of the judiciary once again accentuates Dicey's adoption of the ancient conception of the rule of law.
Law bolstered the moral order of society and judges, as custodians of those values, were deserving of respect and trust.
Dicey viewed the intrinsic connection between law and morality as a vital part of the rule of law.
The new class of citizens whom democracy has empowered ‘partly because of the fairness and regularity with which the law has been enforced for generations in Great Britain, hardly perceive the risk and ruin involved in a departure from the rule of law’.
The tendency of recent legislation also provided cause for concern.
Modern legislation had increasingly vested quasi-judicial powers in officials and excluded or indirectly diminished the authority of the courts.
Dicey recognized that this practice was ‘due, in part, to the whole current of legislative opinion in favour of extending the sphere of the State's authority’ since the courts themselves, being obliged to act in accordance with ‘the strict rules of law’, were unsuited to ‘manage a mass of public business’.
Dicey thus felt that ‘the law of England is being ‘officialised’…by statutes passed under the influence of socialistic ideas'.
This process directly undermined the rule of law: ‘such transference of authority saps the foundation of that rule of law which has been for generations a leading feature of the English constitution.’
Nor did he see much hope in the extension of parliamentary redress: ‘any man who will look plain facts in the face will see in a moment that ministerial liability to the censure not in fact by Parliament, nor even by the House of Commons, but by the party majority who keep the Government in office, is a very feeble guarantee indeed against action which evades the authority of the law courts.’
Finally, Dicey conceded that in the years since 1885 the French system of droit administratif had become increasingly judicialized  and that the entirely negative portrayal of 1885 may no longer be justified.
He thus concluded, perhaps from pessimism about the nature of general trends, on a surprising note:
It is at least conceivable that modern England would be benefited by the extension of official law.
Nor is it quite certain that the ordinary law Courts are in all cases the best body for adjudicating upon the offences or the errors of civil servants.
It may require consideration whether some body of men who combined official experience with legal knowledge and who were entirely independent of the Government of the day, might not enforce official law with more effectiveness than any Division of the High Court.
In later life Dicey therefore felt that developments in society and politics were threatening the idea of the British constitution which he had sought to formulate in 1885.
The harmony of the guiding principles of the constitution had been threatened by the rise of party government and by the acquisition of powers by government.
Dicey's 1914 Introduction may be read as a lament; having adopted an optimistic view of the impact of democracy on the workings of the British constitution he realized his error and wished to realign himself with Bagehot's — if not Maine's — more pessimistic position.
His work is thus marked with a bitter irony which permeated not only the substance of his theory but also its method.
The Law of the Constitution , as we have seen, commences with a sneer at ‘the religious enthusiasm of Burke’ and ‘the fervent self-complacency of Hallam’and proposes analysis, rather than veneration, of the constitution.
In his final commentary, however, he is to be found mourning the loss of faith:
This [contemporary]condition…greatly puzzles the now small body of surviving constitutionalists old enough to remember the sentiment of the mid-Victorian era, with its prevalent belief that to imitate the forms, or at any rate to adopt the spirit of the English constitution, was the best method whereby to confer upon the people of any civilised country the combined blessings of order and of progress.
Dicey and the shaping of the dominant tradition
Dicey has played a major role in the shaping of twentieth-century thought in public law.
His work is rooted in the conservative variant of normativism.
In the interpretation of Dicey which I have  presented the themes that recur in Oakeshott — anti-rationalism, the importance of tradition, and the value of practical experience — can be seen to play major roles in Dicey's theory.
They share common views on the idea of knowledge and of the character of political and legal experience.
More specifically, they hold very similar views on the issues of authority and law.
In Oakeshott's view the establishment of the authority of the ruler is the paramount consideration in establishing the polity and the admiration which he expresses for Hobbes is rooted in the latter s replacement of reason by will as the foundation of political authority.
This perspective, I have argued, forms a major influence on Dicey's views on sovereignty.
Oakeshott's belief in the importance of will rather than reason in establishing political authority flows from his views on rationalism.
His conception of civil association as a form of moral association and his idea of jus of lex should not therefore be viewed rationalistically.
He believed that rationality, as distinct from rationalism, required fidelity to the knowledge we have acquired of how to conduct specific activities.
His views on civil association and the rule of law should be understood as expressions of the values of the ancient conception of the rule of law.
This, for example, is why he believed Hobbes (and himself) to be an authoritarian but not an absolutist.
As I have already suggested, Dicey's views on both the rule of law and the constitution in general should be interpreted in the light of his belief in the ancient idea of the rule of law.
I have also suggested that both Oakeshott and Dicey, in upholding authority and law, apparently blend will and reason or, in the terms of the modern jurisprudential debate, Hart and Fuller.
More strictly, they should be seen as blending Hobbes and Coke, since the idea of reason Dicey and Oakeshott each have in mind is the artificial reason and practical knowledge of the common law.
These values permeate their views on the nature of parliament, the judiciary, and liberty.
Oakeshott, for example, argues that parliamentary government and democratic (rationalist) politics belong to quite different traditions:
The truth is…that the institutions of parliamentary government sprang from the least rationalistic period of our politics, from the Middle Ages, and (despite the cloud of false theory with which recent centuries have enveloped them) were connected, not with the promotion of a rationalist order of society, but (in conjunction with the common law) with the limitation of the exercise of political power and the opposition to tyranny in whatever form it appeared.
The root of so-called ‘democratic theory’ is not the rationalist optimism about the perfectibility of human society, but scepticism about the possibility of such perfection and the determination not to allow human life to be perverted by the tyranny of a person or fixed by the tyranny of an idea.
These views, which are reminiscent of those of Maine and Bagehot, were also held by Dicey, notwithstanding his initial optimism about accommodating democracy to parliamentary government.
He believed that parliamentary government could go a great way towards securing personal liberty but ‘neither parliamentary government nor any other form of constitution…will ever of itself remove all or half the sufferings of human beings.
Utopias lead to disappointment just because they are utopias’.
Dicey and Oakeshott's view of the role of the judiciary is similarly rooted in a scepticism of a scientific approach to adjudication.
As Dicey says, ‘the appeal to precedent is in the law courts merely a useful fiction by which judicial decision conceals its transformation into judicial legislation’.
These are not the words of a proto-realist.
His views must be interpreted within the tradition within which he worked.
What Dicey is saying, and with which Oakeshott would agree, is that the common law system of precedent satisfies the requirements of both continuity and innovation and, more generally, the common law tradition retains the value of political experience.
These traditions of government and law have served to protect our liberties.
Here, it scarcely needs stating, we have in mind a traditional, negative conception of liberty.
Dicey, for example, suggested that the meaning which T. H. Green gave to the concept of liberty ‘was lending support to the current growth of state intervention and ‘social despotism’.’
And the continuing vitality  of these traditions rested on ‘public opinion’ or ‘the prevailing educated moral sensibility of a people’.
These values of conservative normativism underpin the dominant tradition of public law.
They shape orthodox views on such matters as sovereignty and liberty, the authority of the judiciary, and the relationship between common law and statute, particularly when the statute in question may be classified as social legislation.
That we do not see clearly the value system which gives meaning to our orthodox construction of the subject is in part because of the method of this orthodoxy.
The analytical method, which has also been taken from Dicey, and forms part of this orthodoxy supposedly separates fact from value; parliamentary sovereignty, for example, is viewed as part of ‘the order of things’ rather than a concept derived from a particular political theory.
This method constitutes a barrier to understanding.
Nevertheless, notwithstanding the adoption of an analytical method, the dominant tradition is both anti-rationalist and anti-formalist in conception.
While Dicey played a major role in shaping this tradition, his particular views are not to be equated with it.
Although strongly influenced by Dicey, the tradition comes to take on a life of its own.
What specific meanings Dicey himself intended when writing the Law of the Constitution matters little.
The fact that he appeared to revise his views between 1885 and 1914 is not necessarily important.
Although Dicey's theory played a major role in shaping the dominant tradition, his views are subsequently re-invented in the light of the requirements of this tradition.
DICEY AND HIS TIMES
As we have already seen when we considered the foundations of functionalism, the period between 1880 and 1914, during which Dicey wrote, was one of major social and economic change.
This period of the second industrial revolution is marked especially as a period of rapid industrialization and urbanization.
These changes also had a significant impact at the political level as government  sought to introduce reforms to accommodate these changes.
As Maitland, who was a contemporary of Dicey, recognized, one repercussion of the consequent growth in the quantity and complexity of government business was that there was ‘a tendency…on the part of parliament to confine itself to the work of legislation, of framing general rules of law, and of entrusting the power of dealing with particular cases to the king's ministers, to boards of commissioners, to courts of law’.
In other words, there was a growth in the use of ‘framework legislation’, with Parliament establishing a general framework for controlling or regulating an area of activity and granting to governmental agencies both rule-making powers to put flesh on the framework or quasi-judicial powers to resolve disputes that arose in the course of implementing these schemes.
The vesting of such powers in governmental bodies was certainly not new.
What was significant, however, was not so much the practices themselves but rather their scale.
One might have thought that these trends would not present major difficulties since one apparent virtue of the British constitution was its flexibility.
Dicey, however, did not respond to these developments in the role of government by proposing legal arrangements which might ensure that the values of individual liberty were reconciled with these new powers of government.
Instead, he developed a concept of the rule of law, drawing on aspects of both the ancient and modern conceptions, which seemed incompatible with the extensive use of these governmental powers.
Through this conservative normativist theory Dicey attempted to stem the tide of government growth in a collectivist direction.
Dicey's efforts in this direction were as effective as Canute's.
This is not to say that his efforts did not have an impact.
The effect, however, seemed to be quite contrary to his intentions.
By denying the existence of administrative law in the face of the structural pressures for the growth in administration, the influence which Dicey's theory had on political and legal thought served to shield us from the realities and to prevent us from addressing the issues raised by these developments in a constructive fashion.
Rather ironically, given the ‘note of condescension, almost of contempt,[which]characterises Dicey's exposition of continental constitutions’, almost all studies undertaken of the French system of droit administratif have cast doubt on the superiority of the British approach and have concluded that the French system provides greater protections than our own.
Dicey's approach, nevertheless, lived on in the minds of lawyers.
Writing in 1935 Ivor Jennings suggested that Dicey's ‘authority today is greater than that of any other public lawyer’.
But in pressing Dicey's theory into the service of a tradition his thought was transposed into a crude form.
C. K. Allen has suggested, for example, that: ‘It is evidently difficult for a generation brought up on the early editions of Dicey's Law of the Constitution to relinquish the belief that droit administratif is the sinister embodiment of all the distempers of the commonwealth which the Rule of Law has so proudly repulsed.’
More generally, almost in a caricature of Dicey's views, a belief grew during the early decades of the twentieth century that, because of the destruction in the balances in parliamentary mechanisms wrought by the rise of party government, the courts formed the last bastion in the protection of liberties immanent in constitutional arrangements.
A version of this approach may be seen, for example, in the words of Farwell LJ in Dyson v.
Attorney-General :
If ministerial responsibility were more than the mere shadow of a name, the matter would be less important, but as it is, the Courts are the only defence of the liberty of the subject against departmental aggression.
In such forms it seems but a short step from saying that the courts are also our only effective guardians against the evils of socialism.
By the 1920s, the tone of constitutional debate had shifted from one of complacency and self-satisfaction about our matchless constitution to one of growing unease.
In William Robson's words, ‘the complacent contrast between happy Englishmen free from droit administratif and unhappy Frenchmen subject to its terrors  quietly faded out of the picture’.
It came to be replaced by the view that a ‘new despotism’ was arising from the growing practice of vesting legislative and judicial powers in the Executive.
And it is around this issue that the debate in the inter-war years was polarized.
THE NORMATIVIST CHALLENGE
In concluding the lament that constituted his 1914 Introduction, Dicey tried to end on an optimistic note.
He found it in the fact that the State, ‘united for once in spirit’ and ‘with the fervent consent of the people of every land subject to the rule of our King’had entered on an arduous conflict, not for territory or glory but ‘for the sake of enforcing the plainest rules of international justice and the plainest dictates of common humanity’.
From this event Dicey detected a ‘good omen for the happy development of popular government’.
Here again Dicey seems wide of the mark.
Not only did the First World War produce a major crisis of authority for the old order, but it also resulted in the harnessing by the State, on an unprecedented scale, of the power and resources of the nation towards the war effort.
This experience was not lost on socialists.
If the government could acquire broad discretionary powers under the Defence of the Realm Acts 1914–18 to deal with the emergency could not also a socialist government to meet the peacetime emergencies of poverty and sickness?
As Harold Laski wrote in 1925: ‘Anyone who studies the record of war-control of industry from 1914 to 1918, will be amazed at the mass of material we possess upon the necessary mechanisms of regulation.’
It was in the context of this post-war challenge to the authority of the old order, together with the war-time experience of collectivistic state organization, that normativist lawyers swapped complacency for extreme concern.
The issue was recognized by many even before the war was concluded.
One illustration of the normativist concern, both in analysis and prescription, may be found in Lord Shaw's dissent in R v.
Halliday in 1917:
The increasing crush of legislative efforts and the convenience to the Executive of a refuge to the device of Orders in Council would increase th[e] danger [of transition to arbitrary government]tenfold were the judiciary to approach any such action by the Government in a spirit of compliance rather than of independent scrutiny.
That way also would lie public unrest and public peril.
In the immediate post-war period, the main legal concern lay with local authorities which across the country were coming under Labour control.
Many of these Labour controlled authorities began to use their powers in novel ways by, for example, paying more generous sums in Poor Law relief or in adapting general powers to develop municipal enterprise.
In policing these activities the courts were particularly vigilant.
The cause célèbre of the period is Roberts v.
Hopwood , a case in which the House of Lords upheld the decision of the district auditor to surcharge members of Poplar Borough Council for maintaining a minimum wage for its employees which was not only in excess of wage rates in the area but was also paid to men and women alike.
Not only do we find Lord Sumner in this case denying that elected members ‘are to be guided by their personal opinions on political, economic, or social questions in administering the funds which they derive from levying rates’ but Lord Atkinson denounces the councillors for being guided ‘by some eccentric principles of socialistic philanthropy, or by a femininist ambition to secure equality of the sexes in the world of wages’.
Here we might note that Atkinson is largely following Dicey who talked of ‘the delusion that wages can be raised by legislation’.
But after the formation of the first Labour government in 1924 matters potentially became much more serious, since socialists then  came to be vested with the power of legislation.
This normativist concern came to a head with the publication in 1929 by Lord Hewart, the Lord Chief Justice, of a book entitled The New Despotism .
In this book, Hewart warned against the danger of ‘organised administrative lawlessness’ which was arising from the forms in which new statutory powers were being acquired by government departments.
Hewart claimed that this was ‘a persistent and well-contrived system, intending to produce, and in practice producing, a despotic power which…places Government departments above the Sovereignty of Parliament and beyond the jurisdiction of the Courts’.
The importance of the book is attributable to the status of its author.
For here we find the head of the common law courts, echoing the spirit of Coke, Hale, and Mansfield and working largely within Dicey's framework, expressing anxiety about the challenge to the supremacy of the ‘ordinary law’ posed by statutory developments.
These efforts of the judiciary were supported by a number of academics, such as C. K. Allen and Sir John Marriott.
Their chorus was in harmony with the principals on the judicial stage: ‘To any but those who desire to see a Sidney Webbian England’, wrote Allen, ‘it is essential that the bureaucratic mind be confined to its proper function, which is that of the lieutenant, not the captain.’
Recent tendencies in vesting powers in government departments, however, ‘makes the executive not merely a deputy but a plenipotentiary’.
Through such thought and writing the spirit of Dicey was fashioned into orthodoxy in public law.
Most of the key actors mentioned had close connections with Dicey, as a pupil or colleague, and to some extent they formed a fairly distinctive group of conservative libertarians.
Hewart had held both Law Officer positions in the post-war Liberal Government (although it should be said that his arguments in The New Despotism did not seem to  trouble him much in that capacity) and Marriott, an Oxford academic, also become a prominent Conservative MP.
More personal links can be traced through Sir Ernest Benn, the founder of the Society for Individual Freedom, who, in addition to being a good friend of Allen, was also the publisher of Hewart's The New Despotism .
But, although the core of this group was quite small and tight-knit, the influence of their ideas was widely felt.
THE FUNCTIONALIST RESPONSE
The normativist crusade did not go unchallenged.
In the interwar period a group of public lawyers and political scientists developed a distinctive functionalist style of public law.
Their basic objective was to challenge Dicey's theory of the constitution.
They sought both to contest his method and to expose the political values on which his theory rested.
But their primary thrust constituted an attack on Dicey's twin principles of parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law.
The challenge to Dicey's theory
Given the concerns of the 1920s, it comes as no surprise that the initial challenge was over the issue of administrative law.
In 1928 William Robson published Justice and Administrative Law , a landmark text which he later described as an attempt ‘to dispel the illusion held by all the leading lawyers, politicians, civil servants and academics who had been brought up on Dicey's Law of the Constitution that in Britain there was no administrative law’ In this book Robson argued that ‘no modern student of law or political science has today the slightest doubt that there exists in England a vast body of administrative law’and that ‘the problem is not to discover it but rather to master its widespread ramifications  and reduce it to some kind of order and coherence’.
Robson was, in one sense, simply echoing the words of Maitland that ‘if you take up a modern volume of the reports of the Queen's Bench division, you will find that about half the cases reported have to do with rules of administrative law’ and that you must ‘not neglect their existence in your general description of what English law is’otherwise ‘you will frame a false and antiquated notion of our constitution’The fact that Robson felt the need to propound this view so strongly, and that Maitland's thoughts seemed to have been almost entirely neglected, serve to indicate that conservative normativism had by the 1920s become established as the dominant tradition.
Robson's aims in Justice and Administrative Law were to examine the extent and nature of administrative adjudication and to provide an intellectual foundation for the development of a system of public law.
He argued that, although courts of law exist to determine rights and departments of state are charged with the implementation of policy, court judgments can be viewed as the expressions of judicial conceptions of social policy and departmental policies do not in general ignore the issue of private rights.
Here we see a characteristic attempt, evident on a range of fronts, to break down the dualisms of normativism.
Robson recognized that, throughout history, courts have performed administrative functions and administrative bodies have undertaken judicial functions.
With the growth in government activity since the late nineteenth century the administration had, for a variety of reasons, become charged with judicial duties.
While the challenge could not be ignored, Robson felt that it would not be resolved by recourse to conceptualistic argument.
Robson's solution was to enhance the judicial process and cultivate the judicial spirit within the administration by developing a rational system of administrative courts.
Robson's text, which focused mainly on administrative adjudication, was complemented by the work of Willis on delegated legislation.
Willis's treatise provided a powerful corrective to Hewart's book.
It argued that there was a long history of use of  such powers; that, with the widening of the sphere of government, the use of delegated legislative powers was necessary for the efficient conduct of business in the modern state; that the civil service was best placed to provide the expertise which was necessary to make effective use of these powers; and that the way in which the powers were actually used in practice was such as to refute any claim of a ‘new despotism’.
In Willis's use of history, his recognition of the roots of social change, and his orientation to practice, we can see similarities with Robson's approach.
Willis's work also shares Robson's view of courts as framers of judicial policy on social and political questions and it contains a number of pointed criticisms of the normativist style.
Such writing on administrative law was bolstered in respect of constitutional law by the work of Ivor Jennings, whose book,The Law and the Constitution , subjected Dicey's constitutional principles to critical examination:
Looking back to the Constitution of 1884 which [Dicey]was analysing…
, I do not think that his interpretation was in every respect correct.
Since then there have been fundamental changes, and few of his principles appear to me to be applicable to the modern Constitution.
Jennings argued that Dicey's ideas on sovereignty were overly conceptualistic and that his concept of the rule of law was based on an individualistic,laissez-faire philosophy.
For Jennings a constitution is ‘only an organisation of men and women’ and is a ‘transient thing, changing like the colours of the kaleidoscope’.
Consequently ‘an examination of its working involves an examination of the social and political forces which make for changes in the ideas and habits of the population’.
Jennings thus began The Law and the Constitution with an examination of the functions of government and, in an approach reflecting the influence of sociological positivism, commenced with an outline of the growing interdependence of society founded in the increasing division of labour.
In general Jennings sought to re-orientate the focus of public law away from Dicey's concern with individual rights and towards an  examination of the powers and functions of public authorities.
Dicey believed that the constitution was based on principles of private law, which had been extended to determine the position of the Crown.
Jennings, however, criticized Dicey for never considering the powers of public authorities.
Rather than replicate a private law focus, Jennings emphasized that ‘the attitude of the modern public lawyer is essentially different from that of the private lawyer’.
The functionalist style
The style of writing exemplified by Jennings, Robson, and Willis displays a number of common patterns.
Their method is empirical and historical, it is imbued with a scientific temperament, and implicit in their approach is an evolutionary conception of progress.
This style of writing focuses on facts rather than abstractions: this explains the differences in the views of Dicey and Jennings on the subject of sovereignty; it is the reason for the disagreement between Dicey and Robson over whether or not we have administrative law; and it is reflected in Willis's argument against Hewart that the test of the existence of the ‘new despotism’ was to be found in the way in which the powers were actually used rather than how the form of the power cut across abstract constitutional principles.
This empiricist orientation and scientific temperament is also harnessed to a progressive outlook.
Robson's choice of a quotation from Whitehead for the epigraph of Justice and Administrative Law is indicative of the general mood:
The period has been one of unprecedented intellectual progress…
We do not go about saying that there is another defeat for science, because its old ideas have been abandoned.
We know that another step of scientific insight has been gained.
The basic objective of these writers was to project an image of public law.
In general public law should ensure that the legal framework within which government operated provided an effective and equitable structure for the implementation of the public good, as expressed in the positive functions of the state.
From this perspective delegated legislation and administrative adjudication  was not a symptom of despotic power but of the changing role of the state.
The use of framework legislation and the practice of delegated legislation were thus viewed essentially as methods of efficiently allocating legislative tasks.
By relieving it of responsibility for details, Parliament was thereby able to concentrate on major issues of policy.
Furthermore, in the modern era of science and specialization, executive expertise is better able than Parliament to deal with complex and technical matters of detail.
Or, as Bernard Shaw more eloquently put it, ‘The ocean of Socialism cannot be poured into the pint pot of a nineteenth century parliament.’
This functionalist approach also stressed the need for a rational system of administrative adjudication.
The courts of law, they argued, are procedurally ill-equipped for this task since their formality, cost, speed, and complexity made them inaccessible to, or intimidating for, the ordinary citizen.
Further, the judiciary do not possess the expertise or technical knowledge and are not provided with the training to deal effectively with the disputatious issues arising under social legislation.
But the functionalists also argue that the ideology which informs the common law approach is hostile to the positive aims of modern government, that the judiciary display a philosophical, cultural, or political bias when reviewing administrative action and therefore that new institutions with new personnel are required to develop a new jurisprudence for the modern age.
The functionalist style of legal writing was greatly influenced by the work of Harold Laski.
From 1915 Laski had worked to construct a theory of the state appropriate to modern times.
The various elements of this work were pulled together in 1925 in his book,A Grammar of Politics .
His objective was to challenge what he called ‘the liberal theory of the state’ which ‘assumed that in  political society where anarchy was to be avoided there must be a supreme authority which gives orders to all and receives orders from none’.
This liberal theory is, of course, the Hobbesian theory which we have associated with conservative normativism.
Laski argued that, while this theory provided for social order, it was deficient insofar as it was unable to provide an adequate technique for coping with peaceful social change.
In the Grammar Laski, before turning his attention to the issue of sovereignty, commenced his analysis, significantly, with an examination of the purpose of social organization and suggested that, when viewed purposively, the State ‘becomes an organisation for enabling the mass of men to realise social good on the largest possible scale’.
It is from this functional perspective, or ‘realistic view of the State’, that he considered the issue of sovereignty.
Here Laski was highly critical of the abstract legal idea of absolute legal sovereignty, arguing that it could not form a realistic basis for political relationships.
Authority in the state is inherently federal since the state is simply one association amongst many.
This idea of authority was linked to his conception of rights.
Rights, which constitute the groundwork of the State, inhere in individuals by virtue of their being members of society: ‘A State which neglects them fails to build its foundations in the hearts of its citizens.’
From these ideas of sovereignty, authority, and rights Laski developed a sophisticated conception of law:
To those for whom law is a simple command, legal by virtue of the source from which it comes, it is not likely that such complexities as these will be popular.
We are urging that law is, in truth, not the will of the State, but that from which the will of the State derives whatever moral authority it may possess.
That is, admittedly, an abandonment of simplicity.
It assumes that the rationale of obedience is in all the intricate facts of social organisation and in no one group of facts.
It denies at once the sovereignty of the State, and that more subtle doctrine by which the State is at once the master and servant of law by willing to limit itself to certain tested rules of conduct.
It insists that what is important in law is not the fact of command but the end at which that command aims and the way it achieves the end.
It sees society, not as a pyramid in which the State sits crowned upon the summit, but as a system of co-operating interests through which, and in  which, the individual finds his scheme of values.
It argues that each individual scheme so found gives to the law whatever of moral rightness it contains.
Law, that is to say, is made valid by my experience of it, and not by the fact that it is presented to me as law.
Such experience, indeed, is rarely separate in kind (though it is always unique in degree) because it is shared with others in the effort to make an impact upon society.
It appears as an interest which seeks the objectivity of realisation.
It strives to suffuse the law with its sense of need.
…Law then emerges as the evaluation of the interests by the interweaving of interests.
It is a function of the whole social structure and not some given aspect of it.
Its power is determined by the degree to which it aids what that whole social structure reports as its desires.
The influences on Laski's political and legal thought are many and various.
His ideas on sovereignty and social organization seem to have been influenced by sociological positivism and by Duguit in particular.
His pluralist view of the nature of the State seems inspired by Maitland.
His view on the role of the state in the fulfilment of individual personality and his related theory of rights seems greatly indebted to T. H. Green.
Laski's political theory can in general be seen as the product of a pragmatic revolt in politics.
Finally, as the quotation demonstrates, his views on law are greatly influenced by Holmes, Gray, and Pound.
While Laski was thus influenced by many of the strands of thought which we have identified as foundations of functionalism, his views have, in turn, held great sway over the development of the functionalist style in public law.
We can, at numerous points, see the clear imprint of Laski's method and approach on the work of these lawyers.
In effect his  agenda of constructing a theory of the state appropriate to the modern world is transformed by the public lawyers into an agenda for building a modern theory of public law.
Laski himself led the way not only in general theoretical orientation but also in the detailed study.
He believed that the implementation of politics constituted its essence, that ‘a working theory of the state must, in fact, be conceived in administrative terms’.
His thoughtful articles during the early 1920s on delegated legislation, administrative discretion, and judicial review of social legislation seem to point the way for Jennings, Robson, and Willis.
Laski's study of judicial review is particularly interesting since its primary focus is a study of Roberts v.
Hopwood .
He concludes the study with the observation that it ‘is an easy step from the Poplar judgment to the conclusion that the House of Lords is, in entire good faith, the unconscious servant of a single class in the community’.
This has two resonances.
First, Laski is counterposing Dicey's normativist concern with ‘class legislation’ with his functionalist concern with ‘class adjudication’.
Secondly, his formulation, particularly in an American law review, reverberates with Holmes's classic dissent in Lochner v.
New York .
Through this latter resonance we can see the connection between the functionalist style and American legal realism.
The functionalist style in public law exhibits tendencies to examine critically the reasoning processes of courts and to expose the value assumptions on which they rest.
It is highly critical of  abstract theorizing, believing that positivist legal theory ‘is an exercise in logic and not in life’ It adopts a sociological approach to evaluating the meaning and purpose of law and the style is rooted in a social scientific approach.
And a particularly important strand to the style was the emphasis on facts and data gathering, rather than conceptualization, to good decision-making; it therefore had a tendency to place greater trust in administrative bodies than courts.
The functionalist public lawyers of the interwar years were our equivalent of the American legal realists.
Just as there were variations within the Realist movement, so also differences of emphasis were to be found in Britain.
Some writing of Jennings, for example, seems more in tune with Pound's sociological jurisprudence, which views social interests rather than legal rules and principles as the building blocks of the legal order.
But the shared pragmatic approach is clearly evident.
Networks and linkages
If the nodal point of normativism was in Oxford, that of the functionalist style was the London School of Economics and Political Science.
This is hardly surprising since the School had been.
established in 1895 by Sidney Webb with the aim of contributing ‘to the improvement of society by promoting the impartial study of its problems and the training of those who were to translate policy into action’.
Evolutionary rationalism was built into its foundations and was reflected in the character of its early work.
This can be seen, for example, by the fact that Graham Wallas, a prominent Fabian, and L. T. Hobhouse, a leading light in New Liberalism, occupied the first chairs of Political Science and Sociology respectively.
Consider also Hawthorn's assessment of Ginsberg, who succeeded to Hobhouse's Chair:
Unlike Hobhouse, he had no teleology, but he did have faith in an historical progression towards the universalisation of morals, towards a greater influence upon men of their consciences (and thus of their own independently critical rationality), and towards a clearer distinction between individual and collective responsibilities (evident in the steady separation of morals, religion and law).
If moral progress was not, as for Hobhouse, pre-ordained, it seemed nevertheless to be occurring.
But Ginsberg realised that it was a conditional matter, and the task of sociology as he saw it was to discern and specify the conditions under which it could continue.
This of course was exactly Durkheim's view…
Ginsberg's framework, which was in accord with the spirit of work being done by Hobson in economics, Tawney in economic history, and Laski in political science, seems equally applicable to the functionalist style of Robson, Jennings, and Willis.
Furthermore, functionalism as a method of social investigation, which is also traceable to Durkheim, seemed particularly influential at the LSE.
Tawney's The Acquisitive Society , for example, constituted a sustained argument on the need to organize society on the basis of  functions rather than rights and Malinowski did much to pioneer the functionalist method in anthropology.
It was in this intellectual environment that the characteristics of the functionalist style were fashioned.
And it is by bringing this institutional dimension into focus that we may fully appreciate the influence of Laski, who was Professor of Political Science at LSE from 1926 to 1950.
The linkages are too numerous to relate but it is worthy of note that, in addition to acknowledging the help of Hobhouse, Wallas, Ginsberg, and Tawney in producing the Grammar , Laski also mentions Holmes, Frankfurter, and Pound.
We can see here the personal link between Fabianism and New Liberalism as political movements, the positivist and functionalist methods in social science, on the one hand, and, on the other, the sociological and realist movements in American law.
Holmes, the grandfather of realism, maintained a remarkable correspondence with Laski.
Frankfurter, the fact-orientated administrative lawyer and eminent New Dealer, was the sponsor of Laski's appointment at Harvard University in 1916.
It may not be going too far to suggest that Laski was the primary conduit through which early twentieth-century developments in American legal thought were filtered into British public law thought.
Jennings and Robson obtained teaching appointments at the LSE in the 1920s and were greatly influenced by Laski.
Pragmatic instrumentalist thought would appear to have had a significant influence on the general intellectual milieu in which Jennings and Robson worked.
When, for example,The Modern Law Review , based at the LSE, was founded in 1937, the Review published as its  first article an essay by Felix Cohen, a prominent American legal realist, called ‘The problems of a functional jurisprudence’.
Despite these various influences we should also recognize that, perhaps because of the growing differentiation of law as a separate discipline (a process recognized by Ginsberg and associated with a positivist outlook), the methods of the social sciences are often not rendered explicit in the functionalist style in public law.
For this reason, their message is not always expressed as clearly as it could be.
The imprint is, nevertheless, clearly discernible.
THE GROWTH OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
Now that the shape of the functionalist style has been outlined, we must consider the influence which it has had on the development of public law this century.
As we have seen, during the early decades of this century debate in public law focused on the issues arising from the growth in the legislative and judicial powers of the Executive.
These issues came to a head with the appointment of the Committee on Ministers' Powers in 1929.
The committee was appointed to consider powers of delegated legislation and quasi-judicial decision and to report on any safeguards needed ‘to secure the constitutional principles of the sovereignty of Parliament and the supremacy of the Law’.
The terms of reference themselves provoked concern, causing Robson to comment that the Donoughmore Committee ‘started life with the dead hand of Dicey lying frozen on its neck’.
Nevertheless, the function of the Committee was not all that it might appear.
It was, after all, established by a Labour government, it included Laski amongst its membership and, being appointed two days before Hewart's book was published, could be viewed as a means of deflecting the pressures from the normativist legal lobby.
In these circumstances, the conclusions of the Committee were all  too predictable.
Robson argued that the Committee had three broad courses of action open to it:
It could (in theory at least) have recommended a return to the eighteenth century position, illustrated by the Lord Chief Justice when he expressed hope that ‘the worst of the offending sections’ in Acts of Parliament be repealed or amended.
It could have accepted the proposals which I put forward to rationalise and institutionalise the administrative jurisdiction in a boldly-conceived system of administrative courts separated to a large extent from the ordinary routine of departmental administration and free from indirect ministerial interference.
Or thirdly, it could accept the patchwork quilt of ill-constructed tribunals which at present exists, and endeavour to remedy some of their more obvious defects.
Presented in this way, it is almost inconceivable to anyone understanding the function of such committees that it would pursue any other than the last alternative.
The Committee's report thus concluded that these practices were necessary in modern circumstances but they suggested that, because of haphazard evolution, the practices lacked coherence and the system should therefore be regularized and checked.
From a functionalist perspective the Committee's value was, first, as a pressure-release valve and, secondly, that it ‘disposed once and for all of this conspiratorial theory of executive power’.
From a normativist perspective the Report seemed to be the occasion for less satisfaction.
Keeton, for example, in the 1950s argued that:
[F]ew reports have assembled so much wisdom whilst proving so completely useless, as the Report of the Committee on Ministers' Powers…
[I]n no important respect did the report influence, much less delay, the onrush of administrative power, and the  supersession of the ordinary forms of law which is today taking place.
…Its report restored to the public a sense of security, which had been badly shaken by Lord Hewart's book, and which subsequent events have proved to be false.
Nevertheless, while the Report may have rejected the reactionary normativist ideology it is also the case that it did nothing to challenge the dominant legal culture.
Orthodox legal views on the  nature of social legislation and the relationship between that legislation and the common law remained untouched by the Report.
The anti-rationalist, anti-systematizing characteristics of conservative normativism were retained intact.
Although the Donoughmore Report dealt not only with delegated legislation but also with administrative adjudication, the latter subject continued to exercise concern.
It was this issue which lay at the heart of Dicey's concern about droit administratif .
Dicey had feared that if the use of administrative tribunals was extended and regularized, particularly if judicial review were excluded, Britain would rapidly develop an independent and formalized system of administrative law.
This is precisely what Robson, Jennings, and Willis were advocating since they argued for the rationalization of our haphazard arrangements for tribunals with an appellate jurisdiction vested in an administrative appeal tribunal which would be separate from the High Court.
And, as we have seen, this development was rejected by the Donoughmore Committee.
As the century progressed the tribunal network mushroomed, with an exponential growth rate most conveniently tracked in the successive editions of Robson's book.
Of the arrangements for health service tribunals, for example, Robson commented: ‘The complexity of this labyrinthine system of adjudication is fantastic.
It is difficult to discover any intelligible principles which would justify, or even explain, the existence of so many different tribunals.’
This is precisely as the normativist tradition would wish.
In this form they are to be conceived of as ad hoc , dispute-resolving mechanisms.
Without a set of intelligible principles to guide them, or a rational institutional structure to supervise them, tribunals cannot develop a system of administrative law.
Nevertheless, in the period after the Second World War, as the Labour government made significant advances in laying down its programme for a welfare state, there was a growing unease about  the scale of administrative activity.
These issues came to a head with the Crichel Down affair in the 1950s, which led to a general ‘moral panic’ about administrative power.
One of the reverberations was the establishment in 1955 of the Franks Committee, charged with the task of examining the working of the system of administrative tribunals and inquiries.
At this stage, we should record, the ideological dimension of conservative normativism altered its tack.
If the growth of administrative adjudication could not be prohibited, it was argued that it must be regularized by integrating it into the ordinary law of the land, thereby ensuring that it develops in harmony with traditional common law principles.
The Report of the Franks Committee in 1957 was recognized by Robson as ‘an important landmark in our constitutional history’, largely because it accepted that administrative tribunals are ‘a valuable and permanent part of the machinery of justice’ and went much further ‘than the grudging admission of the advantages possessed by tribunals accorded by the Donoughmore Report’.
Nevertheless, on the subject of the clash between the normativist and functionalist styles of public law — which emerged in the Franks Committee's investigations over the question of whether any body responsible for supervising administrative tribunals should be detached from or integrated into the Supreme Courts — the Committee came down firmly in favour of integration.
By this stage, then, the Diceyan argument that in Britain we had no administrative law had clearly been rejected.
The rejection of Dicey's view does not, however, constitute a rejection of conservative normativism.
Conservative normativism lived in the analytical method, which is rooted in the divorce of fact from value, and law from politics, and which ran hand-in-hand with the recognition of the universal supervisory jurisdiction of our superior courts of law.
The patchwork quilt of administrative decision-making powers reinforced the idea that this was not a new system of law in the  making and the formalism of normativism led to the idea that to the extent that we had administrative law, the subject consisted wholly or mainly of delegated legislation and administrative adjudication; that is, the forms of administrative action classifiable in terms of a conception of a formal separation of powers.
In general, the project of conservative normativism has been to ensure that the decisions of ‘inferior tribunals’ are subject to review by the superior courts applying the common law.
There have been those in positions of authority who have expressed doubt about the possibilities of this normativist project.
In 1956, for example, Sir Patrick Devlin commented that:
The common law has now, I think, no longer the strength to provide any satisfactory solution to the problem of keeping the executive…under proper control.
The responsibility for that now rests with Parliament and is to be discharged…in two ways.
The first is by keeping a close watch on the powers that are granted to the executive…
The other is by controlling the way in which the executive exercises the powers which it is given.
Since that cannot be effectively done under the law as it stands, there must be created a new body of law of the sort that has come to be called administrative law.
Others, even during the 1950s, adopted a more optimistic note.
Clive Schmitthoff, for example, contended that:
[T]he most significant legal development of the past fifty years is the almost complete absorption of administrative law into the fold of the common law.
This development is an event of the first magnitude, which is comparable to the incorporation of the law merchant into the common law in the eighteenth century.
Schmitthoff's views, expressed in 1951, seem somewhat premature.
It was not until the 1960s that the courts rid themselves of the most debilitating restraints of formalism and assumed a more active supervisory role.
During the 1970s, the consolidation of this role was achieved by procedural reforms providing for a simplified  application for judicial review.
And in the early 1980s, this procedure was established as an essentially exclusive procedure for the determination of public law rights.
By 1982 Lord Diplock signalled the success of the project in commenting, obiter dictum, that:
[T]he progress towards a comprehensive system of administrative law…
I regard as having been the greatest achievement of the English courts in my judicial lifetime.
The functionalist style in public law, it would therefore appear, has maintained its life only as a dissenting tradition.
Its methods and values have rarely been able to challenge the dominance of conservative normativism.