

OVERVIEW
This manual describes the use of the forms NEWOED1–NEWOED7 and the way in which they are to be completed by the lexicographers in order to request services from either or both of the New OED Computer Group or (indirectly) the Computer Services Department.
It also describes the way the New OED Computer Group and the Computer Services Department must complete their sections of the forms to inform the lexicographers that the tasks set by the issuing of these forms have been completed.
The forms are meant to provide a control protocol for all the concerned parties, as well as fulfilling their primary role, that of initiating services.
The forms can be split into two groups:
forms NEWOED1–NEWOED2
these will require the Computer Services Department to follow a set of procedures
forms NEWOED3–NEWOED7
these forms will require the services of the New OED Computer Group only.
Request Serial Number
For control purposes forms have a request serial number .
This serial number will be filled in by the lexicographers and will represent the order in which the Project Director requires the forms to be actioned.
The form with the lowest  sequenced serial number must be processed first.
The priority numbering system will be strictly adhered to unless a specific request is made by the Project Director to the New OED Computer Group or his appointed deputy.
Common Parts of Form
Lexicographers
For all the forms (NEWOED1–NEWOED7) the following should be completed by the lexicographers:
Request Serial Number (see 1.1)
Issued By (please initial)
Date (current date)
New OED Computer Group
The Completion Confirmed on Date space on all the forms should be completed with the current date before a form is returned to the lexicographers.
General Notes Concerning the Forms
The forms are split into sections.
These sections are labelled as Lexicographers ,New OED Computer Group or Computer Services Department .
Not all sections appear on all forms.
Only the section pertaining to a party shall be completed by that party.
All other sections shall be left untouched.
CONTROL ENVIRONMENT
Lexicographers
The forms should be completed as described later (sections 3–9).
All completed forms should be photocopied before being issued to the New OED Computer Group for actioning.
The photocopied forms should be filed as being actioned .
The request serial number should be noted in a control log book.
When the processing requested by a form has been completed the request form will be returned to the lexicographers with the Completion Confirmed on Date filled in by the New OED Computer Group.
The form should be filed as Completed .
The corresponding form in the Being Actioned file should be removed and discarded,
The request serial number should also be checked off against the records in the control book, and logged as completed.
If it is noticed that a form has not been acted upon after the specified number of working days the New OED Computer Group should be informed.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt of a completed request form by the lexicographers the form should be checked to see whether it is acceptable.
If this is the case proceed as detailed below otherwise return the form with a suitable explanation of why the form is not being accepted.
The form should be completed as specified in sections 3–7.
If the form is one to be actioned by the Computer Services Department:
when the Computer Services Department returns the form as completed, the form should be checked.
If satisfied that everything has been completed successfully then it should be dated in the Completion Confirmed on Date section of the form.
a photo-copy of the form will be returned by the New OED computer group, and the completed form returned to the lexicographers.
If the form is one to be actioned by the New OED Computer Group:
the form should be filed as C.Group Actioned 
the forms should be actioned in ascending numerical order on the request serial number
when the form has been actioned and completed, the form should be dated in the Completion Confirmed on Date section of the form
a photo-copy of the form will be returned by the New OED computer group, and the completed form returned to the lexicographers.
Computer Services Department
When a form is received it should be signed and dated in the Received by and Date spaces on the form provided.
The form should be logged as To be Actioned .
The forms must be actioned in ascending numerical order on the request serial number.
When the procedures associated with a form have been completed, the form should be logged as Completed .
The form should be returned to the New OED Computer Group.
If the procedure has failed to run to a successful completion, Computer Services will enter this fact in the COMMENTS section of the form.
If the job requires re-running a new form will be submitted by the New OED computer group.
NEWOED1
Overview
This form is to be completed if any of the following actions is requested:
CASE 1 — a table is to be restored from a Working-Set area to its place of origin in the Main Database archive
CASE 2 — a table is to be brought into a Working-Set area from the Main Database archive
CASE 3 — both Case 1 and Case 2 above are requested at the same time.
The services of both the New OED Computer Group and the Computer Services Department are required.
This procedure will be run once in any 24 hour period, unless special prior arrangements have been made.
Completing the Form
Lexicographers
CASE 1 : the form should be completed with the appropriate letter (A, B or J) in the From Working-Set space and the corresponding table number (1–40) in the To Table Number space.
CASE 2 : the form should be completed with the appropriate letter (A, B or J) in the To Working-Set space and the corresponding table number (1–40) in the From Table Number space.
CASE 3 : the form should be completed with the appropriate letter (A, B or J) in the From Working Set space and the corresponding table number (1–40) in the To Table Number space.
The form should also have the following filled in, the appropriate letter (A, B or J) in the To Working Set space and the corresponding table number (1–40) in the From Table Number space.
In all cases any comments should be noted in the space provided before the form is photocopied.
The photocopy is filed.
The original form is then issued to the New OED Computer Group.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
When checked the form should be dated and signed in the Forwarded By and Date spaces.
The form should then be passed to the Computer Services Department.
Computer Services Department
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
CASE 1 : this actions procedure PROC1 as specified in Appendix 1.
The rest of the Computer Services Department's section of the form should be completed as specified in Appendix 1.
CASE 2 : this actions procedure PROC2 as specified in Appendix 2.
The rest of the Computer Services Department's section of the form should be completed as specified in Appendix 2.
CASE 3 : this actions procedure PROC3 as specified in Appendix 3.
The rest of the Computer Services Department's section of the form should be completed as specified in Appendix 3.
Upon completion of any of the above procedures the form should be returned to the New OED Computer Group.
New OED Computer Group
If procedures PROC1 or PROC3 have been actioned by the form the New OED Computer Group will produce a report showing the ranges of entries for each Lexicographer Group.
This report should be clipped to the form NEWOED1 and given to the lexicographers.
NEWOED2
Overview
This form is to be completed if the transfer of material for photocomposition is requested.
The services of both the New OED Computer Group and the Computer Services Department are required.
The procedure PROC4 will be completed by the Computer Services Department.
Completing the Form
Lexicographers
The form requires only the Table Number for photocomposition to be specified.
The case may arise when a range of entries or selected entries are needed for photocomposition.
In these two cases the Comments/Dependent Requests space on the form should be completed stating the exact entries to be photocompositioned.
If necessary a separate sheet should be attached specifying the individual entries to be processed.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
There are three cases to consider:
CASE 1 : the whole table is to be transferred to magnetic tape.
For this case a ‘W’ should be entered into the Type space.
CASE 2 : a range of entries from a table is to be transferred to magnetic tape.
For this case a ‘R’ should be entered into the Type space.
CASE 3 : selected entries are required to be transferred to magnetic tape.
For this case an ‘S’ should be entered into the Type space.
Numbers should also be placed in the Start and Finish spaces.
These numbers will be those requested by the lexicographers on the comments section of the form.
When checked the form should be dated and signed in the Forwarded By and Date spaces.
The form should then be passed on to the Computer Services Department.
Computer Services
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
The form actions procedure PROC4 as specified in Appendix 4.
Upon completion of the procedure the form should be logged and returned to the New OED Computer Group.
NEWOED3
Overview
This form is to be completed if the transfer of a single entry or the transfer of a range of entries from/to the working set to/from the table of origin is required.
This form will require only the services of the New OED Computer Group.
Completing the Form
Lexicographers
The form can be completed in a number of ways to request the same action.
There are three distinct ways of identifying an entry.
CASE 1 : by Headword ,Part of Speech ,Homonym Number ,Dictionary Flag .
CASE 2 : by Entity Number .
CASE 3 : by Print Sequence Number .
When a single entry is to be processed the identifier should be completed in the Start column of the form.
Only one of the three identifier sections on the form should be completed when specifying a range of entries and the same identifier should be used for both the Start and Finish of the range.
For CASE 1 above it should be noted that the first three identifiers (Headword ,Part of Speech ,Homonym Number ) always need to be specified when a single entry is to be transferred.
When a range of entries are requested it is only necessary to specify the Headwords but you can be more specific if needed.
There can be two directions of transfer:
from Working-Set to table in Main Database archive.
This requires a tick to be placed in the box labelled Restore to Table 
from table to Working-set.
This requires a tick to be placed in the box labelled Bring to Working-Set .
The Current Version will always be the one(s) transferred unless otherwise specified in the comments section.
To avoid ambiguity it is good practice to complete the comments section even if the current version is required.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
The form should have the Version Number box completed if a single entry is requested to be transferred.
Refer to the New OED Computer Group procedures manual.
NEWOED4
Overview
This form is to be completed if proofing of an individual entry or a range of entries is required.
This form will require only the services of the New OED Computer Group.
Completing
Lexicographers
The form can be completed in a number of ways to request the same action.
There are two ways of identifying an entry.:
CASE 1 : by Headword ,Part of Speech , Homonym  Number .
CASE 2 : by Print Sequence Number .
When a single entry is to be processed the identifier should be specified in the Start column.
Only one of the identifier sections on the form should be completed when specifying a range of entries and the same identifier should be used for both the Start and Finish of the range.
For CASE 1 above it should be noted that it is only necessary to specify the Headword(s) when requesting proofing but you can be more specific if needed.
CASE 1 : when a headword has been specified in the Start column a two possibilities arise as to how the form should be filled in when a number of subsequent entries are also requested to be proofed:
a headword can be specified in the Finish column.
This represents the last entry to be proofed with all entries lying between the two headwords also being proofed
a number can be specified in the Number box.
This represents the number of subsequent entries to be proofed.
CASE 2 : when a number has been entered in the Print Sequence Number Start box the form may be completed in two ways when a number of subsequent entries are also to be proofed:
a number can be placed in the Range box.
This represents the last entry to be proofed, with all entries lying between the two print sequence numbers also being proofed.
a number can be placed in the Number box.
This represents the number of entries subsequent the specified print sequence number which are also to be proofed.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
There is space available on the form to fill out any ‘comments’ arising from the completion of the task.
Refer to the New OED Computer Group procedures manual.
NEWOED5
Overview
This form is to be completed if cross-reference reports on an individual entry or a range of entries is required.
This form will require only the services of the New OED Computer Group.
Completing the Form
Lexicographers
The form can be completed in a number of ways to request the same action.
There are two ways of identifying an entry:
CASE 1 : by Headword ,Part of Speech ,Homonym Number .
CASE 2 : by Print Sequence Number .
When a single entry is required the identifier should be placed in the Start column.
Only one of the identifier sections on the form should be completed when specifying a range of entries and the same identifier should be used for both the Start and Finish of the range.
CASE 1 : when a headword has been specified in the Start column two possibilities arise as to how the form should be filled in when a number of subsequent entries are also requested to be cross-referenced.
an Headword can be specified in the Finish column.
This represents the last entry to be cross-referenced with all entries lying between the two headwords also being cross-referenced.
a number can be specified in the Number box.
This represents the number of subsequent entries to be cross-referenced.
CASE 2 : when a number has been entered in the Print Sequence Number Start box two possibilities arise as to how the form should be completed when a number of subsequent entries are also requested to be cross-referenced.
a number can be placed in the Range box.
This represents the last entry to be cross-referenced, with all entries lying between the two print sequence numbers also being cross-referenced.
a number can be placed in the Number box.
This represents the number of entries subsequent the specified print sequence number which are also to be cross-referenced.
There are three possible cross-reference reports:
when a single entry or all the entries in the range are cross-referenced by other entries.
In this case a tick is required in the Target box.
when a single entry or all the entries in the range cross-reference other entries.
In this case a tick is required in the Source box.
when a single entry is both the Target and Source for cross-referencing.
A tick is then required in both Target and Source boxes.
A space is available on the form for ‘comments’ or special requirements.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
There is space available on the form to fill out any ‘comments’ arising from the completion of the task.
Refer to New OED Computer Group procedures manual.
NEWOED6
Overview
This form is to be completed if a group or number of groups wish to have a status report on the entries they are presently working on.
The form will require only the services of the New OED Computer Group.
Completing the Form
Lexicographers
The form only requires a box or number of boxes to be filled out with the Group(s) identifier (typically A1 etc.)
Any further comments can be filled out in the available space.
New OED Computer Group
Upon receipt the form should be immediately dated and signed in the Received By and Date spaces.
There is space available on the form to fill out any ‘comments’ arising from the completion of the task.
Refer to New OED Computer Group procedures manual.
NEWOED7
Overview
This form is to be completed for any ad hoc requests which can not be requested specifically by forms NEWOED1–NEWOED6.
There obviously can not be a specific method of completing the forms.
It is assumed that on completion of a form some amount of discussion between the lexicographers and the New OED Computer Group will be required to enable the request to be actioned.
As far as is possible the control procedures adopted for all other forms should be followed.
INTRODUCTION
During testing or use of the New OED Computer System, errors may be encountered.
There may be difficulties in the use of a procedure or in understanding the documentation.
The system may not operate as it is expected to.
It is essential that all problems are reported and managed in a disciplined way.
This standards document describes the Problem Management Procedures for the New OED Computer Project.
These procedures are designed to be used in conjunction with the IBM VM Interactive Productivity Facility (IPF) Problem Control Facility (PCF).
The features of this product form the basis for the Problem Management Procedures.
With one exception all errors and problems encountered during either testing or use of the system will be subject to these procedures.
The exception will be errors detected during unit testing which relate to the sub-system or program under test.
These will be corrected as part of the testing function.
The Problem Management Procedure will vary according to the stage of development at which the problem is identified and by whom it is identified.
System testing of each sub-system will be carried out under the control of a member of the Computer Group who is designated as the Test Manager for the sub-system.
Problems identified during system testing which relate to the sub-system being tested, will be controlled by the Test Manager for the sub-system.
Correction of errors caused by a sub-system other than the one being tested will be controlled by the Computer Group Manager.
Correction of errors identified by users will be controlled by the Computer Group Manager.
A problem report will be recorded for each problem, using the IBM VM Interactive Productivity Facility Problem Control Facility.
This facility will be used to record the progress of each problem and to assign responsibility for solving the problem.
The Computer Group will enter each problem encountered during System Testing directly into the computer system using the PCF facility.
Errors found by users or members of the Computer Group during use of the system will be recorded on a Problem Report Form and passed to the Problem Administrator who will enter the problem report into the system.
The Problem Administrator (a member of the Computer Group) will monitor the progress of each problem to ensure that action is being taken.
Section 2 of this document describes the problem management procedures.
Detailed instructions for the use of the IPF Problem Control Facility are not included in this section but notes on this facility are contained in Section 6.
The manual entitled IBM Virtual Machine Interactive Productivity Facility Problem Control (SC24 — 5229) should be used for detailed information on this facility and instructions on its use.
The Problem Report Form is described at Section 3.
Sections 4 and 5 describe other reports which will be used in monitoring problems, namely the Weekly Problem Report and the Test Case Report.
PROBLEM MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
This section describes the New OED Computer System Problem Management Procedures in detail.
The procedures cover each stage from initial reporting of a problem through to eventual correction.
The description is divided into the specific procedures to be followed by each person involved in the problem.
Reference is made in each procedure to the actions taken by other people.
Reporting of Problems Encountered During Use of the System
In the case of problems encountered during use of the system by a user or a member of the Computer Group the following procedures applies.
The person reporting the problem should:
complete a Problem Report Form for each problem.
Section 3 describes this form and how to complete it
provide any supporting documentation which will clarify the problem, and if appropriate add explanatory notes
submit the completed form, together with the supporting documentation, to the Problem Administrator, New OED Computer Group.
The Problem Administrator will ensure that timely action is taken to resolve the problem.
This procedure is detailed below.
When the problem has been resolved the user will be notified by the Problem Solver.
Test Manager Problem Reporting and Management
In the case of problems encountered during system testing, the procedure to be followed varies according to the source of the error.
The Test Manager for the sub-system which is being tested when the problem is encountered will be responsible for recording the problem.
Problems will not be recorded directly by other members of the Computer Group.
The procedure to be followed by the Test Manager for problems that do not originate in or are not caused by the sub-system being tested is described below.
The procedure to be followed when the problem is directly caused by an error in the sub-system being tested is described below.
This procedure describes the actions to be taken by the Test Manager for each problem encountered during system testing which appears to be caused by an error in a sub-system other than the sub-system being tested.
The Test Manager should:
use the IPF Problem Control Facility to record a problem report in the computer system.
The information to include in this report is described in Section 4.
assign the problem report to the Computer Group Manager
provide any supporting documentation which will clarify the problem, and if appropriate add explanatory notes
send the supporting documentation to the Computer Group Manager.
The Computer Group Manager will ensure that timely action is taken to resolve the problem.
This procedure is described below.
The following procedure describes the actions to be taken by the Test Manager for each problem encountered during system testing of a sub-system which is caused by an error within that sub-system.
The Test Manager should:
use the IPF Problem Control Facility to record a problem report in the computer system.
The information to be included in this report is described at Section 4
assign the problem report to the person within the Computer Group who will resolve the problem, i.e. to the Problem Solver
include the name of the Problem Solver and today's date in the detailed description of the problem report
provide any supporting documentation which will clarify the problem and if appropriate add explanatory notes
send the supporting documentation to the Problem Solver.
The Problem Solver will take action to resolve the problem.
This is described below.
When the Problem Solver reports that the problem is resolved the Test Manager should give his agreement to the closure of the problem report.
The Test Manager should regularly check that progress is being made toward resolving the problems that are under his control.
He should refer the following to the Computer Group Manager:
problems which are likely to affect the test schedule seriously, and
problems outstanding for more than five working days.
For each major sub-system (i.e. a sub-system for which system testing is scheduled to take longer than one month), the Test Manager should produce a Test Case Report every two weeks during system test.
This report is described at Section 6.
Computer Group Manager
The problem management procedures which involve the Computer Group Manager are described below.
Problems will be referred to the Computer Group Manager as follows:
the Test Manager will refer problems encountered during system testing of a sub-system which are caused by an error in another sub-system
the Problem Administrator will refer all problems which originate from a user or a member of the Computer Group (other than a) above).
For each of these problems a problem report will be entered into the computer system and assigned to the Computer Group Manager.
Any supporting documentation and Problem Report Forms will be sent to the Computer Group Manager.
The Computer Group Manager should:
review the problem using the IPF Problem Control Facility to access the problem report, and if relevant, also refer to the Problem Report Form completed by the user and any associated documentation
assess the likely cause of the problem and identify the sub-system, programs and data in which the problem originated
assess the urgency with which the problem should be solved
for problems which are likely to require considerable effort to resolve, assign a priority, and schedule actions as necessary
for problems where a change in function is required, close the problem report and invoke the Change Management Procedure
for other problems, assign the computer-based problem report to the person within the Computer Group who will resolve the problem, i.e. to the Problem Solver.
The Problem Solver's name and today's date should be added to the detailed description of the problem report, together with any scheduling and priority instructions
pass any documentation to the Problem Solver
return the Problem Report Form to the Problem Administrator.
The Computer Group Manager should regularly check the progress that is being made towards resolving the problems that are under his control.
When the Problem Solver reports to him that a problem has been resolved the Computer Group Manager should give his agreement to the closure of the problem report.
Each week the Computer Group Manager should prepare a Weekly Problem Report.
This report is described at Section 5.
Problem Administrator
The Problem Management Procedures to be undertaken by the Problem Administrator are described below.
For each problem encountered by a user, the user will complete a Problem Report Form and send this form, together with any supporting documentation to the Problem Administrator.
This procedure is described above.
On receipt of a Problem Report Form, the Problem Administrator should:
use the IPF Problem Control Facility to record a problem report in the computer system.
The information to be entered is described at Section 4.
All information will be taken directly from the form
enter the reference number on to the Problem Report Form which the computer system will generate, in order to identify the problem report uniquely
assign the problem report to the Computer Group Manager
send the Problem Report Form and any supporting documentation to the Computer Group Manager.
The Computer Group Manager will ensure that action is taken to resolve the problem.
This procedure is described above.
The Problem Administrator should access all outstanding computer based problem reports regularly, i.e. those reports that have not been closed, to ensure that action is being taken to resolve the problem and to ensure that appropriate notes have been added to the descriptions of the problem reports to reflect the current status of the problem and the action being taken.
Any queries or concerns should be referred to the Computer Group Manager.
On request, the Problem Administrator should use the IPF Problem Control Facility to produce printed details of problem reports and summary lists of problem reports according to the requirements that he will be given by the person requesting the report.
Problem Solver
Each reported problem will be passed by a Test Manager or the Computer Group Manager to a member of the Computer Group for resolution.
The person given responsibility for solving the problem is known as a Problem Solver.
The procedure to be followed by the Problem Solver is described below.
When a problem is assigned to a Problem Solver, a message will be left in his ‘reader file’.
Each member of the Computer Group should access their ‘reader file’ regularly to determine if a problem has been assigned.
For each problem assigned to him, the Problem Solver should:
access the IPF Problem Control Facility problem report which relates to the problem
change the status of the problem report to ‘ACCEPT’ to indicate that he has received notification of the problem
resolve the problem, test any program changes and alter documentation as necessary
update the status of the problem report to reflect the action being taken
add information to the report description to describe the action he is taking to resolve the problem.
When the problem has been resolved, the Problem Solver should obtain the agreement of the Test Manager or the Computer Group Manager, depending on who originally assigned the problem to him, to close the problem report.
After obtaining this agreement the Problem Solver should:
add an explanation to the problem report description to document how the problem was resolved
close the problem report
notify the person who  originally reported the problem that it has been resolved.
PROBLEM REPORT FORM
This form will be completed by users  and members of the Computer Group of the New OED Computer System to report problems with the system.
The following information should be entered:
Reported By: self explanatory
Date: self explanatory
Brief Description: a summary of the problem which will be used to identify the problem in reports
Detailed Description: a detailed description of the problem, including the steps that led to the problem, any relevant messages or codes displayed or printed by the computer system, and any other useful data.
If necessary this description can be included on a separate piece of paper attached to the form
Supporting Documentation Attached: ‘YES’ or ‘NO’should be deleted as necessary.
Any documentation which will clarify or explain the problem should be described
Severity: a code in the range 1 to 5 should be entered.
1 is the most severe and 5 the least severe.
The codes and their meanings are described on the form.
It should be noted that these codes correspond to those set out in the IPF Problem Control Facility manual
The form should be  passed to the Problem Administrator who will enter a problem report into the computer system using the IPF Problem Control Facility.
The information he enters will be obtained directly from this form.
PROBLEM REPORT FORM
Reported By: Date:
Brief Description:
Detailed Description:
Supporting Documentation Attached?
YES/NO
(If YES please describe)
Severity (see below for codes):
If severity 5, explain
1.
SEVERE I can't use the system at all 2.
FAILURE I can use the system but part of it doesn't work at all 3.
ERROR I can use the system but part of it works incorrectly
4.
SHORTCOMING I can use the system but part of it bothers me
5.
OTHER None of the above apply
SEND TO PROBLEM ADMINISTRATOR, NEW OED COMPUTER GROUP
IPF PROBLEM CONTROL FACILITY PROBLEM REPORT
This section describes the information which should be entered to set up a computer based problem report using the IPF Problem Control Facility.
A problem report will be set up for each reported problem.
The following information should be entered:
Your Name: name of the person who reported the problem
Severity: a code in the range 1 (most severe) to 5 (least severe).
There is a PCF panel to explain these codes
Brief Description: to identify the problem report in a list of problems
Detailed Description: the steps which led up to the problem and any messages or codes that were included.
The computer generated problem report includes a status field.
This will automatically set when the report is entered initially.
This status should be updated as the problem is assigned for solving and action is taken to resolve the problem.
The detailed description should be updated to reflect the action taken to resolve the problem as it is processed through the Problem Management procedures.
WEEKLY PROBLEM REPORT
This report will be produced weekly under the control of the Computer Group Manager for use in regular review meetings with the New OED Project Director.
The report should list, by sub-system:
all problems to date and their status
problems which have been outstanding for more than five days
problems which led to a Change Request.
The summary report print facility in the computer-based Problem Control Facility should be used to print the reports.
The computer printed report should be annotated to indicate those problems which are outstanding for more than five days or which led to a Change Request.
TEST CASE REPORT
The Test Case Report will be produced fortnightly for each major sub-system under system test.
This report will be the responsibility of the Test Manager for the sub-system.
It should be sent to the New OED Computer Group Manager.
The report should consist of two graphs.
The first should show:
the number of test cases planned to be run to date
the number of test cases actually run to date, and
the number of test cases that have failed to date due to errors.
The second should show:
the number of errors detected to date during system testing
the number of these errors that have been solved, and
the number of unsolved errors.
An example of this report is given on the next page of this document.
NOTES ON THE VM/IPF PROBLEM CONTROL FACILITY
This section briefly describes the IPF Problem Control Facility with regard to its use in the New OED Computer Project Problem Management Procedures.
For detailed information on PCF and its use refer to the manual entitled IBM Virtual Machine Interactive Productivity Facility Problem Control (SC24 — 5229).
The IBM terminology for this product is used in this section, to enable easier reference to be made to the manual.
PCF enables a display terminal to be used to report a problem and have it sent for solution.
There are three roles involved in using PCF as follows:
the Problem ‘Author’, a user, or a Test Manager, who originates a problem report
the Problem Administrator, who oversees the problem solving activities, and
the Problem Solver, who investigates and resolves the problem.
There are three PCF dialogues, or groups of panels, one for each role.
The problem reports available are as follows:
the Problem ‘Author’ has access only to the problem reports he has created
the Problem Administrator has access to all problem reports (using the System Administrator's password), and
the Problem Solver has access to all problem reports but may only list reports assigned to him.
The Problem Reporting Dialogue used by a Problem ‘Author’, that is the person who identified a problem, offers the following options:
create a new report
display a detailed report
add a description to a report
change the status of a report
close a report
assign a report to another person
delete a report
display or print a summary report, or
print details of reports from a list.
The Problem Administration Dialogue, used by the Problem Administrator, offers the following options:
display a list of unassigned reports
display a detailed report
add a description to a report
change the severity of a report
change the status of a report
close a report
assign a report locally
display or print a summary report
print detailed reports from a list, or
use VM/IPCS to examine a dump or write an APAR.
The Problem Management Dialogue, used by a Problem Solver, has the following options:
display a detailed report
add a description to a report
change the severity of a report
change the status of a report
close a report
assign a report to another person
display or print a summary report, or
print detailed reports from a list.
The ‘add description to a report’ option should be used to track the report and provide an audit trail.
The option to ‘print a detailed problem report’ enables all or selected reports to be printed.
All open reports, all closed reports, or all open and all closed reports may be selected for printing.
A relevant summary list is displayed, from which all or some reports may be selected for printing.
Summarised reports may be viewed or printed.
Again, all open reports, all closed reports or all open and all closed reports may be selected.
For the printed reports, a particular sequence may be specified.
This included:
report number
author userid
problem severity
date created
problem status
date of most recent response
problem solver userid.