

Conflict or Consensus: Competing Images of Japan
Initially at least, most of us find our thinking about Japan grounded in the differences we perceive between our own society and Asia's New Giant.
In the process we may fall back on an idealized view of our own society, or take our cue from generalized impressions of ‘Western’ experience.
Despite these dangers, there is a widespread belief that Japanese society differs from Western societies because of the greater willingness of the Japanese to conform and defer to group consensus.
Japan's superior economic performance has been a major focus of interest, concern or envy, but alongside the contrast in economic performance has gone fascination with Japan's system of industrial relations.
These two themes of rapid economic growth and workplace harmony are often connected as cause and effect to produce a neat and tidy contrast.
As we shall see, this connection although appearing neat is certainly not tidy because in many ways Japanese industrial relations are not nearly the radical contrast with the West that they first appear.
Nevertheless, our view of Japanese society is often supported by an underlying assumption that a tendency towards social consensus rather than social or class conflict, is what makes Japan different.
There are, to be sure, competing and contradictory images most clearly seen in militarized public demonstrations, but these are frequently and misleadingly labelled as the activities of student radicals or Red Army factions.
Thus this type of conflict is treated as an isolated exception against the backdrop of assumed consensus.
In recent years as Japanese competition penetrates ever deeper, Western media coverage of Japan has been much more concerned with economics and trade than with conflict inside Japan.
Not only are Japanese products now highly visible in our shops, but also Japanese companies are equally visible as employers in their overseas plants.
Nowhere is the idea of harmony and consensus so sharply fastened in Western minds as in our perceptions of Japanese employment practices.
In explanations of fewer days lost through strikes, in comment on superior quality products or in the relative ease with which robots are introduced into factories, workplace harmony is a common thread.
One well publicized feature of harmony and cooperation in Japanese companies can be seen in the removal of the outward signs of distinction between workers, whether these are based on dress, working hours or canteen facilities.
Working together for the good of the company transcends the need to distinguish production from office or staff employees on the basis of the colour of their collar.
Harmony and collective company effort is portrayed as a reciprocal bargain.
Labour gives total commitment in return for a promise of job security; management assures long-term employment and receives positive support for any workplace changes that enhance productivity.
Various institutional arrangements both support and reproduce cooperation such as continuous consultation with the union and the practice of delegated decision-making.
Most unions are single enterprise units extending membership to all regular employees, but what appears unusual from a Western perspective is the amount of administrative support given by the company in collecting union subscriptions or in providing organizational help for union officials.
Another difference is noted in the way union and management negotiators often move across the negotiating table: a chief union official one year, a management representative the next.
Such an interchange is identified as crucial for maintaining the cooperation that appears absent in adversarial Western systems.
Decision-making is also supposed to be different in Japanese companies as power is pluralized in consensual mechanisms such as ringi-sei .
This involves the channelling of policy initiatives upwards from lower levels so that as proposals move through the company they gather support leaving the final decision-maker with the simple task of confirming the agreed consensus.
As a process, this presents a stark contrast to Western models which stress the rights and prerogatives of senior management.
A commitment to power sharing, company loyalty and group harmony does not mean the complete absence of differences in pay and status within the company.
Differentials do exist between blue- and white-collar workers, but they appear to be narrower than in most Western companies, and they are seen to be justified by different educational qualifications.
Pay scales, for example, are determined in part by the length of an individual's educational career.
Another important component of pay is related to the length of service with the company which produces an escalating reward for loyalty.
Taking these two elements together then, pay differentials are considered as only proper because someone with better qualifications and a longer service record may be expected to contribute more to the company.
Hierarchies certainly exist within Japanese companies, but with extensive consultation and the higher entry qualifications of management personnel, the structure of authority appears fair and legitimate.
In a sense, such  clearly defined ground rules are said to reduce the alienation of labour from management, and provide a secure base for corporate harmony.
Reducing the sources of internal division within the Japanese company allows the focus of collective effort to be directed externally towards rival companies in the market.
Extensive interest is promoted in the relative performance of Japanese companies in league tables based on output, exports, or profits, and company commitment binds employees towards the main goal of improving league position.
Such a high level of identification with one's company is reinforced outside normal working hours in the provision of collective leisure facilities for employees and their families; by company-based health, education and welfare schemes or by the provision of company housing or housing subsidies.
In addition, employees share the proceeds of company success either through general productivity bonuses or bonuses attributed to their particular section.
Therefore group effort on behalf of the company is reflected not only in working hours, but also in voluntary overtime clubs or quality control circles that meet outside regular working hours.
When we focus on differences between Japan and the West it has been common to paint pictures based to a large extent on our general impression of how relations at work offer such sharply contrasting attitudes to work.
However, these general impressions run the danger of stereotyping both Japanese experience and the idealized Western contrast.
In later chapters we will probe the image of harmony in some detail to question whether all Japanese companies display such a high degree of harmony, cooperation or power sharing.
There are questions to be raised specifically about the coverage of job security guarantees, especially for women, the amount of independence unions have and the extent of delegation as opposed to ritualized consensus formation.
Equally, there are dangers in suggesting that all Western economic ills are explained by militant labour or autocratic managers, thereby downplaying differences in the quality and quantity of capital equipment used.
Similarly, we might consider whether educational qualifications or length of service are not also components of pay scales in Western companies.
Simply because Japan appears to be different we should guard against reversing the image by suggesting that none of the standard elements of Japanese work practices is present in the West, and that workplace conflict is rare in Japan.
Chapter 3 will question whether the novelty of labour management in Japan has been exaggerated, but it is important to recognize how the stereotypical view of workplace relations is regarded as one manifestation of the general characteristics of Japanese society.
So diminished status differentials in private companies is said to reflect the existence of a more egalitarian society where leadership is based on personal merit.
Collective effort for the good of one's company is seen as one example of the willingness of the Japanese people to sacrifice private interests in favour of the collective good.
1.1 A uniquely consensual society?
The tendency for distinctions between labour and management to appear less overt connects with the widely expressed view that class consciousness is not important to the Japanese.
Public opinion surveys undertaken by the Prime Minister's Office have, over the past two decades, shown that 80–90 per cent of Japanese consider themselves to be middle class.
There are some serious shortcomings in this sort of opinion polling, but there are nevertheless, connections between this majority middle-class identification and trends in income inequality.
By some measures incomes are more equally distributed in Japan than in the West, and in ‘employment income = = Japan's degree of equality parallels that of some of the socialist countries of Eastern Europe’(Boltho 1975 p.163).
Problems abound in measuring income distribution and although there has been a reversal in equality trends since the mid-1970s, middle-class identity in Japan is more closely related to earning middling incomes than attachment to class specific values.
One implication of phenomenal rates of economic growth can be seen in rising incomes leading to an enormous increase in the ownership of consumer durables, although it is debatable whether incomes have risen as fast as GNP.
Thus, relative to other generations and to other societies, the Japanese certainly feel more prosperous and some of the more outward signs of affluence are widely spread.
The company loyalty bargain which exchanges labour cooperation for job security also has a wider significance if we think about the amazingly low national unemployment figures recorded by the Ministry of Labour.
Even in the decade following the 1973 oil crisis, official unemployment rates have never exceeded 3 per cent, compared to the double figure levels in the EEC or the US.
International comparisons of unemployment rates are as notoriously difficult as measures of income distribution, and the Labour Ministry in Japan, as in other countries, has its own idiosyncratic style of creative statistical construction.
There are studies by Japanese labour economists which suggest that if the US definition of unemployment were used in Japan, the unemployment percentage would at least double (Tominomori 1985).
The common issue in disputing the accuracy of unemployment statistics concerns the under-recording of women who wish to take paid employment but do not register.
There will be a more intensive look at this problem later, but for now all that concerns us is that the job security component of the company loyalty is reflected at national level in official unemployment rates.
Management delegation and consultation within companies has its wider reflection in the institutions of Japan's democratic polity.
Japan's 1947 constitution, drawn up by the US occupying authority, widened the franchise to all adults and the frequent national elections since then have, technically at least, given citizens the opportunity to express their preferences.
More  important perhaps for regular consultation are the vast array of interest and pressure groups that coordinate opinion on separate issues, or who are consulted continuously in permanent opinion gathering bodies, or who are asked to participate in Advisory Commissions on specific issues like Public Administrative Reform.
In many ways this array of interest groups is not peculiar to Japan, and the usual debate exists about whether some groups rather than others have more access or influence.
These debates are particularly acute when the level and regularity of consultation with large business corporations is compared to consumer groups, women's organizations, non-unionized labour or minority groups.
Such a list though, would hardly be out of place elsewhere.
One debate focuses on the power and influence of elites within Japanese society, and obviously any book on the Japanese state must have this as a major element, and indeed it does.
Before we plunge into that debate we ought to recognize that recruitment to elite positions in the public and private sectors is said to be highly meritocratic.
We have already seen how authority within companies is deemed legitimate when it is based on educational achievement and length of service; attitudes towards public sector bureaucrats who occupy high office are likewise framed by the priority given to individual merit displayed by educational status.
With one of the highest rates of college and university entry in the world it appears that those who get to elite positions, do so through individual effort, and merit is thus properly rewarded.
So educational achievement rather than nepotism offers a background to the respect, status and deference accorded to elites.
There are competing views which see family income as the key determinant of access to the top universities from which elites are recruited into large companies or the bureaucracy.
 Competition for places in high status universities is so enormous that after-school attendance at expensive private crammer schools is virtually compulsory.
While this tendency towards the importance of supplementary education has grown significantly since the 1960s, the enormous priority given by the Japanese to education underpins the significance of meritocratic ideals.
One other feature which is said to distinguish Japanese society from the West concerns their greater propensity towards collective effort for the good of the nation.
A parallel is drawn between the direction of a Japanese company's collective effort against outside competitors, and the ability to mobilize national effort.
This has been illustrated by comparing the Japanese reaction to the two oil crises in the 1970s.
At the same time as OPEC massively increased oil prices in 1973–4, Japan was experiencing high and accelerating rates of inflation, there was an internal political crisis for the ruling LDP party as their support inside and outside the Diet fell in the face of corruption scandals and popular pressure for tighter controls on environmental pollution.
In this context Japan's overwhelming dependence on imported oil set off the most severe economic recession since World War II and GNP actually fell by 1 per cent in 1974 after growing at an  average rate of nearly 10 per cent in the previous six years.
Not only was the economy fragile and exposed, but also was the domination of the LDP.
By the time the second oil shock hit Japan in 1979–80 the rate of inflation had been brought under tight control by a sharp reduction in the level of wage increases, energy-saving technology had been introduced, stricter pollution controls were enacted and LDP support had revived.
The short-term reaction to the second oil price increase on GNP was much less severe, and Japan went into the 1980s with higher growth rates relative to other Western economies, though well below the rates achieved before 1973.
This relatively smooth response to the second oil shock has been interpreted as a united, collective effort to resolve the severe crisis of the mid-1970s which had exposed Japan's energy vulnerability and her fragile political consensus.
Many factors were involved in the national response to economic crisis, but the belief that Japan can produce a greater sense of collective purpose was a key theme in a general shift of attitudes towards the lessons that Japan can offer the West.
Up to the mid-1970s, the focus of the debate on lessons from the Japanese experience was related mainly to the problems of underdeveloped countries in achieving rapid industrialization.
It is true that there had been a steady erosion to the pre-war image of Japan as a cheap labour economy producing shoddy goods, but the 1970s saw an explosion of interest in what lessons Japan could offer advanced industrial societies.
The main thrust in the ‘Learning from Japan’ movement came from the United States which dominates the literature on Japan published in English, and there are two main areas of interest.
First, a fairly narrow area concerned, initially at least, with management practices and connections between company collectivism and higher productivity levels.
Here, attention is focused on the possibility of transplanting institutions like Quality Control circles or delegated authority mechanisms into Western companies.
However, where such transplantation has been attempted, the results as far as productivity is concerned have not been as dramatic as management academics had expected (Cole 1980).
When the reasons for the disappointing response are explored, we find that the emphasis is placed on the unique social and cultural values of Japanese society.
At this point in the analysis the more narrow focus on production merges with a second broader area of interest.
This too includes analysis of employment practices, but attention is broadened to include a wide range of social trends such as lower Japanese crime rates, a preference for private family-based welfare, income equality, middle-class identity and the responsiveness of democratic institutions.
Vogel's book entitled Japan As Number One (1979) is the epitome of this trend, as he sets a scenario in which he not only predicts that the Japanese economy will be the biggest in the world before the end of the century, but also that Japanese society should henceforth be the model for post-industrial societies.
Special prominence was given to the value of community  policing within densely populated areas, the value of widening entry to higher education, the meritocratic recruitment of elites, the role of harmony in companies and the Japanese welfare system of ‘security without entitlement’.
In social welfare, Vogel touched on a very topical issue when he praised the advantages of a minimal welfare state for holding down tax levels and maximizing individual incentives.
Such a theme was, and still is, at the centre of debate throughout all Western societies, but what was really surprising for the Japanese to read was the clear attribution, from a Westerner, that a limited state role was one of the most important reasons why Japanese was destined to be the ‘Number One’.
It is easy to exaggerate the impact of a single book although when published in Japanese the book was itself the number one bestseller.
Vogel was actually pulling together a good deal of social science research and his approach was not too dissimilar from many others, except in its more explicitly laudatory style.
What was perhaps vital was that Vogel's view of the causes of Japanese prosperity echoed the statements of many of Japan's leaders.
In the context of a smoother short-term response to the second oil shock and a higher long-term economic growth path than in the West, there was an acceleration of interest in the notion of Japan's uniqueness not in the vein of inferiority or economic fragility, but in the context of superiority and independence.
So when comparing economic performance, it appeared that Japan had avoided the endemic Western problems of alienation and social conflict particularly in economic organizations.
A new disease was identified which had the symptoms of workplace disunity, low productivity, poor quality products.
It was named variously as the English, British, European or Western disease — presumably a contagious disease!
The importance of this emphasis on Japanese uniqueness and immunity to the new disease, cannot be underestimated in the contemporary political debates that surround the appropriate role of the Japanese state in the society of the 1980s and beyond.
At another level it raised confidence in national identity and gave support to social science studies of Japan which stressed the way its unique cultural heritage underpinned economic success.
It would be an exaggeration to imply that Vogel's views have been slavishly followed by Japanese or Western writers.
There is a very strong critical tradition within Japan which has stressed the need to consider the other side of the economic miracle whether this concerns the social costs of pollution and congestion, gender and racial inequalities, repressive police methods, the inadequate provision of housing, the lack of proper attention to the elderly or sick.
Publications in English do not in any sense reflect the strength of this critical approach, mainly because it is associated with Marxism, and in a US-dominated publishing market for Japanese studies this is hardly surprising.
Research on the implications of American dominance of Japanese studies in English has been limited, although Dower (1975) Kawamura (1980) and Mouer and Sugimoto (1986) have offered a useful start.
This is not the  place to consider the role of research funding bodies or US universities in constraining the careers or publications of academics, but we should recognize that the bulk of publications in English arc drawn from writers whose work is ‘conceived in terms congruent with idealizations of US democracy’(Boyd 1985).
Such a recognition is doubly significant in Japanese studies because the Japanese polity was reconstructed by the US occupation in the 1947 constitution along the lines of their own system.
Therefore writing on Japan in English operates, to a significant degree, within an agenda set by a liberal democratic tradition involving a commitment to private property, the role of market competition, citizenship rights and representative democratic institutions.
Where democratic institutions were ineffective as in pre-war Japan, it was all too easy for a collectivist tradition to be used to mobilize support for an authoritarian regime.
Vogel and others argue that Japan only became the model to follow once constitutional safeguards of individual rights harnessed a cultural preference into a force for the good of society as a whole.
What was it about Japan's history that limited the pursuit of individual self-interest and gave precedence to the collective community?
1.2 Collective identity in pre-war Japan
Explanations of Japan's unique cultural tradition have as their base then, a belief in the vital place of liberal democratic institutions in the post-1947 era.
What has intrigued many Western observers however, is the absence of the strong sense of individualism that usually distinguishes the ‘liberal’ element in liberal democratic societies.
Using the work of social anthropologists and social psychologists to get closer to an understanding of the unique parts of Japanese culture, great play has been made of the primacy of group over individual interests.
Individuals in Japan are said to find their true self-identity only through membership of, and intimate participation in, group activity.
This approach was popularized by Nakane (1973) who, building on Benedict's earlier study (1946) among others, stressed the preference for group identity in Japan as a clear contrast to Western characteristics of self-assertive individualism.
In the open acknowledgement of group interdependence, conformity to group objectives is based on respect for, and loyalty to, the leadership provided by senior members.
Emphasis is placed on reciprocity in the sense that leaders listen to the wishes of all group members whereupon group activity is designed to reflect the consensus.
Seniority is itself based on the length of service to the group as in the classic statement of Japanese company practices; authority is legitimated by its long record of commitment and respect for seniority is therefore justified.
Vertical loyalties within groups are taken to be the common base for the preservation of conformity  as each individual knows their place and takes on a role consistent with that place.
The connecting mechanism between local groups and Japanese society as a whole, runs along the traces of a common commitment to the nation.
So, the acute sense of collective identity that the Japanese display in language and culture prevents the rivalry of separate groups deteriorating into serious internal conflict.
National leadership, with legitimate authority, binds local group interests into collective Japanese interests.
This kind of analysis sees Japanese uniqueness begin from the basic subversion of individualism into collectivism and traces the implications in cultural patterns which are distinctively different from Western ones.
This contrast is used to explain why the Japanese are said to feel less class conscious than Westerners because vertical loyalties within companies, say, are more important than horizontal relations with other people who occupy the same position but who work for different companies.
This single example shows how powerful the ideal of collectivism can appear, as it seems to connect in a very real way with commonsense ideas, in this case about Japan as a classless society.
Equally it is often used to explain why national leaders are better placed to mobilize collective effort in the national interest such as in the response to the second oil crisis in 1979.
When we consider the dominance of collectivism as an explanation of what makes Japanese experience unique, we do need to emphasize that this is not simply a characteristic of Western or American writing, but many Japanese social scientists have echoed this explanation in their attempts to identify the sources of consensus in Japanese society.
In the debate about uniqueness, a growing minority of writers have raised many problems about the way the connections between collectivism and social conformity vastly understate the importance of social conflict and overstate the level of voluntary conformity to group or national objectives in Japan.
There is also concern that in efforts to provide a contrast with the West, anthropologists have reduced differences within Western experience to derive a convenient comparative stereotype.
But the critics of collectivism face a formidable task because collectivism does seem to fit so well with commonsense ideas about Japan, and the identification of unique cultural values offers a convenient residual ‘black box’ which can be used to explain away those aspects of Japanese experience which don't quite fit with social science models.
It is generally agreed that Japan possesses many of the institutional characteristics of other capitalist societies, but these institutions do not produce the same degree of impersonal alienation because subordinates are regularly consulted and authority is ‘soft’ and legitimate.
Explanations of the contrast are framed by the tradition of group loyalty and consensus formation.
A tradition implies continuity, and the historical origins of collectivism have been traced in a variety of ways.
Perhaps the most common explanation compares the modern version of group identity to the  communal basis of rural rice cultivation in pre-industrial Japan.
In common cause against the elements, each rural community would have mobilized collective effort when planting and harvesting rice, or constructing irrigation systems.
Village meetings would possibly have reached consensual decisions on the order in which crops were to be worked, under the leadership of elders.
Another variant of rural communality in Japan concerns environmental determinism: given the frequency of earthquakes or typhoons collective human effort was essential to survive the ravages of nature.
Rural collectivism is one theme, but the continuity of subordinate loyalty may also be explained by the divergent style of Japanese  Confucianism .
Morishima (1982) has identified a major difference between Chinese and Japanese  Confucianism , in that while the former stresses humanistic benevolence, the latter places much more emphasis on loyalty and duty to seniors in the hierarchy of authority.
Thus collectivism has historical roots in religious or intellectual ideals, and in communal social practices.
However it is not at all clear to what extent religious ideals were widely shared, or to what extent communal cultivation was an agreed voluntary process.
An alternative explanation of collective agricultural work could very plausibly stress the degree of compulsion by landlords on landless peasantry.
Compulsion could then have been justified in  Confucian teachings without there being widespread acceptance of its moral codes.
In raising such questions, the intention is to lay warnings about tracing the origins of voluntary collectivism in selected traditions.
Many more questions have been raised about the adequacy of such historical antecedents, but in a sense it is more pertinent to ask how such ideas and practices have survived the rapid changes that went with the industrialization of Japan after the 1870s.
It is somewhat easier to see how a rurally-based tradition of collectivism could have survived in pre-industrial Japan, especially in the 250 years of isolationist rule which lasted until the mid-nineteenth century.
In that period of decentralized feudalism, one clan (the Tokugawa) usurped the authority of the Emperor and ruled over other clans within a structure which prohibited almost all contact with the outside world.
With strict control over the internal movement of people inside Japan, and a strictly enforced system of social hierarchy, it is not difficult to see how the identity of groups at a local level might be maintained.
This isolated existence was ended in the 1850s when external pressures from Western powers forced Japan to re-open diplomatic and trading links.
In many ways the Japanese response to the external threat was undermined by the internal erosion of Tokugawa authority and its economic weaknesses.
When the Emperor was restored in 1868 national leadership concentrated on centralizing authority in order to foster a national drive for industrialization.
Only through industrialization would independence from the West be maintained, as the internal weaknesses of China and its consequent loss of territory had shown.
Some of the important mechanisms in Japanese industrialization will be examined in other chapters, but the question of continuity in cultural traditions must address the survival of collectivist ideals in the face of the rapid changes associated with industrialization after the 1880s.
Not only were rural communities drawn forcibly into expanding the scale of agricultural production, but also urbanization increased and a compulsory system of education and military conscription brought social contacts that were impossible under Tokugawa feudalism.
It is possible to exaggerate the speed with which industrialization transformed Japan, partly because economic change was not insignificant in Tokugawa times, and partly too because industry was based primarily in the rural areas until well into the twentieth century.
Nevertheless, the vastly expanded social contacts removed a shield of isolation from village life.
Rural communities were still the main focus for most Japanese, but even rural communities had to cope with the exigencies of the drive to industrialize.
Voluntary group participation may have existed in the era of Tokugawa isolation, but how was collectivism maintained thereafter?
Analysis of the maintenance and reproduction of collectivism is divided over whether the tradition of collectivism encourages the voluntary conformity of individuals, or whether the sanctions on non-conformity are so great that individuals have no alternative.
Even in the work of Nakane (1973) and Vogel (1979) we find acknowledgement that collectivism is a perishable commodity that needs nurturing.
Nakane's work has a more voluntaristic approach, but even she writes about the assertive techniques that management uses to build up company identification of workers.
She also makes it clear that if labour attempts to leave one large company for another, such mobility is taken as evidence of unreliability.
Labour will then find it difficult to get an equivalent job elsewhere because they have ‘soiled their curriculum vitae ’(Nakane 1973 p.111).
Vogel too, emphasizes the way company uniforms, badges or songs are used to reinforce worker loyalty and he suggests that wider social conformity and ‘homogeneity is created and maintained by social and educational policy’(Vogel 1979 p. 180).
But there does seem to be tendency to see the symbols or institutions of collectivism as mere reminders of the values in an otherwise ‘collectivist social order accepted voluntarily’(van Wolferen 1982 p.121).
It is on the issue of how far people willingly forego individual interests that much controversy rests.
In particular, with the imposition of liberal democratic institutions after 1947 it is widely felt that ‘the Japanese have elected to forego the assertion of the right to the expression of  untrammelled personal freedom in the.
interest of maintaining public order and the common good’(Smith 1983 p.124).
The dominant view on the crucial place of Japanese tendencies towards group consensus, rests very heavily on the structural changes that were enshrined in the constitutional apparatus.
Collectivism is thus given a very positive image when linked to constitutional guarantees of individual rights.
But this very positive image  is almost the exact opposite of the prevailing view about conformity before 1945.
In this era, it is widely accepted that collectivism was an ideal cultural trait which could be harnessed to the growth of aggressive nationalism.
As the post-war years are the golden age of Japanese liberal democracy, so the pre-war years were a ‘dark valley’(Hein 1984) for the Japanese people.
Militaristic fascism in the 1930s is seen as the inevitable outcome of an increasing use of nationalistic ideals to force people to conform to the goals of independence through industrialization.
Between industrialization and the end of World War II, we find emphasis placed on the way vertical loyalty to the nation took precedence over, and shaped, the absorption of individuals into local groups.
In the absence of deep-rooted democratic institutions which could have held back the force of aggressive nationalism, local groups took the form of mere channels through which the idea of the nation as an integrated family could be reproduced.
Instead of village communality channelling loyalty to leaders of provincial clans, each local group whether it be based on a factory, an army unit, a common landlord, a school, or a community organization now channelled loyalty to the central state.
At the head of the state was the Emperor, the patriarchal head of the national family and all Japanese were to follow his authority as they would follow patriarchal authority in their own families.
Being able to trace the divine origins through centuries of Imperial continuity, allowed the Emperor's authority to be treated as an untouchable prerogative.
Within this context of the nation as a family, the actions of individuals were expected to be based on selfless service to their immediate group, and thereby to the state.
Self-assertive behaviour at whatever level was labelled as a dangerous, anti-social and deviant trait which transgressed the conformist thrust of national familism.
Individuals were guided towards the ideals of service and loyalty through a centralized system of compulsory education and military conscription, but for those whose individualism survived these processes, a comprehensive local police force used repression to eradicate dissent.
The all embracing structure of the nation as a family headed by the Emperor, made it impossible to challenge particular aspects of the social order without calling into question the ultimate authority of the Emperor.
During the 1920s the Japan Communist Party attempted to organize opposition in a movement which asserted the primacy of individual democratic rights.
However in attacking the failure to ensure adequate political representation for labour, any opposition group, let alone the Communist Party, had to face repression on the grounds that they were challenging the entire fabric of the Emperor system.
This dilemma eventually led, in 1932, to the JCP accepting that the only way to alter institutions of exploitation such as in the landlord system or in industry was indeed to dismantle the entire structure of the state as an Imperial family.
Thereafter, the authorities had the evidence from the JCP's own  objectives to justify the suppression and extinction of opposition by labelling it Marxist.
Even anti-Marxist political parties were constrained by the need to frame their objectives in terms consistent with the need to prove loyalty and commitment to the nation as the ultimate expression of collective cohesion.
In the three decades that followed the issue of a new constitution in 1890, elected party members gradually increased their occupation of cabinet posts.
But the constitution itself was explained as a gift from the Emperor as a reward for the loyalty of the restricted numbers that were enfranchised, and its whole ethos was rooted not in the rights of individuals but in their duties as obedient subjects.
This limited degree of representation was in an important sense imposed from above, rather than actively won through struggle from below, in the same way that the 1947 Constitution was imposed by the US occupation.
Making parliamentary representation conditional upon loyalty to the Emperor system, formally narrowed the freedom for party initiatives.
Elected party members may have increased their role in cabinet, but key decisions had to meet with the approval of the Emperor and his personal advisors at Court.
The two main political parties took a generally conservative line and were distinguished more by personal attachment to the leading personalities of each party than by any basic differences in ideology.
What they did have in common, was a relatively poor organizational base among eligible electors and financial dependence on the leaders of industry and finance.
Japan's economic structure has, for the last century, been distinguished by the continuing existence of a limited number of very large producers and a very large number of very small producers.
In the promotion of rapid industrialization, the Japanese state fostered the growth of large organizations which would be better placed to resist the intense competition of Western companies.
These large organizations combined industrial, financial and trading activities around a central holding company and were known as zaibatsu .
Given a severe shortage of expertise in production, finance or marketing the state used the zaibatsu as instruments of national policy by, among other things, offering preferential contracts for state orders, by selling state factories to them cheaply and by building national financial and trading institutions around zaibatsu companies.
By the 1920s, the zaibatsu had come to dominate the newer manufacturing sectors like steel, machinery or shipbuilding but they also dominated the financial sector, owning two-thirds of banking and insurance institutions.
The four main zaibatsu were more than able to supply the financial needs of the two main political parties, but in return they expected state support to continue.
Herein lay a grave source of weakness for the attempt of elected politicians to assert their right to take a greater share of power.
It was all too easy for opponents of the move towards greater political party involvement in national leadership to label the activities of politicians  as corrupt, self-seeking, individualistic and anti-social.
In a society where service to the state was a paramount requirement, the close association of political parties with wealthy financiers and industrialists was a serious liability.
Personal corruption was seen as symbolic, by military officers in particular, of a trend to sacrifice Japan's rural sector for the benefit of the expanding industrial dominance of zaibatsu capitalists.
Throughout the 1920s Japanese silk and rice producers faced severe competition from Asian producers, some of whom were based in territories that had been incorporated into the Japanese Empire.
Matters were made worse by financial policies which kept Japanese export prices high and the declining rate of rural productivity improvement meant that the rural sector was severely affected.
To some extent the blame for rural distress was attributed to the fluctuations in world markets, but as the zaibatsu did not appear to be suffering to the same extent, rural discontent was increasingly directed towards the alliance between politicians and industrial financiers.
Junior military officers played an important part in orchestrating rural opposition within a movement which, in reasserting the ideal of service to the state, took on an anti-capitalist tone.
While it is clear that politicians and zaibatsu groups were the object of a more aggressively nationalist movement in rural areas, there was also some strong anti-landlord sentiment.
In general, links between impoverished peasants, landlords whose rent incomes were falling and junior officers were based on common opposition to the ‘anti-social’ actions of the zaibatsu and their allies.
The role of the military in the transition to ultranationalist authoritarianism in the 1930s remains controversial.
However, junior officers upholding the sanctity of Japan's rural heritage led the physical attack on politicians and zaibatsu leaders in a series of assassinations.
Senior officers may or may not have been involved, but they certainly made public their opposition to party politicians who had held back the growth of military expenditure in budget balancing financial policies.
Senior officers were generally resentful of the attempts of politicians to interfere in military affairs and in the organization of the Empire, which was almost a military fiefdom.
Rivalry between the army and zaibatsu did not prevent the zaibatsu from taking a full part in the production boom of the 1930s.
Where their profits were associated with service to the Empire, their operations reverted to the nineteenth century ‘tradition’ of patriotic capitalism.
There is also great uncertainty about the role played by the Imperial bureaucracy in the 1930s.
In the immediate post-war years there was an attempt to absolve the bureaucracy of responsibility for externally aggressive and internally repressive policies, by pointing out the ways in which bureaucrats had tried to hold back military excesses.
But as far as political representation was concerned, the bureaucracy was unable, or unwilling, to uphold the power of elected politicians relative to military cabinet members.
For the bureaucracy, allegiance to the Emperor came before democratic representation.
When faced with the seemingly inevitable growth  of military authority backed up by frenetic ultranationalism and repression of those who opposed Japanese imperialism in Asia, the Emperor system provided the core values to justify collective effort and sacrifice.
1.3 The US Occupation: rights versus duty
This speedy review of pre-war Japanese history is a necessary scenario against which to assess the motives and methods of the reform policies of the US occupation after Japan's unconditional surrender in 1945.
In preparing the reform and reconstruction of Japanese institutions, there was a conviction that ‘what went wrong’ in the 1930s was the way the traditional commitment of the Japanese to a group identity had been diverted all too easily into collective militaristic nationalism.
An era of ultranationalism had withered the fragile plant of democracy whose seed had been sown in the 1890 constitution, and the 1930s was interpreted as a period of aberration in Japan's progress towards a democratic society.
The idea of the 1930s as an interruption in the development of latent democratic tendencies, has been the dominant one, and seen in this light, US reforms were based on the need to destroy the weeds that had stunted democratic growth, and provide liberal doses of fertilizer.
In contrast to the pattern of sharing the administration of occupied territories in Europe, the US took almost exclusive control of occupied Japan.
After disbanding the Japanese military, releasing political prisoners and legalizing opposition political organizations, the US set about the task of writing a new constitution.
Their aim was, to quote a directive from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the ‘elimination of ultra-nationalism…the strengthening of democratic tendencies in governmental, economic and social institutions = = the encouragement and support of liberal political tendencies in Japan’(Ward 1968 p.480).
All of these objectives were enshrined in a document written at great speed within six months of the Japanese surrender, and enacted in the following year, 1947.
To correct the negative tendencies of Japanese collectivism, the new constitution gave fundamental priority to individual civil and political rights.
Free speech and free political association were to be backed by an extension of the franchise to all adults over the age of 20, a formal extension of the power of the elected legislature (the Diet) and guarantees of judicial independence from both the executive and the Diet.
Alongside national changes went directives aimed at increasing the power of elected local authorities, especially in education and police administration where the power of central bureaucrats was too dominant.
Civil rights were to include the freedom to join labour unions, the right to strike and the right to expect equal opportunity in employment irrespective of gender, race or creed.
As most of these changes conflicted with the pre-war stress on duties  and loyalty to the Emperor, the role of the Emperor was redefined.
After 1947 the Emperor was relegated to a constitutional symbol of the state and his supernatural attributes were denied: sovereignty now passed to the will of the Japanese people.
Other lethal dangers to the fragile democratic plant were to be displaced by formalizing the permanent demilitarisation of Japan in the unique Clause 9 statement that ‘land sea and air forces will never be maintained.
The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized’.
In addition, military elites were to be purged along with other bureaucratic, political, industrial and intellectual leaders of Japan's route through the ‘dark valley’ of the 1930s.
Within this spirit of democratic evangelism, the US occupation followed up their constitutional provision with other reforms designed to implant liberal economic structures which would encourage market competition, and equalize the ownership of private property.
The zaibatsu were to be dissolved as interlocking corporate entities and the US model of monopoly control established.
Financial and business leaders were already on the list of personnel to be purged, but anti-monopoly controls were needed to prevent the re-emergence of conglomerate dominance.
Therefore a new agency, the Fair Trade Commission, was established to act as an independent guardian of market competition.
Land reform was an equally vital commitment if the ‘semi-feudal’ foundations of Japanese rural society were to be undermined.
Tenants were to be transformed into owner-occupiers and thereby be given a property stake in the new society.
At a stroke, this would neutralize the long experience of rural discontent between tenants and landlords, it would remove the over-bearing power of landlords in village communities and in the process eliminate one source of support for the ultra-nationalist movement.
Throughout all of this ‘experiment with externally planned and controlled political change’(Ward 1968 p.483) the US occupation was acutely aware that attitudes and social practices had to change, as institutional change alone would not be sufficient to maintain the substance, as opposed to the form of liberal democracy.
In some ways, this explains why education was an important initial target for reform.
Not only was the administration of education to be decentralized, but also the curriculum was to be revised to eradicate the transmission of ideas about the deferential duties of citizen subjects, which were to be altered to stress individual rights .
Secondary education should not be the preserve of men, and the curriculum should not have a gender specific bias based on expected household duties.
It is in this context of how far US reforms affected the substance of attitudes towards liberal democracy, that we uncover the origins of the positive view of Japan's unique culture so widely publicized by writers like Nakane and Vogel.
Their approach, put crudely, says yes there was a change in basic attitudes following institutional reform, and modern Japan is therefore an uncommonly equal, consensual and meritocratic democracy.
The survival of the 1947 constitution without major change since the US occupation ended, is taken as evidence of how well it fits with the attitudes and expectations of contemporary Japan.
Such a sweeping interpretation can be challenged by distinguishing between the formal acceptance of reform institutions from their operation in practice.
Even before the ink was dry on the main elements of reform, ‘there is no doubt that the relative emphasis and priority accorded to democratization appreciably diminished from late 1947 onward or that this was regarded as a betrayal or serious dilution of earlier objectives’(Ward 1968 p.503).
What was the significance of this reversal for the democratization of Japanese collectivism?
Two aspects of the shift in emphasis accorded to democratic reform need to be distinguished.
First, the specific areas of ‘betrayal or dilution’, and secondly, the very fact that the US found it necessary to alter its stance at all.
As the constitutional reforms were to a very great degree imposed on the Japanese, the lead given by US authorities on interpreting the reforms was going to be crucial to post-Occupation Japan.
Learning how to apply alien Western ideas is supposed to be a special Japanese attribute and the US provided practical lessons of democracy in action down to 1952.
These lessons were contained in revisions to the constitution and in the explanatory legislation that codified its clauses.
In both processes, the US occupation ‘ committed flagrant violations of normal democratic procedure’(Moore 1979 p.727) in a wide range of areas from direct intervention in Japanese politics through a reinterpretation of labour rights to a revival of educational control.
There is a danger of assuming too much agreement within the US personnel who were supervising the occupation.
While MacArthur had enormous power as the supreme commander, there were noticeable differences among his advisors especially on the general issue of the strength of ‘latent democratic tendencies’ in Japan.
While the first year of occupation was marked by a firm emphasis on the need for liberal democratic reforms to avoid a revival of militarism, by 1947 it seems that the need for an anti-military government was not taken to imply an anti-conservative one.
In the turmoil of the two years after the Japanese surrender, catastrophic inflation at triple digit rates coupled with an explosion of labour and political activity culminated in mass protest and plans for a general strike on 1 February 1947.
When MacArthur banned the strike his action symbolized the feeling that Japan was not yet ready for the complete freedoms contained in the labour reforms.
In the following years the US occupation eroded labour rights even further by initiating proposals to remove the right to strike of public sector employees, by supporting the establishment of enterprise unions as opposed to inter-company trade unions and by leading the purge of radical employees in the public and private sector.
Within a context of ‘de-politicizing’ labour affairs, local control over education was constrained by a prior national  need to confront the radical teachers union, and the liberal emphasis on decentralizing curricula control was checked.
At the time these changes were justified by the need to maintain social order and the ‘violations’ of individual rights were explained as purely temporary expedients.
But, in the two areas of labour rights and educational control, it is not at all certain that the temporary reversal of constitutional guarantees has ever been restored.
A common explanation of the reversal of US reform policies relates the changed priorities to the wider context of Asian politics, and in particular the victory of communism in China.
There is no doubt that the US needed a relatively stable ally and that reconstructing the Japanese economy took precedence over nurturing democratic ideals.
But, it is equally vital to recognize that the reversal of reforms began well before Mao's victory in China in 1949, indeed, it appears that one section of the US occupation was anticipating a reversal almost as the constitution was being drafted.
Certainly MacArthur's economic advisors were horrified to find on their arrival from the US, that the need for liberal competition was being used to justify a purge of thousands of business leaders, and they viewed the dissolution of the zaibatsu as a threat to the whole fabric of Japanese capitalism.
There is controversy over the extent to which the zaibatsu were actually dissolved, but there is some agreement that fewer business leaders were purged than originally intended, that many pre-war industrialists reappeared in key positions during the 1950s and that their banks largely survived intact.
When it comes to the separation of powers and the system of checks and balances that the constitution asserted, it is also clear that the bureaucracy was given a much more equal share than either the Diet or the Judiciary.
To some extent this was inevitable given the US decision to operate through a civilian Japanese administration rather than through the US military command.
But once again this ‘temporary’ extension of power and influence has lasted a long time, and the relative weighting of Diet, Cabinet, Bureaucracy and Judiciary remains a debated issue.
So even before the US occupation ended, the Japanese had learned that the form of the constitution did not totally determine the substance of its application.
With independence, came freedom to assess the appropriateness of the US constitutional model which had been imposed on Japan.
There was some consultation with Japanese leaders during the drafting of the constitution, but this was largely concerned with how to redefine the role of the Emperor and at most the consultation was with reluctant partners.
In no way were the reforms ‘of the Japanese people, for the Japanese people by the Japanese people’(Iida 1970 p.62).
Like the changes following the restoration of the Emperor in 1868 or the 1890 constitution, the new structure was imposed from above.
It is arguable that the feeling of external imposition weakened commitment not just to the formal provisions of the new structure, but to the spirit within which these provisions are applied.
While it is true that no major changes have been made to the constitution, this is not through want of trying.
Conservatives have long held the view that there is too much emphasis on individual rights and not enough on duties, especially when they rail against the self-interested, Westernized attitudes of modern Japanese youth.
Clause 9 renouncing the right of belligerency, has been contested throughout the post-war era and remained an objective of the 1986 Prime Minister Nakasone.
Taking a lead from the US Occupation's reversal of the substantive operation of the constitution, there are many instances where either reform reversal has taken place, or where constitutional provision has proved ineffective.
Some of these changes relate to the way the US ideal model of liberal democracy was said to sit uneasily with Japanese experience so some refining was necessary to render them more effective.
But the difference between refining and reversing is a slippery one, so it is not surprising to find those who write in terms of refining, generally say much less about reversing.
Refining, especially among those writers who stress the uniqueness of Japanese collectivism, is part of the democratic process of responding to a consensus of opinion.
Those who stress reversal see the process as one that has been led from the top, using the need to accommodate the reforms to Japan's particular social system in order to legitimate the changes.
1.4 Liberal reforms refined or reversed?
Much greater detail on specific examples is contained in later chapters, but a few examples may establish more clearly the framework of the debate.
If we consider the independence of the Judiciary, the Supreme Court has the right to determine the constitutionality of all legislation.
In practice this power has been rarely used, and only with the greatest reluctance.
Explanations from refiners would suggest that this is because the Supreme Court has confidence in the Diet, regards the legislature as the main expression of popular sovereignty, and that the Japanese tradition is to settle disputes by negotiation which, in the case of controversial legislation, is adequately done in the Diet.
So here Japanese trust in consensus formation through the Diet makes US-style Supreme Court intervention unnecessary.
Those who are inclined towards reform reversal, place much more weight on the way the long dominance of the Conservative LDP party allowed it to pack the Supreme Court with its own nominees, so that the independence of the Judiciary is a myth.
Or alternatively, that the Judiciary fears that too much intervention in the area of protecting individual rights, may result in a revival of pre-war encroachment by the executive in legal affairs.
So keeping a low profile avoids getting embroiled in political controversy, which is the proper province of the elected Diet.
If the absence of active Judicial intervention is to be explained by  confidence in the Diet's ability to represent electoral consensus, we can see how Japan could manage without the fierce watchdog role that the constitution envisaged for the Supreme Court.
But is such confidence in the Diet warranted?
Arguably not, because until recently most political scientists saw the Diet as an institution which merely gave symbolic ratification to legislation handed down by the executive.
Some writers (e.g. Krauss 1984) argue that this power imbalance between the Diet and the executive was just a temporary phase which reflected the obstructionist tactics of Diet opposition groups who did not follow the rules of the parliamentary game.
So from the later 1960s when intra-parliamentary negotiation replaced outright confrontation, the Diet has been a much more equal partner.
In this scenario, the Diet took a subordinate role only until the socialist and communist parties accepted the system of liberal democracy and spent less time arguing for an alternative.
Executive dominance is still evident though, particularly through the power of non-elected bureaucrats who have exceptionally close links with the majority LDP party.
Few writers deny that the bureaucracy is very influential, but most go on to suggest that this influence waned from the later 1960s as the Diet and the LDP cabinet took a more positive role.
Besides, even if the bureaucratic elite is more influential than in the West, their high status as permanent guardians of the national interest is said to be justified by their personal merit.
This stress on meritocratic leadership also justifies the regularized coordination of discussions between bureaucrats, LDP cabinet members and the leaders of big business.
Leaving aside for now the question of whether big business in modern Japan is really the reincarnation of the zaibatsu , there is no doubt that business leaders have preferential access to the political process through a variety of channels.
Just how far they influence policy outcomes is contentious, but the level of consultation is reinforced by the regular recruitment to private companies of bureaucrats who retire early from public office.
In economic terms, the continued strength of large companies may be contrasted with the relative ineffectiveness of the anti-monopoly agency.
At times the FTC appears to spend much of its time worrying about how it can control the anti-competitive actions not of private business but of fellow bureaucrats who are busy promoting cartels.
So in this area, the attempt to impose US guidelines on competition were reversed.
An alternative explanation though, would say that the US model is not appropriate for Japan because it is based on the ideal of atomistic competition between a large number of small firms.
Is it not more important to ensure the survival of important large firms, while at the same time promote fierce competition between them?
That is, replace the model of atomistic competition with one of competitive oligopoly which may be more suited to Japanese conditions.
If fierce competition between large firms is the ‘Japanese way’, it also explains the background to the promotion of enterprise unions as the  mechanism through which collective effort at the company level can be focused against rival companies.
If in the process there is less stress on individual labour rights than the constitution proposed, then this merely reflects its inappropriate model of industrial, general or trade unions.
Is not the excessive stress on labour rights unnecessary in Japan given the tradition of reciprocal labour/management relations?
If women are not treated equally either in pay or promotion prospects, it is either because absolute equality has to be refined to incorporate differences in education or productivity, or because the constitution ignores the wish of Japanese women to give priority to their household duties.
Women's productivity is lower, in this argument, because their employment hours are legally restricted and menstrual leave is guaranteed.
Therefore their child producing role has been protected and inequality in employment is compensated by a superior role in the family where men concede control of finance and child rearing.
Refining individual labour rights is then merely adjusting the ideal model to Japanese social practice.
One final illustration concerns defence.
While military spending was constrained by the renunciation of belligerency, this does not mean that defence expenditure is insignificant.
A Self-Defence Force was established in 1954 to act as a permanent source for disaster relief and as a force capable of defending Japan's borders.
In essence this appeared to reverse the commitment not to maintain land, sea or air forces, but as the stress was placed on self-defence the SDK was said not to contradict the spirit as opposed to the letter of the constitution.
As an extremely well-equipped force, the SDK have been at the centre of political controversy in Japan because of the difficulty of assessing the basic needs of a force that is there purely to defend.
To protect the spirit of demilitarisation, a convention has been followed that defence spending will not exceed 1 per cent of GNP, and although this ceiling has been broken on a few occasions, the 1 per cent target has a symbolic significance.
However 1 per cent of a very large and expanding GNP produces a significant total, making Japan the world's ninth biggest military spender.
With a very vigilant peace movement reflecting a wide spectrum of opinion, the existence of the SDF is publicly justified less by its military role and more by its value for disaster relief.
Given Japan's history of earthquake and typhoon devastation, refining the military role means stressing the unique need for a permanent relief organization.
1.5 Liberal democracy in Japan: issues and perspectives
Many aspects of the issues involved in refining or reversing US reforms, are reflected in debates throughout the West, whether these are concerned with the distribution of political power, labour rights, gender inequalities or defence spending.
Indeed it is from the comparative studies of how  different societies have reacted to these issues, that the view of Japan as a model to follow has emerged.
As I indicated earlier, not all writers think it advisable or possible for the West to import Japanese practices.
Research on the negative side of the Japanese miracle has been undertaken by Western writers with experience of Japan or in collaboration with Japanese social scientists.
This work has given a close insight into problems of pollution, congestion, intense company group pressure, sexism and racism.
But in much of this work there is a tendency to imply that the Japanese system is flexible and responsive enough to correct the negative features, although the response may take longer in some cases than others.
Liberal democratic institutions, it is argued, have been grafted onto a society which places a high value on social consensus, but there are opportunities for groups to press for change.
For example, while some companies may have been able to ignore the social protest of individuals who suffered the effects of industrial pollution, they found it more difficult to resist organized groups of citizens whose opposition accompanied a marked decline in support for the LDP.
When interest group activity is added to electoral pressure, the ‘shame’ attached to being held responsible for social dissensus, lead to changes which may have been a voluntary response or have been supervised by a state responding to legitimate protest.
The underlying assumptions of this view are clearly associated with commitment to the pluralist model of how liberal democracies work with its emphasis on electoral accountability and open access for interest groups to a state which has an arbitrating role.
As this approach dominates US political science, and as the US model was transplanted into Japan during the Occupation, it is, in some ways, not surprisingly the dominant perspective.
The debate about reversing or refining US reforms has illustrated that there are differences between ideals and practices, and US writers have not ignored them.
But, they do seem to stress the way the changes in democratic practices were merely responding to the need to adapt the US model to Japanese values as though there were a collectively agreed set of values to call upon.
When it comes to the question of who initiated changes in the emphasis on labour rights or anti-monopoly legislation for example, answers focus on bureaucrats, cabinet ministers or elected Diet members who were able to represent the national interest or consensus.
The emphasis then is placed on a responsive state, interpreting change in terms of majority preferences.
In economic studies, similar weight is given to the state as guide or guardian within a liberal democratic Japan where the relatively small size of the public sector is seen as an important indicator of the limits to state economic control.
Without a significant amount of public ownership therefore, a liberal market system gives companies independence.
Competition may not follow the perfect model, but fierce large company rivalry should have the same outcome in lower prices and rapid technological change.
Within the general emphasis on political pluralism and competitive markets, various qualifying terms are used to take account of Japanese deviations from ideal models.
So ‘bureaucratic’ pluralism has been used by some in recognizing the more important role of Japanese civil servants; this has been further qualified as ‘bureaucratic-inclusionary’pluralism to suggest that the widest possible range of citizen consultation is used to assess the national interest.
Others, who deny the breadth of consultation, prefer ‘bureaucratic-exclusionary’ pluralism or ‘authoritarian pluralism’(Fukui 1984 p.486).
Economists likewise vary in their labelling: from ‘sponsored capitalism’(Lockwood 1965 p.487) to ‘market oriented = = not market dominated’(Khan 1973 p.5) or MITI's own label of a ‘planned market’.
The perennial problem is how to express market coordination, guidance or indirect nurturing without undermining the host of implications that derive from liberal freedoms.
G.C. Allen, the doyen of British Japanologists, put it this way ‘although government fostered growth in Japan = = it certainly did not and could not prescribe the policy to follow’(1981 p.192, italics added).
Allen's comment is typical of the general approach to the role of the state and two aspects are interesting.
First, his emphasis on the word ‘prescribe’ indicates an inability and/or unwillingness to coerce.
So, a relatively small public sector in the economy is added to a pluralist arbitrating role for the state, to deny the state the power or authority to command.
The state can encourage, foster or guide, but not force producers or consumers to do what they prefer not to do.
The other, not unrelated aspect, is use of the term ‘government’ rather than state, an interchange that is not at all untypical in studies of the political economy of contemporary Japan.
I cannot claim to have undertaken a comprehensive content analysis of the literature, but it is very unusual to find systematic analysis of the ‘state’ as such in works on Japan written in English.
There are a few exceptions which I will come back to later, but generally ‘government’ is used interchangeably with ‘state’.
Even Johnson (1982), who untypically devotes a whole chapter to Japan's ‘developmental state’, changes to ‘government’ on the page following his first mention of the ‘state’.
This interchange between terms, is significant because it implies the equivalence of ‘state’ and ‘government’.
This assumed equivalence is related partly to the notion of a responsive, arbitrating state in pluralist models of liberal democracy.
But in Japanese studies this tendency is compounded by the way contemporary Japan is starkly contrasted with the ‘dark valley’ of the 1930s.
Analysis of pre-war Japan is not at all characterized by the absence of attention to the state, quite the contrary.
Labour repression, military violence, the all-embracing ideology of service to the Emperor and the spirit of ultranationalism are all explained as instances of a domineering state.
In studying this period writers have tended to use ‘government’ to refer to elected party or civilian cabinets, whose position is eroded in the 1930s as the state became even more totalitarian.
When we move to studies  of post-war Japan however, we discover pluralist writers have ‘denied the state a theoretical niche’(Boyd 1985 p.11).
Tight definitions of the state and clear conceptual distinctions between state and government remain enormously contentious, but in European social science at least there has been a lively debate.
This is not generally reflected in work on Japan published in English where the debate, if it is mentioned at all, seems to be based on the early works of Marx and a selective version of Weber.
It is Weber's emphasis on the state's monopoly of the legitimate use of violence, that, it seems to me, gives overtones of coercion which encourage a narrow approach to the state in contemporary Japan.
While coercion may have been appropriate enough before 1945, the plurality of power in a representative system makes it inappropriate thereafter.
Using ‘government’ instead of‘state’, carries important trigger connotations of accountability to electors that are missing from the coercive feel of the term ‘state’.
Weber did qualify his emphasis on the coercive methods through which the state maintains order and compliance, ‘force is certainly not the normal or only means of the state’(Weber 1972 p.78).
But this interplay between coercion and consent has been underemphasized in pluralist analysis by focusing only on the inadequacy of the coercive dimension.
Such a narrow focus on state coercion had led to limited, superficial and largely sterile debate about the notion of Japan Incorporated .
The presentation of the Japanese economy in terms analogous to a business corporation, seems to have been popularized initially in describing the constraints that foreign business was likely to find when selling goods in Japan.
Close consultation between business and the bureaucracy was likened to the internal organization of large corporations, except that Japan Inc. was a national unit headed by public officials.
Even when the central board of directors was expanded to include business and political elites as well as bureaucratic leaders, it never offered much depth in an analytical sense.
Yet, it has been consistently used as a straw model which could easily be knocked down to deny the existence of centralized power centres in Japan.
Disagreement over economic policies between the bureaucracy, the LDP and big business is well documented across a range of issues from anti-monopoly controls through rationalization cartels to state subsidies for rice producers.
Equally there has been disagreement within the LDP, business groupings or the bureaucracy, such that policy making is not the smooth process implied in Japan Inc .
Instead of the central board of directors foisting decisions on unwilling parties, policy formation reflects endless bargaining between diverse competing interests.
Identifying divisions of interest does not by itself provide an adequate rejection of the claim that elites are very powerful in Japan.
To take an outlandish illustration: do divisions between the army, the politburo and industrial managers in the USSR over the allocation of resources between  weapons and consumer goods, imply that pluralism is alive and kicking?
Or let us not forget that research on Japan in the 1930s has revealed conflicts of interest between and within the military,zaibatsu , politicians and the bureaucracy.
Clearly the difference for contemporary Japan in the pluralist approach, lies in the framework of a representative democracy with intense interest group activity.
While it is clear that an enormous range of interest groups exist in Japan, few would argue that small firms, non-unionized labour (who make up over 70 per cent of the total), minority groups or the elderly have the same continuous access to the state as do large companies.
Leading business representatives have access through many different channels being members of the Employers' Federation, trade associations, industrial associations or public advisory bodies, not to mention regular contact through LDP research groups.
Has this extensive network of connections nothing to do with the way contentious issues like discrimination against women or minorities pollution, state welfare, or housing costs were kept from the political agenda for so long?
We need therefore to qualify the existence of pluralist interest group activity by asking about differing degrees of influence and this is one of the main themes in Chapters 4 and 5.
The existence of powerless groups has been highlighted even by those who extol the virtues of the Japanese commitment to consensus.
Nakane for example, writes about ‘the cruelly heavy handicaps facing the powerless and socially inferior’(1973 p.155).
This leads to questions about why these groups miss out, why their inferiority does not result in social disorder and more generally what barriers exist to prevent the mobilization of action to correct their ‘cruel handicaps’?
I will argue later in Chapter 6 that powerless groups are not a small minority especially when we realize that the cherished pattern of lifetime employment applies to barely 30 per cent of labour, within which there are only a tiny percentage of women.
It is misleading to dismiss arguments that focus on the unequal distribution of power in Japanese society simply because there are some examples of disagreement among dominant groups.
There is general agreement between leaders of the LDP and business over the need to reduce state spending so that taxes can be lowered to allow private initiative to flourish.
I will argue later, that by treating state financial deficits as ‘failures’ in the drive to promote a vigorous self-reliant welfare society (Kumon 1984 p.161), big business has supported the agenda within which the state has managed conflicting attitudes to public welfare spending.
The debate about social welfare is but one example of the way even the multi-dimensional negotiation is organized around the general commitment to preserving Japan's existing social priorities.
This has usually meant giving precedence to private sector economic growth rather than other priorities such as social welfare.
Economic priorities are given the status of a nationally agreed consensus, especially by those who stress the unique willingness of the Japanese to forego individual interests for the benefit of  the group.
It would be foolish to ignore the historical roots of self-sacrifice or deference to group leaders, but we do need to avoid the danger of assuming that cooperation is always given voluntarily.
Voluntary cooperation and consensus formation is not simply a matter of agreeing national objectives, it relates to the display of consensus in everyday activities.
Are individual Japanese so decidedly group orientated by cultural tradition or is it that ‘in many cases they are loyal to their groups because it pays to be loyal’(Befu 1977 p. 87)?
In other words, might not loyalty in large companies be bought by promises of job security?
For those without such guarantees, there may be no alternative to pragmatic acceptance of their lot.
There is a danger of assuming that the Japanese have not rejected the contemporary institutions of collectivism because they are accepted as ideal.
Collectivist tendencies, while an important outward feature, may reflect apathy, the lack of alternatives or instrumental acceptance of material rewards, as I will argue in Chapter 3.
We should not ignore collectivism, however, because it is so often used by the state in Japan to mobilize the support of those who have not benefited as much from the economic miracle, or by company leaders to exhort yet more effort from employees.
In either case collectivism is an important rock on which attempts to coordinate opposition to growth-first policies have foundered.
In relating everyday experience of consensus pressures to the overarching priority of economic growth, we find that it is not only the state that constructs their operation.
Private sector employers, university entrance authorities, unions and arguably men in general, play their part in maintaining differences in ‘an individual's access to four types of social resources: income, power, information and status’(Sugimoto 1982 p.17).
These inequalities are managed through the activities of interest groups, market competition, educational institutions, enterprise unions and the state as they participate in constructing the national interest.
Hence we need to consider the mechanisms through which compliance is secured in a system of structured inequalities.
There is a tendency in some pluralist analysis to view the state as an independent public entity outside society acting as guardian of the national interest.
But the division between public and private is very ambiguous and cannot be drawn simply by examining the size of the public sector in the economy and assuming this defines the limit of state influence.
As experience in the US or UK during the 1980s shows, a small state is not necessarily a weak state despite the rhetoric of claims that a limited state sector restores individual freedom and personal initiative.
The Nakasone cabinet in 1986, like the Reagan or Thatcher governments, was deeply involved with issues that are ostensibly private to individuals or families.
For example, in underlining the need to reduce public welfare provision in the long term, the state upholds the family as the alternative centre of provision, with consequent implications for women's domestic role in the  care of children and the aged.
So efforts to facilitate a painless reduction in one sphere requires the state to assist in the maintenance of the other.
Reactions by pluralists to Marxist analysis of the Japanese state have rarely been characterized by rigorous argument.
Although Marxism is very influential in Japanese social science, this is poorly reflected in work published in English.
Even the work published in English by people like Norman, Halliday, Moore or Steven is often ignored or treated as misguided.
One crucial reason for this lies in the way only one element of Marxist work on the state is used by pluralist critics.
In a similar fashion to the narrow interpretation of Weber on state coercion, most responses to Marxist work focus on the state as the agent of monopoly capitalism.
‘The notion that modern state power is merely a committee that manages the common business of the bourgeoisie is one of the least adequate generalizations that Marx ever made’(Nettl 1968 p.571).
What is missed by those who follow Nettl's view, is that a number of Marxists would probably agree, in the sense that the idea of the state as merely an agent distorts the observed contradictions within the bourgeoisie, and assumes a purely passive role for the state in capitalism.
Despite these qualifications to the degree of state dependence on monopoly capital, pluralists frame their response to Marxist ideas almost as though more recent developments in Marxism did not exist.
In my view it is just as vital not to ignore Marxist work because it contains one inadequate generalization, as it is not to ignore pluralist work because it is based on an idealized view of liberal democracy in Japan.
The sterile debate about the contemporary Japanese state has, in. my opinion, emerged from the failure to confront the deeper arguments of both perspectives.
Pluralist accounts of the Japanese state for example underestimate the ambiguity of the division between public and private when they imply that individual rights in a liberal democracy confine the scope of the state to exclusively public spheres.
Neither is it acceptable to see the state as entirely dependent on monopoly capital as some Marxists still suggest.
Rather the state is the central site for the negotiation of conflict over a whole range of issues, in which the state is a participant though not necessarily a consistently dominant or united one.
While many of the negative aspects of compliance in Japan have been highlighted by Marxists, there are non-Marxist critics of voluntary or spontaneous collectivism.
Taken together this work sees Japan as ‘one of the most politically centralised societies in the world = = [But]= = Japan is also characterised by contradictions similar to those found in developed capitalist nations’(Kawamura 1980 p.58).
This emphasis on centralization with contradictions, helps to avoid overestimating the unity of elite interests or treating the state as a monolithic entity.
As a site for negotiation between divided interests, the state aims to secure support for the long-term survival of Japan's capitalist society by, among other things, absorbing the legitimacy  of the elected government into the process of constructing the national interest.
If the state can relate the manifesto of the majority party to policies which emerge from negotiation between interest groups, then these policies can claim to represent both the consensus of individual electors and views of organized pressure groups.
This, in some ways, explains the attraction of using state and government interchangeably because the outcome of negotiation can be expressed in terms of the representative electoral process.
If instead we use ‘government’ to mean the majority party, the government becomes one power centre participating in the formation of state policies.
Even in this sense as Chapter 5 will show, the LDP has hardly been a united force, with the cabinet and Diet members divided into personality factions and at odds with bureaucrats or business on some issues.
There is not, of course total disagreement, but contradictory positions are present, even if they do not radically affect the priority to be given to economic growth.
In what follows the state will be considered as a set of institutions including the Diet, judiciary, police and the bureaucracy but not simply as the location of public employees or officials.
Managing contradictory interests involves active participation and negotiation with other representatives of civil society.
In the process of negotiating conflict all the participants help to set the framework of ideas within which conflict is managed and a crucial dimension of this framework is that the Japanese people are characteristically said to defer to the national consensus.
Many writers have gone on to argue that such consensual preferences became even stronger once post-war reforms ensured a more representative structure through which citizens could contribute to the formation of a national consensus.
This chapter has suggested that it is common to find exaggerated accounts of Japan's position as the model of an unusually successful and harmonious capitalist society, in particular that compliance may be involuntary and that social inequalities are not as insignificant as they may appear.
There seems to be little doubt that the liberal reforms of the US occupation did attempt to safeguard basic individual rights and reinforce the institutions of a free market economy.
But in practice the spirit of these reforms has been refined to undermine part of their intended outcome.
The general case for amending the ways in which the reforms operated in practice, involved adapting imported principles to meet particular interpretations of Japan's national interest.
One such example concerns the way a prior need to reconstruct a war-damaged economy required the model of competition to be adapted so that the advantages of inter-firm rivalry could be retained alongside a degree of interdependent affiliation between Japanese companies.
As Chapter 2 demonstrates the structure that emerged in no small way explains the impressive record of productivity growth among private firms in Japan.
An Economic Structure of Interdependent Rivals
The transformation of the Japanese economy over the past 30 years has been highlighted by its stunning record of growth in output, productivity and exports.
Inevitably, attention has focused on very high levels of capital investment in advanced technology, pioneering innovation and the constant search for new sectors to maintain the rapid rates of industrial growth.
This record though, has not at all reduced the importance of output and employment in small units of production.
In total, some 55 per cent of the labour force worked in units that employed less than 30 people in the mid-1980s and that aggregate was not dramatically different from what it was 30 years before.
What had changed was the distribution of employment so that although Japanese farms are very tiny, the threefold decline in agricultural employment to about 10 per cent of the labour force means that non-agricultural sectors now provide the bulk of small-firm employment.
Adding together the numbers of self-employed, family workers and labour in firms of less than 30 employees in non-agricultural work for 1984 gives a total of about 25 million people, of which it appears that one-third (8.2 million) work in units of less than five people (FTW 1/2/86).
Of course it is true that construction, distribution and services are often very labour intensive sectors even in the West, but in Japan not only are these three sectors more labour intensive, so also is manufacturing industry.
International comparisons of the proportionate employment share of ‘small’ firms are bedevilled by variations in classification categories.
However, if we concentrate on broad comparative trends rather than statistical precision, Figure 2.1 highlights the middling position Japan occupies between the West and other Asian economies when we measure the proportion of manufacturing employment in firms with less than 100 workers.
Neither is there much evidence that the share of the small firm sector   is falling as the Japanese economy becomes more mature: over the 1970s the share actually increased from 51 per cent to 58 per cent.
Equally, there was no reduction in the share of small firms in total shipments of manufactured goods or in total value-added as firms with less than 100 workers contributed fairly constant shares at around 35 per cent and 40 per cent respectively.
These broad comparisons do conceal some interesting short-term changes which I will come back to, but at a very general level Japanese manufacturing industry is twice as dependent on the contribution of small firms than other leading members of the OECD.
While it would be misleading to suggest that small firms are important across all manufacturing industries, it is also incorrect to assume that small firms are confined to traditionally labour-intensive industries like textiles, clothing, furnishing or ceramics.
Ganguly (1982) attempted to disaggregate the manufacturing totals and although his criterion for a small firm was 20–199 employees, his data illustrate well the higher employment share taken by small firms even in industries like metal goods, vehicles and electrical or mechanical engineering.
In each of these four industries, as in total manufacturing, the share of small Japanese firms was about twice as large as that in the UK, US or West Germany.
Of all the major Western economies, Italy offers the closest comparison to Japan in terms of aggregate employment distribution and firm size.
But the duality of Italian production is much more regionally defined with small firms concentrated in the submerged South and large firms in the prosperous Northern cities.
In contrast to the Italian pattern of ‘independently orbiting systems with poor levels of technical and spatial contact’(Tuffarelli 1981).
p. 765), Japan's system is based on cohesive co-existence.
Instead of pitting the small firms against large firms, specialization by technique or process in a pervasive network of subcontracting forges a partnership which seems to have maintained the widely dispersed structure.
The extent to which Japanese manufacturing firms rely on outside orders for intermediate materials, parts or fittings is illustrated in Figure 2.2, and confirms the importance of subcontracting for firms of all sizes.
It is the case that smaller firms are more reliant on subcontracting in its narrowest form: processing materials supplied by firms who purchase the bulk of their output.
But the wider definition of supplying mainly to other producers, indicates that subcontracting is not the exclusive preserve of very small firms.
For example, in a survey of the Iron and Steel Industry during 1979, it was found that over 90 per cent of subcontracting companies employed over 300 workers (Mesatoshi 1980 p.51).
There is nothing especially unique about the presence of subcontracted parts suppliers because all manufacturing firms rely to an extent on the purchase of components from outsiders.
What is remarkable is the extent and persistence of subcontracting relations.
In two of Japan's leading export items, colour TV sets and motor vehicles, it is estimated that only 25 per cent of the value-added in production is generated internally by the company that sells the final product in contrast to 50 per cent in the UK or US.
Industrial production in Japan then, differs from many other advanced economies in the continuing reliance on the contribution of small firms, which is surprising given the economies of scale that large firms can reap by expanding their output.
In most other countries those firms employing over 1000 workers have substantially increased their share of output and employment over the past few decades, so why is Japan different?
One crucial reason is that large and small firms in Japan operate with a greater degree of interdependence than is suggested in conventional models of competitive markets.
In addition to the expectation of continuity in subcontracting partnerships, larger companies share semi-permanent trading agreements and are often stockholders in rival firms.
In what follows I will argue that there are specific financial advantages for Japanese firms which compensate for the presumed loss of efficiency that accompanied the shift away from the model of atomistic competition proposed in the reforms of the US Occupation.
Continuity in subcontracting allows parent companies to diversify the risks of specialization and promotes the exchange of technological information so that the quality of inputs is ensured and delivery schedules guaranteed.
Affiliative links between larger firms enhances the procurement of materials and smooths their pattern of marketing while inter-group stockholding prevents unwanted takeover bids and allows management to concentrate on long-term performance rather than short-term profits distributed to stockholders.
This longer run perspective is a feature of Japanese business and is greatly helped by the    existence of lead banks within affiliated groups that ensure access to loans even in periods when bank credit is restricted.
As we shall see the unequal power relations between parent companies and their subcontractors does mean that the burden of adjusting output in a recession can result in smaller firms going out of business.
In such circumstances the state has sought to mitigate the consequences of recession on small firms although it seems to have acted more effectively when the existence of a larger company is threatened.
Equally, the state has helped to maintain the structure of capital markets which promote closer relations between financial and industrial capital.
In the rest of this chapter we will consider how state policies have reaffirmed the financial advantages that derive from the continuation of a dual structure of production.
2.1 Affiliated subcontracting and flexibility in production
The experience of other advanced economies would lead us to expect the increasing dominance of larger manufacturing firms who can benefit more from economies of scale as the level of output and capital investment increases.
One underlying reason for the expected shift in firm size is related to the higher transaction costs that are involved in using outside suppliers relative to greater in-house production.
Where the purchase of processed or partially processed inputs is outside the direct control of firms there is greater uncertainty about their quality and delivery schedules.
Such uncertainty can be reduced by strict contractual agreements, but the danger, for example, of late deliveries interrupting the flow of production is still greater than it would be if the firm expanded in-house production.
In periods of expansion, the time involved in negotiating contracts can be lengthy as suppliers look for long-term guarantees and may try to play one buyer against another.
Transaction costs have encouraged firms to expand their own internal capacity in preference to extensive reliance on outside suppliers.
However where demand is known to be variable, for example if a large share of output is exported, any major internal expansion carries the danger of periodic over-capacity with consequent higher average costs just as the market is weakest.
Hence the higher transaction costs of using outside suppliers have to be balanced against the dangers of under-utilization before a final decision is made about the scale of internal expansion.
This balance is particularly important for several of the industries that have been at the heart of the Japanese economic miracle like motor vehicles, electrical consumer goods, watches or cameras.
These industries export well over 50 per cent of the output and any exogenous change in foreign exchange rates can have a dramatic effect on costs, relative prices and therefore sales.
One way out of the dilemma has been for larger Japanese companies to reduce transaction costs with outside suppliers by promising continuity in their subcontracting arrangements.
Continuity is idealized as a family relationship and is symbolized in terms such as parent company or child subcontractor.
Indeed the hard and fast distinction between firms becomes very blurred when we find some supplier companies located within the plant of the parent firm, when the smaller company is managed by ex employees of the larger one or when the bulk of the small firm machinery is handed down in second-hand sales from their principal buyer.
This symbolic, familial structure of affiliation between firms of very different sizes makes it difficult to identify the exact extent of independent control especially where subcontractors supply the bulk of their output to one buyer.
Close affiliative relations between firms are not confined to single level subcontracting but are typical of a hierarchical network of connections at several stages removed from the largest firms.
Primary subcontractors will therefore transfer personnel, equipment and ideas about organization to their own subcontractors who in turn do likewise right down to the level of the single-person firm.
Neither is subcontracting confined to Japan, as many electrical goods producers, for instance, buy in parts from subsidiaries in South East Asia.
Figure 2.3 illustrates a production flow in the TV industry with just three stages, but these would have to be extended many   times to include all the firms involved.
One important feature to note, is the way some processes, like printed circuit board assembly, are common to both partners.
This gives the parent firm a measure of independence but with the flexibility to expand output when necessary by giving more orders to outside suppliers.
Although it is tempting to trace the historical antecedents of subcontracting to the pre-industrial ‘putting-out’ system, the crucial impetus came from the very rapid expansion in manufacturing output from the later 1950s.
Surprising as it may seem in the 1980s, there was great uncertainty both within Japan and outside about how long the boom would last.
Large firms attempted to expand production levels but tried to avoid incurring heavy fixed-cost burdens on their own plants in case the boom was only temporary.
It was not simply a matter of avoiding the dangers of under-utilizing capital equipment, but also avoiding any unnecessary increase in the recruitment of regular labour.
Until the early 1960s temporary and seasonal labour was used to supplement the workforce, but thereafter the relative share of temporary labour employed in larger firms began to decline as the role of external subcontractors increased.
There are significant differences in the terms and conditions of regular relative to temporary labour, not simply in terms of wages but involving housing and welfare expenses, which can mean regular labour costing up to 50 per cent more.
When these higher costs are related to the expectation of lifetime employment for regular workers, there was a real incentive for large firms to stabilize their own labour force.
Labour supply in the early 1960s was elastic not least because of a massive decline in the share of agricultural employment, so cheaper subcontracted labour was used in preference to any expansion of regular labour.
Thus the expansion of larger manufacturing firms was designed to give them the opportunity to expand output with protection from fluctuations in demand given by avoiding any excessive accumulation of fixed costs.
In order to expand output quickly Japanese firms did invest heavily at over twice the rates of their competitors, but this increase in their own capacity did not result in the demise of the small firm, rather subcontracted orders offered an expansion path based on interdependence.
With promises of continuous association, transaction costs can be reduced especially when subcontractors are heavily dependent on one source of orders.
Equally, uncertainties over delivery timing can be drastically reduced when subcontractors are located close to the parent and the Japanese obsession with inventory control can easily be extended to suppliers.
Studies of Japanese management practices have highlighted many peculiar features among which is the kanban system of ordering components.
Although kanban is highly developed in Japan, the system reflects a universal desire of management to reduce production costs by treating inventories as ‘the root of all evil’(Hayes 1981 p.59).
Therefore the underlying aim is not unique, but the power of large Japanese firms is  extensive in enforcing systematic inventory reduction.
Kanban when translated as ‘just in time’ neatly captures the essence of the system.
Delivery of components to particular plant sections must be smooth enough to prevent delays and at the same time reduce stocks of surplus materials.
Final output targets are determined at the outset and input requirements are calculated precisely for each stage of manufacturing, including those bought from outside subcontractors.
Not only have the supply of components to be of perfect quality and in the exact quantity, but they have to be delivered in small batches at very specific times.
These times are increasingly denominated in daily or hourly units, thus a motor vehicle survey in 1982 reported that 82 per cent of parts are delivered to hourly or daily schedules (Y. Sato 1984 p. 17).
Parent companies can thereby keep under tight control the capital they have tied up in idle stocks and make substantial savings on fixed outlay in storage or warehousing.
Focusing on the novelty of Japanese inventory control can however divert attention from the fact that kanban is ‘primarily a method of achieving process change and only secondarily as a method for controlling the flow of materials’(Lee, Sang and Schwendinan 1982 p. 149).
Thus small batch deliveries at regular intervals are essential in minimizing the change-over time in the assembly of different models which is critical in the production of differentiated consumer goods.
The system also allows parent firms to concentrate on more capital intensive processes.
Reorganizing the lay-out of the production process can therefore permit the much greater automation of final assembly processes if robots, for example, can be programmed to perform different operations for different models almost to the exact moment the components arrive.
Kanban reflects the drive to speed up a flexible system of production, and success, in terms of productivity, is dependent on the ability of parent companies to guarantee prompt and regular delivery of components.
Attempts to introduce the system in Japanese plants overseas have frequently been thwarted by the inability of component suppliers to meet quality and timing schedules.
When Kawasaki began operations in their US plant at Nebraska they found it preferable to import components from their subcontractors back in Japan who could even at that distance, guarantee weekly deliveries.
Within Japan, larger firms have a tremendous advantage because there are so many small component suppliers who rely extensively on subcontracting for their existence.
Very recent figures on the precise extent of subcontracting are difficult to obtain but the Fifth Basic Survey of Industry (1979) showed that over 60 per cent of small and medium-sized firms (i.e. up to 300 employees) were dependent on orders from other firms.
While it is fair to assume that the smaller the firm the greater the degree of subcontracting, even 50 per cent of firms with 100–300 workers were acting as suppliers to larger firms.
As Table 2.1 shows the degree of dependence for small firms increases substantially when we recognize that   for many of them the bulk of their orders come from a narrow range of just two or three customers.
Similarly, small firm independence is eroded by the fact that over half of the raw materials to be processed are obtained from the buyer and nearly one-third of subcontractors use the buyers trademark.
Not only then is subcontracting widely practised but the small firms are so dependent on a limited range of buyers that they have little alternative but to accommodate to tight kanban schedules.
These indications of the importance of small firm production and the extent of subcontracting make it vital to recognize the place of a differentiated structure of production in assessing the causes of Japan's rapid economic growth.
Small producers have provided larger companies with an important cushion against fluctuations in demand by allowing them to use outside suppliers as shock absorbers.
So for example, as demand falls in-house production takes a greater share to protect employment for regular workers but at the expense of labour in smaller suppliers.
Equally the burden of financing surplus stocks of materials is transferred along a chain of those subcontractors who face reduced orders.
Hence the promises of continuous affiliation with parent firms have to be weighed against variations in the quantities of orders given to child companies.
Apart from using supplementary outside orders as a flexible cushion in recessions, large firms can also maximize the gains from small-firm specialization where production need not be capital intensive.
So for motor industry parts like door handles, plastic fascia or springs, there may be cost savings to be had from the simple labour intensive pressing operations of smaller firms.
The contrast in the relative proportions of labour and capital used in production is clearly reflected in productivity when this is measured in terms of the value added per worker.
While the Japanese record of   productivity improvement has been remarkable, aggregated data masks substantial variations according to firm size which tend to be more marked than in most other advanced economies.
Figure 2.4 offers a broad international comparison which highlights the consequences of much higher levels of capital equipment per worker in large Japanese firms for the size of the productivity gap.
As we will see in Chapter 3, the gap in wages runs parallel to productivity to give the two quite distinct units of production and employment that characterize the Japanese economy.
2.2 Group affiliation among large firms
The extensive network of subcontracting is one important mechanism which preserves dualism in Japan and in the process cushions the impact of market fluctuations on larger companies.
However in industries like shipbuilding, oil refining or chemicals, production is so capital intensive that it restricts the possibility of transferring the burden of adjustment to small firms.
In these sectors the organization of Japanese industry into loosely affiliated groups provides additional sources of protection for large firms.
Research on the level of concentration in Japan usually emphasizes the smaller share of output taken by large companies whether this is measured by the size of the top 100 companies or the share of the three or four biggest firms in each industry.
These quantitative measures though, do not reflect the impact of the extensive coordination that takes place between formally independent firms nor the importance of affiliation through  subcontracting.
Inter-company transactions in Japan are more numerous within the umbrella of federations of industrial, financial and trading companies.
The problem of assessing the impact of these conglomerate groupings lies in the loose, amorphous nature of the connections because in few of the federations is there an obviously dominant leader.
Coordination between affiliated firms takes various forms but intercompany stockholding is one of the most obvious.
Although there are over 20 million individual shareholders in Japan they only account for a quarter of the total shares held.
The bulk of the remainder are held by companies who show a strong preference for holding the stock of companies with whom they have important trading connections.
In some cases this is mediated through the bank that handles the business of both parties, and the banks themselves are also stockholders in their clients' companies.
New issues of stock are frequently allocated to major trading partners through a common bank, which reduces the uncertainties and underwriting costs of new issues.
Since the mid-1970s the proportion of stock held by non financial companies has risen partly because of the constraints placed on stockholding by banks and financial institutions.
As a result, this has produced a ‘tightening of intra-group financial reins’(Shonfield 1984 p.81), both between companies of equal size and between parent companies and their subsidiaries.
It is difficult to measure the extent to which stockholding influences decision-making, but taken together with the interchange of personnel through interlocking directorships, trading connections are most certainly cemented through financial channels.
Once joint prospects arc more securely fastened, even more preferential trading terms can be secured.
For example, a company manufacturing pressed steel cabinets for washing machines clearly benefits from conglomerate connections with suppliers of the basic materials and with those firms who assemble the branded final product.
In such cases trading may be done through reciprocal dealing or swapping arrangements, with trade credit provided by a common bank or trading company.
Marketing itself tends to be a more specialist operation organised through trading companies who act as agents for manufacturers.
These trading companies handle about half of all Japanese exports and approximately 65 per cent of imports which means that they can arrange the purchase of raw materials from abroad, organize the export of finished goods as well as marketing within Japan.
Although the operations of trading companies are not confined entirely to specific conglomerate groups, a certain degree of ‘mutual favouritism’ exists in supplying shipping, insurance, freight, storage and credit services.
At the point of final sales too, trading companies coordinate the activities of group members in retail distribution.
Intra-group connections then, cover the whole spectrum from the source of raw material right through to consumer purchases.
More informal links, which are by no means unimportant, occur through the voluntary exchange  of information between companies and regular meetings of the Presidents of leading members.
None of these connections necessarily implies any reduction of competition between firms that produce similar goods because of the intense efforts that are made to increase market share even at the expense of rivals within the group.
There are as we shall see, problems for consumers at the retailing stage in the sense that distribution is notoriously complex and subject to a variety of restrictive practices, but this is a common feature of the domestic market that applies to all consumer products whether Japanese or foreign.
What the close connections do achieve is a general diversification or sharing of the risks inherent in constantly changing market demand and product development.
New ventures that embody a high degree of risk, for example in high technology areas, are often undertaken by newly formed companies financed by the allocation of stock to group members.
Should the venture fail, the debts can be shared among several companies; if it succeeds not only does the value of the stock rise but group companies can reap the rewards of the innovation in their own production facilities.
Unwanted takeover bids for troubled companies are relatively rare in Japan because intra-group stockholding reduces the availability of stock in companies to outsiders.
In many ways the motive for holding stock in related companies has less to do with short-term dividend prospects and much more to do with group cohesion and stability that is vital for securing material supplies or finding markets.
Equally, group affiliation provides a source of mutual support for companies in financial trouble when group banks take responsibility for coordinating rescue packages.
On the other hand, in periods of expansion the financial muscle of the group can be mobilized to provide preferential loans and credit terms.
One related consequence of mutual support expectations among affiliated companies is to allow operations to be managed within longer term horizons.
Sales maximization and market share objectives are said to be preferred in Japan to short-term profits, although the two strategies are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
If there is any more pronounced preference in Japan for the long-term view, then part of the reason is surely connected to the expectation that managers are less likely to be rejected on the basis of short-term dividend performance.
Overall group needs and mechanisms of mutual support provide the institutional stability that allows a more long-term orientation.
The general umbrella term ‘grouping’ in practice covers a range of different organizations, and much of the comment on their influence has been focused on how much collective power they exercise.
In particular, the question of whether the largest groups, known as keiretsu , are merely pre-war zaibatsu in a different guise.
Certainly the size largest keiretsu have at their centre very influential banks, who in some cases, managed to deflect the attempts of the US Occupation to dismantle their organization.
Certainly too, the size of the big six is significant as they own the equivalent of a quarter of total corporate assets, return a quarter of corporate profits and provide a sixth of national sales (Sasaki 1981 p.98).
But there are differences in that they are not owned by family dynasties, are not as rigidly organized through central holding companies and do not appear to be as dominant in specific industries.
What appears to be of more significance for the role of keiretsu in Japan's economic growth is their objective of diversifying their interests in the widest possible range of activities throughout manufacturing industry, construction, finance and the service sector.
Each keiretsu has representative companies in all these areas and pursues new growth sectors with relentless enthusiasm.
As a result, the whole group through its loose but multifarious connections, can reap the benefits of a conglomerate structure without apparently suffering the organizational diseconomics of large companies.
Adjustment to market variation is never painless, but the advantages of diversification were clearly evident when from 1979–82 Mitsubishi's surplus shipyard workers were temporarily transferred to sell motor cars for the Mitsubishi Motor Company.
Like the subcontracting system, group affiliation provides an important adjustment cushion which helps to explain why keiretsu profits are much less variable, if not necessarily higher, than other firms.
A slightly different format for group affiliation exists in single industry organizations that dominate many of the sectors producing consumer goods.
Companies like Toyota, Nissan, Sony, Hitachi, Honda or Matsushita concentrate on narrower product ranges but their operations involve an extensive array of horizontal and vertical relationships with affiliated firms.
It is in these groups that subcontracting is especially strong, and their organization is more heavily centralized around the parent firm than is the case in the keiretsu .
Even though some single industry groups are less directly connected to banks and financial companies, they are still deeply involved in interlocking shareholding arrangements with their suppliers.
Aoki (1984 p.l5) has shown that the ratio of investment in subsidiaries to total paid-in capital in all Japanese industry more than doubled from 1966–81.
In manufacturing industry this trend was even more evident as the ratio increased from 11 per cent in 1966 to 35 per cent in 1981.
2.3 Industrial strategy, priority sectors and the favoured few
Links between ostensibly independent firms in Japan thus encompass both subcontracting relations and networks of affiliation between firms of relatively equal stature.
Mutual support mechanisms have helped to maintain the drive to diversify into new growth sectors and have facilitated a commitment to long-term market expansion.
The prime movers in developing this structure have been larger firms who can expect favoured  treatment in times of expansion, and can transfer adjustment burdens along a chain of subcontractors in recessions.
In essence, the initiatives taken by larger companies were a consequence of the radical economic strategy which was promoted by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) from the early 1950s.
Not without opposition from other sections of the bureaucracy especially those.in Finance ministries, MITI argued that long-term self-reliance for Japan would be delayed or even undermined by following its apparent comparative advantage into labour intensive sectors.
Despite grave shortages of capital and an infrastructure devastated by US bombing MITI saw the route to sustained economic expansion in sectors that would offer the maximum possible productivity growth.
Heavy industry not toys or low quality textiles, was targeted as the driving force for development, and a vast array of incentives and restraints were applied to ensure that the strategy was implemented.
Several criteria were used to identify priority industries.
First, they should have significant input/output linkages so primary energy sectors for example, would lower fuel costs across the economy, and steel expansion would generate external economies in shipbuilding or motor vehicles.
Secondly, in order to maximize the use of scarce capital resources, industries were selected that could utilize the backlog of technological change that had been developed in the Western economies.
Purchasing patents would make significant savings on initial research costs and adapting or improving known techniques would increase the speed of development.
Thirdly, targeted industries should have markets that were known to be price and income elastic and would offer long-term growth, in contrast to the low value-added products that were the usual sources of stagnation in Asian economies.
To guarantee the survival of these industries and to speed their rate of expansion, the home market was secured behind protective trade barriers.
The need to foster rapid growth in a drive towards reducing Japanese reliance on US financial support, encouraged MITI to concentrate policy incentives on large capital intensive firms.
This renewed the nineteenth century tradition of favouring selected producers in the interests of national strength and independence but with one important difference.
When the state sold off its industrial interests or sponsored new ventures in the 1880s, it favoured the zaibatsu who tended to accumulate specialized industrial holdings, rather like the more recent French strategy of creating large firms as sector leaders.
MITI's approach was to favour several large producers in the manner of an elite squad, and then to encourage rivalry between them so as to avoid the dangers of complacency in single firm monopolies.
Each of the elite firms would, it was hoped, be able to spread the benefits of concentrated but competing favouritism throughout Japanese industry by the increased level of activity among related companies.
By the middle of the 1960s, MITI's strategy was paying handsome  dividends in a wide range of industries where output, productivity, exports and profits were expanding rapidly.
The more important contribution of large firms in terms of investment or technical change was evident, but large and small firms alike shared in the remarkable growth of output.
The years from 1966 to 1969 saw real GDP growing in excess of 10 per cent annually and, with growth at twice the level of Japan's competitors, it was confidently expected that the substantial differences in productivity levels between large and small firms would be eroded.
Marked differences in efficiency and factor proportions between firms in the same industry are usually associated with periods of transition to a fully industrialized economy.
With rapid and sustained economic growth more capital becomes available to finance investment in labour saving machinery, and higher labour rewards in the advanced sector of industry are thought to encourage the mobility of labour away from the small firm sector.
The advantages of scale for larger firms are expected to lead to lower product prices and an increase in market share relative to smaller producers.
In sum, the small firms are squeezed out by losing the advantages of labour intensive production as output becomes concentrated in larger companies.
There is some evidence that from the mid-1950s the average size of firm in manufacturing was growing as the employment share of firms with less than 100 workers fell from 60 to 50 per cent.
The proportion of both total output and value added in production from these same smaller firms also fell, and wage differentials began to close.
Taken together, these trends encouraged the view that ‘duality in the economy is approaching its term’(Allen 1965 p.114).
With hindsight the confidence with which the demise of dualism was predicted appears to have been premature.
Throughout the 1970s the share of employment, value added and output taken by firms with less than 100 workers has grown in an unexpectedly resilient fashion.
Employment is back to 60 per cent of the total, wage differentials between large and small firms have widened and the share of small firms in total value-added and shipments of manufacturing output is back to the level of the later 1950s.
The role of subcontracting and the increasing rate of investment by large companies in their subsidiaries has already been highlighted as one factor involved in the resilience of the small firm sector.
There are several other processes which maintain and reproduce the structure of dualism.
2.4 Differentiated cooperation between finance and industrial capital
Small firms in all economies face severe problems raising finance to expand, or even maintain, their scale of operations.
These difficulties contrast with  the relative ease with which larger firms can obtain investment funds and in Japan the differential access to sources of finance is very significant.
For small firms the cost of raising capital through public stock issues is prohibitively expensive, but in Japan this is not the main problem as firms are significantly less reliant on equity finance.
Although firms are more dependent on external fundraising, the proportion of shareholders equity in total assets is lower than in other advanced capitalist economies.
During the 1970s for example, this proportion was around 19 per cent for manufacturing firms representing half the West German and about one third of UK or US levels.
The traditional external source of funds has been bank loans, and despite some recent reduction in bank dependence as internal reserves or retained profits have increased in importance, higher levels of bank debt is still a characteristic of Japanese company finance.
Bank loans carrying fixed interest payments over specific periods, are thought to be more constraining in contrast to the flexibility gained by varying stockholders dividends in line with company performance.
The ability to alter dividends is said to give companies more freedom relative to the external dependence on banks who may impose unilateral changes in interest rates or loan allocation.
However as we have already seen, there can be disadvantages for companies who rely extensively on equity finance if any fall in expected profits leads to unwelcome takeover bids.
Experience in the UK and US especially, indicates how long-term strategies can be undermined by the need to confront the uncertainties of takeover at the whim of large institutional investors or ambitious competitors.
The objective of long-term stability in Japan's conglomerate groupings does explain their preference for durable stockholders who place group cohesion ahead of short-term dividend gains.
There are also questions to be raised about the supposed disadvantages of excessive dependence on bank loans which relate to their classification as external sources.
Where bank affairs are closely tied to the fortunes of their leading customers through shared group affiliation, the lending bank and the borrowing company are bound to the same fate which makes unilateral changes in loan terms much less likely.
So in allocating loans, banks are especially committed to the expansion of their more important customers and preferential terms are offered through lower interest rates or more flexible borrowing limits.
Companies that arc heavily involved in foreign trade, or whose markets are seasonal, can expect their banks to be responsive to variations in liquidity and generally act as financial advisers.
This frequently involves coordinating the exchange of marketing information and the organization of trade credit with trading companies.
In short the level of cooperation between banks and their more important customers is much more extensive in Japan, thus mitigating the problems of depending on external loans.
Commercial banks have generally been able to provide the finance necessary to support the huge increase in investment because they have  collected substantial deposits from savers.
The level of personal savings is particularly high in Japan at over twice the rate in Western economies, and as the majority preference is for assets with a lower risk, over two-thirds are kept in bank deposits.
Those banks that offer services to affiliated groups benefit from deposits taken from related companies, especially as group employees tend to deposit their savings with the bank most closely associated with their company.
Mutual cooperation between banks and their larger customers is rooted in their common interests.
Banks have a vested interest in the growth of the firms to whom they lend most, not least because their profits are dependent on regular interest payments.
Larger capital intensive firms equally benefit from the reduced levels of uncertainty surrounding their future investment plans.
Although bank loans are a vitally important source of finance, this is not to the complete exclusion of equity issues.
Here also banks play a crucial role in advising on the scale or timing of issues but perhaps even more important in the Japanese context, in assisting the allocation of shares.
Until the mid-1970s, additional equity finance was obtained through rights issues to existing stockholders at par rather than market share values making this a less attractive option for corporate borrowers.
In placing stock with other affiliated companies, the banks played a key coordinating role.
Even though new issues are increasingly being offered at current market values, the banks continue to facilitate the accumulation of stock within related groups of companies.
Not all of Japan's leading companies are members of groups that have particular banks at their centre.
Yet they all certainly benefit from the much closer coordination of industry and finance, whether this is through preferential interest rates from a number of different banks or through the advisory functions of their main lenders.
Large companies in particular, have received extensive support when markets were expanding but they can also rely on financial support in less prosperous years.
Just as banks have a vested interest in the growth of their main customers, they have a clear role to play in limiting the damage that recession can bring especially where the failure of a leading company will affect many of their other customers.
A classic example of this process came in the wake of the huge losses made in 1974–5 by the Toyo Kogyo Co. who produce the Mazda motor car.
Unfortunately for Mazda, the introduction of the powerful Wankel rotary engine coincided with the massive increase in oil prices which spelt disaster for an engine with high fuel consumption.
Enormous bank debts and large stocks of surplus parts encouraged the biggest creditor, Sumitomo Bank to place five of its own executives onto the Mazda board to rescue the company.
To avoid the damage to company status that would have accompanied widespread redundancies, many regular production workers were transferred to marketing jobs, including door-to-door selling, while  Sumitomo officials reorganised the company.
Models were rationalized, a kanban system of inventory control was introduced and within five years a leaner and fitter Mazda emerged.
The importance of Mazda to Sumitomo meant that they could ‘never seriously consider the possibility of letting Toyo Kogyo go under’(Salamano 1980 p.65).
It would be misleading to imply from the experience of Mazda that all large companies have immunity from bankruptcy.
What really influences the incidence of rescue operations is partly the extent of danger to related companies, but also the degree of previous cooperation with group objectives which incur debts of gratitude for past favours.
Unlike Mazda the bankruptcy of the Sanko Steamship Co. in 1985 did not stir any great sympathy because the company management had a previous record of arrogance ‘likened to that of a rowdy lone wolf refusing to line up with other shipping firms’(FTW31/8/85).
In this case the company's record was instrumental in the failure of the usual support mechanisms despite the presence of an LDP Cabinet Minister on the board.
Mutual support in troubled times then, is seen as a reciprocal reward for cooperation over the long term.
If there are disadvantages to higher levels of reliance on bank loans, they are clearly counterbalanced for those large firms that are considered too important to fail.
It is not possible though to find similar priorities for long-term survival where small firms are concerned.
Despite the very high savings ratios, the demand for funds from capital intensive firms has been so enormous that small firms are regarded as marginal prospects and the vast bulk of loans have been allocated to large firms.
In a sense large firms are supposed to act as financial intermediaries for their related suppliers through for example the provision of trade credit or through the re-sale of capital equipment.
Even for small firms closely affiliated to leading companies, preferential interest rates are rare.
More importantly, when credit is tight they find available funds rationed to large borrowers.
Such rationing is determined partly by the rank or importance of companies and is related to the level of deposits that they keep with the bank.
Compensating deposits or balances are usually demanded as collateral before loans are allocated and this is one reason why corporate savings are also higher in Japan.
The interrelation between deposits and loans ‘thus become another form of reciprocal dealing: an increase in either the amount in deposit or the amount on loan is inevitably linked with an increase in the other’(Okamura 1982 p.58).
Needless to say, small firms are less able to maintain high levels of bank deposits and they are not given the priority accorded to the privileged class of borrowers among large companies.
Small firms are consequently forced to rely much more on trade credit to finance their operations.
The payments that small firms receive from their sales tend to be divided in roughly equal proportions between cash and credit notes that delay payment for periods from three to six months.
Credit notes can be exchanged before they mature but this does involve the deduction of a premium.
What is more  disturbing for small firms is the propensity of large companies to increase the length of credit notes when their own liquidity is tight, thereby transferring part of their financial burden onto suppliers.
In a similar fashion large companies frequently reduce the cash element or where they supply materials to be processed by subcontractors, increase the prices they charge for these materials.
Small firms then may have to pay more for their materials, receive less cash for their output and have to wait longer for their credit notes to mature.
These financial burdens are magnified in the absence of other important sources of finance, and it is hardly surprising to find 99 per cent of the total number of firms going bankrupt located in the small firm sector.
This high level of mortality stands in stark contrast to the operation of support mechanism for large companies and was highlighted vividly during the recession of the mid-1970s.
Between 1975 and 1980 the share of firms employing less than 300 workers in total bankruptcy debts rose from 75 to over 90 per cent.
For those small firms that managed to avoid failure, the extent of their fall in profits was proportionate to the extent of their involvement in subcontracting.
Surveys in 1975 and 1980 show that dependent subcontractors in household electrical goods and motor parts, experienced a 30 per cent greater fall in profits than independent small firms (N. Sasaki 1981 p.102 and Steven 1983 p.73).
2.5 The state as financial guardian for large firms
It could be argued that inadequate finance and higher mortality rates among small firms is a reflection of the way market forces allocate scarce capital according to long-term growth potential.
For large companies in Japan, however, the free market has been controlled in various ways so as to ‘mitigate the unfettered ravages of a market economy’(Saxonhouse 1979 p.320).
One way in which this operates is through the coordinating role of banks who can organize a protective safety net during periods of acute financial distress.
This safety net is itself a response to the attitude of the state towards the need to safeguard the position of leading companies.
Much of the debate surrounding the role of the state in financial markets has centred on power of the central monetary authorities over Commercial Banks who frequently overcommit themselves when financing the growth of investment.
As large companies are heavily dependent on bank loans, and with banks tending to lend beyond their means it was crucial for the Bank of Japan as final guarantor to support the banking system.
There appeared to be a chain of dependency from private companies to the state with the Commercial Banks acting as ‘merely a channel through which the Central bank fed industry with funds’(Allen 1981 p. 50).
Through this chain of dependency, it is argued, the state could exercise control over the  policies and practices of the Commercial Banks, and through them Japan's leading firms.
There is some agreement that, down to the late 1960s at least, the state did encourage overborrowing by firms and overlending by banks through its commitment to rapid growth.
There is also evidence to show that by keeping interest rates artificially low in boom years, the state forced banks to allocate credit by rationing quantities and this favoured large borrowers.
But we do need to be wary of inferring too much central direction, partly because this implies that banks or companies were forced into compliance.
As the record shows, the preference given to large companies and the support they receive from their bankers has led to rapid growth in output with consequent effects on the profits of banks and their leading customers.
So there is a sense in which both companies and banks have found the financial system mutually beneficial.
It is also important to recognize that several of Japan's most well-known companies like Honda, Sony or Toyota have relied less on bank loans and have therefore been able to follow fairly independent policies.
Since the 1970s the reduction in dependence on bank loans has been a more general feature, especially among manufacturing firms who are able to finance more of their investment out of retained profits or accumulated reserves.
If we place too much weight on direct financial controls it is all too easy to miss other less visible ways in which the Japanese state has systematically supported the position of large companies.
Corporate taxation policies for example, have greatly favoured capital intensive firms and thus helped to widen the productivity gap between large and small companies.
Rates of company taxation may be high, but what is also significant is the proportion of profit that is non-taxable.
Special purpose tax-free reserves include allowances for bad debts, reserves to cover the impact of exchange rate fluctuations and the accumulating half-yearly wage bonuses.
Employee retirement funds are also included as special reserves, but up to one-third can be used for investment at the discretion of management.
None of these allowable deductions is ‘uncommon in other countries but they are more wide-ranging in Japan than is generally the case elsewhere’(Elston 1981 p.515).
Tax-free depreciation allowances are also in common use, but in Japan they have been more selectively applied.
So in addition to standard depreciation allowances, certain designated sectors can write off another 25 per cent of the investment against tax in the first year, while in energy saving or robotic investment the rate has gone as high as 60 per cent.
Selected industries have also been able to secure extra depreciation in proportion to any increase in the share of exports in their total sales.
In these and other ways the state has favoured those companies who have displayed very high rates of investment, and this almost by definition excludes most small firms.
Where tax-free reserves are so closely linked  to capital investment, the small firm finds a greater proportion of profits subject to tax and may therefore be subject to a higher marginal rate of taxation.
These policies of tax forgiveness have the added advantage of making the sharing of risk between companies and society less visible than would be the case if all assistance were given as direct subsidies in identifiable budget items.
Direct participation by the state in the allocation of savings to industry has been important in both qualitative and quantitative senses.
Just as Commercial Banks have collected deposits from the public so also has the state through the Postal Savings system, where savers can accumulate several tax-free accounts by using fictitious names.
These funds have been used to finance the work of specialist quasi-public financial institutions in a range of activities from overseas projects to long-term loans for the purchase of specialist equipment.
Although the share of state borrowing in total company finance has recently been relatively small at about 10 per cent, in a qualitative sense even a small loan by a state institution carries a seal of approval that enormously enhances the standing of companies with their banks.
In equity finance, the state has allowed the lower dependence of Japanese firms to continue by treating loan interest as tax deductible in contrast to dividends.
This practice is also not unknown elsewhere, but the preferential treatment for corporate dividend receivers where the effective tax rate is ‘close to zero’(Aoki 1984 p.238), has been a clear incentive to intercompany stockholding.
In perpetuating a financial structure which offers tremendous advantages to large firms, it is as important to consider the role of the state in maintaining the  idiosyncrasies of the financial system as it is to debate the extent of state control over commercial banks.
State agencies have also played a formative role in limiting the damage recessions impose on large firms.
MITI has a long record of concern with the dangers of excess capacity for capital intensive sectors.
Specific measures in 1978 allowed tax credits to be accumulated if capacity was reduced in industries like shipbuilding where world demand had slumped dramatically.
More generally, MITI has been a consistent promoter of recession cartels which would facilitate an ‘orderly’ reduction in excess capacity.
The organization of cartels runs directly counter to the anti-monopoly legislation bestowed by the US occupation, and this has produced a prolonged struggle within the bureaucracy between MITI and the Fair Trade Commission.
In some cases this has led to the formation of unofficial cartels often with the tacit support of MITI, but the whole process has led to a ‘systematic undoing of the American-inspired anti-monopoly legislation both in letter and spirit’(Yamamura 1982 p.81).
Large firms have the expectation that prolonged recession will provoke assistance from at least some parts of the bureaucracy.
What is equally well known is that the orderly reduction in capacity will be proportionate to existing market shares.
This expectation adds further pressure on companies to capture  bigger shares when markets are expanding when banks and companies have an informal assurance that the state will provide assistance if markets deteriorate.
2.6 Birth and death rates among small subcontracting firms
Japan's financial structure offers large companies significant advantages in access to funds to finance rapid expansion, and offers substantial support for them to survive periodic recessions.
The risks involved in entering new markets, new sectors or using new processes can be externalized or shared within conglomerate groups or underwritten by the state on behalf of society.
In some ways it is surprising that smaller firms have survived at all, let alone increased their share of manufacturing employment.
As we have seen, the ability of large firms to transfer financial problems to suppliers has led to high rates of bankruptcy among smaller companies.
Yet what distinguishes the structure of Japanese industry is not only the high death rate of companies but the fact that even in the severe recession of the mid-1970s, the birth rate of new small firms exceeded the number of bankruptcies by 50 per cent.
In recognizing the relationship between size of firm and the likelihood of failure it is important to point out that, even in recent years, the failure rate in manufacturing was approximately one in every 100 incorporated firms.
It is widely accepted that the rate increases as firms get smaller as liquidity burdens are passed along in a ripple effect from the very largest firms through lengthening credit notes.
Those firms that rely heavily on subcontracting though, do have a vested interest in offering at least some protection to their main suppliers and this is one reason why the small firm sector has survived.
With, for example, a greater use of kanban inventory control, parent companies have to weigh the advantages of lengthening credit notes against the need to preserve the existence of their primary suppliers.
These more favoured subcontractors, however, gain a greater degree of continuity at the expense of wider variations in profits.
In the lower levels of economic activity since 1973, the extent of competition between subcontractors has allowed parent companies greater bargaining power over delivery schedules, quality specifications and prices.
Survival in business gives little option to small firms but to concede to these demands, especially as larger manufacturers are increasingly using overseas suppliers in Asia where wage costs are significantly lower than in Japan.
While large firms have continued to increase their capital/labour ratios thus widening the productivity gap with smaller firms, this has certainly not prevented them from persuading their suppliers to improve the quality of their equipment.
In one sense Japanese subcontractors are being pushed away from the most labour intensive processes where overseas plants have  the advantage.
Demanding higher levels of technical efficiency from domestic suppliers is directly related to the need to standardize and improve the quality of inputs that are used in later stages of manufacturing, where closer physical location to the main plant is crucial.
Some of the new investment is financed by parent companies, as is shown by the growing share of investment in subsidiaries, but the resale of less up to date equipment to subcontractors is also a common practice.
Entirely new ventures, especially in areas of very advanced technology like microelectronics, have frequently been pioneered by small firms spinning off as satellites from parent companies.
As well as confining the risk of such projects to expendable subsidiaries the new firms enable large companies to transfer surplus labour from their regular payroll.
In the decade up to 1982 employment in firms with over 1000 workers fell by over a quarter and the establishment of affiliated companies provided a vehicle for shedding labour.
New ventures are one way to solve the problem of promotion bottlenecks for middle managers whose prospects are constrained by slower rates of industrial growth.
Such vertical moves ‘became a standardized system for technology transfer as employees of large firms with advanced technological knowledge, as well as employees of subcontracting firms, split off and formed their own businesses’(Y. Sato 1984 p.21).
By creating a new but related company, the parent firm gains a partner with recent experience of its working practices and, as wages are related to seniority, removes an expensive element of labour cost.
Technological improvement has also been an objective in state policies for the small firm sector.
Legislation in 1970 was designed to raise the quality of equipment in small firms by setting minimum standards of quality control and subsidizing regional networks of advice on technical and managerial efficiency.
The meagre supplies of finance for small producers has been supplemented by state agencies especially for research and development of energy saving equipment.
Running alongside this financial support has been an attempt to promote industrial cooperatives where small firms would share distribution facilities or share the production of one brand name.
The problems of small firms have been an increasing focus for the state in most economies following the crisis of the 1970s, and in some ways this is a gesture of concern to those who have been most affected.
As elsewhere the impact of this assistance is difficult to assess, but state loans in Japan form approximately 12 per cent of outstanding loans to firms employing less than 300 workers.
Certainly small business, through its close connections with the ruling LDP party, has lobbied for a shift in the established policies of support and protection for big business.
Financial gestures have been forthcoming, but these were not sufficient to prevent a reduction of 40 per cent in the budget allocation to small and medium-sized firms between 1975 and 1986.
In one other area the state has endeavoured to stabilize the failure rates  among small firms by monitoring the variations in credit note maturity dates.
From 1956 attempts have been made to regulate subcontracting payments and prevent large companies from making unilateral changes in trading terms.
As in some other forms of state intervention in Japan, the policy is backed up not by automatic penalties, but by ‘advice and guidance’ for offenders from MITI.
Even though large firms have continued to vary credit terms to relieve their own liquidity problems, small firms are understandably reluctant to initiate complaints against their trading partners.
Small producers appear to see inferior bargaining strength as the price they have to pay for some continuity in orders.
MITI argues that their guidance has at least prevented maturity rates from getting much longer than the average of four months.
But many small producers fear ‘the rectification of unfair subcontracting arrangements is not high on the official list of priorities’(Anthony 1983 p.71).
2.7 Small firms in distribution
As we have seen the confident prediction that the wide disparities in productivity according to firm size would lead to the demise of the small firm sector in manufacturing has been premature.
Whether we regard state policies towards small firms as rhetorical gestures or as genuine attempts to protect their existence, there does appear to be renewed interest in preserving a differentiated industrial structure.
The rivalry promoted between large companies has its reflection in fierce competition between small suppliers for orders from parent companies.
But just as the state appears unwilling to allow the market a totally free reign over the prospects of large companies, state support for small firms seems to recognize their value.
In particular the way small firms function as ‘a highly elastic shock absorber of underemployed and marginal workers which is extremely important in recessions’(Samuels 1981 p.45).
Small firms provide a useful channel for re-allocating labour from large firms without increasing official unemployment rates.
While much of the focus in this chapter has been on manufacturing where the reliance on small producers is relatively unusual among advanced economies, the small firm is dominant in many other sectors.
Not only is the proportion of self-employed and unpaid family labour higher in Japan (Figure 2.5), but 75 per cent of all paid employees work in firms with less than 100 workers.
In services and distribution especially, very small firms with less than 30 workers account for three-quarters of employment.
What is more, in the decade after 1975 employment in these two sectors grew at twice the average rate for all industry.
Japan's dense network of wholesale and retail distribution has been a contentious issue among overseas producers who claim that it acts as a barrier in their attempts to increase sales.
Imports of consumer goods they   claim, are held back because marketing costs are prohibitive in a country which has over twice the number of retail stores per head of the population than in the US or West Germany.
Perhaps more significant is the accusation that domestic producers are able to limit the penetration of overseas goods by binding Japanese retailers to Japanese products through a range of restrictive practices.
These accusations are frequently dismissed as excuses for inadequate effort on the part of overseas companies, but even a Prime Ministerial Advisory Body called in 1986 for ‘a stricter watch on unfair trade practices in distribution’(FTW 26/4/86).
Leaving aside for the moment the question of informal import barriers, the restrictive practices used by larger manufacturers can be used as one explanation of the highly dispersed structure of distribution.
Small retailers are especially reliant on trade credit, which is often determined by the acceptance of exclusive dealing in particular brands.
This does have some advantages for small retailers in that they can return unsold stock, but the retailer loses flexibility where they are required to maintain the prices recommended by manufacturers.
Sales agents acting on behalf of manufacturers, are vigilant in preventing retailers from selling at lower prices by threatening to cut future supplies.
The retailer may be cushioned from cut-throat competition from supermarkets but at the cost of their freedom to sell or price as they wish: like small subcontractors, being tied to a dominant parent company may be the cost of insuring against business failure.
However it does appear that consumers pay the final bill as retail prices are over four times the level of wholesale prices, which is double the equivalent mark-up in the US or Western Europe.
Retailing employment has been a traditional refuge for those workers most exposed to redundancy in other sectors, and as such higher consumer prices ‘provides a form of social security for the retired and unemployed’(Hills 1983 p.65).
In contrast, supermarkets which exist by cutting prices on a larger turnover with a lower labour force, have a much smaller share of retail sales in Japan.
Partly this reflects the lack of enthusiasm among manufacturers toward any erosion of retail price maintenance.
Partly too it reflects the ability of small business to mobilize their LDP connections to oppose planning applications for larger stores.
Such opposition is backed by appeals to protect the small retailer as a unique feature of Japanese culture against an alien Western transplant.
Few would deny the convenience for shoppers of large numbers of local stores with long opening hours on six and a half days each week, but there is no doubt that consumers pay for the convenience.
Nor is there any doubt that the resilience of the small retailing sector has provided a useful form of controlled distribution for larger  manufactures .
2.8 The small firm: a font of entrepreneurship or a haven for skidders?
The inevitable decline in the significance of small firms in advanced capitalist economies has been a theme common to Marxist and neo-classical political economy.
For Marxists, petty bourgeois producers seem destined to be replaced by monopoly capital, while the advantages rendered by economies of scale have been sufficiently impressive for neo-classical economists to stress the unreality of atomistic competition.
Japan is not alone in experiencing a resurgence in the share of employment taken by small firms or the self-employed in the aftermath of the severe crisis of the 1970s.
More emphasis needs to be placed on the continuing role that small firms play in servicing the needs of large corporations.
Japan's experience shows how both the state and big business have helped to maintain such a servicing role in response to the immediate problems of recession, and in adjusting to the probability of a lower growth path through the 1980s.
Ideologically, a dynamic small firm sector may be said to reflect the opportunities capitalism offers to those prepared to display individual initiative, self-sacrifice and dedication to hard work.
This positive approach to a differentiated industrial structure means for example that ‘the Japanese economic and social situation guarantees the right to set up one's own business and the entrepreneurial spirit is alive and well’(Y. Sato 1984 p.21).
Social mobility, the prospect of rising incomes and independent control of their working lives are the rewards offered for competitive individualism.
Small entrepreneurs in Japan hold tenaciously to the ideals of self-help and dedication to the work ethic, but it is not at all clear that their presence in the small firm sector is entirely based on free choice.
Neither is upward mobility, rising income or independence a necessary consequence of their diligence.
In many ways the small firm acts as a ‘net that cushions the fall of skidders’(Mayer 1975 p.432).
There may be no alternative to working in a small firm for those excluded or transferred from regular employment status in large companies and their primary subcontractors.
Access to the status of a regular employee in a large firm is both a highly controlled and selective process which generates two distinct segments in the labour market.
When access to one is blocked, the small firm may be all that is left.
We have seen in this chapter how a dual structure of production has been maintained in Japan through the interconnected activities of private business and a state which has supported the simultaneous existence of a limited number of larger companies and a massive network of smaller ones.
The question of whether the state merely supported pre-existing market trends or has positively guided the market towards this end is a contentious one which will be addressed in Chapter 4.
A more immediate issue concerns the consequences for labour of a structure which gives priority to flexibility yet at the same time promises a lifetime of permanent employment which seems to imply inflexibility.
If output and methods of production can be changed so quickly how can the input of labour be varied to accommodate these changes?
A Flexible Labour Market
The growth rates of productivity in Japanese manufacturing have consistently outstripped those of its major economic rivals over the past quarter century and output per worker has increased at twice the rate recorded in other OECD states.
Although the rate of growth has fallen since the oil crises of the 1970s, Japan's productivity advantage has been magnified by very low rates of increase in unit labour costs.
These two trends help to explain how cost and price advantages have resulted in the remarkable increase in exports which has produced such an enormous foreign trade surplus.
One key element in higher productivity is the very high rates of investment in manufacturing industry which has led to both quantitative and qualitative improvements in productive equipment.
As we saw in Chapter 2 the expansion of large capital intensive firms has been promoted in a flexible industrial structure which permits them to adjust quickly to changes in demand.
In periods of rapid expansion an increase in their own scale of operations has been paralleled by an expansion of output in smaller affiliated companies.
In recession large firms concentrate more output within their own plant where economies of scale yield lower average costs compared to labour intensive subcontractors The advantages of a flexible industrial structure was greatly assisted up to the 1970s by a protected home market which gave companies a secure domestic base.
Accusations of unfair trading have been particularly widespread in recessions when Japanese companies have been attacked for dumping products in foreign markets.
Foreign firms find it difficult to believe that Japanese costs are really low enough to justify such low prices and there is some evidence that the domestic prices of equivalent goods are higher.
However it is equally clear that large Japanese companies do hold a powerful competitive edge because of the ease with which they can alter the balance between their own output and that of their smaller suppliers.
Of course all large firms try to gain this sort of flexibility and the fact that  they are large indicates that they have succeeded to a greater extent than their smaller rivals.
Japanese industry, though, seems to be systematically structured to give large firms that much more flexibility than their international competitors.
Adjusting the output of existing products and rapidly expanding the share of new ones, requires flexibility in the labour market and it is here that the Japanese have even bigger advantages.
Regular workers appear to cooperate much more with management over changes in work practices, job allocation, retraining or transfers to related companies.
The 10 per cent of employees that are temporary or seasonal workers can be laid off or recruited as required, and altering the proportion of output coming from subcontractors causes them in turn to adjust their labour force.
The elastic network of tiny family businesses and the high proportion of self-employed workers give the whole labour market a greater degree of fluidity than other leading capitalist economies.
At first sight this degree of fluidity in the Japanese labour market sits uneasily with the presumption that employment is for life because this would make wages a quasi-fixed cost.
When we question the actual extent of lifetime employment it is not surprising to find that a fluid labour market requires that only a quarter of employees can expect such guarantees.
Workers in Japan do tend to have fewer employers in the course of their career than in the West even though the comparison is somewhat distorted because of the concentration of lifetime guarantees in the large firm sector.
Security of employment is not as uncommon in the West as the stereotypical contrast with Japan implies, but what is more noticeable is the extension of security to blue-collar labour in Japan as well as white-collar employees.
In Japan as elsewhere the commitment to employment security is an attempt by firms to reduce the turnover of key employees and so avoid transferring the benefits of training programmes to rival firms.
But for those in Japan who do achieve a more secure status it is widely accepted that such benefits are unlikely to be renewed if the individual moves to another company.
This then raises the question of how voluntary is the acceptance of cooperation and harmony between labour and management?
Given the mobility constraints, is the cooperation of labour not better explained by the fact that employees have little alternative?
Whether or not the analogy of the firm as a cooperative family is a realistic one for the majority of labour, this idea forms a crucial part in the ideology that Japanese industrial relations are different because of a longstanding preference for conformity to group consensus.
Promises by management that employment would be for life and the concentration of labour unions within specific firms were in practice a post-war innovation designed to overcome the crisis caused by severe labour unrest following the democratic reforms of the US Occupation.
It was during this period that with the cooperation of the US Occupation, parts of the bureaucracy, elected conservative politicians and private employers sought to alter the  extent of labour rights in order, it was argued, to maintain internal political stability.
But the structure that emerged which judiciously mixes the rigidities of lifetime employment for a minority with flexibility for the remainder, has been maintained ever since.
So in addition to considering the advantages the system has for employers, we need also to examine how state policies continue to support a segmented labour market.
The first thing to establish however is the pattern of differences in pay and employment prospects for different segments of the labour force and the implications these have for assessing the extent of lifetime employment.
3.1 Earnings differentials by size of firm
Figure 2.4 in the last chapter illustrated the extent of differences in value-added productivity between large and small firms and these are very clearly reflected in earnings.
Figure 3.1 gives support to the view that ‘Perhaps the single most distinguishing characteristic of the Japanese wage structure is the effect of firm size on wages’(Hashimoto 1979 p.1098).
All the elements that make up total earnings vary according to the size of the firm but the extent of differences in the basic wage is somewhat less pronounced.
For instance, if we take the basic wage paid by the largest firms to be 100, firms in the two smallest size bands pay 78 per cent and 52 per cent of these rates.
The bonus payment differential though is much larger at only 43 per cent and 22 per cent of the sums paid in large firms.
Bonus payments tend to make up a larger share of earnings in Japan at about one-quarter of the total giving employers more room to adjust wages in line with changes in levels of economic activity.
There is some debate about exactly how flexible bonus payments have been and some argue that in recent years bonuses and basic wages have followed similar trends.
This may be so if the average for all industries is considered, but in the key areas of manufacturing where demand is more variable, the bonus-earnings ratio experiences greater volatility (Hashimoto 1979 p. 1101).
But irrespective of these year-to-year changes the size of the bonus is very sensitive to firm size.
Employees in large firms throughout the 1970s received a bonus payment equivalent to five or six months basic pay compared to less than three months in small firms.
Overtime pay has accounted for approximately 6 per cent of average earnings since the mid-1970s and this too varies with firm size due to differences in the length of scheduled working hours.
Small firms operate a scheduled working week 10 per cent longer than large firms and in manufacturing it is 15 per cent greater.
This means that the extra payments received for overtime beyond the scheduled week are earned at an earlier stage in large firms.
Once again large firms gain the added flexibility of adjusting actual hours worked to a shorter working week, but where   overtime is used their workers gain more as the extra overtime payment is based on a higher basic rate.
Fringe benefits are also more significant for workers in large companies although their exact size is difficult to estimate because the Welfare Facilities Survey covers only the 50 per cent of labour in firms employing more than 30 workers.
The 1983 survey showed that the costs incurred in providing company housing or housing loans, medical, nursery or recreation facilities were at least twice as big in large firms.
Even obligatory health insurance and pension payments per employee were one-third greater for workers in large firms.
A survey of welfare spending by all private firms conducted by the Ministry of Labour in 1975 estimated that such payments yielded benefits equivalent to 10–15 per cent of annual earnings, but did not distinguish very clearly how this differs according to size of firm.
Another source suggests that welfare expenditure per employee in 1980 was three times greater in large firms (Steven 1983 p.166) but other estimates indicate that the gap is less than half this figure.
Whatever the precise levels are, there seems to be no sense in which the earnings gap is bridged by higher non-monetary rewards in small firms.
By itself this association between earnings and company size is not unique to Japan, but as we saw in the last chapter the number of workers affected is greater.
If we take a large firm to be one employing more than 1000 and a small one less than 100, the latter in 1985 employed 15 times as many people in the private sector as a whole and five times as many in  manufacturing.
Exact international comparisons of wage differentials according to size of firm are difficult to make because wage data is often collected into overlapping or incompatible categories.
However it is possible in some cases to obtain a broad indication for 1985 of the contrast between firms with over 1000 and those with less than 100 employees although the data is for manufacturing industry rather than all employees.
In 1985 Japanese workers in small manufacturing firms earned 55 per cent of workers in large firms compared to 75 per cent in West Germany, 73 per cent in the UK and 70 per cent in France or Italy and 66 per cent in the US.
When we take longer working hours into account the differential widens still further as wages per productive hour in small Japanese firms is only 46 per cent of the sum paid in large firms.
The long-term trends in the wage gap between large and small firms are shown in Figure 3.2 and although ‘large’ is taken to be over 500 employees, the trends are fairly clear.
From the mid-1950s to the early 1 970s the high levels of economic growth in all sectors increased competition for labour and allowed the gap to close.
This trend was then halted or even reversed thereafter as large companies especially in manufacturing transferred their excess labour into smaller subcontractors or satellite companies.
A flexible Japanese labour market then has two dimensions: first, the re-allocation of labour other firms, and secondly, the ability to vary unit labour cost by changing the share of earnings taken by overtime and bonuses.
3.2 How inflexible is permanent employment?
In some ways the movement of labour between firms might be surprising given the tendency to associate the Japanese labour market with notions of lifetime employment and seniority wages.
If workers are given jobs for life or if their wages are linked to age and seniority does this not make for a much less flexible labour market?
Any answer to this question depends very much on how many workers can realistically expect permanent employment and in what sense pay is related to age.
The Japanese Wage Structure Survey is one of the most comprehensive sources of data and allows us to shed more light on the realities of the labour market.
While the main focus of the Survey is on basic payments it is nevertheless a crucial benchmark because both bonus and overtime payments are to an extent determined by the basic or standard wage.
It is important to stress that temporary, seasonal, part-time (defined as less than 24 hours per week) and those in firms with less than 10 employees are not included.
As women make up over 60 per cent of these categories their position in the labour market is not well represented by the wage structure data.
Lifetime employment and seniority wages which are said to be the two defining features of the Japanese labour market, are closely related.
Employment for life and pay according to age should produce an earnings curve that rises steadily from recruitment to retirement.
The profiles shown in Figure 3.3 do indicate such a curve for men and for women in the early stages of their working careers.
This data takes the form of a cross-section  in one year to show the average wage in each of the age groups, so 44 year-old men for example earn about twice the wage paid to men aged 20.
Proposals that wages should be linked directly to age were put forward by labour unions in the later 1940s as a way of establishing a wage profile that reflected the increasing levels of housing or educational spending, but the slope of the female wage profile shows that the age/wage connection may not be universal.
For employers, the relationship between age and wages may reflect the accumulation of skill that comes with experience in a particular job.
Even if labour moves between firms, they carry with them more skill and experience than a new recruit and may therefore expect this to be rewarded.
Such a pattern of incremental earnings tends to be common among white-collar workers where general skills and experience are transferable between say schools, universities, hospitals, banks or legal institutions.
In industry, although incremental profiles are less explicit mobility between firms may be the route to higher wages on a scale rising with age.
Where skills are more firm-specific, however, they are less marketable and labour cannot necessarily expect to resume their wage profile when they move to another firm.
In this case mobility between firms is constrained because labour may have to sacrifice the growth in earnings they could expect if they remained with their current firm.
Employers also try to discourage the mobility of their highly skilled labour because they wish to retrieve the investment made in training over the long term, and they certainly would not want competing firms to poach labour that they have trained.
One way to reduce mobility is to offer promises of long-term employment, with the prospect of wage increases rising by promotion steps on a long ladder of continuous employment.
Another way is to organize no-poaching conventions between firms or to pay only low wages in the early years of a career to increase the amounts that mobile workers have to forfeit.
Employers in Japan use all of these methods to prevent the mobility of key workers especially in deferring pay from earlier to later years thereby rewarding highly continuous service to one company.
One reason why the age/wage profile for women is much less steep relates to the way their careers are interrupted between the ages of 25 and 40 by marriage and childbearing.
As the average women's tenure is only half that of men, their promotion up the seniority ladder is cut short.
There are numerous questions to be raised later about those women who would prefer to continue working, but this example illustrates clearly why it is important to distinguish between age per se and continuous tenure when considering wage profiles.
The tendency to reward continuous employment is shown by the much steeper wage profiles for Japanese men in large and small firms in Figure 3.4.
After 20 years of continuous service workers record a growth in wages of 150 per cent in small and 180 per cent in large firms compared to 52 per cent and 30 per cent in the US.
This data does not mean that absolute   wages are higher, because in the early years wages in Japan are relatively low.
Steeper profiles show that ‘the growth rates in earnings attributable to tenure are far greater in Japan than in the US’(Hashimoto and Raisian 1985 p.732).
A similar conclusion was reached in a comparison with Britain ‘the seniority premium being more than double in Japan’(Collier and Knight 1985 p.25).
Comparisons with other Western wage profiles also reveal a contrast particularly for blue-collar workers who in France and West Germany experience a slower growth in wages with a lower peak wage which is maintained from the age of 25 through to retirement (Shirai 1983 p.31).
The offer of longer-term rewards for continuous employment in Japanese firms is common to large and small firms but as Figure 3.4 indicates the profiles begin to diverge after the fifteenth year.
Men in small firms experience an earlier and lower peak growth rate which very quickly drops away after the twenty-fifth year of service.
In the US however, the rate of growth, the eventual peak and retirement wage levels for both large and small firms are very similar.
The distinction between the Japanese profiles highlights the very marked tendency to reward length of continuous employment in large firms and is closely related to their much higher rates of union membership.
The cross-section data used so far gives us little indication about how many workers continue in employment long enough to recoup the wages that were deferred earlier in their career.
If lifetime employment is common  in Japan we would expect longer periods to be spent with particular firms and less mobility between firms.
However the evidence on average tenure and separation rates only partially confirms this expectation.
Labour in Japan does tend to work for fewer employers over a typical career and does therefore tend to stay longer in each firm than in the West, but there are very significant variations depending on age, firm size and gender.
Much of the comparative analysis of tenure and mobility has been based on US experience where an average worker aged 55 would, for example have worked for 10 different firms compared to only four in Japan.
The average length of employment of all labour in 1982 was correspondingly double in Japan at eight to eleven years for men and six for women.
But the averages for Japan mask certain intriguing variations.
For example the mobility of labour between firms is especially concentrated in the earlier and later years of working careers.
In addition the average length of employment for Japanese men in large firms is 50 per cent longer.
What is even more significant for wage profiles is that all of the figures quoted for average tenure are well below the 25–30 years that it takes to reach the peak of the earnings profile.
So in small Japanese firms average tenure may be higher but only one in six men have the 20 years or more of tenure that would place them on the higher parts of their wage profile.
Even in large firms the proportion is only one in four (Hashimoto and Raisian 1985 p.726).
The position for women is even less favourable so although the average length of employment in one firm is greater, few workers are able to recoup the earnings lost in earlier years of their career when wages are lower.
As the overall shape of wage profiles are widely recognized why do workers not stay longer with one firm?
Part of the answer is of course that they have little choice if, for example, the firm is made bankrupt.
Involuntary discharges through bankruptcy are though much less likely to be significant in larger firms where labour turnover is much more related to age.
In the early stages of careers mobility is higher in Japan because part of the workforce is discharged before they reach the higher paid section of the profile to be replaced by younger and cheaper labour.
It is also possible at this early stage for workers to transfer to other firms without falling too far down the promotion ladder although such mobility is rarely between large firms.
Turnover rates for labour are also higher in older age groups especially among those workers over the age of 45.
A larger proportion of labour with continuous tenure means a significant rise in labour costs to firms, and over the past decade Japanese companies have either found ways of flattening the wage profile or have ‘encouraged’ labour transfers into subsidiaries or satellite firms.
Mobility for women who make up 45 per cent of the labour force involves little choice once they reach the 25–30 age group when they are expected to take temporary retirement into marriage.
The differences between the wage profiles of men and women can be    clearly seen in Figures 3.5 and 3.6.
Comparing the average profiles brings out the stark contrast in the slopes of the two curves after the age of 30 which is partially explained by career interruption at marriage.
But even up to the age of 30 the growth in  women's wages is only 35 per cent compared to 90 per cent for men.
The slope for women in large firms is much steeper but this has little effect on the average because so few women actually work continuously in large firms.
In total women make up less than 20 per cent of the labour force in large private sector firms and the majority are young and unmarried who leave before they have accumulated more than 10 years service.
Even if they return to work for the same firm when their children go to school their seniority is lost.
By focusing on wage profiles it is possible to show contrasts between different segments of the labour market.
The allocation of labour to these segments is of course partly predetermined by gender, but recruitment to firms of different sizes is based mainly on educational credentials.
Rather than recruiting to a specific job or skill, hiring is based on ‘intelligence, character and general acceptability as determined by personal history, academic record and company interviews’(Abegglen 1973 p.241).
Thereafter an employee is rotated through several sections or jobs making them more of a generalist rather than a specialist in one skill.
Given the steeper wage profiles in large firms it is not surprising to find intense competition for employment in these firms and employers are able to select those with the highest qualifications.
Thus large firms employ twice as many graduates, but perhaps more importantly they can take their pick of the best graduates from the best universities.
The effect of this recruitment pattern on wage profiles is shown in Figure 3.7 which relates the average wage for each age group to educational background.
It is after the first few years in employment that the profiles diverge dramatically and again the male/female contrast is vivid.
Although University and College graduates are grouped together in this data, men dominate university places 4:1 and women make up 90 per cent of Junior College students which further accentuates the status of men.
In total therefore there are seven times as many graduate men among all employees, so getting on to the wage profiles that grow fastest and last longest is very much a matter of educational credentials.
The resulting pressures on children in getting to the better universities and the question of whether access is open will be considered later.
There is then some evidence to show that Japanese workers do indeed work for longer periods with each employer, but only 20 per cent of labour in the private sector stay long enough to get close to the peak of the wages profile.
Similar conclusions can be drawn about the number of jobs held in an average career but there remain marked differences according to age, educational background, gender and size of firm.
One out of two graduate men aged 40 working in large companies in 1980 are likely never to have changed employers compared to one in twelve men with High School   background in small firms.
By the age of 55 these ratios drop to 1:3 in large firms and 1:36 in small.
Women are five times less likely than men to be with the same employer at 40 and eight times less likely at 55 (Aoki 1984 p.82).
If lifetime employment and seniority wages are seen as key distinguishing characteristics of the Japanese labour market then it has to be recognized that they are far from universal features.
By focusing so much attention on what is different about the Japanese labour market it can be argued that ‘four-fifths of researchers energy has been put into investigating the careers of one fifth of the labour force’(Plath 1983 p.31).
As we narrow down the proportion of the labour market that appears to benefit from lifetime employment in Japan, we get closer to the proportion of labour in Western countries employed by large companies who work to seniority wage profiles that offer accumulating reward for experience.
In both the UK and the US over 40 per cent of workers are expected to stay with their first employer for over 20 years (Collier and Knight 1985 p.21).
If there are tendencies that are different they relate to reduced inter-firm mobility for men between the ages of 25 and 45, and the opportunity for some blue collar workers to experience wage profiles that arc in the West generally confined to white collar professions.
3.3 A flexible core of permanent employees
If permanent employment was a universal feature labour would become a quasi-fixed factor in production and the room for adjusting costs would be confined to altering working hours or bonus payments.
On the other hand, over-reliance on an open labour market also had disadvantages involving the amount of time taken to recruit extra workers, the need to train new entrants and the possibility that firms may have to bid higher wages to attract labour.
Hence Japanese management holds out a promise of permanent employment to a core of selected employees whose numbers are ‘limited to a cyclically justifiable minimum’(Taira 1962 p.l68).
This core can then be supplemented by relying on the open labour market to provide temporary or seasonal workers but also by increasing the share of orders given to subcontractors.
For a selected core, employment guarantees are very much an informal bargain as Japanese labour law forbids work contracts to be extended beyond one year.
However even for male university graduates in large firms there is the prospect of retirement at the relatively early age of 55 although there has been pressure from the Ministry of Labour in recent years for this to be raised.
There is some indication that the official retirement age is increasing but this may be a mixed blessing for middle-aged labour because of the increasing pressure to take voluntary early retirement!
Part of the impetus behind these voluntary decisions also comes coincidentally from the Ministry of Labour who argue that rationalization requires a change in ‘the concept of labour cost from being a fixed to a variable one’(Hamada 1980 p.400).
As the most expensive section of the labour force, middle-aged workers have faced very severe pressures to terminate their employment.
As the President of a leading textile firm put it ‘When the ship is about to be wrecked heavier cargoes should be thrown off to sea’(quoted in Tsuda 1980 p.2).
One effect of these pressures can be seen in the age structure of male employees in manufacturing where in small firms over one-third of employees are over 50 years, whereas the proportion in large firms is less than a fifth.
Thus even for the privileged few the length of time during which they can enjoy their peak earnings is being restricted.
Where once lifetime employment was said to be the key factor behind high productivity levels, the need to reduce labour costs now means that ‘Lifetime employment is becoming something of a curse to Japanese industries’(FTW 12/3/83).
For workers in small firms employment guarantees are very rare, working hours are longer and safety records poor.
In the iron and steel industry for example subcontractors not only employ a greater proportion of older workers but the gap between their working hours and those in parent companies lengthened from 2 per cent to 14 per cent between 1960 and 1978.
This pattern is common among small firms generally where only  one in 25 use a five-day week relative to one in three large companies.
Paid holidays are 25 per cent fewer in small firms and only half of this allowance is actually taken.
With longer hours at work and less investment in safety devices, the frequency of industrial injuries in small firms is twelve times the rate in large firms.
(Japanese Industrial Relations Series,1981 p.9).
Indeed 75 per cent of fatalities in the iron and steel industry were reported in subcontracting firms during the 1970s (Shirai 1983 p.74).
With less extensive retirement pension or company welfare schemes, those 16 per cent of males who in 1979 had spent in excess of 20 years in one small firm paid a heavy price for their continuity of employment.
The experience of older workers seen in large firms shows how tenuous is the reality of lifetime employment and the working conditions in small firms serves as a reminder of the human costs of long tenure.
It seems clear then that ‘for the majority of workers lifetime employment is a wishful ideal rather than an established convention’(Aoki 1984 p.6).
Nevertheless the ideal is important if labour is encouraged to believe that it is a desirable norm and social surveys show that over 85 per cent of employees express the desire to spend their whole working career with just one firm.
In the years before the oil crisis dismissals were frequently justified by arguing that individuals did not merit tenure because they lacked commitment or because of their poor  educational qualifications.
Great weight is still given to both of these factors but since the mid-1970s even higher qualifications have not guaranteed continued employment.
In recent years dismissals have been justified much more in terms of the need to rationalize the labour force in the face of external economic problems which are compounded by Japan's ageing population.
With the longest life expectancy in the world the Japanese have become obsessed with the burdens this places on private employers, their employees and the state.
Dismissals are now explained as an inevitable response to pressures beyond managerial control be they the result of higher taxes to pay for the public finance deficit or the need to introduce even greater levels of mechanization to meet world competition.
That business and the state have spent so much effort in explaining why employment has to be more flexible is testament to their previous success in establishing lifetime employment as a longstanding cultural practice.
What will be more difficult to sustain is the expectation that labour should show total dedication to work now that lifetime employment is becoming ever more the exception.
3.4 The firm as a surrogate family
The notion that the Japanese are a nation of workaholics who are willing to sacrifice their personal lives for the good of their company has become a popular image.
Not only do the Japanese work 10 per cent longer than in the UK, 15 per cent longer than in France or the US and 25 per cent longer than West Germany but absentee levels are less than one-fifth of those recorded in the EEC.
Days lost through labour disputes between 1973 and 1983 were also much fewer at one-third UK rates, one-seventh Italian and one-tenth those recorded in the US.
After work leisure time appears to be dominated by association with colleagues such that various surveys show that one-half of male employees interviewed ate supper outside their home twice or more each week.
While many of these may be social occasions, work groups especially in large companies may often stay on late to participate in quality control circles or zero defect clubs.
There are up to four million quality control circle participants in Japanese industry and in large companies two in five workers are members.
Quality consciousness is said to be very high among Japanese workers who endeavour to eliminate components that are rejected as substandard.
Each smaller work group attempts to perform better than their rival groups in both quality control and in the number of suggestions they offer to improve productivity.
Workplace harmony is enhanced by communal sports clubs, company vacation resorts, one-class cafeterias and the absence of status barriers within the plant.
There is an hierarchical structure, but managerial authority is respected as a benign guardian of company interests.
Corporate identification with workers knowing their place is in short‘a managers Nirvana’(Galenson 1974 p.697).
Whether or not this picture is a stereotype, it is clearly one which is frequently used to explain why labour productivity in Japanese industry is so high.
The association of productivity levels with the extent of company commitment has been a theme among writers who have suggested that elements of the Japanese system should be incorporated into management practices in Western companies.
But there is also a tendency in Japan itself to explain economic success by stressing the connections between social attitudes and productivity.
Following the work of social anthropologists on group dependence, company loyalty is said to give the Japanese much greater emotional satisfaction than overt individualism.
Loyalty to the company means respecting the authority of management whose position reflects their length and quality of service.
Therefore diligence is an ‘expression of a uniquely Japanese cultural pattern of strong group solidarity and loyalty to the company on which the employees life depends’(Atsumi 1979 p.63).
In this kind of analysis the firm is often represented as a family in which respect for male elders is expressed by using seniority as the least disruptive and most predictable basis for internal promotion.
As one is not supposed to leave a family no matter what the dispute or argument, so a lifetime of commitment to the firm is expected from workers.
Seniority promotions and group bonuses act as motivating mechanisms and management displays its concern with the well-being of company employees through the array of company welfare benefits.
Cohesion is maintained by building up a structure of consensual decision-making to make every individual feel an  important participant.
This system of industrial relations ‘is consistent with and is based on very fundamental and very longstanding patterns in Japanese society = = the company is the recipient of the kind of identification and loyalty that is the basis of family organisation’(Abegglen 1973 p.28).
The comparison between workplace and family relations encouraged writers like Abegglen, Khan and Vogel to place this feature at the centre of their explanations of how and why Japan differs from other Western capitalist societies.
However their interpretation has been criticized on several counts which show that ‘the family-firm analogy is misleading and generally overworked; its character is usually symbolic or ideological rather than descriptive’(Fruin 1980 p.432).
This does not mean though that the analogy is unimportant in mobilising habits of deference or in raising individual awareness of the importance that is attached to company loyalty.
Critics of the corporate family model have tended to suggest that it applies more to large firms where promises of permanent employment are more likely to promote corporate identification.
While this is to some extent true, it does not mean that workers in small firms are not expected to show family-style loyalties.
In fact in many small firms the sense of identification with the family is real indeed because employment may be confined to kin relations.
What is missing from small firms is the sense of participation in decision-making as the more intimate working relations between owners and their family result in more authoritarian demands for personal obedience.
Even in large firms the reality of consensual decision-making has been dubbed a ceremonial ritual which merely persuades those most affected to feel they are participants.
Thus suggestions are initiated from the top which are then presented in detail by lower level employees in order to make acceptance of their consequences a less troublesome process.
It also seems apparent that in overemphasising harmonious labour relations, the extent of industrial conflict in Japan may be underestimated.
Strike statistics by themselves may not reflect the often violent background to the annual Spring wage negotiations.
Although strikes tend to be of a shorter duration they are concentrated around this key period when they are accompanied by picketing, working slowly to the rule book and the physical harassment of managers.
What is perhaps peculiar to Japan is the way industrial conflict precedes negotiations and takes the form of ceremonial sabre rattling.
industrial disputes are also much more likely to be confined within a single company and although such disputes cast doubt on the image or harmony, they do show the continuing importance of enterprise-specific industrial relations.
Effective participation and industrial peace may not be the rule in all companies but this does not mean that the company loses its central place in the lives of its employees.
What remains to be explored is how far labour gives loyalty as a voluntary commitment.
If vertical loyalties are so important to the Japanese, why are songs, slogans, badges and other ceremonies  needed to raise company consciousness?
The presence of aggression rooms where workers can relieve their frustration on plastic effigies of managers might indicate that loyalty is ‘perishable and the tremendous fuss about loyalty results not from its spontaneous presence but the need to nurture it’(Woronoff 1983 p.68).
In some ways loyalty is perishable because the promises of permanent employment in return for commitment are not kept.
Recognizing the possibility that consent and consensus might not be a customary social practice raises the issue of whether Japanese workers are ‘passively responding to the ideological insistence of those in positions of authority’(Sugimoto 1982 p.5).
Critics of the firm as a cooperative family have produced a more penetrating assessment of Japanese industrial relations which shows them to be less unique than they at first appear.
Management by participation and the delegation of decision-making is a technique commonly used in bureaucratic organizations to reduce feelings of powerlessness or alienation among employees.
Similarly large corporations in the West have attempted to reduce undue rates of labour mobility among key workers by offering incremental wage scales or by placing contractual restrictions on their movement to rival firms.
Yet despite similar tendencies elsewhere it does appear that conformity to company goals is demanded from Japanese workers to a greater extent.
The rewards for those who do conform, and the penalties on those who do not, are justified in terms of a cultural tradition which places the group first and the individual second.
Seen in this light the family analogy can still have a powerful influence although all its elements may not be an accurate description of reality.
If there are material inducements offered to place the company first they are bound to affect motivation especially as they are backed by sanctions against those who do not display cooperative attitudes.
The work of social anthropologists is important in offering a guide to the ways in which management legitimizes their authority by recourse to tradition.
Those who question or reject managerial prerogative can be accused of a selfish rejection of Japanese values in favour of alien Western individualism: ‘an obligation of mutual attachment between firm and employee [is]Sanctioned by what is seen as tradition, morally correct and emblematic of Japanese culture’(Clark 1979 p.175).
3.5 Company loyalty: voluntary acceptance or obligatory requirement?
In a society where the uniqueness of Japan's past weighs heavily, employers are able to justify their demands for personal loyalty and sacrifice in terms of longstanding cultural practices.
However, ‘Like other peoples the Japanese are not averse to inventing traditions’(Karsh and Levine 1973 p.13).
Although there are some dissenters, it seems to be accepted that a  lifetime of attachment to one company together with seniority promotions and group bonus schemes for all workers did not become a common practice until the 1950s.
Traces of all three elements have been found in isolated cases before then so it is perhaps exaggerating to say that an entirely new tradition was invented.
It is probably more accurate to say that as a package the new employment system used traditional symbols to make the unfamiliar appear customary.
‘In the process of responding to problems people look selectively at their values and historical traditions and select those parts which will reinforce the sort of structure that they think will solve their problems’(Patrick 1975 p.187).
What sort of problems provoked the integration of various cultural symbols in to a new package of employment practices?
At the risk of oversimplifying, the new style of labour relations were designed to overcome a high turnover of skilled workers, intense industrial conflict and a lack of motivation and commitment that was said to be the cause of Japan's reputation as a producer of shoddy goods.
In other words those very characteristics that are said to be proscribed by the importance the Japanese attach to group loyalty and deference to authority.
Manufacturing industry had been particularly affected by very high rates of inter-firm mobility during the inter-war years when average turnover of skilled labour was more than 50 per cent per annum .
Employers therefore sought to stabilize labour turnover with a package of inducements for key workers in order to insulate their internal labour market from the competition of rival firms.
A lifetime of commitment though required not just higher rewards or the promise of permanent employment, but also some limitation on the ease with which labour could move to other employers.
One way of reducing the marketability of labour was to limit a worker's property rights in a particular job or skill.
By establishing the practice of job rotation workers become generalists so that their skills and experience are specific to particular firms and therefore less transferable.
The promise of security and the expectation that wages would rise with promotion and seniority were offered as the reward for sacrificing the ability to move easily between employers.
With positive inducements to continuous employment in one firm and severe constraints on mobility, it is hardly surprising that Japanese rates of labour turnover are now lower than in the West.
The development of the new package was supported by an extension of welfare provision to all regular employees as an indication that management was replacing their old authoritarian image with that of a benevolent or sympathetic parent.
This is not to say that workers necessarily believed or accepted the new image of employers especially as during the 1950s memories of the pre-war era were clearly resonant.
It may be more pertinent to think of their pragmatic acceptance of the new system.
Any attempt to establish how far individuals comply with the ideology of the firm as a family is fraught with difficulty because motives are likely to vary.
Some may feel coerced into company-centred behaviour, some may accept  for instrumental reasons because there is no alternative while others may see the family analogy as the ideal structure for industrial relations.
But because ‘the ideological equivalency of firm and family has been transformed into a post-war simile of cultural proclivity’(Fruin 1980 p.447).
Japanese workers are encouraged into a greater sense of dependency on their firm and their immediate work groups.
It is sometimes argued that the firm has actually replaced the family as the central focus of social existence.
Whether this is out of personal preference or a sense of obligatory requirement remains an intriguing and much debated question.
Association with colleagues after working hours could be taken as an indication of the priority given to company matters but it may be reluctantly undertaken.
Those who place the company second to private or domestic interests are often accused of possessing little ambition and become an object of contempt.
Younger workers living in company dormitories have little opportunity to escape from the affairs of their firm and from an early age their leisure time is dominated by work colleagues.
Working, living and playing together in the knowledge that this may continue for many years to come increases the pressure to conform to the wishes of the group.
In a similar fashion a refusal to participate in quality control circles through which management make labour responsible for product quality, is taken as a sign of selfishness.
At Toyota at least this added burden meant that QC participation was seen as a ritual necessity ‘to keep management off our backs’(Cole 1979 p.163).
Exactly how much initiative labour exercises in QC operations does vary but in many cases labour has to meet a target of suggestions on an agenda set by management and coordinated by foremen.
Rather than embodying the principle of voluntary participation QCs may ‘in practice be semi-compulsory’(Tokunaga 1983 p.324).
The pressure to engage in after-work activities can be intense as it has both social and financial dimensions.
Bonus payments in general serve to promote involvement in the company but the share of each individual is determined by their own performance and that of their work group.
Any lack of required work effort by an individual will affect the immediate group bonus and so peer pressure can be significant.
Free riders may be ostracized because their colleagues can easily detect uncooperative attitudes to the company.
Personal evaluations occur bi-annually and are used to assess both changes in the basic wage and individual bonus payments.
Seniority as we have seen has less to do with age per se than promotion either to a higher position or within a grade.
In all aspects of pay and promotion the personal evaluation is critical and it takes account not just of performance at the current job but desirable personality traits such as creativity, emotional maturity and ability to cooperate with others.
Evaluations may also be made of the whole work group so that judgements are made of workers' attitudes and performance at both levels.
The role of foremen or front-line supervisors in these evaluations is a central one and it developed during the 1950s as an integral part of efforts to promote QC activities.
Foremen are promoted from the ranks of production workers and as pivotal intermediaries they have quasi-managerial status.
Although foremen attempt to act as parental elders or trusted friends to the groups within their charge, their evaluation function ensures that all corners of the plant are subject to the gaze of management.
Any individual display of selfish or uncooperative attitudes can lead to the allocation of jobs that carry low prestige, smaller annual increments, more limited promotion prospects and which convey a humiliating stigma in the eyes of colleagues.
In many cases these changes then result in ‘voluntary’ withdrawal from the company.
There is then tremendous financial and social pressure on individual workers which can be used to account for high levels of commitment to the company.
These same pressures help to explain why vacations are not taken and long hours are accepted as any individual decision to take a holiday or finish work on time places a burden on the rest of the work group.
It also seems that the pressures have increased since the 1970s as manufacturing firms especially have reduced their labour force and no worker wants to be nominated for early retirement or transfer.
Promotion opportunities have also been restricted and in the competition for higher status positions, personal merit evaluation is now given greater weight in determining pay and position.
Diligence at work then may have more to do with the consequences of non-cooperation than it does with internalizing the primacy of company interest.
Dismissal or even voluntary separation from a large company once a worker has reached the age of 30 is unlikely to result in recruitment to a similar position in another large firm.
Such mobility may carry the stigma of personal failure or a defective personality that are said to be the result of ‘soiling one's curriculum vitae' (Nakane 1973 p.111).
In any case the financial penalties of moving are sufficient to deter many especially as the inferior wages and working conditions in small firms are widely appreciated.
Company commitment and the willingness to remain with the same firm for long periods may therefore be underpinned by the prospect of heavy sacrifices that accompany the alternatives.
Certainly the lower levels of Japanese public welfare make even temporary periods of unemployment appear a bleak proposition.
Even those employed in small firms have to accept the limited rewards and the lower level of company welfare benefits if they are to fill the void left by limited state welfare provision.
The absence of alternatives to becoming highly dependent on private companies may leave little choice but to accept the parameters set by the ideology of the firm as a family.
3.6 The formation of an enterprise union structure
So far labour has been treated as a passive agency responding to the pressures of market forces and managerial authority but how has labour reacted collectively to the loss of property rights in particular skills?
If lifetime employment is so limited, to what extent have labour unions fought to widen its coverage?
Unions in Japan have had a major influence on the way the labour market is structured, but this reflects principally the fact that union membership is in large part confined to regular workers in large firms.
Therefore unions in representing the interests of their immediate membership have played an important role in supporting the pervasiveness of the company culture.
Unions in Japan are, with a few exceptions, organized separately by enterprise or where a company has several plants through a federation of plant branches.
Although most enterprise unions are affiliated to a number of national labour federations, industrial or trade unions which include workers from many different firms make up only a tiny proportion of Japanese labour unions.
All non-managerial personnel belong to the same union, but the privilege of membership is confined to regular workers.
Overall union membership at 27.6 per cent in 1988 is comparable with the US but is well below European levels, but what is more significant is its distribution.
Figure 3.8 illustrates for 1979 the dominance of large firms in private sector unions.
To put this data into perspective, of the 25 million workers in firms employing less than 100 only 5.4 per cent belong to a union.
The restriction of membership to regular workers means that less than one in seven private sector union members are women and the bulk  of these will cease to be members when they follow the convention of ‘retirement’ to child raising by the age of 30.
With such a concentration of union representation it is not unreasonable to conclude that ‘Labour unions are so structured and their membership distributed in such a way as to defend the privileges of the elite’(McGown 1980 p.111).
Any assessment of the impact of labour unions requires us to consider not only their influence on the wages and conditions of their members but also how this affects non-members in the same firm and labour in general.
The separation of unions by enterprise may lead them to show an ‘excessive identification with the interests of the firm and subordination to the authority of management’(Cole 1971 p.260) or in other words to be unions ‘by appointment’.
However there is a case for considering the role of unions in upholding and maintaining labour rights more generally.
For example, the new constitution bestowed by the US Occupation in 1946 included legal protection for organized labour.
This replaced the pre-war notion of duty to the employer and the state, with individual rights to minimum standards of employment and collective bargaining.
In a variety of ways these rights were re-interpreted from the later 1940s and this has been taken as an indication that ‘duty’ remains the norm as ‘Japanese business has still not accepted a union's right to speak for its members’(Halliday 1975 p.221).
Consequently the regular use of the National Labour Relations Commission by enterprise unions renews the ‘certification of their legitimacy by government institutions’(Hanami 1983 p.172).
The fact that unions feel it necessary to reassert their inalienable rights to organize labour may be indicative of the threats they perceive.
But in the process of renewing their legitimacy they may at the same time uphold general labour rights.
The annual Spring wage offensive fought initially by the larger unions could be said to establish the benchmark for wage increases throughout Japanese industry.
Here bargaining on behalf of their own members may have real if indirect effects on non-members.
So against the narrow focus of the impact of enterprise unions within their own firms we need to consider how far their achievements are filtered down to small firms where formal labour representation is minimal.
Enterprise unions along with other elements in the association of the firm with the family, developed out of the political turmoil and economic devastation that followed the end of the Pacific War in 1945.
In these years of prolonged crisis, the structure of industrial relations was crystallized around separate unions in each enterprise, the partial incorporation of age related wage profiles and a determination to make public sector workers an exception to the constitutional provision for collective bargaining rights.
Aggregate economic indicators give but a partial insight into the extent of devastation after the war because of the shattering emotional impact of Japan's unconditional surrender.
The economy had been close to collapse even before Atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and  the surrender itself coincided with one of the worst rice harvests for decades.
Defeat meant the loss of colonial food imports and the allied bomb damage to 75 per cent of urban housing together with the famine saw many Japanese returning to rural areas in a desperate search for food.
The general price level consequently rose by 40 per cent per month in the first six months of peace.
Even this rate of increase in the official price indices hardly records the real impact as large quantities of food were only available on the black market.
Against this background the main concern of Japanese labour was with the basic struggle to live, and to stay alive they needed an income from work.
Production was chaotic partly because equipment had been grossly undermaintained during the war but also because manufacturers were busily hoarding stocks of materials.
Fears that the US occupation would wreak vengeance on those who had assisted the war effort, brought about the sabotage of industrial plant and industrial output fell to less than a third of pre-war levels.
The fears of retribution were heightened by a directive from Washington not to assume any responsibility for the rehabilitation of Japan nor to assume the obligation to maintain any particular standard of living.
Even though this policy was reversed by 1947, the problems of supplying basic necessities remained immense especially with an extra three million mouths to feed when troops and colonial workers returned to Japan.
Between the surrender and December 1948 the Tokyo Chamber of Commerce retail price index rose by 4000 per cent and it is estimated that black market prices increased at double this rate.
If these post-war years were to be so crucial to the formation of the post-war employment structure, economic dislocation provided an atmosphere in which self-preservation was an understandable objective.
Economic chaos was only one element in the social turmoil that exploded when the new constitution removed the previously draconian constraints on individual rights.
The universal franchise and freedom for all political parties saw the development of mass support for socialist and communist parties that had previously been suppressed.
With labour rights now guaranteed, union membership rose from 7 per cent to 50 per cent between 1946 and 1948 and organized labour attempted to coordinate the attack on food stockpiling, to use strikes to force management to re-start production and to demonstrate in the streets against those wartime leaders still in power.
High levels of public violence eventually forced the US ‘occupying forces to take the necessary steps to control and remedy such a deplorable situation’(Yamamoto 1981 p.30).
To the authorities, one of the most disturbing trends was the incidence of production control by workers in companies where management refused to re-open factories.
Despite the rhetoric of slogans looking to the socialization of industry, such moves were often based on the basic need to continue working to protect living standards.
Without the roots of extensive planning ‘these developments did not add up to an articulate  challenge to the restoration of bourgeois rule in Japan’(Armstrong, Glynn and Harrison 1984 p.39).
What production control did achieve was the combination of blue and white collar labour in ways that reflected the essence of enterprise unions.
To an extent these ‘mixed’ unions of office and production workers built on the wartime associations which had been sponsored by the state to suppress opposition to the war effort.
Although these associations were formally banned by the US Occupation, their organizational basis was used to support the development of a collective labour voice in firms.
Two broad alternatives appeared to face labour in these crisis years: either to use united inter-industry unions to maintain a subsistence income or to concentrate activity within particular firms.
In some ways the latter offered more short-term gains and also suffered less opposition from the Japanese state and the US Occupation.
An agreement in 1946 negotiated by the Electric Power Workers Unions, the Densan system, laid the basis for firm-specific bargaining.
In order to secure an income that reflected the subsistence needs of families, wages were to be set according to age and family responsibilities.
Once the basic wage was agreed, increments would be given each year up to the age of 40 and additional payments made for each family member with a 25 per cent component left for job performance.
This agreement offered management some discretion in relating wages to individual ability but it aimed to guarantee labour a basic income that would rise with age and family subsistence needs.
The age component was essentially a revival from pre-war wage systems but the 25 per cent merit components soon grew in weight giving management more opportunity to distinguish between individual workers.
In the short term though what was crucial for labour was the offer of more secure living standards.
The alternative option, promoted by an intriguing coalition of US Labour Advisors and the Japan Communist Party was to press for a basic minimum wage across all industries with additional earnings to be related to productivity not age.
US labour experts warned that age scales would encourage the use of younger workers and would unfairly discriminate against women who would not be given family allowances.
Japanese opponents of Densan wanted inter-industry bargaining to improve wages for all workers by collective action.
A minimum wage was established by the minority Socialist government in 1947 but it suffered from two significant weaknesses compared to Densan .
First the basic minimum was set at a very low level and was related to pre-war wages thus not reflecting the very steep increase in the prices of basic necessities.
Secondly, the minimum was actually interpreted as a maximum, and even then the fact that this was an average wage for each firm left management with control over the way this was distributed among individual employees.
Densan tended initially to limit managerial discretion much more and thus seemed to offer a better alternative for labour.
In some ways, though, the choice between the two options was constrained by the association of general collective bargaining with the policies of the Communist Party.
From 1947 to 1950 there was a contest over the rival merits of enterprise agreements against collective industrial bargaining but the Densan precedent had the support of the US occupation, the Japanese state and local employers.
With hindsight, therefore, only one outcome was likely although the struggle was often violent and bloody.
Many writers have identified the increasing intervention of the US Occupation in labour affairs with the anti-communist spirit in Washington that grew partly in parallel with Mao's growing dominance of China.
Certainly the Occupation authorities did take a more interventionist stance, but it is important to remember that US policy directives were the outcome of collaboration with Japanese bureaucrats.
The continuity of unpurged sections of the bureaucracy in economic affairs has been highlighted in the study of MITI (Johnson 1982).
Similar continuity of personnel in the Home and Welfare Ministries that administered labour affairs meant continuity in attitudes towards the ‘obstruction of trade union organization and activity’(Garon 1984 p.443).
About 80 per cent of officials in these ministries survived the US purge and went on to cooperate with the Occupation in containing the labour movement into ‘sound’ de-politicized unions.
Their advice defined political unions as those attempting to follow Community Party policies which sought to replace enterprise-specific agreements with inter-industry collective bargaining in order to widen the class struggle.
Anti-communism thus united the interests of the US Occupation, the Japanese state and private employers especially in the face of a united front of public and private sector workers.
The first significant manifestation of joint labour action was halted by General MacArthur in January 1947 when he banned a general strike.
In the years that followed labour unity was undermined by further US directives prohibiting national strikes and by revisions to Trade Union laws which sought to isolate those labelled as ‘militants’.
Effectively this meant sponsoring ‘democratic, autonomous and responsible’ unions as a bulwark against Communist influence.
For bureaucrats this revived pre-war preferences, for the US Occupation this matched their cold war mood and for employers this delivered a labour movement which would be willing to accept enterprise bargaining.
As the main force behind united labour action, the public sector unions felt the full force of US-Japanese reaction when amendments were made to the constitutional guarantees of labour rights.
Japanese bureaucrats had long argued against the extension of labour rights to state employees and MacArthur accepted their views in 1948 by depriving civil servants of the right to strike and to bargain collectively.
Workers in other public enterprises were also prevented from striking although this did not stop strikes by postal and railway workers.
The continuation of labour disputes in both of these sectors heralded a wave of dismissals using anti-communism as a  p. 765), Japan's system is based on cohesive co-existence.
Instead of pitting the small firms against large firms, specialization by technique or process in a pervasive network of subcontracting forges a partnership which seems to have maintained the widely dispersed structure.
The extent to which Japanese manufacturing firms rely on outside orders for intermediate materials, parts or fittings is illustrated in Figure 2.2, and confirms the importance of subcontracting for firms of all sizes.
It is the case that smaller firms are more reliant on subcontracting in its narrowest form: processing materials supplied by firms who purchase the bulk of their output.
But the wider definition of supplying mainly to other producers, indicates that subcontracting is not the exclusive preserve of very small firms.
For example, in a survey of the Iron and Steel Industry during 1979, it was found that over 90 per cent of subcontracting companies employed over 300 workers (Mesatoshi 1980 p.51).
There is nothing especially unique about the presence of subcontracted parts suppliers because all manufacturing firms rely to an extent on the purchase of components from outsiders.
What is remarkable is the extent and persistence of subcontracting relations.
In two of Japan's leading export items, colour TV sets and motor vehicles, it is estimated that only 25 per cent of the value-added in production is generated internally by the company that sells the final product in contrast to 50 per cent in the UK or US.
Industrial production in Japan then, differs from many other advanced economies in the continuing reliance on the contribution of small firms, which is surprising given the economies of scale that large firms can reap by expanding their output.
In most other countries those firms employing over 1000 workers have substantially increased their share of output and employment over the past few decades, so why is Japan different?
One crucial reason is that large and small firms in Japan operate with a greater degree of interdependence than is suggested in conventional models of competitive markets.
In addition to the expectation of continuity in subcontracting partnerships, larger companies share semi-permanent trading agreements and are often stockholders in rival firms.
In what follows I will argue that there are specific financial advantages for Japanese firms which compensate for the presumed loss of efficiency that accompanied the shift away from the model of atomistic competition proposed in the reforms of the US Occupation.
Continuity in subcontracting allows parent companies to diversify the risks of specialization and promotes the exchange of technological information so that the quality of inputs is ensured and delivery schedules guaranteed.
Affiliative links between larger firms enhances the procurement of materials and smooths their pattern of marketing while inter-group stockholding prevents unwanted takeover bids and allows management to concentrate on long-term performance rather than short-term profits distributed to stockholders.
This longer run perspective is a feature of Japanese business and is greatly helped by the    existence of lead banks within affiliated groups that ensure access to loans even in periods when bank credit is restricted.
As we shall see the unequal power relations between parent companies and their subcontractors does mean that the burden of adjusting output in a recession can result in smaller firms going out of business.
In such circumstances the state has sought to mitigate the consequences of recession on small firms although it seems to have acted more effectively when the existence of a larger company is threatened.
Equally, the state has helped to maintain the structure of capital markets which promote closer relations between financial and industrial capital.
In the rest of this chapter we will consider how state policies have reaffirmed the financial advantages that derive from the continuation of a dual structure of production.