

THE LIMITS OF PRESIDENTIAL POWER
The president of the Unite States is, at first sight, an extraordinarily powerful figure.
He is the principal leader of one of the largest, wealthiest and mightiest nations on earth.
In theory, he commands a formidable array of armed forces and in his hands lie the means for destroying the human race.
Yet for all that he is a political leader of remarkably limited powers.
Within his own country, he is not so much a Leviathan as a Gulliver figure hemmed in and tied down by a complex network of restraints that must be thrown off if he is to be more than a helpless giant in the White House.
The principal purpose of this book is to examine Ronald Reagan's efforts to deal with these problems; to examine the techniques he and his staff used as they sought to break free from the ties that bound them; and to assess how successful Reagan was in mastering the system of government and in achieving his policy objectives.
This chapter is the first of two devoted to providing background essential to an informed assessment of the Reagan presidency.
I shall first review some of the main impediments to the exercise of power that confront all modern presidents and then consider what can be done to overcome these difficulties.
This will encompass American political culture; the role and structure of the legislative branch; the place of political parties, problems of bureaucratic control; and the nature of presidential power.
Before turning to these matters, however, I shall use as my starting point the rather more advan-tageous conditions for executive leadership that exist in the United Kingdom.
EXECUTIVE HEGEMONY IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
The distribution of political power in the UK is broadly centrepetal.
The national entities of England, Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales are organized in a unitary rather than a federal structure and parliamentary government in practice provides for the supremacy of the executive branch.
In the 1980s, the tendency for political power to be concentrated at the centre has been carried a stage further by a prime minister sufficiently determined and resourceful to achieve a high level of dominance over her cabinet colleagues.
However, Mrs Thatcher is by no means a typical prime minister; her approach to the job has been quite unlike that of most of her modern predecessors who, with one or two exceptions, have adopted a less ambitious, more pragmatic consensual style.
Nevertheless, if British governments usually provide leadership that is more authentically collective than at present, the possibility of executive branch hegemony is always there.
Assuming that the government of the day has a comfortable majority in the House of Commons, executive dominance over the legislature and control over the processes of decision making becomes possible.
The case should not, of course, be overstated.
Nowhere does the exercise of political power come about easily.
All British governments, however large their majority, must have an eye to the next election and an effective opposition will take maximum advantage of that fact.
In recent years, moreover, the incidence of backbench revolts among government supporters has increased and the House of Lords has more than once demonstrated an inclination to go its own way.
For all that, executive branch dominance continues to be one of the striking characteristics of the British political system.
That dominance thrives on the enthusiasm for positive and effective  government that is embedded in our political culture.
Public opinion polls reveal a powerful popular distaste for divided political parties and an aversion to coalitions, both of which are assumed to detract from effective government.
Executive hegemony is also facilitated by institutional arrangements that combine, rather than separate, the legislative and executive branches.
More than a hundred members of the legislature are simultaneously part of the executive and they provide a large phalanx of obedient support for cabinet initiatives.
The almost automatic acceptance of those same initiatives by the legislature as a whole is assured by the formidable mechanisms of party.
Executive  branch ‘henchmen’ in the whips' office armed with inducements and sanctions can, in almost all cases, ensure that rank and file members of the legislature will follow the injunctions of the party leadership.
As a consequence, the executive branch in the United Kingdom, provided it is fortified by a working majority in the legislature, has a comparatively awesome command of the political process.
for all sorts of reasons it may fail to fulfil its potential.
It may be divided within itself; it may lose bye-elections, or it may lack resolution or competence.
But, providing it survives these and other perils, it will be possible for the executive to bring about significant public policy change.
No such guarantees are available in the United States where the political culture is fundamentally different, the separation of powers principle is alive and well and political parties are notoriously weak and undisciplined.
THE CONSTRAINED PRESIDENT
Presidents, no less than prime ministers, normally enter office bent on making things happen.
They are typically determined to bring about change, to introduce reforms and to reverse what they see as the mistakes of the past.
Reasonably enough, newly elected or re-elected presidents interpret their success at the polls as a mandate to move the country in new directions.
Richard Nixon, for example, after his re-election in 1972, said at his Inauguration,
Nixon's ambitions were to crash on the rock of Watergate, but even without that disaster it is most unlikely that he would have come even close to fulfilling his mandate, In that, he would not, by any means, have been alone.
Indeed very few presidents in the last half century have accomplished much in the way of substantial policy change.
Fred Greenstein argues that ‘the impact of modern presidents on public policy need not be apocalyptic to be important’ and no doubt this is true.
However, a distinction surely has to be made between those presidents who alter the terms of the debate and change the course of  history and those who achieve no more than marginal change.
Franklin Roosevelt could be said to fall into the former category, but it should not be forgotten that he took office at a moment of great crisis in American history and was aided by unusually large majorities in both houses of the legislature.
Roosevelt, furthermore, was almost certainly the most gifted man to sit in the White House in the twentieth century.
Lyndon Johnson initiated a considerable amount of legislation and several other modern presidents could claim some limited success in the realm of foreign policy.
However, of Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Nixon, Ford and Carter, none could be said to have had a decisive impact on the direction of domestic policy.
How do we explain all these paltry records?
Why is it that presidents come and go and yet accomplish so relatively little?
The procedures whereby political decisions are made in the United States surely have much to answer for.
These are so ponderous and unwieldy and so vulnerable to obstruction that it seems remarkable that major decisions are ever made outside of crisis situations.
The decision making process can be likened to one of those great lumbering steam locomotives seen in Western films.
The president is ostensibly the driver of this large complex machine, but at the beginning of each new administration the question is: Will the man temporarily in charge of this unwieldy, temperamental vehicle be able to master its tricky controls and get it to move at all?
The odds are that the engine of public policy change will, in fact, make few significant journeys and will spend most of the time hissing and panting in a siding.
The truth is that it is monumentally difficult to galvanize the American political system into action.
The president, in the modern age, is the key political actor and the public constantly looks to him for initiatives, services and solutions.
In other words, they demand that he give a lead; meanwhile, however, countless obstacles are placed in his path to prevent him from actually exercising leadership.
If he is to meet his responsibilities, the chief executive must impose his will, his preferences, his policy choices on that ‘maze of personalities and institutions called the government of the United States’.
In order to understand what a president has to do to master that maze we must first briefly consider some relevant features of the American political culture.
POLITICAL CULTURE
The people of the United States tend to be instinctively wary and  suspicious of government in all its forms.
These attitudes arise from the American historical experience.
Many of those who founded the country had fled to the New World to escape the oppressiveness of traditional societies marked by hierarchy, inequality and the absence of freedom.
The architects of the Constitution were accordingly intent upon constructing political mechanisms that would allow for the essential minimum level of government without encroaching on their hard-won liberties.
There was to be no all-powerful central state apparatus, and political leaders were to be given no blank cheques; on the contrary, they were to be hedged in by a complex, decentralized and fragmented system designed to prevent any one leader or group of leaders from becoming excessively powerful.
The Constitution has undergone much development in the last two centuries, but the concerns and fears that motivated the Founding Fathers have not lost their relevance.
Americans continue to be sceptical about the virtues of government and are almost paranoid in their attitudes towards political leaders.
Presidents are obliged to tread carefully; as we noted, they are expected to lead, but they must do so without stirring up age-old resentments and suspicions.
Given this ambivalence towards political authority, there is little scope in the United States for heroic leadership.
Strong leaders are sometimes the subject of admiration, but typically they are long dead, like Washington, Lincoln or Roosevelt, or they can be safely admired from a distance, like Margaret Thatcher or Mikhail Gorbachev; Winston Churchill has the advantage of falling into both categories.
It is also the case that the American people have occasionally, in crisis situations, been prepared to shelve their traditional fears and to tolerate strong leadership from the White House.
Thus, Lincoln during the Civil War, Wilson during World War I and Franklin Roosevelt in an era of domestic and international crisis were all temporarily accorded a leeway that non-crisis presidents have not enjoyed.
It is worthy of note, however, that these presidents were all followed by periods of anti-executive backlash.
Witness the attempt to use the impeachment process against Lincoln's successor, Andrew Johnson; the defeat of Wilson over the Treaty of Versailles and the routing of his party in the 1920 election.
Finally, and perhaps most significant of all, there is the passage of the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution prohibiting third terms and clearly designed to guard against the possibility of another Franklin Roosevelt emerging.
In normal circumstances the American political culture is a restraint on leaders in general and on chief executives in particular.
The latter must be careful to avoid giving an impression of revelling in the  trappings of power, and they must beware of appearing to threaten the prerogatives of other political actors such as the Supreme Court or the Congress.
Strident, overbearing leadership is inadvisable in this political culture.
Those who seek to lead must act with subtlety and caution or they will meet with strong negative reactions.
CONGRESSIONAL POWERS
In institutional terms, the major potential obstacle to presidential leadership is normally the United States Congress.
In most Western democracies in the twentieth century, legislatures have lost a great deal of ground to executive branches.
This has occurred in America too, but to nowhere near the same extent as elsewhere.
Congress has not become a parliamentary poodle or a mere captive of the executive branch; it remains an imposing and fractious body, fully capable of defending its position and thwarting presidential ambitions.
The exceptional importance of the legislature in the American system is provided for by a constitution that makes Congress the ‘first’ branch of government; endows it with the legislative power; gives it control over the purse strings; allows it a considerable role in the making of foreign policy; and makes senior executive appointments subject to its approval.
To be sure, the president is usually the dominant partner in the legislative process; most major legislative initiatives come from him and little legislation of real consequence is likely to pass without his support.
Nevertheless, if congress has largely surrendered the positive power to initiate legislation to the executive, it remains a formidable negative force.
Any bill proposed must navigate a complex network of committees and sub-committees that offer innumerable opportunities for delaying, diluting or defeating legislation.
Even a president whose party controls both the House and the Senate is obliged to approach the legislature more or less cap in hand as he seeks approval for his programme.
Similarly, the legislature's ‘power of the purse’ is not to be underestimated.
Important policy changes will invariably carry revenue and expenditure implications and Congress jealously guards its constitutional rights in such matters.
The Budget committees, the Senate finance Committee, the House Ways and Means Committee, the Appropriations committees in both houses and their sub-committees are all major power centres well capable of inflicting severe damage on the executive branch.
In the domestic policy arena, there can be no doubt that the legislature remains an institution of great consequence; however, in the overlapping realms of foreign and defence policy, the pendulum of power has swung rather more sharply in the direction of the president.
from the beginning, the president's constitutional position in these areas has been strong.
He is designated Commander-in-Chief, making him responsible for the safety of US troops abroad and for dealing with any threat to the nation's security at home.
In addition, the president is constitutionally responsible for the making of treaties and the appointment of ambassadors and is effectively put in charge of foreign policy.
In the modern age, furthermore, the role of congress has been undermined by the special needs of this policy arena.
Congress, so it is argued, lacks the information resources of the executive and is neither capable of keeping secrets nor of providing the sort of instant response to crises that modern technology and weaponry demands.
It is also claimed that the irrational and inefficient procedures of pluralistic decision making are inappropriate in foreign and defence policy, where considered rational responses in the national interest are required.
The weight of these and other arguments has, without question, sharply shifted the balance in favour of the president in this century.
In crisis situations, the initiative inevitably rests with the executive — it is the president who authorizes immediate military responses and in so doing he may not be as carefully respectful of the Constitution as some purists would like.
Nevertheless, there is much more to foreign and defence policy than crisis response, and in these circumstances Congress can play a more meaningful role.
Executive officials can be hauled before Congressional committees and asked to justify their conduct of policy.
New weapons programmes cannot proceed without Congressional authorization.
Military adventures abroad that extend for any length of time depend on the legislature being willing to provide the necessary funding and the Senate's approval of treaties can, by no means be taken for granted.
In short, despite some loss of power congress remains an institution of genuine weight unlike the situation in Britain where  
THE STRUCTURE OF CONGRESS
The president's difficulties in dealing with the legislature are compounded by the structure of the institution.
Power is intensely fragmented and dispersed rather than being centred in a small group of party leaders as in a parliamentary system.
Thus, in the UK power is concentrated in the cabinet, a situation made possible by a weak legislature and strong political parties.
No such luxuries are available to presidents who confront a legislative branch of imposing strength that has chronically weak political parties and a near chaotic distribution of power.
In trying to meet his responsibility to govern, a president must deal not with a select group of leaders but with a multiplicity of party and committee leaders.
His starting point will be the congressional leaders of his own party, but their cooperation alone will not get him very far.
The influence of such leaders on their followers is limited and they may be quite helpless in the face of recalcitrant committee and sub-committee chairmen.
In specific policy areas, moreover, these committee leaders are likely to be the more important political actors, fully capable of destroying a president's legislative proposals.
In parliamentary systems with strong parties, party leaders can control committees by ensuring that only good party loyalists are appointed as chairmen, but this is not possible in the US.
For many years all major committee chairmen acquired their posts solely from their seniority, and even now this is true of almost all chairmen.
That is to say, chairmen are invariably the most senior member of the majority party on that committee.
It should be noted that these arrangements have important consequences for the distribution of power in congress.
Seniority provides committee chairmen with an independent power base and helps to insulate them from control by party leaders and presidents.
Even if a president and his staff are successful in obtaining the cooperation of party and committee leaders, there are no guarantees that they will be able to deliver the votes of rank-and-file members.
This has become especially the case in the ‘new’ congress of the 1980s, where congressmen and senators have become even more individualistic and less amenable to control than before.
Since the 1950s and 1960s there has been a weakening of the norms of ‘good’ congressional behaviour which, by obliging most members to conform, had in the past helped to bring some order into the legislature.
In addition, procedural reforms in the 1970s transformed the relationship between  chairmen and their committee colleagues.
Rank-and-file members now participate far more fully in committee proceedings and are no longer subordinate to chairmen to the degree that they were in the past.
These changes have made congress more democratic, but they have also added immeasurably to the difficulties that presidents face in trying to obtain congressional cooperation.
Individualism among today's members of congress has also been heightened by electoral considerations.
At the present time, success at the polls turns primarily on effective personnel rather than party organization and on the establishment of a good personal relationship between legislators and their constituents.
Particularly in the House of Representatives, constituency service is regarded as the key to re-election and arguably, as a consequence of their single-minded pursuit of this strategy, almost all incumbents seeking re-election to the House are successful.
The relentlessly parochial orientations of congressmen and senators inevitably give them perspectives on issues at variance with presidents responding to a national electorate.
Another potentially troublesome difference in perspective between presidents and members of the legislature arises from the separation of powers.
In the American system there is no career link between the executive and legislative branches.
Legislators will not normally have had prior experience of governing, nor do they provide a government-in-waiting, as in the United Kingdom.
In the latter, ‘in criticism, proposal and debate, the leading members of the opposition are…guided by their own previous experience in the various ministries and their expectation that one day they themselves may have to administer the policies now under debate.’
Members of congress, by contrast, enjoy great power without responsibility; it is possible for them to wallow in carping criticism and to engage in other negative tactics free from the anxiety of ever having to shoulder the responsibility for government — a burden that the president cannot escape.
The intense diffusion of power that characterizes the American national legislature is one of the principal difficulties facing every president.
In other systems, parties facilitate the work of executive branches by concentrating power at the centre.
party leaders, moreover, are provided with an array of rewards and sanctions that can be used to bring rank-and-file members into line.
US parties are, by comparison, broken-backed organizations incapable of fulfilling the functions performed by parties elsewhere and providing relatively little assistance to a president trying to bring about public policy change.
BUREAUCRATIC CONTROL
Presidents and their staff must come to terms with a powerful, but formless and undisciplined, legislative branch; however, this will not, by itself, be sufficient.
persuading legislators is essential to the policy-making process but, in addition, non-elected officials holding pivotal positions in the bureaucracy must also be convinced of the justification of the president's proposals.
Leaving aside those bodies that, for the purposes of this discussion will be treated as presidential staff agencies — the White House Office, the Office of Management and Budget and the National Security Council and other agencies within the Executive Office of the president — there are approximately three million civilian and two million military personnel in the employ of the federal government.
Annual editions of the Government Organization Manual provide neat schematic diagrams of the federal administration with the president at the top, above thirteen executive departments and innumerable independent agencies.
Taken at their face value, such diagrams convey the impression that the president is the chief administrator of the federal government with all its employees directly answerable and accountable to him; the reality, however, is very different.
Constitutionally the president is, without doubt, the chief executive, but what is seriously in question is his freedom to direct and control those who work in ‘his’ administration.
That vast organization is as amorphous and as difficult to impose discipline on as the legislature; from the most senior to some quite junior levels, there are many opportunities for bureaucrats to undermine and defeat a president's purposes.
A president cannot even be sure of the loyalty of cabinet members to his programme.
He appoints them to run departments and expects them to use their positions to aid the fulfilment of his purposes, but cabinet secretaries and departments are not answerable only to the White House.
Members of the cabinet are nominated by the president, but their appointments have to be confirmed by the Senate.
Departments are established in the first place by Act of Congress and they remain subject to Congressional oversight.
Their budgets are closely controlled by Congress and any departmental legislative proposals will have to run the gauntlet of Congressional scrutiny.
Departments, moreover, are not easily moved in new directions by the outsiders that presidents set over them.
Indeed, there is an ever-present danger of those outsiders — cabinet and sub-cabinet  appointees —‘going native’ and accepting departmental rather than presidential priorities.
Within departments, career bureaucrats exercise great influence and these men and women may well not share the partisan or policy preferences of their supposed political masters.
Furthermore they will inevitably develop close relationships with important members of relevant congressional committees and with the leaders of constituent groups served by the department.
This will lead to the formation of issue networks or sub-governments — essentially triangular groupings of élites embracing bureaucrats, congressmen and pressure group leaders who share a common interest and are in a position to distort the policy making process to their collective advantage.
The most notorious of these powerful informal alliances is the military industrial complex, but this is only one of many such groupings that a president must accommodate as he seeks to bring about policy change.
It is with good reason that presidents constantly complain of the large problems they face in trying to get the bureaucracy to do what they want it to do.
Even the outstanding president of the twentieth century, Franklin Roosevelt, armed with a massive popular mandate and large majorities in both houses of the legislature, had grave difficulties in moving bureaucrats in the directions he, rather than they, wanted to go:
Roosevelt, however, was president in a relatively uncomplicated era and since his time government has become vastly more complex and expansive with the problems of bureaucratic control increasing by quantum leaps.
In recent decades, moreover, the difficulties in these matters have been especially acute for Republican presidents for the simple reason that few senior civil servants are Republicans.
According to one study, published in 1971, only 5 per cent of career foreign service officers in the State Department regarded themselves as Republicans.
Another source established that no more than 17  per cent of senior career administrators in a range of departments and agencies dealing with domestic affairs, were Republicans.
Richard Nixon repeatedly expressed his exasperation at having to work with an unresponsive bureaucracy.
On one occasion, for instance, with typical pungency he commented to John Ehrlichman; ‘We have no discipline in this bureaucracy!
We never fire anybody.
We never reprimand anybody.
We always promote the sons-of-bitches that kick us in the ass!’
Since Watergate, Nixon has been a discredited figure and some of his attempts to bring order to the fragmented system of government stepped beyond the bounds of legality.
Nevertheless, his conviction that the federal bureaucracy was packed with administrators holding policy views antithetical to his own was founded in fact and was an experience common to Republican presidents.
Ensuring that non-elected  officials conform to the wishes of their elected superiors presents difficulties in all democratic systems of government.
The Yes Minister television series obviously deals in caricature, yet it has been said by insiders to be alarmingly close to the realities of the British political system.
In comic and overdrawn form, this programme presents many instances where civil servants manipulate government ministers and play an improper part in determining policy outcomes.
At a more serious level, Richard Crossman and others have shown that, in the right circumstances, civil servants in the UK may have an undesirably large role in policy-making.
On the other hand, the civil service in Britain is much more centralized and hierarchical in its structure and, consequently, is more easily subject to control by elected officials.
This is made possible by different cultural attitudes, secrecy in government and the sinews of party.
Senior administrators are not above attempting to influence the shape of policy, but once the policy has been made they accept that it is their responsibility to bring about its implementation.
There is little incentive in the British context for disaffected administrators to try to achieve their ends by making informal alliances with members of the legislature.
Budgetary and legislative control lies with a cabinet backed by the formidable mechanisms of party, and few parliamentary committees have real teeth.
Even those committees so bold as to demand to see papers and witnesses are unlikely to receive the cooperation they require.
The opportunities for bureaucrats in the UK to subvert or negate the wishes of elected officials are far fewer and more limited in scope than is the case in the diffused, more open and non-hierarchical structures of the federal administration in the United States.
PRESIDENTIAL POWER
The American presidency, despite appearances, is a much constrained and limited office.
Onerous responsibilities are heaped upon the man in the White House, but many obstacles are placed in his way as he attempts to meet those responsibilities.
According to Godfrey Hodgson: ‘Never has so powerful a leader been so impotent to do what he wants to do, what he is pledged to do, what he is expected to do, and what he knows he must do’.
Presidents must operate in a political culture that is riddled with anti-governmental attitudes and is hostile to political leadership.
It is imperative that they establish a good working relationship with a legislative branch that has real teeth and is characterized by a deeply fragmented structure of power.
A chief executive must also subdue an enormous and amorphous federal administration packed with individuals who, if not restrained, may thwart a president's plans.
And this is not the end of the story.
We have concentrated here on the formal institutions of government and the political culture context, but there are other constraints on presidential power.
There are pressure groups (which were alluded to under bureaucratic control, but not discussed in any detail), the media, international organizations and the governments of other nations.
No wonder Lyndon Johnson remarked in exasperation, ‘The only power I've got is nuclear and I can't use that.’
Some presidents, however, do come to terms with the multiplicity of constraints that confront them and manage to compile reasonable records of achievement.
How is this to be explained?
What are the secrets of presidential power?
The first thing to be said is that the ‘circumstantial variables’ of a president's incumbency may give him important advantages.
The tenor of the times may be favourable to presidential action.
He may take office during a period of crisis when the American people are willing to suspend their paranoia about leadership.
In such a situation members of congress may also be prepared to forego their usual concern with constitutional niceties in the interest of allowing the president to cope with an international or domestic crisis.
A president may also benefit from movements in the cycles of American history, by taking office at a moment advan-tageous to his policy preferences.
Some presidents are favoured with sweeping personal victories at the polls and that success may be flanked by considerable success for their party in congressional elections.
by no means will the latter guarantee the president success in his constant struggles with the legislature, but it will provide him  with an invaluable starting point.
His chances of accomplishing policy change will also be enhanced if he maintains high levels of support in public opinion polls.
Armed with some or, very rarely, all of the above resources, presidents may achieve some degree of mastery over the American political system.
Such mastery, however, will normally be brief; it is unlikely to outlast the passing of crisis and/or movement in the cycles of history; it will not survive substantial loss of congressional or popular support and it will be relentlessly eroded by the passage of time.
And if only fleeting mastery is possible for exceptionally advantaged presidents, what of the generality, of those who possess few resources?
All presidents must move carefully and skilfully if they are to be effective leaders.
Even those with many advantages will have precious few opportunities for issuing commands with the expectation that they will actually be executed.
Harry Truman summed up the central dilemma of presidential power when, in reference to his successor, he said, ‘He'll sit here, and he'll say, ‘Do this!
Do that!’
And nothing will happen .
Poor Ike, it won't be a bit like the Army.
He'll find it very frustrating.’
It was, of course, absolutely correct to assert that the government of the United States bore little resemblance to the army.
Military organizations possess hierarchical structures; senior officers at the apex of a pyramid issue commands which are relayed down to those who are obliged to carry them out.
Even in military organizations subordinates are not above evading or diluting orders from on high, but given the extent of relatively rigid discipline the scope for such activity will be very restricted.
Presidents, on the other hand, can rarely issue plausible, self-executing commands; for the most part they must persuade rather than order other political actors to do what they want them to do.
To implement his programme, a president must gain the cooperation or acquiesence of other members of the political élite, but such people are unlikely to be responsive to presidential directives for the relationship between them and the president is not one of simple dependency.
Members of congress, senior bureaucrats and other leaders share power with the president; they do not hold their jobs at his discretion and the fulfilment of their career objectives does not lie in his hands alone.
As Richard Neustadt puts it, ‘When one man shares authority with another, but does not gain or lose his job on the other's whim, his willingness to act upon the urging of the other turns on whether he conceives the action right for him.’
Legislators and civil servants in the US enjoy a degree of independence and freedom to go their own way that is unheard of in the UK.
Given the above circumstances it is hardly possible to dissent from Neustadt's assertion that ‘presidential power is the power to persuade’, what is more controversial, however, is his further statement, ‘the power to persuade is the power to bargain.’
The notion of bargaining undoubtedly captures a great deal of what presidential power is all about, but it does not provide a complete explanation.
Bargaining occurs in all political systems, but nowhere is it more prevalent than in the United States —‘The necessity for constant bargaining is…built into the very structure of American government.’
Bargaining is  synonymous with trading or dealing and may be briefly defined as participation in mutually beneficial transactions.
A seeks the cooperation of B , but lacks the means to impose his will.
B may be willing to cooperate in return for an inducement offered by A .
Political life in America sometimes seems only to be about bargaining in one form or another: Bargaining skill is indispensable in a chief executive obliged to operate in a pluralist system of  decision -making where power is diffused and decentralized, and where there is a multiplicity of significant power holders rather than just a few.
The president is the chief bargainer in the American political system.
Without bargaining skills, a president will be a nonentity in the White House, unable to control other political leaders and incapable of meeting his responsibilities as the principal public policy-maker.
Suppose, for the purposes of illustration, that a president and his advisers are convinced of the essential need for a new weapons system.
At some stage this will require the passage of authorizing legislation and a key figure in the legislative process in this case will be the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee; without his or her agreement the president's bill will not pass.
This major congressional leader may not be a member of the president's party, but, even if he is, his cooperation cannot be guaranteed.
Whether this chairman goes along with the president or not may turn on many factors, but bargaining is very likely to play a part.
What this hypothetical committee chairman has to offer a president is self-evident, but what favours can the latter trade in return for the  chairman's support?
Some of the benefits used by chief executives for negotiating purposes may be quite trivial, although of great importance to the recipient.
Congressmen value invitations to White House functions and enjoy receiving presidential pens at bill-signing ceremonies.
Similarly, a photograph of the congressman with the president at his side may be invaluable for electoral purposes.
At a more substantial level, a president might agree to appear in the constituency of a key congressman at election time to provide him with highly visible and, possibly, crucial support.
Patronage in the form of federal jobs for the friends and followers of members of congress is useful for bargaining purposes.
The president can use his influence to channel campaign contributions in the direction of favoured legislators; by working through party leaders, he may help a congressman to achieve a desirable committee post.
A president's support for a legislator's pet bill may be vital to its passage.
Similarly, success in obtaining appropriations for projects in a member's constituency may depend on signals from the White House
The president has at his disposal an array of bargaining counters that he must ceaselessly and skilfully deploy in countless negotiating situations.
Often, of course, bargains are implicit rather than explicit.
A congressman's support for the president on a particular issue may not represent a straightforward quid pro quo ; it could well be a mark of his gratitude for favours bestowed upon him in the past.
Bargaining might be said to help fill the vacuum that in other systems is occupied by disciplined political parties.
To put it another way, bargaining provides the cement essential if the American polity is to be anything more than a conglomeration of unintegrated fragments.
Only by constant bargaining can a president hope to bring order to the inherent chaos of the US political system and thereby give it direction and purpose.
On the other hand, there are disadvantages in a decision making system that depends so much on bargaining.
Such arrangements are not conducive to rational problem-solving; solutions turn not on principle and reasoned argument, but on  compromises, accommodation and, on occasion, rather sordid ‘wheeling and dealing’.
The rooting out of inefficiency and waste in government becomes extremely difficult, because a reforming president, will soon be in trouble if he is insensitive to the needs of congressmen demanding patronage and other benefits for their constituents.
Another difficulty that arises in a system where public policy emerges primarily out of a clash of partial interests, crudely resolved by bargaining, is that the national interest is likely to be neglected.
Furthermore, those with the most resources, the most bargaining counters, will be at an advantage; the organized, the wealthy and the privileged are likely to gain while the problems of the unorganized, the poor and the underprivileged may be given insufficient attention.
In political systems heavily dependent on trading and dealing, matters of principle get short shrift, long-standing problems are not faced and there is little scope for more than modest incremental change.
Bargaining is an unavoidable necessity in American politics and negotiating skill is a central component of presidential power.
It would be a mistake, however, to assume that the latter is about nothing else.
To assume that everything turns on the exchanging of benefits is to cast an unwarranted slur on many honourable, and sometimes courageous, public officials.
by no means are all such men and women impervious to the claims of rational problem-solving and the demands of the national interest — the politics of principle also has its place.
We must also remember that human motivation is a very complex matter and monist explanations are rarely adequate.
There are many reasons, apart from the trading of favours, for a legislator or bureau-crat going along with the wishes of the man in the White House.
They may be responsive to his charm, his charisma, his intellectual quality or his symbolic position as Chief of State.
Members of the political élite may give a president their support out of friendship or because they find him to be a likeable person.
They may be moved by a sense of party loyalty.
They may be intimidated by the president's apparent command over public opinion — a position he may seek to reinforce by using television, radio and public speaking in general.
Members of congress are, in any event, likely to be in awe of the president; a direct telephone call from him will carry special weight as Tip O'Neill reports: ‘The men and women in Congress love nothing better than to hear from the head guy.
So they can go back to their districts and say, ‘I was talking to the president the other day.’’
When congressmen visit the president in the White House, surrounded by the trappings of his great office, they are hardly likely to perceive him as just another bargainer.
For his part the president, as he tries to get the cooperation he needs, will not restrict himself to offering inducements.
He will use the arts of cajolery and flattery, possibly deferring to the experience and expertise of congressmen and pandering to their keen sense of constitutional importance.
To summarize, presidents do not depend on the trading of favours alone.
Members of Congress and senior administrators are moved by considerations other than the carrots and sticks available to a chief executive.
The latter and his staff will use an amalgam of  stratagems and techniques, many of which do not fall within a satisfactory definition of bargaining.
Nevertheless, a willingness and an ability to bargain are essential in a president who aspires, as they all must, to be ‘on top in fact as well as name’, and who hopes to bring about significant public policy change.
If we return to the point where this chapter began, it is surely evident that nothing approaching the executive hegemony found in the United Kingdom exists in the United States.
In the former there is far greater scope for effective executive leadership, and public policy change can occur in an orderly, rational and efficient manner.
By contrast, the decision making system in the United States can only be described as ramshackle; however, rationality and efficiency are not necessarily the first priorities of a democratic political system, especially one as vast and heterogeneous as the United States.
In such a country consensus does not come about easily and in many policy areas may be impossible.
From this side of the Atlantic we may raise our eyebrows at the opportunities for obstruction and procrastination and the constant search for the lowest common denominator, but arguably these are part of the price of freedom and democracy in the American context.
THE IMPERILLING OF THE PRESIDENCY
Ronald Reagan's election to the White House occurred at a moment when the credibility of the American presidency was at a particularly low ebb.
Of the previous four presidents one, Johnson, had been effectively driven from office by the failure of his Vietnam policy; one, Nixon, had resigned in disgrace and neither Ford nor Carter had been able to cope with the limits on presidential power.
To place the Reagan presidency in context therefore, we need some understanding of the political history of the post-World War II period.
This chapter begins by considering the circumstances that brought about the so-called imperial presidency.
This will lead into a discussion of the Nixon presidency including Watergate and the repercussions that followed, such as the widespread decline in public trust and a vigorous reassertion of congressional power.
These and other factors — such as congressional reform, the increased importance of television in politics and the further weakening of political parties — combined to produce an environment in the middle and later 1970s even more hostile than usual to effective presidential leadership.
Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter were in office in conditions far removed from those that prevailed at the beginning of the decade.
As Ford himself put it later the imperial presidency had been replaced by an, ‘imperilled presidency’.
THE IMPERIAL PRESIDENCY
In Chapter Two it was noted that although presidents face many difficulties in imposing their will on the American political system  their chances of doing so are rather greater in foreign and defence policy than in domestic affairs.
In the former areas the chief executive is sustained in his perennial struggle for mastery with congress by his claim to represent the nation as a whole and by the provisions of the Constitution that designate him as Commander in Chief and give him special  responsibilities in international relations.
In the early years of the republic these were factors of no great consequence, but they have assumed great importance since the movement of the United States on to the world stage in the twentieth century.
Furthermore, for the past fifty years there has been a more or less perpetual state of international crisis, with America constantly involved as a leading player.
Crisis situations invariably tend to tilt the balance of power in favour of the president at the expense of congress.
As former Senator Fulbright remarked in 1966:
That unhinging extended back at least as far as the Japanese attack on the American fleet at Pearl Harbor in December 1941, a crisis which allowed Franklin Roosevelt finally to break free from the congressional restraints on executive action that had been operative in the inter war period.
On this occasion congress exercised its constitutional right to declare war, but, in retrospect, this seems to have been no more than a case of going through the motions — the age of crisis was well underway and the constitutional balance of powers would never be the same again.
Just how far things had gone was demonstrated in 1950 when North Korea invaded South Korea.
In a reaction with profound long-term implications President Truman promptly despatched American forces to support South Korea and, on the advice of Dean Acheson, his Secretary of State, deliberately chose not to seek congressional authorization for this act of war.
Truman defended his response to the North Korean invasion as falling within his constitutional power as Commander in Chief and claimed the right to send US troops wherever in the world he thought necessary.
What is remarkable is not so much Truman's sweeping claim, but the ease with which he gained support for his action in congress.
Liberal senators — such as Wayne Morse of Oregon, Paul Douglas of  Illinois and J.William Fulbright of Arkansas — who were noted for their intellect and independence, all vigorously defended Truman against lonely critics like Robert Taft of Ohio.
According to Douglas, ‘With tanks, airplanes and the atom bomb, war can become instantaneous and disaster can occur while congress is assembling and debating.’
In emergency situations, it seemed, constitutional niceties had no place and the chief executive had to be allowed a free hand, an ominous precedent that was to be followed by a series of major military initiatives by presidents with little or no regard to the war power of congress.
Thus, in 1958 Eisenhower sent 14,000 troops into the Lebanon without congressional authority.
The abortive attack on Cuba at the Bay of Pigs was set in train by the Eisenhower administration and implemented by Kennedy in 1961 without Congressional approval.
Similarly, Congress played no role of consequence in the Cuban Missile crisis and Lyndon Johnson, by the end of his presidency, had more than half a million troops in Vietnam without Congress ever having declared war against the North Vietnamese.
By the time Richard Nixon sent units of the US army into Cambodia in 1970 without the approval of the legislature the war power of congress appeared to be a dead letter and the age of the imperial presidency seemed to have arrived.
That is to say, the position had been reached where, ‘the constitutional balance between presidential power and presidential accountability [was]upset in favor of presidential power’.
by no means had this state of affairs been brought about by presidents alone.
Congress had  willingly surrendered its prerogatives in the foreign policy field and both the media and the academic community had generally applauded the development.
Historians and political scientists like Arthur Schlesinger and Clinton Rossiter repeatedly made the case for an all-powerful president well able to provide effective leadership not only in international affairs, but on the domestic front as well.
In the wake of Watergate and other scandals, the pejorative connotations of the imperial presidency gained added weight, but the concept was always something of a cliché.
The word ‘imperial’ summons up images of the president as an emperor, a supreme sovereign authority, a master of all he surveys.
Roosevelt, at the beginning of the 1930s and at the height of World War II, may have briefly approached such a position of pre-eminence, but none of his successors has come even close to such a situation.
In the 1950s and 1960s presidents were accorded, in American terms, great leeway in  foreign policy, but even that came nowhere near the extraordinary freedom to manoeuvre enjoyed by British prime ministers in such matters.
And in domestic affairs the power of the legislature continued to be formidable.
‘Congress derided President Truman's domestic program, passed significant legislation over his veto and generally dismissed his hope of extending the Roosevelt New Deal into the Truman Fair Deal.’
Eisenhower, despite two terms, had little success in domestic policy; Kennedy was only briefly in office and even Lyndon Johnson's famed mastery of congress was very short-lived.
Richard Nixon, meanwhile, was constantly driven into a fury by congressional and bureaucratic resistance to his domestic policy initiatives.
With some reason, former President Nixon has said, ‘The ‘Imperial President’ was a straw man created by defensive congressmen and by disillusioned liberals who in the days of FDR and John Kennedy had idolized the ideal of a strong presidency.’
This analysis could be said to be self-serving, yet it is not without justification; the president was never as powerful as the critics suggested.
Nevertheless, the image of an out of control, imperial president became well established in the early 1970s and contributed much to the strong backlash against presidential power that bedevilled Ford and Carter.
THE NIXON PRESIDENCY
The name of Richard Nixon will forever be associated with the Watergate scandal.
Nixon betrayed his trust in a number of ways and was justifiably forced to resign; however, the collapse of his presidency turned on relatively trivial matters.
The burglary of the offices of the Democratic National Committee was a harebrained and quite unnecessary enterprise and the case against the president that eventually forced his resignation could never have been constructed without the re-installation of recording devices in the Oval Office.
The White House tapes provided dramatic evidence not only of a conspiracy to obstruct justice, but also of the existence of a seige mentality in the upper reaches of the executive branch.
The president and his senior staff shared a fervent conviction that legislators, administrators and the national media were resolutely opposed to all that Richard Nixon stood for and were determined to prevent him from making a reality of his policy intentions.
The deep sense of frustration and resentment felt by leaders of the Nixon administration should not be dismissed as mere paranoia.
In his memoirs the former president writes, ‘At the beginning of my second term, Congress, the bureaucracy and the media were still working in concert to maintain the ideas and ideology of the traditional Eastern liberal establishment that had come down to 1973 through the New Deal, the New Frontier, and the Great Society.’
This is no more than a statement of fact; throughout the Nixon years the opposition party held large majorities in both Houses of Congress; the bureaucracy was thick with Democrats and the national media, at least, tended to be markedly hostile.
Notwithstanding these disadvantages, Nixon was determined to be an activist president.
There was little he could do to combat the hostility of the media, but after the frustrations of his first term he decided to face up to the bureaucracy and the legislature.
After his re-election in 1972 Nixon asked for the resignations of all non career employees in the executive branch and took steps to ensure that all those appointed or reappointed were loyal to him and his policies.
Nixon's strategy, in other words, was to take over the bureaucracy while, at the same time, he would take on the congress.
Although he had been a member of both the US House of Representatives and the US Senate he had never been a true man of Congress.
By the time he reached the White House, he shared fully the deep contempt for Congress that his hero Woodrow Wilson had repeatedly displayed.
Like Wilson, Nixon believed that his national mandate gave him a legitimacy that the legislature lacked, a body that was, ‘cumbersome, undisciplined, isolationist, fiscally irresponsible, overly vulnerable to pressures from organized minorities, and too dominated by the media’.
John Ehrlichman, Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs, has provided vivid testimony of the low esteem accorded the legislative branch in the Nixon White House.
According to his view, congress was no more than a ‘herd of mediocrities’ where, ‘members consume time in enormous quantities in their quaint Congressional  processes.
They recess; they junket; they arrive late and they leave early; they attend conferences out of town, fly off to give speeches, sip and chat and endlessly party.
And only sometimes do they focus on legislation.’
Gerald Ford, the leader of the Republicans in the House, ‘might have become a pretty good Grand Rapids insurance agent; he played a good game of golf, but he wasn't excessively bright’.
The Senate Republican leader, Hugh Scott, meanwhile, was ‘a hack’ and ‘a rotund, owlish pennsylvania machine politician’.
Not surprisingly, meetings between Nixon and his staff and Republican Congressional leaders were not especially happy affairs.
‘Our dynamic legislative leaders drank coffee and occasionally took notes, but they rarely were given a chance to say anything.’
These remarks it should be noted were directed specifically at the Republican Congressional leadership by the man with the primary responsibility for persuading congress to accept the president's domestic programme.
In their efforts to master Congress, presidents have normally given a high priority to working through their party's legislative leaders, but it is clear that an amicable and productive relationship with such leaders was not established during the Nixon years.
It has been argued also that if the president and the Congress are to work well together, each branch must respect the other's legitimacy and competence; however, Nixon and his aides made no pretence of granting that much to the legislature.
Instead they set out to ride roughshod over the legislative branch, attempting to govern without congress rather than with it.
Given these provocations, it is not surprising that Congress, when it got the chance, should strike back against the executive.
Watergate was to provide just such an opportunity.
As that scandal unfolded during 1973 and 1974, foreign observers viewed the proceedings with some amazement.
In the first place they were presented with a riveting demonstration of what a genuinely free press is capable of.
Journalists such as Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein of the Washington post filed innumerable stories, often drawn from anonymous sources, and including less than completely substantiated allegations of criminal behaviour by public officials.
Piece by piece, a picture emerged of wrong-doing in high places and eventually congress and law enforcement agencies were obliged to take action.
Such stories would have never been published in the United Kingdom, for instance, where public officials can hide behind punitive laws of libel and press freedom is less assiduously protected.
The Watergate hearings in Congress and the publication of the White House tapes also made possible an exposure of the inner workings of  an administration to a degree inconceivable in Britain, where the shroud of secrecy that envelops matters of state is never lifted more than fractionally, even in moments of high crisis.
There was some tendency at the time to argue that the Watergate affair had revealed weaknesses in the American presidential system not found in parliamentary systems.
A prime minister, so the argument went, who was the subject of such a massive loss of confidence among both the political élite and the public at large would swiftly have been removed from office.
The boil of misgovernment would have been lanced very quickly and a long festering crisis of confidence in the integrity of the system would have been avoided.
However, what such an analysis fails to take into account is that the evidence of wrong-doing that became so public in the United States would almost certainly have never surfaced in the United Kingdom, given the laws of libel and the willingness of the British people to tolerate secrecy in government.
European observers were also inclined to become impatient with the agonizingly slow pace at which congress appeared to move towards the impeachment of Richard Nixon.
Television screens around the world seemed to show that the president and his associates were guilty as charged and there could be no doubt that public confidence in the Nixon administration had been shattered.
Why, therefore, did congress not get on with the business of removing a patently guilty president?
Impeaching a president, however, is not comparable to the removal of a prime minister.
The latter is a mere politician, whereas the former is much more than that.
He is also a symbolic figure who represents the unity of the nation and sits in the chair once occupied by folk heroes and demi gods such as Washington, Jefferson and Lincoln.
To remove a president from office is comparable to removing a monarch, impeachment is closer to regicide than to the mere sacking of a prime minister.
Nixon's forced resignation, in other words, was a deeply traumatic episode in the history of the United States.
It struck a devastating blow at the presidency as an institution and gave powerful new impetus to the collapse of trust in government that had begun some years previously.
A famous study of comparative political culture, based on research in 1959 and 1960, revealed that, when Americans were asked what things they were most proud of in their country, 85 per cent had spon-taneously mentioned governmental and political institutions.
By comparison only 46 per cent of British respondents, 30 per cent of Mexicans, 7 per cent of Germans and 3 per cent of Italians expressed pride in their governmental and political institutions.
The 1960s and 1970s, however, saw, in the United States, a devastating erosion of  public confidence in political institutions.
Thus, in 1964 only 22 per cent of Americans held to the view that government could be trusted only, ‘some of the time’ whereas this had increased to 37 per cent by 1968, 45 per cent by 1972, 61 per cent by 1974 and 73 per cent by 1980.
The collapse of trust in government that occurred in the 1970s cannot be attributed entirely to Watergate; the trend was established before 1973.
Nevertheless, there was a particularly sharp increase in cynicism about political institutions in general between 1972 and 1974.
During this same period there was also a precipitous fall from 76 per cent to 42 per cent in public confidence in the executive branch of the federal government.
It is clear that by the time Ronald Reagan entered office concerns generated by the spectre of the imperial presidency and intensified by the pattern of misgovernment symbolized by Watergate had had a seriously detrimental effect on public perceptions of the presidency.
CONGRESSIONAL REASSERTION
Congress has always posed major problems for the man in the White House.
He must work in, ‘a government of separated institutions sharing powers’, and he will accomplish little without the cooperation of the legislative branch.
That cooperation, however, is not easily obtained; congress has become notably more difficult to master than before.
In part, this may be attributed to Watergate and related scandals, but those events by no means provide a complete explanation.
Many of the changes that helped to bring about in the 1970s a new, more fragmented and more intractable congress would have happened irrespective of the misdemeanours of the Nixon administration.
The invasion of Cambodia by US troops in 1970 can be seen as the high point in a twenty-year erosion of the legislature's role in the making of foreign and defence policy.
However, as the United States began its ignominious withdrawal from South East Asia congress finally set about reclaiming the ground it had surrendered to the executive branch.
During the 1970s there was to be a flood of legislation designed to limit the freedom of the president in these policy areas.
The decade began with congress passing various bills that sought to cut off funding for the Vietnam War and in 1973 legislators moved on to pass the War Powers Act over president Nixon's veto.
The provisions of this act require a president to consult with congress about any commitment of American troops abroad and oblige him to withdraw those troops within 60 days (with the possibility of a 30-day extension) if a declaration of war is not forthcoming from Congress.
When this act was debated, many doubted whether it would achieve its dual purpose of curbing presidents and giving teeth to the constitutional war power of Congress.
With good reason some senators argued that the position of the president in these vital matters would be strengthened rather than weakened.
He was effectively granted a blank cheque to conduct a war without Congressional authorization for up to 90 days.
And, at the end of such a period, if American troops were still abroad it would be unthinkable for Congress to sabotage their position by denying the chief executive a declaration of war.
In practice, moreover, presidents have shown the War Powers Act scant respect; nevertheless, in the context of 1973, it was a symbolically important reassertion of congressional prerogative.
Further evidence of a new mood in the legislature in this period can be seen in the steps taken to curtail the activities of the Central Intelligence Agency.
High-powered investigations of intelligence agencies in the wake of Watergate had revealed much evidence of illicit and unconstitutional behaviour.
With the Hughes — Ryan Act of 1974, Congress endeavoured to impose some discipline on the CIA by requiring the agency to obtain presidential approval before embarking on covert operations and obliging it to notify eight different Congressional committees either before, or soon after, such operations commenced.
This was amended in 1980 — notice now only has to be given to the House and Senate Intelligence committees.
A determination to rein in the president also lay behind the Case Act that became law in 1972.
Historically, the Senate's claim to a say in the making of foreign policy had depended on the provisions in the Constitution regarding treaty-making.
Treaties with foreign powers were to be negotiated by the president, but were then subject to ratification by the Senate.
In the twentieth century, however, presidents had increasingly made use of executive agreements as instruments of foreign policy.
By definition, such agreements did not require approval by the legislature and ‘In the year 1930 the United States made 25 treaties and only 9 executive agreements; in 1971, 214 executive agreements and only 17 treaties.
The Nixon administration, up to May 1, 1972, had concluded 71 treaties and 608 executive agreements.’
It was argued in the Senate that presidents were using executive agreements not for minor matters, as originally intended, but as vehicles for entering into major foreign and defence policy commitments without reference to congress.
The Case Act was devised to end such abuse; forthwith executive agreements, within 60 days of their negotiation, would have to be sent to the House and the Senate for approval.
By the War Powers Act, the Hughes — Ryan Act, the Case Act and a number of other bills in the 1970s, Congress made strenuous efforts to reclaim ground lost to the president in the realm of foreign policy.
Similarly, the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Act of 1974 reflected the determination of the legislature to reassert its authority in domestic policy-making.
Legislators had been deeply angered by Richard Nixon's assault on congress's most important and most treasured prerogative — the power of the purse.
Bolstered by his landslide electoral victory in 1972, the President moved to take on the legislature.
Central to his strategy was impoundment, a procedure whereby the chief executive chooses not to spend funds that have been appropriated by Congress.
This was an entirely legitimate and historically well-founded practice, but Nixon carried it to extreme lengths, seeing it as a way both to cut back on federal expenditure and to impose his own order of spending priorities.
Impoundment may be justified when the administration of a programme reveals opportunities to save, or perhaps divert, funds without negating the policy intentions of the legislative branch.
Impoundments that went beyond that and involved policy change had occurred in the past, but these were either justified under the Commander-in-Chief clause in the Constitution, or had been the subject of consultation with congressional leaders.
President Nixon, however, used the weapon of impoundment without restraint, embarking ‘on large scale impoundments in programs that he wanted to terminate or curtail.
The impoundments — predominantly for policy purposes — totalled in excess of $18 billion, double the amount officially reported by the administration and far above the comparable action of any previous president.’
In response, Congress, in the 1974 Act, included provisions requiring the president to report impoundments to the legislature, making it possible for either the House or the Senate to compel the release of impounded funds, and obliging the executive to spend them in accordance with legislative intent.
Once again Congress had struck back against an overweening executive branch.
The Budget and Impoundment Act also introduced major changes in congressional procedures for dealing with the president's budget.
Reformers had long argued that the credibility of the legislature in the  eyes of the public and its ability to compete with the executive were both weakened by a chaotic Congressional budgetary process.
Budgets, on arrival from the White House, were dismantled and considered piecemeal with little attention to overall concerns about the state of economy, the need to balance expenditures against revenue or the national interest.
The budget process in Congress, in other words, was deemed to be irrational, uncoordinated and inefficient.
Under the new act these problems were to be addressed by setting up coordinating budget committees in the House and the Senate, drawing up a realistic timetable for dealing with the budget and establishing a Congressional Budget Office that would provide the staff and expertise necessary for dealing with the budget responsibly.
Like the War powers Act, the budget reform act has not lived up to the expectations of those who crafted it.
Nevertheless, the establishment of the CBO in particular had significant consequences for the balance of power between the legislature and the White House.
Since the establishment of the modern presidency in the 1930s and the massive expansion of governmental activity, congress has always been at a disadvantage in its constant battles with the executive arising from the latter's superior access to information and expertise.
This had been especially the case in budgetary matters and the foundation of the CBO went some way towards correcting the situation.
In the words of Stuart Eizenstat, Jimmy Carter's domestic policy chief, ‘One can trace from the time of the New Deal through the early and mid-parts of the Nixon administration, a clear, gradual, perceptible increase in presidential power relative to the legislative branch.
The creation of the CBO began to redress the balance of power.
It did that via one fundamental way — it ended the president's monopoly on information, on budget forecasts, on economic forecasts.’
By the middle of the 1970s it was evident that a new mood was present in congress.
Vietnam, Watergate and other horrors associated with the so-called imperial presidency had wrought severe damage on the standing of the executive branch.
Those who, in the media and academe, had for years vaunted presidents  and expounded ‘executive force’ theories were now busily reconsidering their views.
In this new atmosphere the legislature displayed a determination to defend itself against executive encroachment, not seen for some years.
CONGRESSIONAL REFORM
The new posture was reflected in other steps that Congress took in an attempt to improve its procedures and which, ultimately, were to make life substantially more difficult for presidents.
In the late 1960s the case for Congressional reform had gathered strength.
The legislature was condemned as unrepresentative, as an institution dominated by a minority of rural and small town based conservatives, usually from the South, out of touch with the needs of the majority, located largely outside the South and living mainly in urban areas.
The structure of the ‘old’ Congress was found badly wanting.
In both houses, the reformers claimed, committee chairmen exercised disproportionate power.
Secure in their seniority, these Congressional ‘barons’ determined when and if committee meetings were held; controlled the appearance of witnesses; decided the speaking opportunities of their colleagues on the committee; hired and fired committee staff; decreed whether or not their would be sub-committees; appointed sub-committee chairmen; reported the deliberations of the committee to the full House and appointed committee representatives to conference committees.
by no means were all chairmen tyrants, but the opportunities were there and had made possible the emergence of uncontrollable ‘powerhouse’ figures such as Judge Howard Smith of Virginia, the chairman of the House Rules Committee, and Wilbur Mills of Arkansas, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.
The undue power of committee chairmen in relation to their colleagues was more of a problem in the House than in the Senate, but in the latter a system of legislative norms or folkways made possible dominance of the proceedings by leading members of the Senate inner club or establishment.
In 1963 Senator Joseph Clark of Pennsylvania said, ‘The Senate establishment…is almost the antithesis of democracy.
It is not selected by any democratic process.
It appears to be quite unresponsive to the caucuses of the two parties, be they Republican or Democratic.
It is what might be called a self-perpetuat-ing oligarchy with mild, but only mild overtones of plutocracy.’
Clark's analysis was confirmed by eminent observers of the Senate such as William S. White and Donald R. Matthews.
They argued that the Senate was in the hands of a mainly southern élite, armed with a self-serving code of legislative norms.
Senators who entertained thoughts of becoming effective members were obliged to serve a lengthy period of apprenticeship; they had to be dedicated to their work as senators; they were also expected to specialize and, in turn, to  respect the specialization of others.
In debate they had to be elaborately courteous towards their colleagues and non-ideological in their comments.
And, above all else, members were obliged to display a total commitment to the Senate as an institution.
Senators who refused to conform to these inherently conservative norms were condemned to ineffectiveness.
Some of these arguments were overstated; nevertheless, power in the Senate in that era was, without doubt, highly centralized with most leading positions held by senior conservatives, or by those who made themselves acceptable to the ruling élite.
In both Houses of Congress in this earlier period the mechanisms of party possessed little meaning.
The Democrats had ostensibly been in control of Congress for some time, but the real power lay with a conservative coalition embracing, on the one hand, southern Democrats, and Republicans on the other.
This cross party informal alliance had a stranglehold on key committees such as the Rules and Ways and Means committees in the House and the Finance and Judiciary committees in the Senate.
Presidents in their dealings with congress had to cope with some extraordinarily powerful leaders.
Smith and Mills in the House had their counterparts in the Senate — leaders of the ‘inner club’, such as Richard Russell of Georgia and Robert Kerr of Oklahoma.
There were also occasionally outstanding party leaders like Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House and Senate Democratic leader Lyndon Johnson.
However, these were leaders whose strength rested not so much on their control of the machinery of party as on their skill as exceptional political manipulators.
A ‘new’ Congress began to emerge in the early 1970s following changes in its regional composition, Congressional reform, developments in campaign practices and the new importance of television in legislative politics.
In the first place Democratic representation from the South declined.
In 1960, 94 per cent of House seats in the South were held by the Democrats, a figure that declined to 68 per cent by 1972.
In the Senate, meanwhile, the Democrats held all the seats in the South in 1960 but only 68 per cent by 1972.
As late as 1967, 50 per cent of all standing committee chairmanships in the House and 56 per cent in the Senate were held by southerners.
By 1971, however, the number of house standing committees chaired by southerners had fallen to 38 per cent and to 23 per cent by 1979; meanwhile the comparable figures in the Senate were 53 per cent in 1971 and 27 per cent in 1979.
In the 1970s in other words, the influence of the South in Congress declined dramatically.
The 1970s was also an era of Congressional reform.
Pressures for change had been building up within the legislature for some time and these were to be given added impetus by the events surrounding the resignation of President Nixon.
In 1970 the first Congressional reform bill for more than two decades was passed — the Legislative Reorganization Act.
Among other things, this bill strengthened the position of rank-and-file committee members vis à vis chairmen.
Thus, in the absence of the chairman the ranking majority member of a committee would preside.
There was also an attempt to ensure full and free participation in committee hearings by all members and restraints were imposed on the use of proxy votes by chairmen; in addition, all votes in committee and on the floor were now to be recorded and open to public scrutiny.
In the same period the power of standing committee chairmen was further eroded by the institutionalization and proliferation of sub-committees.
Hitherto such bodies had been under the sway of the main committee chairman, but now they began to acquire a life of their own.
The Democratic caucus in the House decided in 1971 that members should be limited to one sub-committee chairmanship thereby making it possible for many more congressmen to hold these coveted posts.
Two years later the so-called sub-committee bill of rights  In 1974 the Democratic caucus further decided that all standing committees with more than 20 members should have at least 4 sub-committees.
The effect of all these changes concerning sub-committees was dramatic.
Twenty years previously there had been only 83 sub-committees of standing committees in the House, but by 1976 there were 151; during the same period the number of sub-committees in the Senate increased from 88 to 140.
There were now large numbers of sub-committee chairmen and within the narrow policy area covered by that sub-committee they were highly influential political actors.
Power in Congress, in other words, was even more diffused and scattered than it had been before.
The distribution of power in the legislature was also fundamentally altered by the dilution of the seniority principle in the early 1970s.
Seniority had been a bulwark of power and independence for chairmen in the past, but now both parties in both houses began to edge towards change.
In December 1974 the Democratic caucus in the House took the momentous step of agreeing to an automatic secret ballot election for all committee chairmen and went on to remove W. R. Poage, the chairman of the Agriculture Committee, F. Edward Hebert, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and Wright Patman of the Banking Committee
Committee chairmen generally continue to be selected on the basis of seniority and, indeed, only one other sitting standing committee chairman, Mel Price of Armed Services in 1985, has actually been deposed since in either house.
There have also been a few cases where junior members have  successfully challenged senior colleagues in contests for sub committee chairmanships.
Nevertheless there is no denying that the threat of removal has radically altered the relationship between chairmen and committee members.
Judge Smith formerly chairman of the Rules Committee was a man greatly feared by his colleagues, but no chairman would dare follow his example in the congress of today.
As Representative Mo Udall has colourfully put it, ‘It used to be that when you met a chairman in the hall you bowed low and said, hello Mr Chairman; now when you meet a chairman in the hall he bows low.’
Modification of the seniority system grew out of the renewed importance of the Democratic party caucus and in turn added weight to that organization.
The influence of party structures had for long been curtailed by the arrangements for selecting chairmen; arrangements which made it possible for situations to arise where the president, the Congressional party leadership and a majority of the majority party could all be united on a particular issue yet might be thwarted by the whims of an all-powerful committee chairman.
Seniority reform made committee chairmen more beholden to their party and its leaders and other innovations carried this process further.
The speaker, the principal majority party leader, now acquired the right to nominate his party's representatives on the mighty Rules Committee, subject to ratification by the caucus.
Furthermore, the Democratic members of the House Ways and Means Committee lost the power to determine committee assignments for their party.
Democratic committee assignments would now be in the hands of an executive committee of the caucus, a re-styled Steering and Policy Committee chaired by the Speaker.
The Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970, the sub committee bill of rights and seniority reform all helped to break the power of  committee chairmen in the House of Representatives while other changes, including public and recorded voting, plus new rules decreeing open committee meetings, except in special circumstances, had the effect of making the House more open and accessible than it had ever been before.
Parallel procedural changes occurred at the same time in the Senate, but other factors were at work there too.
By the early 1970s the Senate was no longer controlled by an oligarchy.
The norms of good legislative behaviour had lost the potency they once had, as former Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield said on his retirement in 1976: The democratization of the Senate proceeded further after Mansfield left.
It became even more individualistic and displayed few signs of the closely knit and hierarchically organized structure of the previous era.
The balance of power shifted sharply in favour of rank-and-file members; deference towards seniors and courtesy towards all of one's colleagues became less common, and specialization was no longer essential.
The norm of institutional patriotism lost its force with senators no longer speaking as if a seat in the Senate was the very height of their ambition
The increasing irrelevance of legislative norms, the disappearance of the inner club and the triumph of individualism in the Senate are partly accounted for by the decline of the influence of the South in the chamber, although changing leadership styles have also had an effect.
Lyndon Johnson led the Democrats in the Senate when the club was at its height in the 1950s; however, his all-encompassing, domineering style contrasted sharply with that of later leaders.
Mansfield, Robert Byrd, Howard Baker and Robert Dole have adopted lower profile leadership styles and accepted that junior colleagues should be allowed to play a full part in the proceedings of the Senate
The further extension of democracy in Congress and a strengthening of the legislature in relation to the executive followed the rapid growth in congressional staff in the 1970s.
In a complex modem society, information and expertise are major political resources.
If committee chairmen have a monopoly over such resources their colleagues will be badly disadvantaged.
Similarly the executive will almost certainly have superior access to these resources when  compared to the legislature.
Deficiencies in information and expertise can, however, be overcome by the employment of staff.
Individual members can be strengthened by the acquisition of personal and committee staff, whereas the legislature as a whole can, by employing its own bureaucracy, better compete with the vast bureaucracy of the executive branch.
Congress has always been better staffed than its counterparts  elsewhere in the world and by 1979 it had a total staff of 23,056.
In other words, there were approximately 43 members of staff for every national legislator divided between personal, committee, leadership and support agency staff.
The number of personal staff per member increased in the House from 9 in 1967 to 16 in 1979 and from 17 to 35 in the Senate during the same period.
Committee staff in 1965 numbered 571 in the House and 509 in the Senate, whereas by 1979 there were 1,909 such staff in the House and 1,269 in the Senate.
The staff in congressional support agencies working for members of congress grew from approximately 1,514 in 1965 to approximately 2790 in 1979.
Not all the consequences of this explosion of congressional staff have been beneficial.
There are, for instance, adverse implications for democracy — in some situations the bureaucrats rather than the elected officials are likely to be found taking decisions.
The proliferation of staff has also damaged collegial relationships in Congress.
Inevitably there is less face-to-face contact between members and communication must often take place via staff.
Nevertheless, the large and rapid growth in staff assistance has undoubtedly made Congress not only more democratic internally, but also more formidable to the chief executive.
CAMPAIGNING FOR CONGRESS
Individualism in Congress arising from internal factors has been reinforced by external change, most notably in electoral campaigns.
Congressional elections have, in the last twenty years, become increasingly personal.
Success turns on the ability of candidates, first, to attract financial contributions as tokens of personal support; second, to construct an effective personal organization; and, third, to establish a good personal relationship with the voters.
The costs of electioneering rose sharply in the 1970s.
Between 1967 and 1980 the Consumer Price Index rose by 67 per cent, whereas  during the same period campaign expenditures for House elections rose by 163 per cent and by 150 per cent for elections to the Senate.
The total cost of congressional elections in 1980 was $210.6 million and the overwhelming proportion of that amount was raised through personal rather than institutional means.
In the House only 6 per cent of election funds were raised by the parties, whereas 66 per cent came via individual contributions and 28 per cent through political action committees, i.e. organizations that make contributions on an individual basis.
In the Senate in the same year 9 per cent of funding came through the parties, 62 per cent from individual contributions and 19 per cent through political action committees.
Closer examination of these figures show that the proportion of party funds tends to be higher for Republicans than for Democrats, but it is clear that parties in general contribute only relatively small amounts to Congressional election funds.
Consequently, parties have little by way of financial sanctions to bring against undisciplined members of congress.
State and local parties have also become significantly less important as campaign organizations for Congressional elections.
Candidates must now set up personal machines manned by workers attracted to them by their individual qualities and stands on the issues with little or no reference to party loyalty.
Parties, moreover, have lost some of their functions to television.
Voters depend much less on the cues and guidance given them by party workers and rely instead on television.
Voting decisions tend to be shaped by perceptions derived from television coverage of campaigns.
Political commercials might not be as persuasive as is commonly thought, but there are few doubts as to the importance of candidate appearances on ‘free’ news broadcasts.
Television is, of course, a relentlessly personalizing medium.
Candidates are required to sell themselves to the voters not so much on the strength of their stands on the issues as on their personal qualities.
A candidate's ability to project an image of an agreeable and concerned legislator who will carefully protect and advance the interests of his  constituents is crucial.
Close attention to constituent needs has always been an indispensable condition for success in elections to the US congress, but in the 1970s it assumed a new significance.
Members of congress increasingly came to believe that they could insulate themselves against electoral defeat by assiduous attention to constituency casework.
In an increasingly complex world and confronted by a vast impersonal federal bureaucracy Americans have more and more tended to turn to their Representative or Senator for help with important electoral pay-offs for legislators responsive to these needs.
In the words of one  congressman, ‘A near idiot who has competent casework can stay in congress as long as he wants, while a genius who flubs it can be bounced very quickly.’
Incumbent members of Congress have always been difficult to defeat and too much may have been made of the advantages of incumbency in the modern legislature.
What is of greater significance for our analysis is the heavily personal nature of campaigning for today's congress.
Members now believe that their success at the polls depends, ultimately, almost entirely on their own efforts.
They must raise the large amounts of money needed themselves; recruit an effective personal staff; perform adequately before the TV cameras and maintain a satisfactory personal service for constituents.
Given these conditions of campaigning it is not surprising that when they get to Washington legislators are even more inclined towards individualistic behaviour than before, and even less responsive to the appeals of party leaders and presidents.
By the middle of the 1970s a markedly different, and, according to some observers at least, much improved congress had come into being.
It was less passive and more assertive, determined to hold on to the powers it had reclaimed from the executive in both foreign and domestic policy.
This new Congress was more democratic in its structure with committee chairmen in the House no longer all-powerful barons and the Senate no longer controlled by an oligarchy.
A career in congress had now become more meaningful with openings for committee or sub-committee chairmanships widespread.
The national legislature was also now more representative and accessible and in closer touch with the world outside.
 In addition it was a more professional institution aided in the work of government by an expert staff and impressive resources.
There were, however, drawbacks in this new congress, particularly as viewed from the White House.
Congressional reassertion from that end of Pennsylvania Avenue became belligerent bloody-mindedness, and congressional reform had created an amorphous and leaderless legislature.
As a former aide to president Johnson told Paul Light in early 1979: From the president's perspective Congress had become impossibly formless in structure.
There were no effective leaders with whom he  could deal and, at this point, Congressional parties were of little help to a chief executive trying to meet his responsibility to govern.
The Congressional reformers had hoped that, by modifying the seniority system, strengthening the party caucuses and other changes, parties would be made more viable, but their efforts were offset by other developments, most notably in the realm of campaigning.
The exercise of presidential power is never easy, but Richard Nixon's successors in the 1970s faced especially difficult problems.
In contrast to the boundless optimism of the 1960s the country was still recovering from the traumas of Vietnam and Watergate and undergo-ing a crisis of confidence in both political leaders and institutions.
The office of president had been discredited and the balance of power in the political system had shifted in favour of a revived and even more inchoate congress.
In addition, the massive increase in the price of oil 1973 — 74 precipitated a period of recession with double-digit inflation, high unemployment, falling industrial output and collapsing world trade.
All of these factors taken together helped to bring about a national sense of economic and political malaise.
Yet, if Ford and Carter were, to a significant extent, in the age of the ‘post-imperial’ presidency victims of circumstances beyond their control, their failures were also due, in part, to inadequacies in their approaches to the problems of presidential leadership.
GERALD FORD: MAN OF CONGRESS
The accession of Gerald Ford to the presidency in 1974 was a relief for many Americans.
Watergate and other traumas could now be put behind them and in place of the paranoid, embittered and beleaguered Richard Nixon there was now a decent and agreeable man in the White House who just might be able to heal America's wounds and restore faith in the political system.
Nixon had gone to war with Congress, but there was reason to believe that the new president's relationship with the legislature would be more amicable and constructive.
Ford, after all, had, until very recently, been a member of Congress.
He had served twenty-four years in the US House of Representatives, including nine as Minority Leader of the Republicans, and it was Ford's popularity on both sides of the aisle that had brought him to the presidency.
When Spiro Agnew had been forced to resign in 1973, President Nixon would have preferred to appoint as vice-president the renegade  Democrat, John Connally.
Nixon's advisers impressed upon him that such a controversial figure could not be confirmed by an overwhelmingly Democratic congress.
Ford, on the other hand, was one of Congress's own as well as an uncontroversial and innocuous figure acceptable even to Democrats.
When he eventually succeeded Nixon, Ford immediately made reassuring noises to his former colleagues in the legislature.
There was no question of his denying the legitimacy of the role of Congress as Nixon had done.
Ford signalled his intention to treat legislators as allies rather than adversaries.
He assured congress, ‘I do not want a honeymoon with you.
I want a good marriage.
As President I intend to listen.’
His relationship with Congress, Ford said, would be marked by ‘communication, conciliation, compromise and cooperation’.
Notwithstanding these comforting words, Gerald Ford never succeeded in establishing a productive relationship with the legislative branch.
According to Thomas Cronin: As Cronin and others suggest, Ford was constantly rebuffed and disappointed by Congress; his positive achievements in both foreign and domestic policy were few and in any history of presidential congressional relations he is likely to be best remembered for the most extensive use of the negative power of the veto in modern times.
Overall, the presidency of Gerald Ford was not a success.
He proved incapable of imposing his leadership on the political system and he failed to bring about significant public policy change.
by no means can Ford's failure be wholly attributed to his personal inadequacies.
The success or failure of any president is dependent upon circumstantial variables such as the mood of the country, the size of the chief executive's electoral mandate and the constellation of party forces in Congress.
In some respects the popular mood was, initially, rather favourable to Ford; Gallup recorded 71 per cent approval of his presidency.
To set against that, however, Ford entered office at a moment when confidence in political leaders had collapsed catastrophically and when the anti-authority tradition embedded in the American political culture had resurfaced.
Ford did not possess an  electoral mandate of his own at all and in both houses of congress the Republicans were in the minority by large margins — in the Senate there were 56 Democrats and 42 Republicans whereas in the House there were 242 Democrats and 192 Republicans.
Within a short period, Ford's already weak position worsened.
His standing in the public opinion polls plummeted as a result of his pardon of Nixon, and the 1974 congressional elections led to further decimation of Republican party representation — the Democrats gaining 49 seats in the House and 4 in the Senate.
Given these crushing disadvantages and a term of less than two and a half years, it is perhaps not surprising that Ford's presidency was a failure.
As a member of his staff not unreasonably put it: Ford's own reflections several years after he left the White House are also pertinent to an understanding of the difficulties he faced whilst in office.
Writing in 1980, Ford bemoaned the fact that ‘the presidency does not operate effectively’ and went on to identify two principal areas of difficulty — the Congress and the bureaucracy.
In regard to the latter, Ford deplored ‘the inability of the White House to maintain control over the large federal bureaucracy.
There is nothing more frustrating for a President to issue an order to a Cabinet officer, and then find that, when the order gets out in the field, it is totally mutilated.’
The former president noted that the relationship between the legislature and the executive was no longer what it had been: ‘Immediately after World War II the presidency was at a peak; the Congress was very responsive, especially in foreign policy.
Today a President really does not have the kind of clout with the Congress that he had thirty years ago, even in matters that affect national security.’
Ford suggested that three developments had brought about this weakening of the president's position.
First, Congress lacked leaders of consequence and influence like Sam Rayburn, Lyndon Johnson and Everett Dirksen.
Second, Congressional reform had made matters worse; it had ‘really messed up the way the Congress effectively works.
You could run down a list of things that have been done under the title of reform, and they all look good, but the net result is that the Congress has really lost its capability to respond.’
The third factor  pinpointed by Ford was the decline in party responsibility, ‘The parties today are really more or less impotent, and if you do not have party responsibility, the system does not work.’
Ford's survey of the new and more difficult circumstances for chief executives in the late twentieth century was very much to the point.
Controlling the bureaucracy poses problems for all presidents and Ford was undeniably correct in arguing that presidents had been deprived of the sort of ‘clout’ they once had in matters of national security.
The new congress did lack consequential leaders and congressional reform and the further weakening of political parties had brought about a variety of undesirable developments.
These considerations, however, do not fully account for the failure of Ford's presidency.
Some commentators have found his leadership badly wanting.
Richard Reeves, for instance, is quite savagely critical, presenting Ford as a rather vain, ignorant and vacuous man with no attachment to goals or principles, but a great talent for ingratiation.
Ford, according to Reeves, had built a career, become a congressional leader and eventually reached the White House not on the strength of any real ability, but because of his extraordinary skill at making himself acceptable to others.
He succeeded, in other words, ‘by finding and being the least objectionable alternative’.
On the other hand, Ford possessed few of the qualities required of a real leader: ‘conditioned not to offend,[he]did not know how to inspire, persuade or force people to go any place.
He did not have the skills and when he tried to imitate them, as he did in pushing the WIN program, all he could offer was a parody of leadership.’
The above rather uncharitable analysis probably takes insufficient account of the deep affection that Ford evidently inspired amongst hard-headed and intelligent congressional colleagues.
Nevertheless, Reeves' view is broadly confirmed by Barbara Kellerman's revealing case study of Ford's efforts to obtain a tax cut from congress.
On taking office in August 1974, Ford declared that his first priority would be to deal with the ailing American economy.
Shortly afterwards he identified inflation as, ‘Public Enemy Number One’ and urged a tax increase upon congress as a way of damping down consumer spending.
It swiftly became apparent that congress would not go along with such an increase, especially after the big Democratic gains in the 1974 elections.
By late December, however, the president had, in any case, reversed his position and now took the view that rather than a tax increase a tax cut was required to stimulate the economy.
This remarkable volte face did little for the president's public reputation, was the cause of much scathing comment in the media  and, not surprisingly, a poll revealed that 86 per cent of Americans, ‘had no confidence in the ability of the President to manage the economy’.
At the beginning of 1975, Ford sought a tax cut of $16 billion from congress, but once again the portents for approval were not good.
Conservatives worried about the budget deficit implications of the proposed cut while the many liberals in congress were convinced that the cut did not go far enough.
President Ford threw himself into an extensive programme of consultation with members of congress on behalf of his new policy, but his performance in this acid test of presidential leadership was unimpressive.
His earlier complete reversal of his position had done little for his credibility and now as he went after a tax cut his touch was decidedly uncertain.
The real point at issue between the president and the big Democratic majority in congress was the size of the tax cut, but Ford showed weakness by revealing, at an early stage, a willingness to give ground on size while insisting that the most important requirement was that the legislature should act quickly.
This was to avoid the difficult and genuinely contentious question and to focus instead on a secondary matter.
As Kellerman says, Eventually, faced by a less than resolute and tactically naive president, congress agreed a tax-cutting package of nearly $7 billion more than Ford had requested.
For a few days the president agonized over whether to exercise his veto, but, in the end reluctantly signed what was now a Congressional rather than a presidential bill.
This lack-lustre performance by Ford, at the beginning of his presidency, in the most crucial area of domestic policy-making, set the tone for his administration.
It revealed a chief executive who lacked a clear sense of direction, who compromised too early and too readily, and was insufficiently determined in pursuit of his objectives.
Ford was unwilling to apply such sanctions as were available to him, and ‘showed no proclivity for arm twisting, or for that matter for doing anything that was likely to incur the wrath or even displeasure of another.’
All in all President Ford faced many disadvantages, but he  also appears to have lacked the mettle, the tactical know-how, the commitment to goals and the persuasive skills required for effective presidential leadership.
JIMMY CARTER: AN OUTSIDER IN THE WHITE HOUSE
Jimmy Carter's presidency, like that of Gerald Ford, began on an optimistic note with commentators deriving satisfaction from the fact that for the first time for eight years president and Congress would be in the hands of the same party.
One journalist went so far as to assert, ‘Carter should have little trouble with Congress’, while Professor Ross Baker noted that ‘the basic elements are in place for a highly satisfactory relationship between Carter and Congress…there is no reason to forecast discord between the White House and Capitol Hill.
Indeed, should serious strife occur, it would imply an extraordinary erosion of some very auspicious omens.’
These rosy expectations were not, however, to be fulfilled and even allowing for a degree of misfortune, Carter's record of achievement as president was slim.
Like his predecessor, Carter never really mastered ‘that maze of personalities and institutions called the government of the United States’, and did not accomplish significant public policy change.
Jimmy Carter's status as an outsider is central to an understanding of his career in national politics.
It was crucial to his remarkable success in winning the nomination of his party; without that asset it is most unlikely that he would have secured his narrow victory over Gerald Ford, but it was his insistence on remaining an outsider in spirit that limited his accomplishments in office.
As the 1976 national elections approached the Democrats were still smarting from the humiliations of 1972 when a badly divided party had nominated George McGovern and seen him overwhelmed by a landslide victory for Richard Nixon.
Democratic leaders were anxious to avoid a repetition of the damaging splits of 1972; they hoped to nominate a candidate acceptable to all the major elements in the party.
The ability of party leaders to manipulate the nomination process had been substantially undercut, however, by party reform.
Nominating procedures were now more open and participatory than they had ever been before.
Rules changes had transformed the Democratic National Convention into a body much more representative of minorities and the rank-and-file.
And, most important of all, the number of states  using primary elections to select delegates to the  convention had risen from 17 in 1968 to 29 in 1976, with the number of votes cast by delegates chosen or bound by primaries increasing from 37.5 per cent to 72.6 per cent.
In these new circumstances of ‘open parties’ and ‘participatory politics’it became possible for outsiders to seize nominations irrespective of the wishes of party leaders, and Jimmy Carter proved to be just such a candidate.
A former governor of Georgia with no national reputation to speak of and, unlike other candidates, unencumbered by office at the time, Carter began his campaign in December 1974, spending the next two years criss-crossing the country seeking name familiarity and the approbation of local and state party officials.
by vigorous and confident campaigning Carter first succeeded in the Iowa caucuses and followed this by winning the New Hampshire primary of his party.
On the strength of this scanty victory (23,000 votes, i.e. 28 per cent of the total number cast) this largely unknown candidate was now treated by the media as ‘the front runner’ and ‘the man to beat’, allowing him to gather the momentum that finally brought him the Democratic nomination.
Carter's success in obtaining the nomination rested on three strengths: first, a long, energetic and assiduous campaign aided by media hype; second, his position as a centrist candidate able to unite the liberal and conservative wings of the party; third, his position as a Washington outsider untainted by the current collapse of confidence in political leaders.
In the general election campaign Carter continued to harp on the need to clear up the ‘mess’ in Washington, constantly re-echoing the theme of his acceptance speech: ‘We want to have faith again!
We want to be proud again!
We just want the truth again….
We can have an American government that's turned away from scandal and corruption and official cynicism and is once again as decent and competent as our people.’
Given the widespread feelings of disillusionment abroad in 1976, Carter's strategy of offering himself as a new broom was electorally well judged, but if he impressed the voters, his relentless and sanctimonious moralizing irritated and alienated legislators whose support he would eventually need.
When the 1976 election returns were in, Jimmy Carter was found to have won a narrow victory over Gerald Ford.
The latter had the  important advantage of incumbency, but, as we have seen, was handicapped by a poor record as president and had stumbled badly during the campaign; nevertheless he ran Carter close — 49 to 51 per cent in the popular vote and 240 — 297 in the Electoral College.
As a result of the congressional elections meanwhile, the Democrats retained their crushing margin of superiority, returning 292 candidates in the House (as against 143 Republicans) and in the Senate finishing up with 62 seats (compared with 38 for the Republicans).
These majorities in the legislature were only marginally less favourable to the president than those enjoyed by Lyndon Johnson after the 1964 election.
However, while Johnson's coat-tails had carried in a sizeable number of members of congress this was not true of Carter who, in fact, ran behind no less than 270 successful Democratic candidates for the House.
The circumstantial variables that prevailed when Carter held office were mixed with some favouring the president and others not.
Ford had had a measure of success in restoring confidence, but the national mood remained generally pessimistic and unresponsive to political leadership.
‘The historical moment is confused, uncertain, unpredict-able.
The enthusiastic liberal solutions of a decade ago seem to have failed; the rise of passionate single-issue politics, the decline of party loyalty and the new brittleness that resists compromises make the tasks of leadership more difficult.’
Carter had done his best in his campaign to capitalize on this negative mood, yet the margin of his success at the polls had been small.
The chief executive's position vis à vis congress was, at first sight, far better than that of most other modern presidents.
In contrast to the plight of every Republican incumbent, both the House and Senate were held by the president's party, and by big majorities at that.
Other Democratic presidents, Harry Truman and John Kennedy, had been less well favoured in terms of congressional support and had been much troubled by the deep divisions in the party between northern liberals and southern conservatives.
Carter, on the other hand, not only had big majorities, but was a centrist ideologically — a self-proclaimed fiscal conservative who was also a liberal on civil rights, the environment and education, making it possible for him to straddle the historical division in the Democratic party.
Nevertheless, when it came to seeking allies in Congress, Carter's position was much weakened, first, by the fact that so few members had any reason to be grateful to the president for their election and, second, because he had so conspicuously run against the existing political order which included, of course, Congress.
The demanding business of running for the presidency had shown Carter to be an exceptionally energetic, ambitious and intelligent politician and it was to be expected that he would want to be an activist in the White House — a president who left his mark and fulfilled the commitments he had entered into during the campaign.
In fact Carter's performance in office fell far short of his and other people's expectations.
The formulation and implementation of a national energy policy was the first priority of the new president in domestic politics, and, as he saw it, some sort of test both of the governability of the United States and of his exercise of leadership, ‘Our decision about energy will test the character of the American people and the ability of the President and the Congress to govern this nation.’
An energy policy was, however, not surprisingly not quickly agreed; it passed only after a long and bitter struggle that extended through most of Carter's term of office and the package of measures finally agreed was inevitably different and weaker than the one the White House had originally requested.
If the development of an energy policy was a test of presidential leadership, it was not one that Jimmy Carter passed with distinction.
To the chagrin of congressional leaders, his policy proposals were prepared in secret without consultation with them.
In general, the attitude of the administration towards congress was disdainful and unsympathetic.
The president's lobbying on behalf of his programme was uneven and spasmodic.
He had begun by characterizing the struggle for an energy policy as the ‘moral equivalent of war’, but then, for long periods, his enthusiasm for this cause appeared to wane while his proposals floundered in the legislative maze.
Incredible though it seems for such an intelligent man, Carter's principal error at the beginning was to assume that once the underlying rationale of his energy programme had been explained to, and absorbed by the public, opposition would melt away.
The crassness of this assumption was forcibly put to the president by the speaker, Tip O'Neill, following the former's televised address to the nation on the energy problem on 18 April 1977.
According to O'Neill: Given this remarkable posture it is not surprising that Carter's record of policy-making in other fields was unimpressive.
Thus, in the key area of economic policy, despite an occasional victory, Carter achieved little.
Tax reform had been a major campaign commitment in 1976, but four years later very little progress had been made on this matter.
Similarly, few of the president's counter-inflation measures became law and, indeed, the inflation rate rose to 18.2 per cent during his tenure.
As the Congressional Quarterly commented in 1980, ‘on the economic front the administration has little to crow about.
Most of the programs Carter proposed either were never passed or were drastically rewritten by Congress.’
Major reform of the welfare system was one of Carter's most important objectives, but that too fell by the wayside.
Likewise, after a long and acrimonious struggle with congress the president's plan for containing hospital costs was defeated.
The introduction of a national health care system had been a major plank in Carter's programme in 1976, but his proposals failed to become law.
As the president himself said later, ‘The fight for equitable health care was one of my major efforts and one of my great disappointments.’
In the realm of foreign policy, Carter had two notable successes, the negotiation and ratification of the Panama Canal treaties and the negotiation of the  Egyptian -Israeli Peace Treaty.
On the other hand, his presidency, in its last year, was crippled by the Iran hostage crisis.
Carter also suffered a devastating setback when the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union made necessary the withdrawal of SALT II from the Senate, a treaty that had been the centrepiece of his defence policy.
Obviously these latter disasters were largely outside the President's control, but the generally poor state of his relations with congress was not inevitable.
Carter himself, however, has been reluctant to accept that his record in dealing with congress was particularly bad.
In 1980, for instance, he claimed, ‘There's not been a president in modern history, including Franklin Delano Roosevelt and including Lyndon Baines Johnson, who has a better record of support from the Democratic Congress than has Jimmy Carter.’
In his memoirs, Carter is more restrained, but even there he makes much of Congressional Quarterly presidential support scores to support his claim that he ‘did reasonably well in (his) overall relationship with  congress’.
It is true that his average support score during his presidency was 76 per cent(Johnson's was 83 per cent , and no figures are available for Roosevelt), but such scores are of only limited value as a measure of a president's relationship with the legislature.
Presidential support scores are compiled by calculating the number of times members of Congress vote in a way preferred by the president, even though he may not have proposed the measure in question.
There is no attempt to weight the votes — a vote on whether the marigold should be the national flower counts as much as a vote on an arms limitation treaty.
These scores also combine Congress's support for the president's proposals with the president's support for bills and resolutions emanating from Capitol Hill not sponsored by him.
Presidential support scores are so inadequate and so subject to misinterpretation by students and others (including presidents!) that it is time for Congressional Quarterly to consider abandoning them.
President Carter, in his 1976 campaign, referred to the ‘present disharmony and total separation’ between president and congress and pledged to remedy the situation.
In the long run he learned some hard lessons and improved his grasp of what good executive legislative relations require in the American pluralist system.
Nevertheless, taking his presidency as a whole, harmony between the two branches was not realized and many important goals remained unfulfilled.
In attempting to understand why yet another presidency in the 1970s failed, it is necessary first to return to some of the earlier analyses.
Carter, like Ford before him, was handicapped by the circumstances of the time-conditions that were particularly unfavourable to the exercise of presidential leadership.
In the summer of 1979, well before the Iran hostage crisis, Carter's approval rating, as measured by an ABC-Harris poll, had slumped to 25 per cent and in commenting on the crisis of national leadership Lance Morrow wrote: This is to state in moderately colourful terms some of the points raised in previous pages and also addressed by Jimmy Carter himself in his memoirs: It is difficult to quarrel with the main thrust of Carter's observations, although indiscipline within the Democratic party was hardly a new development.
It is also the case that the president's unfalteringly outsider style of leadership tended to make worse an already difficult predicament.
It is difficult to think of any twentieth-century president who was a more complete outsider.
That role made possible his nomination; he was elected as an outsider and, by his own admission, he never ceased being one whilst in office.
‘We came to Washington as outsiders and never appreciably changed that status.’
Carter was an outsider to an extent even greater than he was prepared to admit.
He was not just antithetical to the way national politics had developed in the United States in the 1970s, he was totally out of sympathy with the very foundations of the political system.
His occasional genuflections in the direction of the Constitution, in his memoirs and elsewhere, are not to be taken seriously.
The separation of powers, one of the two central principles upon which the Constitution is based, was for Carter a flaw that prevented presidents from governing rationally in the best interests of the nation at large.
Outwardly Carter was more polite towards Congress than Nixon had been, but he shared the latter's contempt for the legislature and was no less shocked by its disorderly, undisciplined ways and its vulnerability to special interests.
President Carter's background and philosophy of life made him ill suited to the demands of presidential government.
It was not just that he was unversed in Washington mores; he was also a deeply religious man with a highly developed moral sense.
Moralists are, by definition, inclined to deal in absolutes and to be uncomfortable with pragmatic accommodation, but political leadership in the United States requires bargaining skills and, ‘calls for actions such as compromise, renunciation, face saving of oneself, which are morally ambiguous or even downright immoral to people with morally rigorous standards.
Before entering Georgia politics Carter had been an engineer in the navy, but that did not provide very suitable preparation for his political career.
As William Pfaff has argued, engineers and scientists typically assume that, given the requisite amount of research and application of the relevant expertise, objective answers to particular problems are possible.
Agreement on solutions will follow, provided that the channels of communication are working properly.
Carter, accordingly, seemed to believe that if he studied the energy problem in sufficient detail and drew on the views of the appropriate experts his administration could develop an adequate policy.
Once the policy had been formulated, its acceptance by the American people would turn on communication, on whether the president and his staff were  sufficiently adept as communicators.
However, scientific problem-solving and public policy-making are not the same thing, and Carter as a policy-maker was ‘a scientific man searching for certitude in an area of human experience, that of political conflict, which lacks mathematical or material certitude.’
Politicians rarely deal in objective answers; in the real world of politics, they are often obliged to steer a course between incompatible interests; they are required to bargain and accommodate and must always settle for less than ideal policies.
Jimmy Carter's limited experience in politics had not given him adequate preparation for the demands of the White House.
He had served in the Georgia legislature and been elected governor of the state in 1970.
As governor, Carter had to deal with a one-party, part-time legislature quite unlike that found in larger, more populous states, to say nothing of the United States Congress.
As Speaker O'Neill forcibly pointed out to the newly elected President Carter, tactics that had worked in the relatively sedate politics of Georgia were unlikely to be effective in Washington.
The inappropriateness of Carter's background and experience was reflected in the insensitivity of his handling of Congress.
In September 1976, he evinced some good intentions: In practice, however, Carter failed miserably to live up to these sentiments.
At the beginning there was the ritual flurry of meetings and  consultations with members of Congress, but these soon tapered off and there was, in any case, little real meeting of minds.
Very quickly, complaints about the president and his staff began surfacing on Capitol Hill.
Members complained that their phone calls were not being answered; federal appointments were being made without reference to them; legislative proposals were emerging without prior consultation with congress and senior presidential staff were accused of not treating Congressional leaders with sufficient respect.
Congressmen and senators did not like being bombarded with an estimated eighty legislative proposals in Carter's first year and were unim-pressed by his resistance to compromise, his aversion to bargaining and his threats to go over their heads directly to the people.
The president's efforts, early in 1977, to eliminate arbitrarily some public works water projects dear to the hearts and the constituent interests of members caused uproar in Congress and legislators were heavily critical of the quality of Carter's legislative liaison operation.
An effective legislative liaison office had, since the days of President Eisenhower, been seen as essential to a good relationship between the chief executive and Congress.
Typically, Carter appointed as head of legislative liaison Frank Moore, a Georgia associate and professional management specialist with no experience of Washington politics.
The staff recruited were young and inexperienced and the structure of the operation was seriously flawed.
As outsiders, Carter and his staff seem not to have fully appreciated that, Of the other presidents who had served in his lifetime, Carter admired Harry Truman the most — an unlikely choice in a number of respects.
In fact Carter's style as president was probably closest to that of Woodrow Wilson who, as it happens, died a few months before Carter was born in 1924.
Both were deeply religious, highly  intelligent, moralistic southerners who went to the White House as amateurs and outsiders.
Carter was a president in the progressive mould that Wilson had helped to fashion; both were self-righteous and sanctimonious in their  attitudes towards politics as commonly practised; they shared a powerful distaste for special interests and demonstrated a comparable insensitivity in dealing with the legislature.
Neither seemed willing to accept that lobbying on behalf of special interests and trading in order to build coalitions in congress are both necessary and entirely legitimate activities in the context of the American pluralist system.
Wilson, unlike Carter, sufficiently over-came his lack of sympathy with the system to compile an impressive record of legislative  achievement early in his first term.
Carter's saving grace was that he was probably one of the most honest, honourable and hard-working presidents to have graced the White House.
Unfortunately, virtue alone is not enough; possibly Carter would have been more successful and might have won a second term if he had been less intense, more flexible, less immersed in the detail of government and a little more willing to dissemble occasionally.
His presidency, in other words, might have ended less ingloriously if he had been more like his successor in the White House.
A PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE FOR THE 1980s
Europe and the United States observers were scathing about the lack of qualifications for the presidency of both Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan.
In comparing the procedures for electing party leaders in Britain and the United States, Anthony King concluded that, ‘recent developments in the American presidential nominating system have greatly increased the probability that men will be nominated who lack relevant experience and have no evident aptitude for one of the most demanding and powerful jobs on earth’.
i The discussion in the previous chapter provides a degree of support for such a conclusion.
In 1976, earlier changes in the nominating process had made it possible for an outsider to seize the Democratic nomination, but in office, Carter's lack of ‘relevant experience’ and ‘aptitude’had proven to be a serious liability.
The example of Ronald Reagan is, however notably less supportive of King's thesis.
PRESIDENTS AND PRIME MINISTERS
In his discussion, King brings out major differences between the selection of party leaders in the UK as compared to the US.
Both Margaret Thatcher and James Callaghan, for instance, had worked their way up through the structure of party; they had spent a lifetime in politics and had served long periods of apprenticeship, first as backbenchers and then as junior ministers, ministers and shadow cabinet members.
They had then been elected as party leaders by their colleagues, by fellow members of the political élite with no popular  participation.
In other words, party leaders in the UK are selected from experienced national politicians whose competence and party loyalty have been regularly tried and tested, who have been subject to a careful process of peer review and have come to the fore not as a result of their electoral appeal, but because they have won the confidence of the people with whom they would have to work in government.
Carter and Reagan, by contrast, had come into politics relatively late in life, had no prior experience of national politics and had become party leaders after long and expensive electoral campaigns.
These were leaders who had not been subject to party screening or peer review and had succeeded almost exclusively on the strength of their appeal to mass electorates.
Both candidates for the presidency in 1980 were short of relevant experience and had shown no great aptitude for working with other political leaders.
One problem with King's line of argument is that several modern presidents, apparently long on relevant experience, have not done well in the White House.
Richard Nixon had been in the House and the Senate and vice-president for eight years, but ultimately he proved to be a disastrous president.
His successor displayed no great competence for the job even though he had been a member of the House for twenty-four years and had successfully met the demands of peer review to achieve major leadership posts in the legislature.
Franklin Roosevelt, generally agreed to have been the most successful of modern presidents, had, by contrast, no national legislative experience and had held only very junior office in Woodrow Wilson's administration.
There are also difficulties arising from cross national comparison in these matters.
By British standards Ronald Reagan was  appallingly ill-qualified for a party leadership position.
We can hypothesize that he would not have survived the rigorous processes of peer review in the British system and it is exceedingly difficult to envisage him negotiating the hazards of leading a party from the dispatch box in the House of Commons.
Similarly, it is inconceivably that Mrs Thatcher would have succeeded in the American context.
A leadership style that has made her a remarkably effective prime minister would be a crippling liability in the White House.
This brings us back to some of the points raised at the beginning of this book.
The political systems and the political cultures of the United States and the United Kingdom are very different and the demands and expectations that face British prime ministers are quite unlike those encountered by American presidents.
Presidents are tribunes of the people in a way that prime ministers are not, and British general elections — notwithstanding some recent increase in the importance of the personality of leaders — continue to be overwhelmingly party-based affairs.
Politics in the US is less structured, less ideological and less dominated by party.
Presidential elections turn on the personality of the candidate to a far greater extent; those who seek the presidency must communicate effectively with a mass electorate at a personal level.
It was Franklin Roosevelt's extraordinary skill as a communicator that made possible his legendary success; he campaigned superbly, handled the press deftly and brilliantly exploited the new medium of radio.
Half a century later, given the further demise of party and the massive presence of television in American life, it is even more imperative that presidents should be good communicators.
THE GREAT COMMUNICATOR IN TRAINING
In considering Ronald Reagan's pre-political experience, therefore, we must take account of his long training in the communications industry.
As Laurence Barrett puts it, ‘by the time he got to the White House he had spent more than fifty years using every communications medium save Morse code and smoke signals.
He had been a successful stage actor in high school and college, a pioneer in the young radio business, a journeyman screen performer, a television personality, a speechmaker to audiences of all description, author of a syndicated newspaper column.’
The starting place for Reagan was the small midwestern town of Tampico, Illinois, where he was born on 6  February 1911.
His father was of Irish descent and his mother's parents were of Scottish and English origin.
The Reagan family, while not impoverished, was of modest circumstances.
‘Our family didn't exactly come from the wrong side of the tracks, but we were certainly always within sound of the train whistles.’
Reagan's formative years were spent in a series of small Illinois towns — Tampico, Monmouth, Dixon and finally Eureka where he attended the small church-related Eureka College from 1928 until 1932.
Like many students the world over, the young Reagan was not overly committed to academic work; both at school and college his grades were mediocre and his principal preoccupations were sport and drama.
On graduation Reagan opted for a career in show business.
At first he believed Hollywood and Broadway to be out of reach, and decided to try his luck in another branch of the industry, radio, centred in nearby Chicago.
Initially rebuffed by NBC in Chicago, Reagan found work as a sports announcer for a small radio station in Davenport, Iowa.
Moving on to a major NBC station WHO in Des Moines, Iowa, Reagan, during the next four years, acquired considerable broadcasting experience.
‘I did possibly forty-five football games from virtually every major press box in the Midwest.
I covered by telegraph more than six hundred big league baseball games, plus swimming meets (and) track meets….
Those were wonderful days.
I was one of a profession just becoming popular and common — the visualiser for the armchair quarterback.’
Reagan was obviously rather good at his job, rapidly becoming something of a celebrity in Des Moines and, ‘one of the best sportscasters in his region’.
In June 1937 Reagan took up residence in Hollywood and quickly established himself as a promising film actor, performing in eight films in his first eleven months and going on to make more than fifty films altogether.
Few of these were memorable, but in a fiercely competitive profession Reagan was a notable success even if never a star of the front rank.
By the age of thirty he had proven himself in the communications industry.
He had emerged as a consistent and capable performer and had acquired a range of skills essential to his later success in politics.
Ronald Reagan's serious interest in politics dates at least as far back as his early days in Hollywood and, given the later doubts about his intelligence, it is interesting to note that, at this stage, he hardly lived up to the image of an empty-headed film actor.
Indeed, according to Lawrence Williams, who appeared in five films with him, Reagan in those days was a surprisingly intense, well-informed and thoughtful man to be avoided in the studio canteen by colleagues likely to be somewhat less interested in the world about them.
On the set Reagan was liable to use the long, slow periods that abound in film making as opportunities to   Admittedly not everyone was impressed.
Some found Reagan to be rather shallow; the formidable Bette Davis, for instance, marked him down initially as a ‘silly boy’.
Other sources confirm that he was a voracious reader and Jane Wyman, a notably intelligent actress, not only married Reagan, but is also said to have ‘admired his mind’.
Similarly, June Allyson, ‘thought it was wonderful that Ronnie was vitally interested in everything and was always studying a new subject…he showed the same thoroughness in matters other than politics and he was…always studying’.
In this phase of his life, at least, Reagan was regarded by many who knew him well, not as an ‘amiable dunce’ but as a lively, intelligent man with an obsessive interest in politics.
It was this interest in politics no doubt that caused Reagan to become an active trade unionist.
He joined the Screen Actors Guild in 1937 and was appointed to its board in 1941.
After World War II industrial relations in Hollywood were in a turmoil and the SAG became  Reagan became president of the SAG in 1947 and was subsequently elected to a further five one-year terms as president.
It was also during this period that his political ideas began moving sharply to the right.
In the past he had been, by his own admission, ‘a near-hopeless hemophilic liberal’ and a devout follower of Franklin Roosevelt, but by the late forties he was rabidly anti-communist, an FBI informer and a Republican in all but name.
Reagan remained a major trade union leader in the film industry until 1960 and there can be no doubt that during this phase of his career he gained much experience relevant to his later career in politics.
As Oliver Wright has remarked, ‘to be the president of a trade union is to gain an apprenticeship in negotiating, to develop an instinct for when to ‘hang tough’ and when to ‘cut a deal’.’
By the middle of the 1950s Reagan was no longer in great demand as a film actor, but new opportunities became available to him in television.
In 1954 he was contracted to host a television programme, General Electric Theater (he also acted in some of the plays presented).
This popular prime-time, Sunday evening CBS network show provided Reagan for eight years with ‘a vehicle for becoming familiar to a whole new generation of young people who would later vote for him.
They were the first television generation, being introduced to the man who would use television better than any other politician.’
No less important to Reagan's political future was the other part of his contract with General Electric which required him to spend 16 weeks a year touring GE plants around the country.
The purpose of these tours was to boost morale and encourage a sense of identity amongst the company's 700,000 employees.
Over a period of eight years, Reagan visited 135 plants in more than forty states, met 250,000 people and stood before a microphone for an estimated 250,000 minutes.
On some days he delivered as many as fourteen speeches and on one occasion shook 2,000 hands in a receiving line.
According to Reagan himself, when he appeared on the factory floor  In assessing Reagan's qualifications for the presidency his experience before he ran for elective office cannot be discounted.
There is more to his background than the dismissive labels of ‘retired film actor and professional after-dinner speaker’ would suggest.
Although he was paid a handsome salary by GE to be a morale booster and public relations spokesman, it should not be assumed that his role was merely that of a glad hander, a retired film star capitalizing on a fading reputation.
There was something of that to be sure, but his tours were soon extended to include speeches to more discriminating audiences.
Speaking before business, civic and other groups Reagan was an impressive performer according to the former newspaperman who organized his early GE tours.
On one occasion when Reagan, at  short notice, addressed an audience of between three and four thousand teachers  As a GE spokesman Reagan had the opportunity to hone his oratorical skills, and develop his political ideas.
He spoke increasingly less about Hollywood and more on the political issues of the day.
In particular, he began to harp on the conservative themes that would provide the centrepiece of his campaigns for the governorship of California and which he would eventually carry with him into the White House.
By 1966 when Reagan ran for the governorship of California, he was not simply a novice with little to offer except an agreeable manner and celebrity status; he was rather a widely experienced and articulate political animal with many of the attributes necessary for success in American politics in the late twentieth century.
Since his youth he had been perceived as a likeable man.
Physically attractive and possessed of considerable personal charm, his demeanour was self-effacing, gracious and polite.
In maturity Reagan was undoubtedly politically ambitious, but continued to project an unassuming and non-threatening image and to display the great political gift of making others feel comfortable in his presence.
As a young radio announcer he had shown a talent for communication that he had subsequently built on during his years in Hollywood and it was also during this period that politics became a consuming interest.
The GE phase of Reagan's working life was to act as a bridge between his declining film career and public life.
In his relentless meeting, greeting and speaking on behalf of GE he gained experience directly relevant to politics.
At the same time he moved into television, thereby acquiring knowledge and understanding of a medium destined to become of supreme importance in American political life.
Presidents must be good communicators and, in the modern age, television is the medium of communication.
Reagan's aptitude in front of the television camera, his ability to project a positive image, has been a priceless political asset.
And such talents, it should be emphasized, are necessary not just for campaigning, but also for  governing; presidents unable to master television are unlikely to be effective in office.
As Joseph Califano observes, ‘Television is critical to the president, initially in his attempt to reach office, then in the exercise of his power as he presents to the people his policies, programs and interpretations of events.’
Reagan's command of television was a vital qualification for the presidency in the 1980s.
RUNNING FOR GOVERNOR
Ronald Reagan has made a career out of being underestimated and the same mistake was made in 1980 when his critics wrote him off as an amiable, ex-movie actor ill-qualified for the presidency.
In fact, by then Reagan had served a valuable apprenticeship in the communications industry and had completed two terms as governor of the most populous state in the union with a GNP comparable to that of Canada and exceeded by only six national economies.
California in the 1960s was not only a big and important state, it was also a political forcing ground where developments were occurring in microcosm that would eventually take on national dimensions.
It is possible, for instance, to see in California at this time the beginnings of a national swing to the right.
It was here that disenchantment with the liberalism of the New Deal and its successor the Great Society began setting in, which eventually culminated in the landslide victories for Ronald Reagan in the 1980s.
More specifically it was in southern California, Reagan's home territory, that political issues began to surface that were to play a major part in national politics in the years that followed.
It was in this region that James Wilson writing in 1967, found evidence of a new conservative political culture amongst the children of those who had emigrated to southern California from small mainly midwestern towns.
In this culture, business values were preeminent and, ‘business values are here meant in the widest sense — a desire for expansion and growth, a high rate of increase in property values, finding and developing mass markets, and keeping capital moving and labor productive’.
Such people believed that the principal purpose of government was not to protect gains already made, but to facilitate further growth in the economy.
These largely working class conservatives wanted ‘limited government, personal responsibility, ‘basic’ education, a resurgence of patriotism, an end to ‘chiselling’, and a more restrained Supreme Court'.
It was by appealing to such sentiments that Goldwater had defeated the liberal Nelson Rockefeller in the crucial Republican primary in California in 1964.
In the general election, Lyndon Johnson took the state by a landslide, but his majorities were notably slim in southern counties.
Goldwater, in any case, fought an inept campaign and was ruthlessly outmanoeuvred, but, in retrospect, his candidacy was a harbinger of the future.
One of the bright spots in that black year for Republicans was an inspired television address on behalf of Goldwater by a rising star in the party and one of southern California's own, Ronald Reagan.
Goldwater's enemies presented the Senator as a harsh, uncompromising ideologue, a threatening figure likely to abolish social security and to get the United States involved in a nuclear war.
Reagan, by contrast, appeared to be a much more reassuring figure.
His views were no less radical than those of Goldwater, but his mild, self-deprecating smiling manner was, in the long run, to make him a far more formidable advocate of conservatism.
Reagan's campaign for governor in 1966 was a response to the same shifts in public opinion that Goldwater had attempted to exploit, but it was not only in political attitudes that southern California was ahead of its time.
By the end of the 1970s, the increasing weakness of American political parties had become the subject of comment and concern across the country.
In California there was nothing new about enfeebled parties.
Progressive reforms dating from the beginning of the twentieth century such as the presidential preference primary, the direct primary, cross filing, the initiative and the referendum had long since destroyed party machines and undermined the power of party bosses.
Party leaders in California possessed few of the powers available to their counterparts elsewhere.
The early introduction of merit systems deprived them of patronage, and nominations for public office were outside their control.
In the absence of significant parties, nominations could be won by charismatic self-starters who could project an acceptable image.
Successful candidates were those who were good at selling themselves personally to the voters.
The politics of party, in other words, was replaced by a politics of personality in California many years before such trends became widespread elsewhere.
According to Lou Cannon, ‘Most importantly the near destruction of the parties had created a star system of personality politics long before television had arrived.
At a time when most other states favored candidates who had advanced through the ranks California selected office holders on the basis of real or supposed charismatic appeal.’
Well before such things had become commonplace elsewhere, campaigning for office in California  was a personal rather than a party matter, depending on the candidate's ability to attract funds, to put together a personal following and to master the available means of communication.
By the 1960s parties in California had relatively little to do with campaigning: The state of California in the 1960s thus offered a singularly appropriate training ground for an aspirant national politician.
It was here that attitudes and issues began emerging that were later to assume national significance and where parties were being transformed into empty shells, the eventual fate of parties at both the national and state levels.
It was the chronic condition of parties in the state that allowed Reagan, despite his novice status, to obtain the Republican nomination for governor in 1966.
He entered the primary at the urging of a group of wealthy backers including Holmes Tuttle a car dealer, Henry Salvatori and Cy Rubell, both oil magnates, and Stuart Spencer, a political consultant.
As Cannon comments, ‘in no other populous state of the nation at this time could a handful of millionaires and a political consultant so early have decided on their own to run an aging actor for governor without consulting party leaders.’
Reagan's opponent in the primary was George Christopher, a Republican moderate and former mayor of San Francisco.
In their campaign speeches, the Republican candidates refrained from attacking one another and Reagan concentrated his fire on the incumbent Democratic governor, Pat Brown.
Reagan hammered away at themes which he had been developing for some years and which would be wheeled out every time he ran for public office.
Government had become too big and too expensive.
Taxes were too high and the state bureaucracy too large and too much power had become centralized in Washington at the expense of the states.
A Reagan administration in Sacramento, the voters were led to believe, would do something about the rising tide of crime in the state, would take people off welfare and put them to work and, above all else, it would get the government off the people's back.
Reagan throughout his political career had more than his share of good fortune and he had the luck to begin by facing a weak and inept opponent; Christopher was ill equipped to meet the demands of  appearing on television, and, according to one authority, he ‘conduc-ted one of the most ineffective campaigns in California's political history’.
Reagan, on the other hand, soon showed himself to be an effective campaigner who projected an attractive and reassuring image on television.
When the votes were counted the novice in politics had routed the experienced professional, taking 65 per cent of the votes cast and amassing large majorities in southern counties in particular.
In the general election, the incumbent, Brown had two strategies, neither of which seems to have worked very well.
Reagan was presented first of all as a hopelessly unqualified candidate and, secondly, as an extremist of the Goldwater stripe.
As a way of emphasizing the first charge, TV commercials were run, including clips from old Reagan films embellished with slogans such as‘Vote for a real governor, not an acting one’, or ‘Over the years Ronald Reagan has played many roles.
This year he wants to play governor.
Are you willing to pay the price of admission?’
To offset the charge of inexperience, Reagan's sponsors arranged for him to be briefed on state issues by specialist advisers.
They also sought to turn the criticism on its head by offering Reagan as a ‘citizen’ candidate running against a seasoned and, by implication, tainted professional politician.
The attempt to portray Reagan as an extremist, meanwhile, failed in the face of his likeability.
‘He did not come across to people as an inflexible ideologue, but as a sensible sincere man with a good sense of humor and a friendly interest in other people's concerns.
In short, he had a warm, human quality that defied the stereotype of the evangelist or extremist set on an unrealistic return to the past.’
The strength of Reagan's appeal in combination with the rightwards shift in the thinking of many Californians was reflected in a landslide victory for Reagan and successes for other Republican candidates in 1966.
Reagan secured 57.5 per cent of the vote as compared to Brown's 42.5 per cent and the Republicans gained seven seats in the State Assembly plus six seats in the Senate.
GOVERNOR OF CALIFORNIA
When Reagan first became governor the worst fears of those who had questioned his suitability as a candidate for public office appeared to be confirmed.
He went to Sacramento with no readymade staff; he had no understanding of how the political system worked and had no strategy for translating the goals he had espoused during the campaign  into a programme of practical proposals.
Two and a half months after his inauguration, journalists asked the governor what his legislative programme was and were stunned by his reply.
Glancing towards his staff' he said, ‘I could take some coaching from the sidelines, if anyone can recall my legislative program.’
Reagan, however, throughout his life displayed a quality that other, more egotistical or less self-assured political leaders have lacked: the ability to learn from past errors.
Gradually, he discovered what he needed to do in order to meet his responsibilities as governor.
The Reagan forces claimed that the previous administration, anxious to avoid a tax increase in an election year, had left behind a sizeable budgetary deficit thereby forcing on the new governor the need to introduce legislation substantially raising some forms of taxation.
The obvious contradiction that this created between Reagan as campaigner and as governor was partly offset by compensatory reductions in property taxes.
In addition, Reagan introduced a number of economies in line with his pledge at his inauguration ‘to squeeze and cut and trim until we reduce the cost of government’.
An across the board budgetary cut of 10 per cent for all state departments was proposed; there was to be a freeze on the hiring of state employees, a large reduction in the staffing of state mental hospitals and various other cost cutting measures.
Within a short time, however, most of Reagan's proposed changes had foundered either because they were inherently unworkable or because of his failure to consult with those who would have to approve the necessary changes in the law, i.e. members of the state legislature.
As a reform candidate Reagan had made clear his low view of legislators, presenting them as the tools of special interests, primarily concerned with feathering their own nests.
According to one moderate Republican leader in the Assembly, ‘The first year or two of Reagan's administration in California was a disaster.
The Reagan crowd ran against the government and against Sacramento and they came in on their white horses and railed against the Legislature.
The people around the Governor didn't like us.
In their view, we were the hacks he'd run against and we didn't like being treated that way.’
During his first term, Reagan and his staff eventually developed a better appreciation of the merits and responsibilities of legislators and came to realize that the making of policy required the executive branch to ‘bargain with, cajole and otherwise court the legislative branch’.
Reagan's capacity to learn from past mistakes and to make the adjustments necessary to achieve at least part of his declared purpose can be seen in his second term and in the passage of welfare  reform legislation.
This was the most impressive accomplishment of the Reagan administration and was made possible by a modus vivendi worked out between the Governor and Robert Moretti, the Democratic Speaker of the Assembly.
After long and difficult negotiations a ‘classical political compromise’ was reached which allowed Reagan to meet one of his main objectives, a narrowing of the criteria for receiving welfare.
In return the Democrats obtained improved benefits for those who remained on welfare.
Even Reagan's critics concede that welfare reform was a significant achievement, but more than that it was an important turning point in the education of a chief executive.
Reagan absorbed many other valuable lessons from his experience as governor of California and it is possible to see in this period the evolution of a style of executive leadership that he was to take with him to the White House.
In Sacramento he began as an unworldly ideologue, but went on to become a pragmatist.
He came to understand the need to settle for half a loaf rather than nothing at all; he recognized the need to negotiate with legislators while he also discovered how to bring them into line by going over their heads to the people.
He experimented with a chairman of the board management style, delegating details to others without surrendering overall control.
Most importantly of all, he acquired an understanding of the realities of decision making without losing his sense of direction, or his commitment to a set of simple conservative beliefs.
This is attested to by Moretti, a key Reagan opponent in Californian politics, yet one who came to realize that, despite his failings, the governor also had some strengths.
Just how successful Reagan was as governor of California has, not surprisingly, been the subject of dispute, with his supporters exaggerating his achievements and his opponents giving him less than his due.
The beginning of his first term was unimpressive, but, after an initial learning period, the governor and his staff improved their performance considerably.
Even a harsh Reagan critic like Garry Wills concedes that he governed California, ‘competently, popularly, routinely’.
It goes without saying that his accomplishments did not  match his campaign rhetoric — taxes were increased, the state budget more than doubled while he was in office and there were no significant reductions in the size of the state workforce yet his ‘record in Sacramento is generally regarded as favorable’.
And this, it should be remembered, was in a large important state with many difficult problems and a notoriously fractious and undisciplined legislature that, for six of Reagan's eight years, was under Democratic control.
We must surely conclude that when Reagan ran for national office in 1980 he was hardly the amateur in politics that his critics suggested.
To be sure, he lacked the background appropriate to a british prime minister and even in American terms his credentials were open to question.
He had not worked his way up through his party in the manner of a Franklin Roosevelt and unlike, say, Nixon, Kennedy, Johnson and Ford he was totally without legislative experience.
Yet for all that, Reagan was not without experience highly relevant to the demands of executive leadership in the 1980s.
Natural aptitude and a career in radio, film and television had helped him become an outstanding communicator — a strength chat not only made him a formidable campaigner, but also equipped him for the business of government in the television age.
Then, in Sacramento, he underwent a lengthy apprenticeship in the art of executive leadership and was, ultimately, reasonably successful as the governor of a major state.
THE ROAD TO THE WHITE HOUSE
Anyone elected governor of a major state immediately becomes, in the eyes of the media, a possible candidate for the presidency and Reagan, in 1966, was no exception.
Even as governor-elect he was obliged to disavow any interest in the 1968 nomination; however, it seems that his wealthy backers from the beginning had the White House in mind.
Henry Salvatori, Goldwater's finance chairman in California, came to realize that Reagan had strengths that the Arizona senator lacked.
No less conservative, Reagan presented his ideas far more skilfully, ‘People criticize Ronnie for having no political experience.
But he has a great image, a way to get through to people.
Look at the Goldwater experience.
His philosophy was sound, but he didn't articulate it moderately.
The Governor has a similar philosophy but he can express his thought.’
Reagan's half-hearted bid for the Republican nomination in 1968 had little hope of success against an extremely well-prepared Richard  Nixon.
Despite his humbling defeat for the governorship of California in 1962, the latter had made a remarkable comeback.
He had campaigned assiduously for Goldwater in 1964 and worked hard for Republican candidates in the difficult year of 1966.
Consequently, Reagan, in looking for support from conservative Republicans, ran up against the reality that many of those same people felt bound by obligations to Nixon, who duly won the nomination on the first ballot at the Convention.
When it came to 1972, Reagan had no chance of wresting the nomination from a well-entrenched incumbent, but in 1976 Watergate and President Ford's misplaced decision to pardon Nixon raised the possibility of an incumbent president being deprived of the nomination.
In the end, Reagan came very close to defeating Ford, obtaining more popular votes in the primaries than the president and only losing on the ballot for the nomination in the Convention by 111 votes out of a total cast of 2,257.
Reagan's strong showing against Ford is accounted for by several factors; the continued reaction to Watergate compounded by the pardon of Nixon; campaign finance reforms that had improved the chances of outsider candidates; new apportionment rules in the Republican convention that strengthened the Sunbelt states of the South, the Southwest and the West and, finally, the increase in the number of primary elections.
‘The spread of presidential primaries…favoured Reagan.
Party leaders became less influential in the choice of delegates.
Instead, an effective campaigner like Reagan could make a direct, popular appeal, and actually outpoll the President in these contests.’
By a slim margin Ford defeated Reagan in the 1976 Convention, but the former governor had run surprisingly well and the conservative wing of the Republican party had substantially strengthened its position.
The ground was well prepared for another bid for the nomination by Reagan in 1980.
On the other hand, many commentators believed that it would be disastrous for the Republicans to nominate Reagan encumbered as he supposedly was by three disadvantages: his lack of experience of national office, his age and, most importantly, his identification with the extreme right of his party.
According to the conventional wisdom, successful presidential candidates had to come from the middle of the political spectrum.
Parties committed electoral suicide by nominating extremist candidates like George McGovern and Barry Goldwater.
Reagan, however, was no Goldwater.
The former's adherence to conservatism was tempered by an easy and agreeable manner that disarmed public, politicians and the press alike.
Furthermore, he did not make the  mistake of insisting on ideological purity during his nomination campaign; there was to be no ‘extremism in the defence of liberty is no vice’ or ‘moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue’rhetoric from Reagan and no abrasive assaults on the liberals in the party as had occurred in 1964.
Reagan possessed other strengths as well.
Prior to the 1970s, delegates to national conventions had been selected by a mixed system of state conventions, caucus gatherings and primary elections; under these arrangements nominations remained largely under the control of party leaders with a limited degree of popular participation.
But now there was in place a plebiscitary system; the total number of presidential primaries had risen sharply, thereby substantially increasing popular participation in the selection of delegates and further weakening the power of party leaders.
Under this system  These were conditions tailormade for a candidate like Reagan.
After the completion of his second term as governor in 1975, he was unemployed and had the opportunity to trail back and forth across the country making contact with local and state party leaders, raising financial support and fashioning a personal organization.
The increase in the number of primary elections and other assaults on the power of parties during the 1970s were enthusiastically welcomed by the Reagan forces.
Over many years in California they had acquired the know-how required to exploit a weak party situation.
They were years ahead of their rivals in the use of political consultants, computers, direct mailing systems and polling techniques.
And in Reagan they had an exceptionally gifted and professional campaigner.
He was, however, prone to gaffes, and doubts were repeatedly raised about how much substance lay behind the impressive campaign style.
Reagan had a better grasp of the complexities of politics than sometimes appeared to be the case, but regrettable though it may be, primary elections turn on superficial impressions.
In introducing primaries at the turn of the century, progressive reformers had naively thought that such arrangements would allow an enlightened electorate to make considered, responsible choices.
Unfortunately, despite advances in education such hopes  have not been realized.
Like the citizens of other advanced industrial countries, Americans in general have only a slight and spasmodic interest in politics.
Most voters have neither the time nor the inclination to scrutinize position papers or to weigh judiciously the qualities of those who offer themselves in primary elections.
Such contests have always been likely to degenerate into personality or ‘beauty contests’.
Ronald Reagan was well equipped to succeed in such situations.
By 1980 he had a well-established track record as a campaigner.
He was physically attractive and highly photogenic; on the television screen he came across as a man of warmth and charm.
It should be added that Reagan was not all style and no substance.
He was not an intellectual; he made constant use of anecdotal evidence and some of his views bordered on the banal, but one of his great strengths has always been his resolute attachment to a few simple conservative themes.
This gave his candidacy a clear sense of direction that others have lacked.
Voters may not have agreed with Reagan, but they had no doubt where he stood.
Television, which had become a major force in American political life, was essential to Reagan's success in obtaining the Republican nomination in 1980.
Whereas in the past voters had looked to parties and party workers to help them make sense of politics, this function was now largely given up to television news broadcasts.
The major network evening news programmes were being watched by an estimated 50 — 60 million people and 65 per cent of people were said to be getting 100 per cent of their news from such programmes.
Primary elections are very popular with the television industry; they make for good visuals, and they allow producers to focus ad infinitum on personalities rather than getting bogged down in the boring complexities of issues.
Such contests permit ‘horse race journalism’; they make possible endless speculation about who the front runner is, who the dark horses are and who has fallen at what fence, all of which helps to make television news broadcasts more exciting and enter-taining than they would otherwise be.
Reagan stormed through the Republican primaries in 1980 winning 29 of the 34 held, aided by an experienced professional staff fully aware of the significance of television and of the need to shape a campaign around the exigencies of those responsible for television news.
Many of the latter looked on politics and politicians with a jaundiced eye and held in their hands the means of destroying ill-prepared, amateurish candidates.
A good staff manoeuvred to avoid such disasters, attempting to manipulate the presentation of news.
This required taking such steps as arranging the candidate's  schedule so as to ensure that he arrived at campaign stops in time for coverage on the nightly news.
It was essential that the candidate's appearances were carefully staged so that he came across in a favourable light before the television cameras.
Reagan's staff had the advantage of a candidate responsive to direction, a man who knew about the importance of good camera angles and could read from a teleprompter with the effortless ease of a trained, accomplished communicator.
The importance of television in US politics, it should be stressed, lies not so much in the paid media of political advertising as in the free media of news broadcasts.
Much money is spent on political commercials, but students of the subject are sceptical about their benefit — a viewpoint reinforced in 1980 by the experience of John Connally, one of Reagan's most feared rivals for the nomination.
Ostensibly, Connally was a very strong candidate.
With a handsome face and flowing silver hair, his appearance was eminently statesmanlike; he was a former Governor of Texas and, unlike Reagan, he had had experience of national politics, as Nixon's Secretary of the Treasury.
Notwithstanding these advantages and the expenditure of close to $13m mainly on television advertising, Connally won no primaries and had only one delegate committed to him at the convention.
Success in primary elections, it would seem, cannot simply be bought by political commercials however cunningly they are crafted.
What is of far greater importance is that the candidate should come across well on TV news programmes and should constantly be seen in favourable settings making crisp and newsworthy remarks.
It is often argued that television has contributed much to the trivialization of politics in general and to the nomination process in particular.
The network news programmes provide only a ‘headline service’, nothing can be dealt with in any depth and everything that is covered has to be supported by good televisuals.
Primary elections have always person-alized politics to an excessive degree, but television has made the situation much worse.
The arrangements for selecting presidential candidates that produced Ronald Reagan in 1980 have been the subject of much criticism.
Anthony King, David Broder and others have deplored the fact that candidates for the presidency are no longer subject to adequate party screening and peer review procedures.
The Economist a few years ago conceded that the new system had some merits, but carried with it some important disadvantages; on the positive side   The nomination process is certainly very costly, yet trying to engage the attention of a mass electorate scattered across a huge and diverse country is bound to be expensive.
In spite of its pernicious effects television has made possible a degree of political education and communication between politicians and voters that was not possible years ago.
The voting decisions of most Americans in the past will have been very uninformed.
Even the sight of a national candidate must have been a rare and unusual occasion.
Few voters could have obtained a real grasp of the issues at stake and hardly any would have been in a position to assess the leadership qualities of the candidates on offer.
Citizens in an earlier age got their voting cues from friends and relations, from newspapers and party workers and it is doubtful whether their decisions today are any less soundly based.
It is also possible to make too much of the argument that the present procedures produce candidates good at running for office but not qualified to run the country.
The processes of governing and campaigning are not unrelated and both require mastery of the principal means of communication in American life, television.
Once in office this sensitivity to the thinking of the people is an invaluable resource and the skills of self-presentation are not irrelevant to the task of government.
To be an effective leader, to get bureaucrats and legislators to do what he wants them to do a president must retain the support of the public and, in the modern age, that is hardly possible without consistent command of television.
THE 1980 GENERAL ELECTION
Reagan's victory in the 1980 General Election was of landslide proportions.
He won 81 per cent of the popular vote against 41  per cent for Jimmy Carter and in the Electoral College led by 489 to 49.
At the same election the Republicans gained twelve seats in the Senate and won control of that chamber for the first time in twenty-five years.
In elections to the House of Representatives the Republicans made a gain of 33 seats and managed to defeat four incumbent committee chairmen.
For Republicans this was a particularly rewarding set of results; in recent decades they had enjoyed considerable success in presidential elections, but the victories of Eisenhower and Nixon had not, with the fleeting exception of 1953 — 55, been flanked by success in Congressional elections.
However 1980, it seemed, just might represent a genuine national shift towards conservatism thereby providing the underpinning for a new alignment of electoral forces to replace the Democratic coalition founded by Franklin Roosevelt.
There are no simple explanations for complicated events like general elections, but we shall take as our starting point V. O. Key's learned view that elections are determined largely by retrospective considerations.
The 1980 election, in other words, is to be seen primarily as a referendum on Jimmy Carter's stewardship during the previous four years.
For most voters, evaluations of Carter's record turned primarily on economic matters.
For many years prior to 1976, foreign policy questions had headed Gallup polls as the most important issues in presidential campaigns, but all this had changed by 1980.
Economic issues had loomed large in the primaries and continued to be the most important concerns of voters in the General Election.
Unfortunately for Carter public perceptions of his record in economic affairs were overwhelmingly unfavourable whereas, by comparison, Reagan appeared to many voters to have something to offer in this key area.
In September 1980 when Gallup asked which of the three main candidates would best deal with ‘improving the economy’ 44 per cent said Reagan, 30 per cent Carter and 12 per cent Anderson; on ‘reducing inflation’the figures were 44 per cent for Reagan, Carter 29 per cent and Anderson 13 per cent.
When it came to the television debate between Carter and Reagan, the latter brilliantly exploited his advantage on economic questions by asking the voters to consider ‘Are you better off than you were four years ago?’
When the voters went to the polls, of those who believed they were worse off, 64 per cent voted for Reagan and 25 per cent for Carter.
Even among blue-collar workers, traditionally strong supporters of Democratic candidates, 62 per cent of those who thought they were worse off than four years previously voted for Reagan and 30 per cent for Carter.
In the field of foreign policy, Carter was also weak although less disastrously so.
He had the advantage of being seen as a man of peace, whereas Reagan made many voters nervous.
When asked which candidate would do a better job at ‘Keeping the United States out of war’, 50 per cent of those polled said Carter while 25 per cent opted for Ronald Reagan.
On the other hand, polls measuring public approval/ disapproval of Carter's handling of foreign policy generally were highly unfavourable.
When asked which candidate would do better in ‘strengthening national defence’, 55 per cent of those polled said Reagan as against 28 per cent for Carter.
On the matter of ‘Increasing respect for the United States overseas’, 42 per cent believed that Reagan would do the better job as compared to 31 per cent for Carter.
The question of international respect for the US was clearly at issue in the Iran hostage crisis, and over the long term this matter had a relentlessly negative effect on Carter's chances of re-election.
Initially his management of this crisis had met with high levels of popular approval, but as the conflict dragged on it became a damaging symbol of American weakness and presidential ineptitude with polls clearly revealing the public's dissatisfaction with Carter's performance.
Taken together, Carter's handling of economic affairs, the hostage crisis and foreign policy in general combined to give him ‘the lowest job approval ratings of any president since Gallup began taking these measurements in the 1940s’.
Ronald Reagan was not without handicaps and dissatisfaction with both of the party's standard bearers in this election was unusually widespread.
In the case of Reagan many had doubts about his age, his competence, his inexperience and his tendency towards extremism.
If elected he would be almost seventy as he took office; some spectacular gaffes during the campaign did not inspire confidence.
He described the Vietnam war as a ‘noble cause’, charged that Carter's economic policy had caused a ‘severe depression’ and raised doubts about the theory of evolution.
Reagan, furthermore, notwithstanding executive experience as a two-term governor of California, was totally without national political experience and was a complete novice in foreign affairs.
In addition, despite a disarmingly pleasant manner, Reagan was widely considered to harbour views that placed him outside the mainstream of American politics; there was a possibility that he might tamper with social security or lead his country into war.
This perception of Reagan as an ideologue had its beneficial side for ‘the strong beliefs that made many voters fearful of Reagan also attracted voters to him, since they suggested leadership and decis-iveness — qualities widely felt to be lacking in the Carter presidency’.
The issue of leadership was crucial in this-election; Carter came across to the voters as a decent man of high moral principles, sympathetic to the underprivileged and of moderate views, but he was not perceived as a strong positive leader.
In front of the all-seeing eye of the TV camera, he did not appear to have a firm grasp of America's problems or a clear understanding of where he wanted to go.
As Elizabeth Drew remarked, ‘Carter does not have a commanding presence, and his efforts to appear to take charge have flopped….
History, if it is fair, will probably say of Carter that he was able to get some things done but that he wasn't able to lead, that he wasn't able to get the confidence of the people.’
There were many reservations about Reagan, too, but these were offset by some notable strengths.
Reagan was perceived by many to possess the leadership qualities that his opponent lacked.
Gallup in September 1980 asked voters to indicate which of various descriptions best suited the two candidates and Reagan was placed well ahead of Carter on several leadership questions: ‘Has strong leadership qualities’, 65 per cent— 31 per cent ; ‘Decisive sure of himself, 69 per cent — 37 per cent ; ‘Has a well defined progam for moving the country ahead’, 53 per cent — 27 per cent ; ‘You know where he stands on the issues’, 54 per cent — 33 per cent .
In a rather confused, uncertain, period Reagan stood out as an upbeat, optimistic candidate who, despite his failings, had an easily understood programme and a clear sense of the direction in which he would take his country, if given the opportunity.
How is the 1980 election to be interpreted?
Did it represent a significant move to the right by the people of the United States presaging a deep rooted realignment of electoral forces favouring the Republican party?
Or was the 1980 result merely a personal victory for Reagan?
The Republicans drew comfort from the fact that trends of opinion had, for some time, been moving in their direction.
Disillusionment with the ‘big’ government philosophy of the New Deal and the Great Society had been growing during the 1970s — even Carter had been fairly conservative in domestic policy.
More and more Americans were coming to the conclusion that government itself was a problem — a belief that ‘clearly squares with established Republican doctrine and thus contributes positively to the fortunes of the GOP’.
To set against this trend, however, there was much evidence to support the view that the public continued to look to government for assistance.
Thus, by overwhelming margins voters, in 1980, believed that ‘too little, or about the right amount’ of public money was being spent on various problems: halting crime (94  per cent); drug addiction (92 per cent ); health (92 per cent ); education (89 per cent ).
The voters, in other words, had not moved solidly to the right, their position was one of ambivalence; they had become deeply sceptical about the role of government and yet they still expected government to aid them as they tried to meet the pressing problems of modern life.
With the benefit of hindsight it can be seen that the 1980 breakthrough for the Republicans did not herald a realignment.
To be sure, many core groups from the old Democratic coalition voted in large numbers for Reagan, including Catholics, Jews, southerners, blue-collar workers, union members, the poor and even a third of the unemployed.
However, despite holding on to the Senate for a total of six years and securing further landslides in the 1984 and 1988 presidential elections, the Republicans have not been able to bring about a real realignment — a fundamental reordering of political loyalties extending down through all levels of the political system.
The Democrats in the 1980s have continued to dominate congressional, gubernatorial and state legislative elections.
As a party, the Republicans, in electoral terms, remain weak below the presidential level and Reagan's victory in 1980 can now be seen as largely a personal rather than an ideological or party triumph.
By the end of the 1970s the American electorate was in a fluid, dealigned state with parties no longer able to provide the degree of structure that they had contributed in the past.
Parties, in many respects, were no longer taken seriously by the voters; many more people now disavowed parties altogether and declared themselves to be independents.
Few looked upon parties in a favourable light and majorities even of party identifiers were unable to Perceive any important differences between what the Republican and Democratic parties stood for.
Other evidence of the amorphous state of the electorate in 1980 was to be found in poll data revealing rapidly shifting tides of support for various candidates.
Thus, a survey in November 1979 showed that 69 per cent preferred Edward Kennedy as the Democratic candidate for the presidency as compared to 31 per cent for Jimmy Carter.
By early January 1980, 58 per cent preferred Carter while 42 per cent went for Kennedy and when, in the same poll Carter was matched with Ronald Reagan he outpolled the Californian 65 per cent— 35 per cent .
Another poll in July 1980 had Reagan leading Carter 55 per cent— 27 per cent and then in September public opinion swung back to Carter again giving him 44 per cent to Reagan's 40 per cent .
Finally, in the election itself Reagan led Carter by ten percentage points.
To add to these impressions of an electorate in a constant state  of flux there were other polls showing that many voters only decided at the last minute how to vote.
Gallup, for example, claimed that 37 per cent of voters made up their minds in the last week and 10 per cent decided on the day of the election.
The American electorate for much of 1980 was in an uncertain state of mind.
Parties no longer provided the signposts that citizens had earlier relied upon to guide them in their voting decisions.
Such situations favoured effective personal campaigners — candidates with the ability to master the available means of communication and to make favourable personal impressions.
Carter had been no mean personal campaigner himself in the past, but by 1980 his situation had changed fundamentally.
He was now encumbered with a record that the voters generally regarded in an unfavourable light.
He was personally held responsible for the failures of his economic stewardship.
Throughout the campaign he was deeply absorbed with the plight of the hostages in Teheran and when they were not released it was seen as a personal failure.
During the second half of his presidency, Carter's image on the television screen was unfavourable.
He came across as a weak, indecisive leader wracked by doubt and in danger of drowning in the complexities of the problems that faced him.
Reagan had no record to defend and had spent years perfecting the skills required to project an effective personal image.
Instead of gloom and despair, he offered optimism and reassurance.
In place of agonizing doubt and uncertainty, he appeared to have a clear sense of direction.
To voters who had lost their party moorings, who focused on political matters only spasmodically and relied on fleeting impressions derived from television, Ronald Reagan proved to have exceptional appeal.
He was in that sense truly a presidential candidate for the 1980s.
CHANGING THE TERMS OF DEBATE
Presidents of the United States rarely accomplish very much.
They enter office clutching sheaves of policy intentions, but the translation of those expressions of intent into realities is another matter.
The president has to operate within an inert political system.
one which is monumentally difficult to galvanize into action outside of crisis situations.
In the modern age he is expected to lead and the people look to him for solutions to their problems, but the chances of his being allowed to do what he needs to do are negligible.
This built-in tendency towards stalemate is accounted for in a number of ways.
For instance, embedded in the American political culture is an antipathy towards government in all its forms and an almost paranoid suspicion of leaders.
The constitutional framework reflects and sustains that political culture by providing an almost paralysed political system that sets one branch against another and hamstrings those who aspire to lead.
If a president is to break out of this situation, if he is to become a leader rather than a mere presider, he requires a reasonably united administrative branch, yet that minimum requirement is not easily come by.
The loyalty of cabinet members and other political appointees is likely to weaken in the face of intense cross pressures, and senior career officers in the bureaucracy, from the beginning, may not share the president's policy preferences.
Assuming that a president can overcome these difficulties sufficiently to establish some discipline within the executive branch, he must also obtain the agreement of congress to his legislative proposals.
But congress is not easily brought to order, it is a legislature with teeth and a fractured distribution of power well capable of preventing a president from governing.
In the 1970s the odds had lengthened against effective leadership from the White House; there had been a   succession of failed presidencies public confidence in political institutions had slumped disastrously and congress had become even more difficult to deal with.
In 1980, it seemed unlikely that the elderly Ronald Reagan, lacking in Washington experience and with an insubstantial mandate, would be able to impose his will and his policy preferences on the political system.
Few grounds for optimism in these matters could be derived from the analysis of Paul Light who argued in The President's Agenda that a chief executive's success in getting his domestic policy agenda accepted would depend on his command of internal and external resources.
The internal resources are time, information, expertise and energy, but they alone are insufficient; however skilled, resourceful and energetic a president and his staff may be, policy change will not occur without adequate external resources, in other words, political capital.
Capital is an amalgam of party support in Congress, public approval as expressed in public opinion polls, and the margin of the president's victory at the election.
The principal element in capital is party support for public approval, and presidential electoral success will count for little if the seats in Congress are not there.
Ronald Reagan's stock of capital as he began his presidency was comparatively low, as Table l shows.
By comparison with recent predecessors (apart from Richard Nixon in 1969), Reagan's situation as he embarked on the ‘honeymoon’ period of his first term was not especially favourable.
John Kennedy, despite a narrow popular vote margin, had large  majorities in both houses of the legislature and a high level of public approval.
Lyndon Johnson had massive support in all forms of political capital, and even Jimmy Carter had commenced  with big majorities in Congress and a level of popular approval far higher than Reagan's.
In early 1981, Reagan and his aides spoke confidently of his having received an impressive mandate at the recent elections, and many in Congress and the media seemed to find the argument convincing.
On closer inspection, however, that mandate appears to be distinctly fragile.
In the Electoral College, Reagan's victory had been of landslide proportions, but the popular vote told a different story.
In a three way contest almost as many people had voted against Reagan as for him and in only a few states, mainly in the South, had he performed significantly better than Gerald Ford in 1976.
Of those who voted for Reagan many did so without great enthusiasm and a ‘large’ if indeterminate, proportion of Reagan's support came from people who went to the polls to vote against President Carter'.
Reagan's party had won control of the Senate, which was most unusual for a Republican president, by 53 — 47 and this was an undeniably important material and psychological gain.
On the other hand, the margin of seats in the Senate was slim and in the House, despite an impressive surge by the Republicans, the Democrats were still ahead by 51 seats.
All in all, as Reagan prepared to take office the omens for a successful presidency did not look particularly good.
According to one authority, ‘Most close observers of the Washington scene and system saw Reagan as a media success who would be overwhelmed by the immense substantive and managerial demands of the presidency.’
Others anticipated that Reagan would ‘be a fairly passive president, a throwback to the conservative, pro-business quietism of Warren G. Harding and William Howard Taft’.
In the event, these gloomy prognostications proved to be unfounded.
Against the odds, Reagan and his staff were not overwhelmed by the demands of the office; indeed, they established sufficient mastery over the machinery of government to bring about major changes in the direction of public policy.
REAGANISM
In his first term Ronald Reagan was spectacularly successful in bringing about a fundamental change in the ‘terms of political debate’.
His principal objectives as expressed in the 1980 campaign, were to reduce the size and role of the government, to revive the economy and to strengthen the nation's defences.
In pursuit of these aims the president and his staff proposed bold innovations in economic policy, the introduction of which became their first priority.
For years before becoming president, Reagan had harped on conservative economic themes.
He had constantly called for reductions in the burdens of taxation on both corporations and individuals and regularly denounced the federal government for being too big, too meddlesome and too wasteful of the taxpayers' money.
As the 1980 election approached, advisers like Martin Anderson set about incorporating Reagan's idea into a coherent economic strategy.
The essentials of that strategy, of Reaganomics, were put together in an economic policy memorandum agreed seventeen months before Reagan took office.
This blueprint challenged the assumptions of Keynesian theory that had provided the basis of economic policy in the United States for close to half a century.
It had long been argued that the maintenance of a low level of unemployment should be the guiding principle of a government's economic policy.
According to the Keynesians, unemployment rose when demand was too low, but fortunately demand could be stimulated by lowering taxes or increasing public expenditure.
When full employment was reached and demand exceeded supply, inflation was likely to follow, but this could be counteracted by reducing demand so that it came back into line with supply.
Previous administrations had tried to manage the economy principally by ‘fine tuning’ demand.
Obsessed by the need to keep unemployment low they had, according to their conservative critics, pushed up levels of public expenditure and recklessly run up budget deficits without regard to inflation and the difficulties it created.
The Reaganites argued that the ‘stagflation’ of the 1970s demonstrated that there was no evidence of a trade-off between unemployment and inflation, and heaped scorn on policies aimed at managing demand or  artificially controlling wages and prices.
With the right policies they believed it was possible to reduce inflation without incurring excessive levels of unemployment — to keep prices down and to sustain economic growth at the same time.
Many of the economic advisers in the Reagan camp were influenced by the ‘supply side’ theory.
They argued that the Keynesian obsession with the demand side of the economy was misplaced; the real focus of attention should be the supply side.
Policy-makers should stop fretting about unemployment and the provision of welfare state safety nets and should concentrate on doing whatever was necessary to achieve inflation free economic growth.
This required, above all, substantial tax cuts to foster hard work, enterprise and saving.
Public expenditure must be savagely reduced, business had to be liberated from the web of state and federal regulations and stability brought about in the monetary system.
The capitalist system had to be unchained and the conditions created that would allow it to flourish.
Market forces should, as far as possible, reign supreme and welfare state arrangements should be minimized or eliminated altogether, except for those in dire need.
Reagan rarely used the term ‘supply side’ himself and in the long run shrank from the full implications of the theory.
Nevertheless, supply-side doctrine provided a theoretical underpinning for the main thrust of his economic strategy.
There were to be four principal elements to that strategy:(1) a substantial reduction in taxes;(2) heavy cuts in the rate of growth of public spending;(3) deregulation reform; and (4) the establishment of a sound monetary policy.
Before attempting to introduce the legislation this strategy required, the Reagan forces prepared the ground by taking unprecedented steps to ensure that those appointed to the new administration were fully committed to the president's aims.
ADMINISTRATIVE STRATEGY
Effective presidents, according to the criteria used in this book, are those who succeed in translating the proposals they have advanced on the campaign trail into policy action.
In trying to accomplish these ends, a president is dependent on the services of senior White House staff and the agencies that fall within the Executive Office of the President.
In the normal course of events, such agencies can be relied upon to pursue conscientiously the president's programme.
However, the loyalty of political appointees and career civil servants in the federal administration at large is much more open to question.
As Clinton Rossiter maintained, for some presidents the chief executive's most difficult task ‘is not to persuade Congress to support a policy  dear to his political heart, but to persuade the pertinent bureau or agency or mission, even when headed by men of his own choosing, to follow his direction faithfully and transform the shadow of the policy into the substance of a program’.
Conservative Republican presidents are especially vulnerable in this regard.
‘Big’ government is anathema to them, and bureaucrats are their natural enemies.
Senior career civil servants invariably identify with the Democratic party.
The dangers inherent in the situation had been brought home to senior figures in the Reagan camp who had served in the Nixon administration.
In his first term, Nixon had devoted relatively little attention to the selection of those who would be responsible for the administration of his programme.
Reasonably careful consideration was given to cabinet appointments, and appointments at the sub-cabinet level were also subject to vetting, but responsibility for selecting the remaining 2,000 political appointees was delegated to cabinet members.
Furthermore, President Nixon misguidedly instructed his cabinet to appoint on the basis of ability first and loyalty second.
The adverse consequences of such loose rein appointment procedures were not lost on one White House aide who served both Nixon and Reagan  During the transition the Reagan forces took a number of steps designed to deal with the sort of problems over appointments that Nixon had encountered.
The first appointments were made by Reagan himself.
His chief advisers were to be Edwin Meese, James Baker and Michael Deaver and Meese, as Counsellor to the President, took on the major responsibility for selecting and indoctrinating political appointees.
Meese was well qualified to be the keeper of the Reaganite grail.
He had been a friend and ally of the president for many years and had served as chief of staff when Reagan was governor of California.
Meese was also something of a hard-line conservative, ever alert to any dilution of the faith or any hint of  disloyalty to the president.
Meese was closely involved in the appointment of cabinet members and worked with Pendleton James, the White House personnel director, to ensure that not only sub-cabinet appointments but also the 2,000 lower level political positions went, as far as possible, to candidates who were both competent and ideologically sound.
It was quite unheard of for the White House to be so intimately involved in the appointment process so far down the administrative hierarchy.
Elaborate precautions were also taken to guard against the danger of senior members of the administration becoming, in Reagan's own words, ‘captives of the bureaus or special interests in the departments they are supposed to direct’.
Richard Nixon had been plagued by the phenomenon of political appointees ‘going native’, a process that began immediately with career civil servants initiating their newly appointed political superiors into the mores, values, policy preferences and interest group connections of the department.
In part to prevent such developments, the Reaganites established transition task forces comprised mainly of conservative ideologues who were commiss-ioned to scrutinize and prepare detailed reports on the workings of agencies and departments.
When these investigations were concluded, the task forces briefed cabinet members on their responsibilities, suggested where funding cuts might be made and which bureaus might be closed while also advising on the hiring, firing and movement of personnel.
Cabinet members and other senior administrators were also obliged to attend indoctrination sessions where major figures, from the president down, lectured them on the virtues of teamwork and exhorted them to remain faithful to the principles of Reaganism.
Economic policy was the core of Reagan's programme and especial care was taken to ensure that those primarily responsible for economic matters were fully conversant with and totally committed to the president's position.
There was to be no debate about which direction to take in economic policy; the essentials of supply-side theory were to be taken as given and the criteria for appointment to the major economic policy posts were to be, ‘competence, experience, and absolute, complete loyalty to Reagan's economic policies….
Every key player in the decision-making process was carefully chosen and fully indoctrinated.’
Some interesting reactions from a cabinet member on the receiving end of the doctrinal ministrations of Meese and other Reaganite hawks are to be found in the reflections of Terrell Bell, a Republican moderate and Secretary of Education in Reagan's first administration.
The Department of Education had been established by Jimmy Carter and during the 1980 campaign Reagan had declared his intention to abolish the department if elected.
Bell was appointed to preside over an abolition which, in the event, proved  impossible .
At the first meeting of the new cabinet, Bell was surprised and mildly irritated to be repeatedly told, first by Meese and then by the president, of the need for teamwork.
‘It seemed redundant to me to tell us we were ‘part of the president's team’.
We were his cabinet so this was obvious.’
This was a rather naïve reaction on the part of Bell; as the senior presidential advisers knew only too well, there is always a danger that cabinet members will develop a relationship with their department that takes precedence over their loyalty to the president and his programme.
Bell also took exception to the briefing provided by the task force assigned to his department.
‘My meeting with the transition team was a testy one.
I was not prepared to do much of the aggressive abolishing and slashing proposed in its reports.’
In addition, the secretary had grave difficulty in reaching agreement with the White House on senior appointments in his department.
Bell vigorously resisted the attempts by Meese and others to foist on him people he regarded as unqualified ideologues; he was convinced that movement conservatives wanted to infiltrate his department with appointees who shared their extreme views: ‘They wanted to be able to monitor deliberations about proposed actions and have early warning of what might be brewing in suspect agencies.
(The Education Department) was high on that list of departments.’
It is difficult not to sympathize with the frustrations of an obviously sincere cabinet member trying to remain loyal to the president while, at the same time, protecting the education service from the depre-dations of conservative extremists.
Bell, however, had the misfortune to be a moderate serving in a conservative administration and he was bound to be regarded with suspicion.
Looked at from a White House perspective, it is clear that if a president is to be effective in achieving his objectives he needs unity and discipline within the executive branch.
This is not easily accomplished in a vast and amorphous federal bureaucracy, but Meese and his colleagues were more successful than most presidential staffs in bringing it about.
Cohesion in the administration was also facilitated by a system of cabinet councils, introduced at the suggestion of Meese and a major feature of Reagan's administrative strategy in his first term.
Initially five cabinet councils were established; one on economic affairs, one on commerce and trade, one on human resources, one on natural  resources and the environment and finally, one on agriculture and food.
As their names suggest, these councils covered broad policy areas affecting several departments; they brought together senior White House staff with cabinet members at the highest level of decision-making.
This countered the tendency towards antagonism between presidential advisers and departmental secretaries that had weakened other administrations, and it also reduced the chances of cabinet members ‘going native’.
All cabinet council meetings took place in the west wing of the White House within a few feet of the Oval Office.
This enabled the president to attend a large number of these gatherings, thereby delivering on his promises to work closely with his cabinet in the formulation of policy.
The symbolic importance of cabinet members being regularly drawn into the White House ambit was stressed by one participant.
‘Just the act of having to leave their fiefdoms, get into a car, and be driven to the White House was a powerful reminder to every member of the cabinet that it was the president's business they were about, not theirs or their department's constituents.’
White House control was further strengthened by the staffing arrangements for cabinet councils.
Each council was staffed by a secretariat made up of one representative from each cabinet member with its work directed by an executive secretary from the staff of the Office of Policy Development within the White House.
This apparatus provided a ‘superb control and monitoring instrument’ allowing presidential advisers to keep a tight grip on the domestic policy agenda and to guard against any dilution or deviation.
DEREGULATION
The Reagan forces were also alert to the possibilities of using administrative discretion as a means of policy change.
They recognized that some of their objectives could be reached by administrative action without running the gauntlet of the legislative process.
Regulatory reform, for example, was a major item on Reagan's agenda.
In common with other supply-side enthusiasts, he was convinced that sundry federal agencies had put in place a web of unnecessarily restrictive regulations that distorted market forces and inhibited the spirit of free enterprise.
Carter had advocated deregulation, but he approached reform via legislation whereas his successor sought the same end primarily through administrative action.
Reagan, at the beginning of his first term, appointed Vice-President Bush as chairman of a Presidential Task Force on Regulatory Relief which was made up largely of cabinet members and staffed by the Office of Management and Budget.
Most of the actual work was done by staff rather than the high powered task force members.
Nevertheless, in April 1982 the OMB was able to claim that the size of The Federal Register listing regulations had been reduced by a third.
A few months later OMB also claimed that deregulation had brought about savings of $9 billion to $11 billion in once-only costs and 86 billion in annual recurring costs.
The deregulation effort eventually petered out, but the Reaganites continued to use administrative discretion in their efforts to lighten the burden of regulation on industry and business.
Cutting back on the staff of regulatory agencies was one ploy used, and, according to figures provided by one source, in eleven selected agencies there was an average 29 per cent decline in permanent staff positions during Reagan's first term; including falls of 53 per cent in the Federal Grain Inspection Service, 41 per cent in the Interstate Commerce Commission, 38 per cent in the Consumer Product Safety Commission, 32 per cent in the Federal Trade Commission and 21 per cent in the Environmental Protection Agency.
The work of regulatory agencies was also undermined by budget cuts and a concerted unwillingness to enforce existing regulations.
Thus, in Reagan's first term the overall budget of the EPA was cut by 35 per cent, there was a 62 per cent drop in enforcement actions against strip mine violations and a 50 per cent fall in hazardous waste prosecutions.
The Reagan administration weakened the enforcement of anti-trust laws and, where possible, held back from implementing in full civil rights and affirmative action legislation.
The decisions of bodies like the Occupational Safety and Health Administration tilted towards business and against labour and Reagan used the appointment power to bring about similar results at the National Labor Relations Board.
The percentage of decisions by the NLRB in unfair labour practice cases favouring employers increased sharply.
The Reagan example illustrates the advantages that a president may derive from an effective administrative strategy.
By carefully vetting and indoctrinating appointees, he can bring some order and direction to a mammoth, unruly bureaucracy and progress towards policy change can be made by administrative action.
On both counts, it would seem, the White House was unusually successful and this is important to an understanding of President Reagan's effectiveness.
If one strand of Reagan's economic strategy — deregulation — was pursued principally by administrative means, a second — the establishment of a sound monetary policy — was, in the main, beyond the executive branch's sphere of influence.
Monetary policy is, in fact, the responsibility of the Federal Reserve Board, an independent agency that may be influenced by the executive but is not subject to its direction.
The two remaining elements of Reaganomics — tax cutting and reductions in the rate of growth of public spending — would require the agreement of the US Congress.
AN ECONOMIC POLICY COUP
In a well-known biography of Franklin Roosevelt, it is asserted, that ‘the classic test of greatness in the White House has been the chief executive's capacity to lead Congress.’
This is hardly less true in the 1980s than it was in the 1930s.
To govern rather than merely preside, to bring about meaningful policy change as distinct from tinkering with the status quo, a president must establish a productive relationship with congress.
In other words, he needs a successful legislative strategy to place alongside his administrative strategy.
In the 1970s neither Nixon nor Ford nor Carter could be said to have passed the ‘classic test’.
Nixon had tried to govern without congress and Ford had been pathetically inconsequential; Carter, in his memoirs, claimed to have had a reasonably good relationship with the legislature, but this was not a widely shared view.
Ronald Reagan, on the other hand, stunned observers by his early success in getting the legislature to accept a fundamental reordering of national priorities.
At the end of the first session of the 97th Congress, Helen Dewar reported in the Washington Post : Even one of Reagan's severest critics, Tip O'Neill, the former Speaker of the House of Representatives, does not underestimate Reagan's early achievements: ‘(He) pushed through the greatest increase in defense spending in American history together with the greatest cutbacks in domestic programs and the largest tax cuts the country has  ever seen.’
The magnitude of these accomplishments should be fully recognized.
Irrespective of whether Reagan's economic policy was correct or not, or whether it achieved the objectives sought, the fact that the policy was put into place at all is remarkable in itself.
This provides a classic instance of a president taking on the legislature in the most important of policy areas and succeeding in imposing his will.
THE BUDGETARY PROCESS
The principal instrument for this economic policy coup was to be the budgetary process.
In the United Kingdom the legislature has effectively long since surrendered the power of the purse to the executive, but that is far from being the case in the United States.
At Westminster, the government annually presents a package of spending and revenue-raising measures which parliament, after a relatively brief period of ritual debate, duly ratifies.
The executive branch in Britain is firmly in charge of the budgetary process with the legislature, in the normal course of events, little more than a cypher.
There is some tendency to assume that in Washington, too, budget-making is largely an executive function.
Reference is constantly made to the president's budget and the chief executive is held responsible for the consequences of budgetary policy, especially by members of the opposition party in Congress.
In truth, however, Congress is a full partner in the business of budget-making as Donald Regan, Reagan's first Secretary of the Treasury, made clear: This is an executive branch viewpoint, but hardly an excessive overstatement.
The initiative in budgetary matters rests mainly with the president, but, once he has submitted his proposals, they cannot become law until they have obtained Congressional approval.
In all probability, his budget will be substantially rewritten as it trails through the Congressional maze and the eventual outcome may be quite at odds with the president's original intention.
Even in 1981 this occurred, to some extent, with the president's budgetary plans being modified to a degree that a British prime minister would regard as  wholly intolerable.
However, relatively speaking, Reagan and his staff, in the first year of his presidency, were brilliantly successful in maintaining control over the budgetary process and were able to ensure that the budget that eventually emerged was reasonably close to their original blueprint.’
In approaching the legislature, the Reagan forces were determined to avoid the mistakes of Jimmy Carter; the new administration would have a clear sense of direction and a well-defined order of priorities.
Thus, for the moment, foreign policy and other issues were to be neglected while economic policy took precedence.
‘[The Reaganites]put only one legislative ball in play at a time, and they kept their eye on it all the way through.
Shortly after the inauguration, for example, when Secretary of State Haig tried to raise the issue of Central America, the White House told him to leave it alone.
There was to be only one issue on the agenda — the economy.’
It was essential, moreover, that the executive should, as far as possible, remain in charge of the budgetary process to ensure that the final product, as far as possible, reflected the president's economic policy preferences rather than those of the legislature.
To that end Stockman, the director of the OMB and the principal architect of Reagan's first budget, set about reducing the role of Congress to something not far removed from that of the House of Commons.
‘The constitutional prerogatives of the legislative branch would have to be, in effect suspended.
Enacting the Reagan administration's economic program meant rubber stamp approval, nothing less.
The world's so-called greatest deliberative body would have to be reduced to the status of a ministerial arm of the White House.’
As with so many of Stockman's ambitions, this one did not come close to full realization; nevertheless, in the early months of Reagan's first term, the legislature was repeatedly upstaged and out-manoeuvred by the White House.
Constructing the federal budget is a protracted and complex matter, not easily described in brief.
The first stage of a process taking, roughly a total of eighteen months to complete, occurs within the federal administration.
Over a period of approximately nine months, departments and agencies of the federal government engage in detailed discussions with the White House prior to the presentation of the president's budget proposals to the legislature shortly after Congress convenes in January.
On receipt by congress, the budget is dealt with first by a variety of committees.
Before the expenditure of any money can be approved, authorization is required and this is a matter for the specialist, standing committees.
Assuming authorization has been agreed, actual expenditures, or appropriations, are considered by the  appropriation committees.
Proposed revenue changes are dealt with by the Ways and Means Committee in the House and the Finance Committee in the Senate.
Prior to 1974 these various activities took place in an uncoordinated manner, but, since then, budget committees have been set up in both houses.
These committees are responsible for drafting resolutions that must eventually be agreed by Congress as a whole.
The first such resolution is designed to provide coordination and guidance to the specialist, appropriations and tax-writing committees.
It includes aggregate estimates of government spending and revenue while also providing target figures for expenditures broken down into functional categories.
After the initial, concurrent budget resolution has been agreed, the committees go to work considering the president's budget proposals in minute detail.
At the end of these deliberations there are likely to be discrepancies between committee recommendations and the target guidelines.
These have to be settled, if necessary, by a process of reconciliation whereby the budget committees impose specific ceilings.
Eventually a further final, concurrent budget resolution has to be voted on and submitted for the president's signature, theoretically in time for the beginning of the financial year on 1 October.
CUTTING THE BUDGET
Throughout his campaign, Reagan had made clear his intention to cut government expenditure, to lower taxes and to increase defence spending, and he and his staff now moved to make a reality of those promises.
In his first State of the Union message, Reagan reiterated the essentials of his programme and went on to call for an increase in defence spending of $7.2 billion and cuts in excess of $40 billion from the proposed 1982 budget of $740 billion.
Agreement on this package within the administration had not occurred without a struggle.
Despite the care taken in selecting cabinet members to ensure that only men and women loyal to Reagan were appointed, there were inevitable attempts to break ranks when budget-cutting proposals were under discussion.
As director of the OMB, David Stockman's responsibility was, first, to keep the cabinet in line and then to mastermind the passage of the president's proposals through Congress.
Stockman got most of the cuts he wanted from the cabinet and then turned his attention to  the legislature.
As a former congressman himself, he was well acquainted with the dangers facing the executive's proposals when they reached Capitol Hill.
Without close supervision the suggested cuts, in particular, would fall victim to the machinations of interest groups and the pork barrel orientations of members of Congress.
In other words, if precedent was followed, the package of budget cuts would be attacked piecemeal when it disappeared into the congressional maze; even though there might be general agreement on the need to cut the budget, vested interests operating through sympathetic members could, one by one, weaken or restore specific cuts.
It was to counter such developments that the Reaganites and their allies in Congress resorted to a reconciliation strategy.
The reconciliation procedure was designed for use at the end of the budgetary process, but the Reaganites manoeuvred to attach reconciliation instructions to budget resolutions at the beginning.
The effect of this profoundly important innovation was that members of Congress were required to vote up or down the administration's complete package of cuts at the beginning of the congressional phase of the budgetary process.
In addition, the relevant committees, when they began their work, would be obliged to operate not with fairly loose guidelines and a relaxed timetable but with specific ceilings and a tight schedule.
Effectively, the legislature agreed to forego the extended debate and process of negotiation over appropriations that normally occurred.
In institutional terms these procedural manoeuvres were of great significance; the executive was strengthened while the legislature, to some extent, was reduced to the rubber stamp status craved by Stockman.
It was hardly a parliamentary situation with the executive totally dominant, but it was a striking change from what had gone before.
With good reason the Reagan administration began the fight for the budget in the Senate where there was a Republican majority.
The Senate Budget Committee duly reported out reconciliation instructions on 23 March 1981 requiring fourteen Senate authorizing committees to alter programmes so as to cut $36 billion from the fiscal year 1982 budget.
Ten days later, the Senate as a whole approved this bill by an overwhelming majority before going on in May to embrace a budget resolution that ‘contained nearly one hundred per cent of the administration's entire economic program, by a vote of 72 — 20.
The politicians had flinched.
They had rubber stamped the Reagan Revolution.’
The House of Representatives presented an infinitely more daunting challenge; in that chamber there were only 190 Republicans, against  242 Democrats.
Of the Republicans, Stockman estimated that perhaps fifty were not enamoured with budget-cutting; these were the so-called ‘Gypsy Moths’, liberal Republicans from the Northeast and the Midwest.
On the other hand, there were around sixty southern Democrats, potential ‘Boll Weevils’, some of whom might be induced to vote with the administration.
But both of these key groups, in Stockman's view, were made up of unreliable allies.
Even the conservatives in the House could not be entirely depended on, for all but a few of them were no more than ‘Hooverites’ to use Stockman's contemptuous label; they were keen on budget-cutting only up to a point and were anxious that the budget should be balanced, but they had no stomach for swingeing tax cuts — the main article of the supply-side faith.
Despite these unpromising signs, there were reasons for the Reaganites to hope that they might be able to succeed in the House.
For a start, the Democratic leadership capitulated rather easily; the 1980 election results appeared to frighten them into cooperation with the president.
According to a member of the Speaker's staff, the Democrats felt that they should ‘recognize the cataclysmic nature of the 1980 election results.
The American public wanted this new President to be given a chance to try out his programs.
We weren't going to come across as being obstructionists.’
This defeatism, unwarranted either by the fragility of Reagan's mandate or by the public opinion polls, led the Speaker meekly to surrender his control over the legislative schedule by agreeing to an accelerated timetable allowing for final votes on the president's programme by mid-summer.
In his memoirs, O'Neill offers an unconvincing explanation for this major concession; ‘I was fully aware of the advantage I was giving the Republicans as all the votes would take place well within the new president's honeymoon period.
But my strategy was to keep in mind the long-term situation….
I was convinced that if the Democrats were perceived as stalling in the midst of a national economic crisis, there would be hell to pay in the midterm elections.’
By conceding on the timetable, O'Neill gifted the Republicans an important advantage, helping them by drastically curtailing the protracted and damaging interplay of pluralist forces that would have otherwise taken place over the budget.
Other evidence of the Democrats in the House surrendering the initiative to the White House is to be seen in the actions of the Budget Committee.
The chairman of the committee was Representative Jim Jones of Oklahoma, a conservative Democrat who agreed with the main thrust of Reagan's economic policy — the need for budget cuts  and for a reduction in taxation.
Under Jones' leadership, the Democratic majority on the committee was prepared to give the president much of what he wanted.
‘They disagreed with him on the size of the tax reduction.
But they acceded to his request for an overall cutback in government spending and accepted to the letter a majority of the budget drafted by the OMB.’
By conceding a large part of Reagan's requests in both budget cuts and tax reductions, Jones hoped that compromise with the White House would be possible, but he was to be bitterly disappointed.
Stockman, Regan and the president all made it clear that compromise was not on offer — a position that Jones rightly interpreted as an assault on congressional prerogatives.
‘The administration says it can accept no amendments; that its budget is untouchable.
No administration has ever made such demands; and no congress has ever accepted such demands.
It is not the job of Congress not to think.’
In the end, however, Reagan won this crucial skirmish with the legislature.
On 16 April the House Budget Committee reported out a budget resolution that incorporated $15.8 billion in cuts — $20 billion less than the administration had requested — and the battle was now joined for the votes of those who could make or break the president's programme, the Gypsy Moths and the Boll Weevils.
The chances of the Democrats succeeding in this crucial struggle were not helped by the Speaker who, after a trip abroad, gave a ‘dispirited news conference’ where he said, ‘I can read Congress.
They go with the will of the people and the will of the people is to go along with the President, I've been in politics a long time.
I know when you fight and when you don't.’
The president, meanwhile, stood high in the public opinion polls after the attempt to assassinate him at the end of March.
He and his staff had also been busy cultivating the swing voters in the House and on 28 April he capped his effort with a triumphant televised address to Congress.
In this speech, Reagan again made clear his determination not to compromise with the House Budget Committee and threw his support behind a bipartisan resolution fostered by Stockman and dubbed Gramm-Latta after its co sponsors.
This resolution was offered as a substitute for that reported out by the Budget Committee, and if accepted would give the president virtually all the cuts he had asked for.
The stage was set for a critical vote where members would be asked to decide whether they were for or against Reagan's economic programme.
In Stockman's words this ‘decisive battle for the Reagan Revolution got reduced to an image contest between the Speaker and the President, a question of hope versus nostalgia.
Would  you go with the President's brave new gamble or stick with the Speaker's failed tax-and-spend policies of the past?’
On 7 May 1981 the House of Representatives opted heavily for Reagan in accepting by a vote of 253 — 176 the Gramm-Latta programme of cuts.
This was followed eventually by the adoption by congress, as a whole, of a concurrent budget resolution including reconciliation instructions requiring the authorizing committees to cut approximately $36 billion from the financial year 1982 budget.
During June the administration successfully fended off Democratic attempts to recoup their losses earlier in the year, allowing the president, on 13 August, to sign ‘into law the deepest and farthest-reaching package of budget cuts that Congress had ever approved.’
THE TAX CUT
The administration's success in cutting the budget was an impressive accomplishment, but for supply-side hawks like David Stockman, it was only a means to an end, an essential first step, for the real heart of the Reagan Revolution lay in the massive tax cut needed to unfetter the capitalist system and to revive the American economy.
In the lace 1970s, Congressman Jack Kemp and Senator William Roth had put forward the idea of an across-the-board income tax cut of 10 per cent in each of three successive years, a proposal taken up enthusiastically by supply-side advocates like Stockman and warmly embraced by Ronald Reagan.
Stockman portrays himself as being almost alone amongst the Reaganites in having ‘an actual passion for a supply-side tax cut.
To me the issue was meta-numerical.
It was critical to my view of the world.
As I saw it, supply siders were dedicated to capitalist wealth distribution, whereas the politicians were dedicated to socialist wealth redistribution.’
The majority of Democrats in congress were opposed to Kemp-Roth, the Boll Weevils were not enthusiastic and this was also true of many traditional Republicans.
Republican congressional leaders like Howard Baker and Robert Dole in the Senate and Robert Michel in the House were, at best, lukewarm in their support and ‘all in all, the Congress of early 1981 was exceedingly inhospitable terrain upon which to champion a supply-side oriented tax cut’.
Even in the White House itself, Stockman detected ideological fainthearts.
James Baker, the Chief of Staff, was a natural compro-miser happy to settle for half a loaf as long as it could be made to  look like a victory for the president.
Donald Regan, the Secretary of the Treasury, had no personal commitment to Kemp-Roth and only worked for it out of blind loyalty to the chief executive.
Given these circumstances it seems remarkable that the proposed tax cut made any significant headway at all, but it had one enormously important advantage — the whole hearted support of Ronald Reagan.
In a book generally very critical of Reagan, this comes as a rather surprising encomium to his effectiveness in office, although Stockman also makes it clear that the president did not get all that he had asked for in tax cuts.
With great reluctance, Reagan bowed to pressure from his advisers and compromised the Kemp-Roth principle somewhat by agreeing that the first cut should be delayed for a few months and reduced to 5 per cent in the first year with 10 per cent cuts in years two and three.
Reagan had also hoped for a ‘clean’ bill, one that was not adorned with ‘ornaments’— in other words, concessions made to facilitate passage.
However, only by accepting the inclusion of a number of such ‘sweeteners ‘was Reagan able to prevent his bill being replaced by a one-year tax cut proposal offered by the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Dan Rostenkowski.
The president refused any further compromise on the Kemp-Roth principle before launching another masterly televised appeal for support on 27 July that produced an avalanche of mail and telephone calls to members of congress.
Reagan's success in the Senate was never in doubt, and on 29 July a package of tax cuts virtually identical to those asked for by the president was approved by 89 — 11.
On the same day, the House voted on whether to adopt an administration-backed bill in place of that sponsored by Ways and Means with Rostenkowski warning: ‘If we accept the President's substitute, we accept his dominance of our house for the months ahead.
We surrender to the political and economic whim of his White House.
On this crucial vote, 48 Democrats voted with the president while all Republicans, with one exception, stayed loyal and the House voted 238 — 195 in Reagan's favour.
In early August, Congress formally ratified both parts of the administration's economic programme, the budget cuts and the tax cut, and at this point few could doubt that Ronald Reagan had passed with distinction the classic test of presidential greatness.
The weakness, if not incompetence, of the opposition would appear to have been an important contributory factor in Ronald Reagan's astonishing early success in seizing control of the agenda in the manner of a Roosevelt or a Johnson, even almost of a prime minister.
In the Senate the Democrats acted as if shell-shocked by the experience of losing overall control, and a non-charismatic, unimaginative leader like Robert Byrd was no match for White House strategists and men like Howard Baker and Robert Dole on the Republican side.
In the House, Speaker O'Neill's leadership, as we have seen, was not impressive.
In his memoirs he rightly insists that the 1980 election ‘did not represent a revolution in American values.
And, despite what the media claimed, Reagan was not elected because people were fed up with the huge federal deficit and were clamoring for budget cuts….
I didn't buy the idea of a Reagan mandate then, and I certainly don't buy it now.’
This is brave talk after the event, but in 1981 the speaker certainly acted as if the president had a mandate, meekly conceding control over the timetable and repeatedly running up the white flag before crucial votes.
Thus, at the end of April, as the battle over budget-cutting came to a head in the House with members asked to choose between the Democratic-controlled Budget  Committee package and the administration-sponsored Gramm-Latta substitute, O'Neill, ‘threw in the towel two days before the actual vote.’
Similarly, as the debate on the president's tax reform bill was about to get underway in the House the speaker ‘all but conceded the battle was lost — largely as a result of heavy lobbying by the president, his aides and voters mobilized by Reagan's television appeal’.
It is difficult to understand why the Democratic leadership should have been quite so defeatist in 1981.
To be sure, Reagan had a number of strengths.
There was much disenchantment with the policies of the past; he had won by a landslide in the Electoral College; his party controlled the Senate; he had run ahead of quite a few southern Democrats in the House and he was clearly an exceptional performer on television.
On the other hand, the Democrats still held the House and the 1980 election result was at best ambiguous, representing neither a vote for conservatism nor for liberalism.
Public opinion polls, furthermore, provided additional evidence of that ambiguity, showing that many Americans had negative attitudes towards big government, but by large majorities wished to preserve, if not extend, the ‘service state’.
The sight of Ronald Reagan on television clearly terrified the Boll Weevils and the Democratic leadership, but, in fact, it is not the case that Reagan,in 1981 , enjoyed high levels of popular approval.
Reagan actually began his first term with an approval rating lower than that of any other president for whom records are available.
In answer to the question ‘Do you approve or disapprove of the way…is handling his job as President?’ the respondents answers are given in Table 2, which also shows that after the fourth month of Reagan's first term, and in the wake of the assassination attempt on 30 March, his approval rating rose to 68 per cent.
But even that was inferior to Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson and hardly better than Nixon and Carter at the comparable stage in their presidencies.
By the following month, furthermore, Reagan's rating had dropped ten points, where it broadly stayed during the next three months while the administration successfully defended its budget-cutting package and won a stunning endorsement of the tax reduction measure.
LEGISLATIVE LIAISON
Whether soundly based or not, it is clear that congressional perceptions of Reagan's popularity were important in influencing  votes in the legislature; and the defection of Boll Weevils, in particular, was essential to the president's success on key votes.
This support, however, did not fall into the president's lap; David Stockman regarded both Republicans and conservative Democrats as very suspect allies, unreliable when it came to budget cuts and with little stomach for serious tax reduction.
The Reagan administration's success in building a series of ad hoc coalitions in support of key economic policy votes owed much to the brilliance of the White House staff with special responsibility for dealing with legislature.
Reagan's notoriously detached style of management made high-quality staff essential, and in his first term he appears to have been particularly well served by those responsible for ushering his economic policy proposals through congress.
Stockman was obviously a key figure; a supply-side zealot with an impressive grasp of the complexities of the budgetary process, he dazzled both colleagues and adversaries.
‘If Reagan provided the soul of the Administration's program, Stockman provided the intellect.
He seemed to have all the answers, all the zeal…(he was) the structural engineer of Reaganomics.’
Responsibility for Reagan's legislative strategy in general rested with the Legislative Strategy Group chaired by the president's Chief of Staff, James Baker.
Baker an urbane, Princeton-educated Texan was a close friend of Vice-President George Bush and had been Bush's campaign manager during the 1980 primaries.
As his effortless glide from the staff of the liberal Bush to the conservative Reagan suggests, Baker was a skilful operator — a man with no strong political convictions, fascinated by the machinery of politics and deriving satisfaction from getting the system to work.
Above all else, Baker understood the essential role of compromise in executive-legislative relations and it was the LSG that prevailed upon Reagan to give ground on the tax cut by accepting reductions of 5 per cent— 10 per cent — 10 per cent in three successive years in place of the 10 per cent — 10 per cent — 10 per cent of Kemp-Roth.
Baker's part in such compromises angered conservatives in the country who saw him as a closet liberal subverting the president's conservative instincts.
Martin Anderson is one conservative insider  who believes this to be a misconception.
In his view, Baker and the LSG loyally pursued the president's agenda and it was Reagan himself who decided whether to compromise, and when: ‘It was Reagan, and Reagan alone, who decided that four fifths of a loaf, especially a loaf that was perhaps too large to begin with, was better than no loaf.’
It is also possible to see Baker as a ‘lightning rod’ for the president, protecting him from the ire of conservative ideologues who, by definition, would never be satisfied with less than the whole loaf.
Baker's principal lieutenant on Capitol Hill was Max Friedersdorf the first head of the new administration's Congressional liaison office.
Legislative liaison in the Carter administration had been notably weak; Frank Moore, a fellow Georgian whom Carter placed in charge of the operation, had no previous congressional experience and proved inept and insensitive in his dealings with members of congress in the crucial early months.
Friedersdorf, by contrast, was an old hand in the field of congressional liaison, having worked in the area for Nixon and been Ford's chief of legislative liaison.
‘Quiet and distinguished, Friedersdorf had a reputation for honesty and integrity and was highly regarded by senators and Congressmen of both parties.
He was indispensable to Reagan's extraordinary success with Congress in the first year.’
As the architects of the president's legislative strategy, Baker and Friedersdorf moved first to gain control of the legislative agenda.
They were mindful of Carter's mistake at the beginning of his term in setting off too many policy hares at the cost of a focused programme with a clear sense of priorities.
For the Reaganites, economic policy was the legislative priority; first came budget cuts and then tax reduction and it was essential that these should be in place within a few months, before the end of the honeymoon period.
According to Friedersdorf, ‘We knew we had to get our bills enacted before the Labor Day recess.’
Again in contrast to the Carter administration, the Reagan legislative liaison office mounted an efficient operation.
According to Mark Siegel, who worked in the Carter White House, With Reagan in the executive mansion the atmosphere was different; members of congress were pleased to have their telephone calls returned; where possible they were provided with assistance and they were carefully plyed with the ‘small potatoes’ of presidential patronage.
Tip O'Neill is instructive on the differences between the two administrations in these matters: Being ‘helped out’ in one's district was a matter of the greatest importance to members of the House of Representatives, the forum where Reagan's legislative strategists would face their severest test.
Not only were the Republicans in a minority, in recent years the House had become a less disciplined and more individualistic legislative body.
Party leaders and committee chairmen no longer carried the weight they once had and ordinary members now assumed that the secret of holding one's seat in perpetuity depended on their success in cultivating their district.
It was clear to the LSG that their success in getting Reagan's radical programme adopted would require careful coalition building.
They would need to hold together their Republican support while detaching sufficient numbers of conservative Democrats to fashion the succession of majorities required.
Coalition-building was to be approached on two fronts; the first involved horse-trading, the striking of deals or bargains in order to win support.
The second approach was to bring pressure to bear on Congressmen indirectly, by working through conservative sympathizers and contributors in their districts.
Carter, certainly at the beginning, had been reluctant to engage in conventional trading for support, but the Reaganites were significantly less inhibited.
When, for instance, the president's programme of budget cuts was in danger of being subverted in the summer, a rash of horse-trading took place as Stockman reveals.
As the moment approached for a key procedural vote that would make or break Reagan's programme, Stockman received an agitated telephone call from Bill Thomas, a conservative Republican from California and an agent of the administration on Capitol Hill: This extended quotation provides a fascinating picture of the American pluralist system in operation while helping us to understand why the Reaganites were successful in fashioning the coalitions they required in the House of Representatives.
That success, as Hedrick Smith shows, also turned on the ability of the Reagan administration to play ‘outside politics’.
They understood that the modern congress with its emphasis on constituency service provided new opportunities for influencing members of congress.
The president's television addresses activated grass-roots support in members' districts, but administration strategists were not content to leave the matter there.
Lyn Nofziger and Lee Atwater took responsibility for stimulating outside pressure on congressmen from fifty-four swing districts — areas of the country where there were likely to be many conservative activists and where the president had run strongly in 1980.
These districts were treated almost as if a presidential campaign was underway; radio and television advertising time was bought; mail and telephone blitzes were organized; administration speakers Appeared and organizations like the National Association of Manufacturers, the US Chamber of Commerce, the American Medical Association and other organizations supportive of Reagan's programme were mobilized.
According to Atwater, at the time   There was nothing new as such about grass roots lobbying, but the sophistication and skill brought to this tactic by the Reaganites in the new conditions of the 1980s was a development of great significance.
THE CHIEF LEGISLATOR
Reagan was supported by an exceptionally talented staff in his first term and it might be said that his legislative triumphs can best be explained by the quality of the team around him.
Presumably the ability to attract good staff is, in itself, the mark of a good leader, but beyond that it can be said that Reagan himself was an indispensable part of the team.
In 1981 Reagan was at his best, at the height of his powers.
He had learned valuable lessons from his experience as governor of California and illness and old age had yet to take their toll.
Like most presidents, he began with earnest expressions of intent to work harmoniously with congress, but unusually, he followed through on the promise.
In the early months, Reagan was meticulously attentive to the legislature.
He met frequently with the Congressional leaders of both parties; and he made considerable use of the telephone in seeking the votes of rank-and-file members while also inviting them to the White House in groups.
To cite O'Neill again, ‘Some House members said they saw more of (Reagan) during his first four months in office than they saw of Jimmy Carter during his entire four years….
Reagan took Congress very seriously and was always coming over to the Capitol for meetings.’
In his meetings with legislators Reagan's personal qualities proved invaluable; his relaxed and affable manner, his warmth, humour and charm all helped him to establish an unusual rapport with both Republicans and Democrats.
Unlike, say, Lyndon Johnson, there was no chance of Reagan overwhelming or brow-beating legislators into submission; nor was he likely to intimidate them as Jimmy Carter often did by dazzling but discomfiting displays of his mastery of the detail of policy-making.
The contrast between Reagan and his predecessor in these situations has been pointed up by one Democratic congressman.
He recalled an unsatisfactory meeting with President Carter, ‘We had hardly got seated and Carter started lecturing us about the problems he had with  one of the sections of the bill.
He knew the details better than most of us, but somehow that caused more resentment than if he had left the specifics to us.’
The contrast with a meeting that took place with Reagan was considerable.
No details were discussed: ‘I wasn't there more than a couple of minutes, but I didn't feel rushed and I am not quite sure how I was shown the door.
The photographer shot the usual roll of pictures; the President gave me a firm, friendly handshake.
He patted me on the back and told me how much he needed and appreciated my support.
He said I should call if I needed help on anything.
That was it.’
Reagan's low-key, laid-back, non-specific approach clearly went down well with legislators who, for once, could feel they were being treated as genuine co-partners in the policy-making process.
It is also evident that, unlike Carter, Reagan had no inhibitions about tending to the needs of congressmen in return for their support.
That is to say, he was perfectly willing to make deals where necessary, although he was careful to leave the details to his staff.
However, if many members found Reagan personally impressive, there were others who were disconcerted by his folksy, anecdotal style and alarmed by his insecure grasp of detail.
Some clearly shared David Stockman's notoriously low estimate of Reagan's intellect and were not convinced that he had an adequate understanding of the intricacies of economic policy-making.
I shall return to these reservations in a later chapter, but for the moment it should be noted that well-qualified observers such as Martin Anderson and Donald Regan take a different view.
They insist that the president did understand the rudiments of economic theory and, despite an unusual propensity to delegate detail, made the crucial decisions himself.
Thus Regan, in memoirs not noted for their kindness to the president, says, ‘[Reagan's]grasp of economic theory as it had been taught in his time (Eureka College, class of 1932) was excellent, and he kept abreast of later theory.
He had no trouble understanding the leading ideas of the day, or in making reasonable judgements about the effects produced by policies based on Keynesian theory, of which he was deeply suspicious.’
Meanwhile, Anderson says of the president, ‘Over the years he made all the key decisions on the economic strategies he finally embraced.
He always felt comfortable with his knowledge of the field and he was in command all the way.
Reagan's reluctance to dabble in detail may have contributed to one of his undoubted strengths, his sense of direction.
Again, unlike Carter, he left no one in any doubt as to where he wanted to go in  policy terms.
His ideas on economic policy, as on other matters, may have been overly simplistic or even fundamentally erroneous, but the fact that he had a vision of the America he wished to bring about was a strength he possessed, one that many other presidents and presidential candidates have lacked.
Reagan also met one of the crucial tests of leadership in a pluralist system — the capacity to be both firm and flexible.
He did not compromise easily, but was willing to accept less than he had hoped for rather than to make no gain at all.
Finally, in considering Reagan's personal contribution to the triumphs of his first term, we must obviously take into account the consequences of his appearances on television.
No administration has been more conscious of the political power of TV or, Kennedy apart, been blessed with a more gifted exploiter of the medium as president.
In 1981 Reagan appeared regularly on television to advance the claims of his economic policy, and several of these were impressive performances with the president drawing on the skills acquired during many years in the business of communications.
Reagan's television appearances furthermore were carefully scheduled to take place just prior to critical votes on his budgetary and tax policy.
Carter had used television in a somewhat haphazard fashion, but Reagan ‘marshaled his television appearances to promote his policies.
Each was dramatic and each was followed only a short time later by a key Congressional vote.’
One of Reagan's most spellbinding TV performances came on 27 July, two days before both houses were to vote on his tax cut proposal.
It generated a large volume of mail and telephone calls and frightened enough members into believing that the electoral consequences would be dire if they failed to support the president.
In reaction to Reagan's performance, one southern Democrat said, ‘I sure hope he doesn't go on television to promote the elimination of fucking’, while another, more politely, said, ‘The constituents broke our doors down.
It wasn't very subtle.’
The picture that these comments conjure up of a president made massively popular by his command of TV is not confirmed by public opinion poll statistics.
After the seventh month of his presidency (July), Reagan's popular approval rating, according to Gallup, was 60 per cent which compares with 66 per cent for Carter, 62 per cent for Nixon and 73 per cent for Kennedy at the comparable point in their first terms.
And a month later, Reagan's rating fell to 52 per cent.
Even if such statistics belie the myth of an enormously popular president, the fact is that he and his staff managed to convince sufficient members of congress that he and his programme enjoyed overwhelming public support.
Thus, Reagan's early successes can be variously accounted for.
The Democratic leadership was inadequate.
This mattered less in the Senate, but in the House, where the battle was really joined, the unwarranted defeatism of the speaker played into Reagan's hands.
The defection of southern Democrats was essential, but it should not be assumed that this came about automatically, As Stockman makes clear, a whole series of ad hoc coalitions involving many unreliable allies had to be painstakingly constructed.
The high quality of White House staff with special responsibility for legislative-executive relations — notably Baker, Stockman and Friedersdorf — was another major factor.
From the beginning they established control over the legislative agenda, obliging congress to focus almost exclusively on economic policy and requiring the legislature to deal with these matters in a manner and a timeframe favourable to the president's programme.
They mounted an especially effective legislative liaison operation that secured a high level of Republican unity while drawing in conservative Democrats.
In support of this ‘inside’ strategy, there were other members of Reagan's staff out in the grass roots exploiting the constituency orientations of members of Congress, those who might provide the swing votes on key roll calls.
Finally, there was the contribution of the president himself.
He provided the essential vision; it was his power of persuasion, exercised via the telephone or in face-to-face meetings with members of congress, that brought sufficient votes to his side for the crucial roll calls.
And it was his skill as a communicator, mainly through television, that created the impression of towering popular support for his programme.
As the Congressional Quarterly Almanac concluded: ‘In all, the first session of the 97th Congress was a great personal triumph for Reagan.
Congressional approval of his plan was due largely to his own efforts and strengths’.
The magnitude of Reagan's achievement in his first term has been subject to question on several grounds.
Many have argued that the economic policy put in place in 1981 was, from the beginning, ill-conceived and wrong headed.
However, this analysis is not concerned with the merits or the efficacy of policies, but with a president's success or failure in gaining acceptance of his policies by other political actors.
Of more relevance here are the criticisms of those who argue that Reagan, in reality, fell far short of his declared policy purposes, or who point to the thinness of his legislative record in the remaining three years of his first term.
David Stockman ultimately proved to be one of Reagan's most trenchant critics.
His book is the testimony of a disillusioned man who  turns with some bitterness on his former colleagues.
He chastises them for their lack of true commitment to the supply-side faith and their unwillingness to make the necessary hard choices.
With the passion of a self-proclaimed ‘radical ideologue’ and revolutionary, Stockman called for the immediate liberation of American capitalism from the fetters of ‘welfare statism’.
The ‘combat’ called for here would certainly have been ‘risky’for it would have led inevitably to the destruction of both the Republican party and the Reagan administration.
The fact is that neither congress nor the American people were ready in the early 1980s for the demolition of the welfare state, however much conservative theorists might believe that to be desirable.
Stockman recognized that the sort of fundamental change he sought ‘would have hurt millions of people in the short run’ and involved the, ‘ruthless dispensation of short run pain in the name of long term gain', but these, he believed, were the hazards that true revolutionaries faced without flinching.
‘Revol-utions have to do with drastic, wrenching changes in an established regime.
Causing such changes to happen was not Ronald Reagan's real agenda in the first place.
It was mine, and that of a small cadre of supply-side intellectuals.’
It is obvious that neither Reagan nor the men around him such as Meese, Baker, and Regan were revolutionaries.
They held conservative views, some of them very radical in their implications, but they remained realists endeavouring to work within the existing political system.
They accepted the need to formulate policies that the US congress and the American people could be induced to accept by democratic means.
The politicians that Stockman so despised knew that the dismantling of the welfare state and the elimination of federal largesse were not options available to them — public opinion polls had made that very clear.
Stockman denounces Reagan for his susceptibility to hard luck stories and his economic illiteracy, but, if the president's grasp of economics was shaky, he understood politics in a way that the director of the OMB did not.
Reagan was indeed a ‘consensus politician, not an ideologue’, but he could hardly be anything else.
Had the  Republican candidate in 1980 been an ideologue, he would have suffered the same fate as Barry Goldwater in 1964; if, by some fluke, he had been elected, he would have been denied cooperation by congress and would have been drummed out of office in 1984.
The constraints on presidential power are formidable.
Chief executives are obliged to back and fill, to accommodate, to deal and to compromise if they wish to accomplish that modicum of public policy change that, short of crisis situations, is usually the best that can be hoped for.
The sort of ‘sweeping, wrenching change in national economic govern-ance’ that Stockman yearned for is the stuff of utopian dreams and has little to do with the realities of American politics.
It certainly is the case that the Reagan administration was never able to duplicate the domestic policy triumphs of 1981 in the remaining three years of the first term.
The president's later budgets were substantially rewritten; he was obliged to accept a succession of tax increases; the legislature was unreceptive to the president's agenda of social issues, ie school bussing, abortion and prayer in public schools.
Congress also declined to cooperate with Reagan in many of his more ambitious attempts to reduce the size of the federal government.
The paucity of Reagan's legislative record after 1981 is reflected in Congressional Quarterly presidential support scores.
Indeed, if taken at their face value, these measures suggest that Reagan was less successful in his dealings with the legislature than almost any other modern president.
According to Charles O. Jones's calculations, the average support scores for presidents since Truman were Eisenhower 72 per cent, Kennedy-Johnson 84 per cent , Nixon — Ford 65 per cent , Carter (four years) 76 per cent and Reagan (seven years) 64 per cent .
As Jones acknowledges, and as was argued earlier, presidential support scores are far from adequate measures of presidential success or failure.
They take no account of the lineup of party forces in congress and, most importantly, they do not weight different votes.
Such calculations, therefore, fail to distinguish between important and trivial bills whereas the Reagan administration, unlike almost all others, succeeded in obtaining the adoption of landmark legislation.
The effect of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act and the Economic Recovery Tax Act was to move the United States in new directions in economic policy; fundamental change of a sort that had not been seen for half a century.
A new political atmosphere was created where minimal government, budget-cutting and low taxation had become the norm.
The significance of these bills for domestic policy in the future far outweighed those passed by any president since Franklin Roosevelt.
The budget act has been characterized by one  scholar as ‘the most important piece of domestic legislation since the Social Security Act of 1935…(bringing about) a marked shift in the substance of domestic policy and in American federalism.
In pursuing their administrative and legislative strategies, the Reaganites were not fiddling at the margin or tinkering with the status quo.
They sought a change in the terms of the debate and, to a large extent, they succeeded in bringing that about in 1981.