

Letters
Wisden Cricket Monthly welcomes Readers' Letters on any cricket topic, contemporary, controversial, historical or humorous.
Please keep letters as brief as possible, and legible; we reserve the right to edit them.
Letters should be sent to:
Richards regrets
READING you review of Wasim and Waqar (WCM Aug) was a timely reminder to one B.A. Richards of some writing in the late 1970s of which he is not proud.
Somehow, without guidance and peer influence, cricketers are apt to bite the hand that feeds them.
If I might be so bold, for one who missed out on so much (and not just in a cricket sense), I would offer a few words of advice.
Through all the drudgery (as it may seem), cricketers should enjoy the fruits of what they do and achieve, but they should also remember to make friends and speak fondly of the game, and they will then want for nothing once their playing days are over.
That may sound emotional, but we are mere custodians of the game, which will be there long after we have departed.
These Pakistani fast bowlers are rare talents, and it is disappointing to hear them speak in such negative terms, for it will rebound on them in the years ahead.
Some people have already been down that road!
Chief Executive, Queensland Cricket Assn & addr 
No helmet
MAY I please be allowed to comment on just one of the points in Mr Prytherch's letter (WCM July), written in refutation of mine of last December.
In his support for helmets he adduces the case of Roger Davis.
If I am not mistaken, Davis was fielding at the time of his injury, and while one must concede that the wearing of helmets by batsmen, though hideous, is permissible, their use in the field is surely unacceptable and should be banned.
Joyce reprieve
THE ICC has removed the ban on the ‘rand rebels’ on the grounds, as I understand, that South Africa is no longer outside the pale of accepted cricket intercourse as it was at time the offence was committed.
Shall we assume that the Home Secretary, too, will grant a reprieve to William Joyce (‘Lord Haw Haw’) because by January 3, 1946, the date of his execution, Germany had ceased to be an enemy country?
Now that sheep-stealing, forming trade unions and various other minor offences do not merit transportation to the colonies, a similar pardon may be granted to those who had been deemed worthy of such punishment in a different age.
The return of their descendants to a multitude of towns and villages between Tolpuddle and Troon could be serious in its implications for Ashes loyalties.
With such encouragement on their part cricket's authorities have no excuse for present or future complaint that players have less interest in principle than in the interest of their principal.
Bad feelings
While I fully endorse the punishment handed out to Aqib Javed, I do not agree with the double standards and hypocrisy which surround English cricket.
When Mike Gatting and Co. disgraced cricket in 1987 they did no get fined.
Indeed, all they got was a great amount of sympathy and a £1000 bonus!
Can anyone please tell me the difference between what happened in Pakistan in 1987 and at Old Trafford in 1992?
My own view is that what happened in 1987 was far worse.
Believe me it is the sense of double standards, and this alone, which infuriates the Pakistanis and brings out the bad feelings.
DOUBLE STANDARDS have prevailed in world cricket for some years now, demonstrated as forcibly as anywhere else in the sage of South Africa.
Our reader is not alone in finding the hypocrisy distasteful.
Honest men will never grow accustomed to it.
Mr Mahmood asks what was the difference between the incidents in July and five years ago: smouldering resentment had reached explosion point in both cases, but the umpiring, it has to be said, was not comparable.
Documentary evidence exists to show that the umpiring in Pakistan in 1987 — particularly in the Lahore Test which preceded the infamous Faisalabad Test — was quite appalling (see Wisden Book of Test Cricket, Vol II , p 292 for easy reference).
We now know, of course, that the 1992 Pakistanis are to get ‘hardship bonuses’.
— ED.
Adversity
WITH DUE respect to Devon Malcolm, anyone who has to resort to bowl bumpers at him is not much of a bowler.
We taught most of these countries how to play the game.
It seems now that we must also teach them how to survive in adversity.
After all we have had very good experience over the last 5–10 years!
Old Mujtaba
WHY DO commentators keep referring to Asif Mujtaba as ‘new to Test cricket’?
Anybody who has kept copies of WCM will see that he made his debut against West Indies at Lahore in November 1986, scoring 8 and 6.
He made 12 and 6 at Karachi, and didn't take a wicket.
He was then dropped, but came to England in 1987, scoring 11 first-class runs in five innings on the whole tour, and not taking a wicket (I wonder which run he remembers most!).
He was back in the Test team again against England at Lahore in November 1987, being bowled by Neil Foster for 7.
That was the end of his Test career until the present tour of England, for which he was chosen after doing well as an allrounder in Pakistan domestic cricket.
At 24, he seems to be doing better at Test cricket the second time round!
More letters on page 17
Secret weapon
I WRITE in response to David Close's letter (WCM Aug) concerning the hourly breaks in BBC TV's cricket coverage for News updates.
I agree wholeheartedly with his complaints and have been equally infuriated when missing wickets falling ‘live’.
Particular examples that spring to mind include Phil Simmons's dismissal at Lord's last year (Graeme Hick's first Test wicket) and Asif Mujtaba at Headingley recently.
However, with these examples, might it no be of benefit to the England side to increase the frequency of these News bulletins?
England's bowlers clearly save their best deliveries for these five-minute breaks, so would more breaks mean more much-needed wickets for England?
Jealous?
I HAVE listened with great interest to those voices who don't want the ‘South African tour rebels'’ ban to be lifted, and it is clear to me that many of them are not expressing these views out of a sense of justice or respect for the millions of blacks still suffering in South Africa.
They are merely thinking of themselves.
Take Derek Pringle, for example.
Perhaps he is jealous of the players who were offered huge sums of money for to tour, while he wasn't.
And what about Robert Bailey?
He would be against the lifting of the ban, wouldn't he?
In hindsight, it might have been better for him to have taken up the offer.
After all, if he couldn't get into the England team while the ban was in force, what chance has he got once a world-class player like Gatting becomes available again?
Approved umpires
I AM A 24-year-old Test cricket lover and I used to feel that English umpires were the best in the world.
However, Pakistan have, in my opinion, paid for the Gatting/Rana affair and all that went with it in 1987.
At Manchester Ramiz Raja went to a dubious faint edge, and at Headingley some marginal decisions cost the Pakistanis dear.
On the second day Smith was palpably out lbw but went on the score 42; Mujtaba was given out when the ball seemed to hit his boot; and Gooch, I believe, should have been given out three times in the second innings.
The cricket authorities should set up a neutral-umpire system, or, failing that, a panel of umpires acceptable to the tour team.
OUR reader has listed only some umpiring decisions which may have disappointed Pakistan, without referring to such concerns as Ramprakash's dismissal in the Edgbaston Test to an equally ‘dubious faint edge’, or a number of slightly questionable lbws against England during the series.
It remains our conviction that the umpires have done their conscientious best throughout the summer, and that only ‘line decisions’(run-outs, stumpings, boundary incidents) should be referred to a third umpire who has a TV playback monitor.
Pakistan manager Khalid Mahmood's suggestion of ‘home’ umpires being selected by the visiting team may have some merit, but only as long as the visitors have sufficient knowledge of all those on the umpires' panel — ED.
Wider wicket
AFTER viewing the frequent unsuccessful lbw appeals during the Headingley Test, I think it is worth reminding umpires of a rarely considered yet obvious fact.
The lbw law states inter alia that the ball must have been going to hit the stumps.
The wicket is 22.86 cm (nine inches) wide, as stated in Law 8:1.
However, for the purposes of the relevant part of the lbw law, the wicket is actually about 37 cm wide — over 38% wider — as you should add almost the total diameter of the ball (over 7 cm wide to both the off and leg stumps to allow for a ball which would have flicked the stumps — thus fulfilling the criterion of hitting the wicket.
I feel that most umpires do not consider this obvious fact, much to the bowler's detriment.
1066 and all that
I NOTE that another Sussex town has been conquered!
On this occasion defeated by the joint forces of two cathedral cities: Crawley c Wells b Salisbury 49 (Sussex v Lancashire, Hove, July 21–23).
No pressure
E.M.
WELLINGS'S claim (WCM Aug) that Graeme Hick's failures have put ‘pressure’ on his England team-mates strikes me as somewhat baffling.
Since Hick's elevation to the Test team we've seen England share the most successful series against West Indies in the last nine, win a series against New Zealand for the first time in four attempts, win a Test match against Pakistan for the first time in 10 years, and, for good measure, reach the World Cup final.
Parker's honour
A SMALL point on your book review of Durham: Birth of a First-Class County : had Ralph Dellor consulted the club or been at the match, he would have noted that it was Paul Parker who took the first ball from Oxford University pace bowler Michael Jeh, and not John Glendenen.
It was a dreadful ‘howler’ from a scorecard gleaned from the Press Association and not the official scoresheet.
Official Scorer, Durham CCC 
Great bowlers
IT SEEMS that Pakistan cricket simply cannot win with the English media.
If they win at Faisalabad, their umpires cheat, and if they win at The Oval then they still cheat, but nobody knows how!
May I present a few eye-openers for those who have accused Pakistan bowlers of doctoring the ball?
(1) Waqar Younis shared exactly the same ball with England prospect Martin Bicknell only last year when they played for Surrey.
Waqar took 113 wickets, Bicknell 45.
(2) If Waqar and Wasim Akram were using a doctored ball then why did Aqib Javed not benefit from it?
(3) Throughout the series, whenever Waqar took five or more wickets, Wasim Akram returned mediocre figures, and when Akram took wickets Waqar failed.
A doctored ball should do the trick for both at the same time.
All this proves conclusively that Waqar and Akram are genuinely great and exceptional bowlers.
Why should it seem odd that they should win Tests for Pakistan?
Bit at a time
IN ONE important aspect, baseball has a better arrangement than cricket.
Instead of one side doing all their batting in one go and setting a target for the other side to beat, baseball's innings are broken up into bits, with each side batting in turn until nine innings have been completed.
This keeps the game ‘alive’ from start to finish as teams jockey for the lead as in, say, soccer.
I would like to see, in one-day cricket matches, each side batting for, say one-fifth of their innings in turn until both innings are complete.
This way, spectators can see who is actually ‘winning’, and each part of the innings will have far more immediate significance and excitement, with the crowd's attention more intent.
It would also, not least important, enable a fairer result to be obtained if rail intervenes.
If it is too drastic to jump in at the deep end with such a sweeping change, why not try it out in experimental matches, festival or night matches?
OR IN the Sunday League?
This is surely fertile ground for experimentation.
The above suggestion seems worth a trial, even if time would be lost between the 10 innings.
To focus potentially massive public attention, these experimental matches could also serve as a trial base for TV assistance for umpires in run-outs and stumpings. — ED.
Any takers?
WITH REFERENCE to your Editorial (WCM Aug), bearing in mind that the venue for the next World Cup has yet to be confirmed, will this have any bearing on England's next proposed visit to Pakistan?
It would appear that the earliest possible date is the 1995–96 season, eight years after Mike Gatting's last visit.
Methinks that our selector' biggest problem will be to find 16 players prepared to make the trip.
Those who have been before wouldn't touch it with a bargepole and those of more tender years are almost certain to have been warned off anyway.
Ban lifted?
FOLLOWING the recent decision to lift the ban on those cricketers who toured South Africa 2½ years ago, I find myself wondering whether it is worthwhile making laws and regulations at all.
At the time the rebel tour was arranged, it was made crystal-clear to all the potential participants that a direct consequence of their actions would be an immediate five-year international ban.
This has now been totally ignored.
My sympathy lies squarely with those who refused to be part of the South African sham in order to remain eligible to play at the highest level, but who now find that they will probably lose that chance.
In order to ensure fair play in this situation, those who kept within the regulation in this matter must be the first to be given the option (ability proven, of course) of playing for England this winter and subsequently for at least two years.
And in response to Ted Dexter's statement: the non-rebels also had families and mortgages at that time.
Middlesbrough plea
ACKLAM PARK has been the home of Middlesbrough CC since 1931 and has, since 1956, hosted an annual Yorkshire fixture.
The club are joint owners of the ground with Middlesbrough Rugby Union FC, who share the facility.
The committee of the Rugby club have recently decided in favour of holding further talks with a company representing the Argyle Group regarding an offer of £5 million to purchase the site for use as a supermarket and filling station.
Readers who have visited the ground will probably well understand the feelings of adjoining home-owners in what is at the moment a prime residential area.
The cricket section, despite being joint owners, have been advised that it seems likely that if one of the owner clubs should decide to sell they could well proceed unilaterally.
We wish to keep our present facility.
May I ask if any clubs, players or lovers of the game could support us in our fight to keep Acklam Park alive.
Hon.
Secretary 
The Invalids
I AM writing a book on the history of the famous cricket team, The Invalids, founded by Sir John Squire after the First World War, which provided the original of the team of literary gents in A.G. Macdonell's novel England ,Their England .
If any readers have any information about this legendary team, in particular personal recollection, I should be very grateful indeed to hear from them at this address.
Needless to say, all assistance will be fully acknowledged in the eventual book.
Sponsors on Sundays
THE Sunday League, lacking a sponsor since Refuge Assurance withdrew after the 1991 season, is to be relaunched next summer under new sponsorship.
The TCCB announced on August 13 that Equity & Law will be putting £2½ million into the competition for the 1993, ‘94 and ‘95 seasons.
It is the insurance company's first venture into cricket sponsorship.
In 1993 the League will be expanded to 50-overs-per-side, and coloured clothing will be worn for the first time in senior English cricket.
Shirts will bear the players’ names.
Television coverage will probably be shared between BSkyB, who currently hold an exclusive contract, and the BBC, who televised the Sunday game throughout its years of sponsorship firstly by John Player and then Refuge.
David Thorley, head of AXA Equity & Law's marketing, said that he had considered 42 other sponsorship opportunities before deciding to back the Sunday League.
He saw the relaunch of the competition on World Cup lines and the relaunch of his own company as a ‘perfect match’.
David Gower's thoughts on the new format: page 6
Historical perspective by David Potter: page 24
EDITORIAL
Come in, dear weaklings
ZIMBABWE, according to the former Prime Minister of Rhodesia, Ian Smith, is ‘going to the dogs’.
Seeking clarification from one who should know, we are told that Mr Smith is short on pessimism.
Zimbabwe, we are told, has already gone to the dogs.
What a fillip for that nation, therefore is its elevation to full Test-match status, as granted by the International Cricket Council in July.
It also happens to be a disastrous blow to Test cricket's normally well-guarded sanctity as the supreme form of the game's expression.
Zimbabwe's election to the top shelf cannot properly be justified, and renders future results and averages farcical.
Their team is not as strong now, nor its future as bright, as when previous applications were rejected.
So what has changed?
Did that one-day victory over England at Albury in the World Cup swing the voting?
If so, let's have Holland in.
They have beaten Australian and English teams in their time.
Was a complex deal struck in the Lord Harris Gardens?
Let Zimbabwe in, and England can stage the next World Cup and have its South African tour ‘rebels’ freed by Christmas?
Might South Africa's continuing claims to the next World Cup be nothing more than a clever cover?
They in turn will be glad that Zimbabweans now have no need to try for Test representation by moving south.
It is some years since it became generally if reluctantly accepted that sport and politics cannot be separated.
Zimbabwe's elevation has about it a pronounced aroma of political engineering.
The cost to cricket will be the diluting effect it has on Test cricket.
It is tedious enough to have to append footnotes to certain records springing from the county game, explaining that they were arrived at by contrived cricket.
The addition of this weakling to the family of Test nations will seen them merely tolerated as non-profitable visitors, lower on the scale even than Sri Lanka, who are still awaiting a first invitation to play West Indies after 10 years of Test status.
Runs and wickets secured against Zimbabwe may be qualified in italicised footnotes by the discerning, but they will still assist someone, in all probability, to overtake Gavaskar's and Hadlee's overall Test records.
It adds a huge oddity to the history of cricket that while President Mugabe (who once acknowledged that cricket civilises people) snatches agricultural land from Zimbabwe's whites for minimal compensation, and with the drought turning much of his land to dust, a former Test cricketer from the region, Jackie du Preez (South Africa 1966–67), says unequivocally: ‘We are simply not good enough.
I am afraid we will be slaughtered and embarrassed.
The ICC and Zimbabwe are taking a very long gamble.’
That gamble may not be unconnected to the old England-Australia veto power, which has never been employed but still offends the newer Test nations.
What chance the ICC meeting of 2020 being in Harare, with England's delegates struggling to justify retention on the full Test panel?
NEWS REGISTER
AUSTRALIA will play six Test matches in England next year, at Old Trafford (June 3–7), Lord's (June 17–21), Trent Bridge (July 1–6, Headingley (July 22–26), Edgbaston (Aug 5–9) and The Oval (Aug 19–23).
Three one-day internationals will be played, at Old Trafford (May 19), Edgbaston (May 21) and Lord's (May 23).
Micky Stewart, who is retiring as England's team manager, will remain with the TCCB as ‘development of excellence officer’.
Zimbabwe had hoped to recruit Stewart, 60, as team manager for their inaugural Tests.
Graham Gooch has been confirmed as England's captain for the winter tour of India.
‘It will definitely be my last tour,’ said the 39-year old Gooch.
South Africa and Australia will stage reciprocal tours during the 1993–94 season.
South Africa will join New Zealand and the hosts in the World Series Cup, while Australia will travel to South Africa in Feb 1994 for four Tests and eight one-day internationals.
Former West Indies wicketkeeper Jeff Dujon is to play for Jamaica again, having reconsidered his decision to retire.
He had mistakenly believed that total retirement from first-class cricket was necessary before he could avail himself of the pension fund for West Indies Test cricketers.
Sept 18 marks the centenary of the birth of Sam Staples, who took over 1200 wickets for Notts (1920–34) and appeared in three Tests in South Africa in 1927–28 (15 wickets at 29.00).
He was chosen for the 1928–29 tour of Australia, but rheumatism forced him to return home before he had played a match.
He was Hampshire's coach in 1939 and stood as a first-class umpire in 1949, the year before his death.
Worcestershire's Dave Roberts is to replace the retiring Lawrie Brown as England's physiotherapist.
The late John Arlott's full set of original Wisden Cricketers' Almanacks is to be sold at Christie's London saleroom on Sept 25, together with his original oil,in the Nets , by Lawrence Toynbee.
Most of the Wisden s bear Arlott's signature.
At an earlier Christie's auction, on Sept 11, a collection of general books, manuscripts and letters (from, among others, Dylan Thomas and E.M.
Forster) from the Arlott collection will be on offer.
A run of Wisden s, well worn, from 1898 to date (lacking 1916), belonging to cricket-writer E.M.
Wellings, will be sold at Phillips' Winchester saleroom on Sept 17, the sale starting at 11 am.
Enquiries to .
England footballer Gary Lineker scored 1 for MCC against Germany (winners of the European Cricketer Cup) in his first match at Lord's in July.
‘I always score one against the Germans,’ he commented.
Jonathan Agnew, BBC Radio's cricket correspondent, came out of retirement to help injury-hit Leicestershire win their NatWest Trophy semi-final against Essex.
In his first county match for two years Agnew, 32, returned the tidy figures of 12–2–31–1
John Crawley scored 217 not out and 117 for Lancashire II in their Rapid Cricketline 2nd XI Championship match against Somerset at Crosby, his twin-century feat being emulated twice in later matches by his team-mate Jason Gallian (158 and 105, both not out, against Sussex II at Liverpool; 160 and 104, both not out, against Essex II at Old Trafford).
Other twin centurions were Darren Robinson (164 and 134 for Essex II in the same match as Gallian), Rob Turner (109 and 100, both not out, for Somerset II v Notts II at Clevedon) and Asif Din (109 and 104, both not out, for Warwickshire II v Leicestershire at Oakham).
Din later added 194 against Notts II at Trent Bridge, while David Fulton made 200 for Kent II at Worcester.
For the bowlers, Somerset's Andre van Troost took 7 for 44 (10 for 73 in the match) against Middlesex II at Southgate, and Gloucestershire's Ricardo Williams took 7 for 73 at Worcester.
Playing for Stockport against Oldham in the Central Lancashire League, Rohan Merry hit sixes off the first five balls of Howard Schofield's only over, but was caught on the boundary off the final ball, leaving the bowler with figures of 1–0–30–1.
Berkshire have agreed a three-year sponsorship deal, covering the Minor County side and the Under-25 and -19 teams, with Reading-based solicitors The Head Partnership.
Play at Beaconsfield CC's six-a-side festival was abandoned after the club's president Tom Orford, 86, lost control of his car, which then ran across the pitch and hit a bench near the pavilion, injuring four spectators.
Gloucestershire fast bowler David Lawrence underwent an operation on Aug 15 to remove steel pins from the kneecap shattered in the closing stages of the final Test of England's tour of New Zealand last winter.
‘REBELS’ REPRIEVED
AT THE International Cricket Council meeting at Lord's in July, the five-year bans imposed on those who joined the English XI ‘rebel’ tour of South Africa in 1989–90, captained by Mike Gatting, were lifted.
Gatting and his former colleagues will be eligible to play international cricket again from Oct 1.
The proposal to rescind the ban came from New Zealand, and was seconded by Australia.
Apart from Gatting, who is seen as a near-certainty for England's winder tour of India, others who may come back into the international reckoning are Chris Broad, Alan Wells, Matthew Maynard and John Emburey, while Neil Foster (another South African tourist) might have been considered for the winter tour but for a knee injury which kept him out of the Essex side for the last part of the season.
Foster has been granted a benefit by Essex in 1993.
The ICC also agreed to elevate Zimbabwe to full membership: the African nation's first Test match is likely to be against India this winter.
The choice of venue for the 1996 World Cup was not decided: those countries wishing to host the tournament have to submit bids by Dec 1.
Those thought to be interested in staging the 12-team event are England, South Africa and Pakistan.
The ICC also ruled that ‘warm-up’ matches played between Test-playing countries before the recent World Cup should not be considered as official one-day internationals.
Lancashire cricket manager Alan Ormrod (above) paid the price for his county's disappointing season when he was sacked on Aug 11.
David Hughes will take over temporarily.
Lancashire also announced that former Test players Paul Allott and Graeme Fowler would leave at the end of the season
NEWS REGISTER (cont)
MCC is considering a proposal to stage a baseball tournament at Lord's during October 1993.
MCC secretary Lt-Col John Stephenson said: ‘My immediate reaction was to say ‘Not on your Nellie, not at Lord's’.
But the committee have approved the idea in principle and have instructed me to investigate the matter further.’
The new chairman of the Cricket Society (membership now over 2000) is David Allsop, who succeeds Nigel Haygarth, who has retired after occupying the post since 1983.
Derek Lodge,WCM 's quiz-setter, succeeds Tony Handley Jones as the Society's vice-chairman.
Essex have signed Muneeb Diwan, a 20-year-old opener who was born in Canada.
He scored 120 and 74 not out on his debut for the 2nd XI, against Kent at Chelmsford.
Glamorgan have given a six-week trial to former Kent allrounder Mark Dobson, 24.
The left-arm spinner made his debut for the Welsh county against Oxford University in The Parks.
Cardiff allrounder Sam Kirnon, 29, who also made his Glamorgan debut in that match, has been released by the county by mutual consent.
Glamorgan have also given a trial to Stewart Taylor, 20, a left-arm spinner from Dublin who has played for Irish Schools.
Richard Nowell scored 1505 runs (75.25) for Trinity School, Croydon in the 1992 season, 29 short of Neil Lenham's alltime record aggregate for a school batsman (1534 for Brighton College in 1984).
Graham Lloyd of Lancashire received an inscribed Gucci watch, worth £1000, and a case of champagne after being named Young Player of the Month by City investment company Whittingdale, whose chairman Patrick Whittingdale hosted a celebrity lunch for umpire Dickie Bird before the Oval Test.
Former Somerset captain Peter Roebuck broke his left ankle during the Minor Counties championship match between Berkshire and Devon at Reading.
Roebuck had earlier bagged a ‘pair’ in Devon's match with Dorset, for whom the former Gloucestershire seamer Julian Shackleton, now 40, took 7 for 57.
Pakistan will play three one-day internationals (Dec 27, 29 and 31) and a Test match (Jan 2–7) in New Zealand during the interval between the two sections of Australia's World Series Cup, in which the participants are to be Australia, West Indies and Pakistan.
Melbourne CC, Jamaica celebrated their centenary with a tour of Trinidad & Tobago in June, playing (and losing) matches at Guaracara Park and Moosai Sports, with a third match being washed out.
Telecommunications company Cable & Wireless have extended their sponsorship of West Indies Test cricket for a further four years in a deal worth $2 million.
By Royal Appointment: Ian Botham at Buckingham Palace to collect his OBE, proudly held here by younger daughter Becky.
Also pictured are daughter Sarah, wife Kathy and son Liam, 14, who made headlines of his own during August: on his debut for England Under-15s against Wales, Botham junior too 5 for 64, and later won the match with a spectacular 77 not out, including five sixes.
Back in 1977, I.T.
Botham took 5 for 74 on his Test debut, against Australia at Trent Bridge
Hong Kong retained the Tuanku Jaafar Trophy (for the South-East Asia cricket championship), defeating hosts Singapore by six wickets in the final.
Malaysia and Thailand also took part.
Grenada Schools retained their Sir Garfield Sobers Schools title in the annual tournament in Barbados in July.
They overcame South African school Michaelhouse by 27 runs in the final at the Kensington Oval.
Scottish school Merchiston Castle reached the semi-finals.
Somerset have signed Pakistan legspinner Mushtaq Ahmed, 22, as their overseas player for the next three years.
South African fast bowler Richard Snell, Somerset's current overseas signing, has decided to complete his university studies.
Pakistan called up allrounder Ijaz Ahmed for the one-day internationals at the end of their tour of England.
Ijaz, 24 on Sept 20, was a member of the Pakistan side which won the World Cup final in March.
Frequent pitch invasions forced the abandonment of a floodlit charity match between Pakistan and India at Crystal Palace on July 28.
Here Kapil Dev and Imran Khan (whose Cancer Hospital appeal was the charity involved) face more interruptions.
A second charity match, at Middlesbrough three days later, went ahead without incident, Pakistan winning by 22 runs
IRELAND are to resign from the Cricket Council, in order to seek associate membership of ICC.
They hope to complete in the next ICC Trophy event, which will be held in Kenya in 1994, from which three countries will progress to the World Cup proper.
Torrel James, 28, a policeman in Port-of-Spain and a former Trinidad & Tobago Youth representative opening bowler, has been jailed for 15 years and received 20 lashes with the birch after being found guilty of the attempted murder of his girlfriend and her father in 1989.
In an unusual ‘vote of confidence’, all Kent's players have been offered contracts which last until the end of the 1994 season.
Ian Botham and Viv Richards are to undertake a 63-date speaking tour of England and Australia, starting in Preston on Nov 1.
Teddy Griffith, 56, a business executive, former Barbados and Jamaica allrounder, and son of pre-war West Indies fast bowler H.C.
Griffith, is to head a West Indies Cricket Board of Control special committee to ‘devise a strategic plan covering the Board's operation over the next five years’.
Serving with Griffith are former Test players Joey Carew and Andy Roberts, Franz Botek and Pat Rousseau, with Andrew Sealy as secretary.
The committee will concern itself with matters relating to administration, marketing, finance, playing, development, and public relations.
The Royal Air Force clinched the annual Inter-Services Championship by defeating the Royal Navy by six wickets on Aug 11.
A persistent knee injury has forced Northants allrounder Richard Williams, 35, to retire.
Williams, who made his debut for the county as a teenager in 1974, scored almost 12,000 runs and took nearly 400 wickets in his first-class career.
The New Stand at Canterbury, built in 1986, was renamed the Colin Cowdrey Stand by the Lord Lieutenant of Kent, Sir Robin Leigh-Pemberton, on Aug 8.
Among those present at the ceremony was the former England captain's mother Molly, now 89.
Anton Joyce hit a century in 25 minutes (36 balls) for Woodhouse against East Leeds in the Leeds League during July.
Cricket benefited by about £750,000 when the July awards of the Foundation for Sport and the Arts were announced.
The National Cricket Association received £350,000 to provide non-turf pitches ‘in areas where schoolchildren should be given the opportunity to learn the game on good surfaces’, while among grants to some 50 other cricket organisations were sums of £90,000 for Irthlingborough CC, £26,000 for Shanklin CC and £20,000 for Halstead CC.
South Africa's multiracial Under-15 team, the first national side from the Republic to play in England since 1965, lost the first match of their tour, to the Prime Minister's XI at Finchley on Aug 3.
The team went on to play three matches against England's Under-15 side.
A commemorative cover was issued on Aug 24 to mark ‘the last three-day County Championship game at Northampton’.
It is available for £2.50 (incl. p&p) from  .
Alison Inverarity, the daughter of former Australian Test player John, finished eighth in the women's high jump at the Barcelona Olympics.
The first International Cricket Masters event — a tournament for international players aged 35 and over — will take place in Barbados in October.
The brainchild of former Middlesex and England batsman Roland Butcher, the first matches will see West Indies, captained by Clive Lloyd, take on an England side led by Mike Brearley.
Wales and Denmark had one victory apiece in a two-match series of one-day internationals recently.
AT Brondby on June 30 Denmark (262) beat Wales (214 for 9), but the Welshmen (227 for 8) turned the table the following day at Glostrup, defeating Denmark (223 for 8) by two wickets.
Prince Edward has accepted an invitation to succeed Leslie Crowther as president of the Lord's Taveners for 1993–94.
Lancashire batsman Nick Speak, who scored 476 runs during the month, won the £300 Britannic Assurance Championship Player of the Month award for June.
Essex won the £1000 Team of the Month award after winning four of their seven Championship matches in June.
The July awards were won by fast bowler David Millns (37 wickets) and his club Leicestershire (won four matches out of six).
Joanna Craig of auctioneers Bonhams holds a rare Coalport jug, featuring a cricket scene and marked ‘Cambridge Cricket Club’.
The jug was sold to collector Tony Baer for £4400 at auction on July 22
Former Derbyshire and England legspinner Tommy Mitchell, one of only three survivors of the MCC team on the ‘Bodyline’ tour of Australia in 1932–33, celebrates his 90th birthday on Sept 4.
Mitchell, who won five Test caps, took 1483 wickets at 20.59 in his career: he was the subject of a lengthy interview in WCM July 1986.
Former England Under-21 player Keith Benton fractured his son Seb's skull when he hit the ball into the crowd during a match in Buckingham.
The three-year-old was released after a night in hospital.
STAC International Sports, official distributors of cricket equipment, clothing and accessories at The Oval, are now open for business in the new Ken Barrington Centre.
Former Leeward Islands and Combined Islands opening batsman Vance Amory has become Premier of Nevis, his native island.
The Barbados Cricket Association are marking 100 years of organised club cricket on the island with a series of celebrations.
The first European Pro-Am Cricket Tournament takes place on Spain's Costa del Sol from Oct 1–5.
Further details may be obtained from Sport Abroad Ltd,.
A World XI (283 for 6; Mark Greatbatch 60, Roger Harper 81) overwhelmed Wales (70) in a one-day match at Brecon on July 16.
Leave Sundays alone!
DAVID GOWER'S penetrative thoughts on recent changes to the system — and on Zimbabwe's elevation
THESE ARE changing times, and it seems that many controlling bodies in international sport are involved in tinkering with their various sports to try to improve both the standards of performance and the quality of entertainment provided.
Rugby Union is experimenting with changes in the points-scoring system; Formula One is questioning the capabilities of its cars; and cricket in this country is being revised according to the recommendations of the Murray Commission.
The ICC, meanwhile, have decided that ‘the more the merrier’ is the key to success, and have somehow allowed Zimbabwe to join the ranks of the Test-playing nations.
David Gower checks page 178 of this year's Wisden , which shows him 33 runs behind Geoffrey Boycott as England's leading runscorer.
Next year's edition will tell a different story
I was one of those asked to provide an opinion or two for the Murray investigations, and must give them credit for thoroughness of their enquiries and for most of the conclusions they reached.
As far as I am concerned, four-day cricket is worth a go, and the committee were right to endorse it as a means to aid the development of future England cricketers.
I still believe that three-day cricket can make certain players lazy, as opportunities come round thick and fast and failures are overtaken very quickly by the next match.
My ideal would be a system that allows players to play a high-grade cricket as demanded by a four-day format, with a modicum of one-day cricket and enough gaps in the fixture list to allow players to recover from the demands of persistent cricket, without having to play seven days a week.
Captains, the public, and the media, in any order, all seem to be becoming more demanding in their requirements throughout all cricket.
Television, especially highlights both the strengths and defects of the modern player, and the papers continue the process of daily analysing players and teams.
Never is it allowable for an individual or a team to have an off day for the very simple and plausible reason that they are just tired!
Hence there is a very valid reason for building rest days into the system, as well as the normal gaps in the fixture card to allow bodies and minds to recuperate briefly.
Which brings me onto the new plans for Sunday cricket.
In my answers to the Murray Commission, I was not very complimentary to 40-overs Sunday cricket, thinking based on the fact that this version of the game is the one furthest removed from ‘proper’ cricket, and that over the 1991 season I had become so disenchanted with the Sunday slog (in both senses) that I had played so consistently badly on the Sabbath as to persuade my employers that somebody else might be more usefully selected on the day.
However, now that it has been decided that a Sunday game of 50 overs per side is a better idea ‘for cricket’, many are already beginning to rue the demise of the 40-overs game.
The players are certainly going to find regular 50-overs cricket very demanding, coming as it will in the midst of already demanding four-day cricket.
Perhaps this will be the incentive to win in only three days to earn that precious day off!
Any one-day match is potentially physically and mentally tough.
Batsmen, bowlers and fieldsmen must be at a peak throughout the day to ensure success: there are no second innings or chances to make amends.
The current afternoon start on Sundays does at least give the players a little weekend leeway and one morning to mow the lawn, lie in, or say hello to the wife.
It also suits the fans likewise, who quite like to pop off to the cricket after lunch, and who also might like to travel to away league matches without having to leave before dawn to see the first ball bowled.
Perhaps, one starts to think, the 40-overs beast was actually quite a friendly animal after all, and should not need to follow other endangered species into extinction.
Moving on to Zimbabwe's admission to Test ranks, one can only congratulate them and wish them well, while inevitably questioning their prospects in that kind of company.
There are some talented cricketers in Zimbabwe, but already some of their best have left to play elsewhere in order to further their careers.
Granted, most of these, except obviously G.A.
Hick, could be available still to play for Zimbabwe, but it does not bode well for the development of cricket in Zimbabwe itself, and I would agree with those who hoped that perhaps Zimbabwe could have been readmitted as part of South African cricket in their domestic competitions.
One may go on saying that newer nations will develop and strengthen in the way that, say, Pakistan have in their own time in Test cricket, and Zimbabwe obviously need much development before they become capable of competing over a Test series against a major nation.
At present, most county sides would happily take them on — and probably would not need all five days to effect the desired result.
Still, neither domestic nor international cricket can afford to stagnate, and there will be deservedly close scrutiny on other aspects of the game: bouncers, intimidation, over rates, behaviour, and umpiring, to name but a few, which will give administrators the world over much to ponder.
COUNTY CRICKET
David Foot GLAMORGAN GLOUCESTERSHIRE HAMPSHIRE SOMERSET
WARWICKSHIRE WORCESTERSHIRE
Exercising the mind
HOLED UP through the summer months in a succession of Press-boxes, commodious and quaint, perky and poky, the eyes eventually glaze over, the joints seize up and the marbles get sluggish.
At times, it's hard for the romantic aspects of our job alone to sustain us.
So it isn't a bad idea at this stage of the season for us to conjure up a few exercises to test receding intellectual fibre.
Nothing too demanding, mind you.
Who, for instance, is going to be Somerset's overseas player in 1993 if, as seems likely, Richard Snell doesn't return to Taunton?
Bowler or batsman?
That's another of the imponderables, of .Several weeks ago, I tossed the name of Aqib Javed into the guessing-game ring.
Since the, there have been hints of enthusiasm in certain quarters for the wristy genius Mushtaq Ahmed (who eventually got the nod — ED.).
Jimmy Cook was also back in familiar territory, quietly amiable as ever, pulling on the moustache and whispering that he wouldn't mind another year or two with Somerset after all.
FORGIVE AND FORGET
AS THE vaults of memory crumble
In our dotage, we may find
Past acquaintance, proud or humble,
Face eviction from our mind.
Thus our sapient selectors
Fear their proteges will fade;
To forgetfulness defectors
Irretrievably mislaid.
But, haply from their lips may fall
One Bleak far-distant hour:
‘A name we cannot help recall
Is that of David Gower.
Though seldom one to make a fuss,
He once said ‘Sod ‘em’, meaning us!
And furthermore incurred our wrath
Disporting in a Tiger Moth.’
Jimmy's feats were much admired.
His statistics are there in the Somerset yearbooks for future generations to admire.
But somehow I can't see him being re-signed.
Nor do I in the case of Martin Crowe, whose influence during his Taunton days was quite considerable and who return, given sufficient fitness to sustain the rigours of a year on the circuit, can't be completely discounted.
Viv Richards: no more county cricket?
If Somerset should opt once more for a batsman, my instinct tells me the favourite would be Richie Richardson.
He has affectionate links with the county and indeed played for the 2nd XI and a local club after being brought over originally by Viv Richards, a fellow Antiguan.
Chris Tavaré, who has struggled for batting form for much of the summer and come unstuck with some of his third-day declarations, will be back next year.
He must be favourite to stay in charge.
But it's a valid question to ask who may later succeed him.
Richard Harden, who batted particularly well until his fractured hand, is the vice-captain and must be a strong contender.
So could be Neil Mallender, now deservedly the Test bowler he never really thought he'd be.
And what about Nick Folland, expected to give up geography teaching at Blundell's for a stab at county cricket with Somerset in ‘93?
Folland, 29 on Sept 17, has shown leadership qualities with Devon.
He seldom appears to fail with the bat.
Now one must wait to see how well and happily he adapts to the professional cricketers’ treadmill.
As these notes are being written he has not yet officially decided to shelve teaching.
I'm sure he will, at least in the short term.
It is something he has contemplated privately before; the temptation was this time, I suspect, to great to resist.
But we were talking earlier of overseas players.
Last month we touched on Worcestershire's needs.
The same goes for Glamorgan.
It has not been a productive summer for Viv Richards.
The timing and the eyes have let him down.
I'll be surprised if the option for another year is taken up.
In effect, his season appeared to be ending when Glamorgan went out of the NatWest quarter-finals.
That was the end of their aspirations for the time being— and the end of that romantic notion of one final Lord's appearance for IVA.
There have been a few uneasy ripples  around the cricket fields of Glamorgan this season, of course.
Hugh Morris's future has inevitably been a matter of some debate.
To his surprise, he was overlooked for the vice-captaincy.
Tony Lewis, the chairman, set out the rationale in his newspaper column.
More recently, he had a meeting with Morris, when a new three-year contract was offered to the opening batsman.
This was to include a 1994 benefit.
I know that at least half-a-dozen other counties would like him; they are well aware of the player's pained feelings.
Morris is a Welshman.
He isn't a sulker, nor is he avaricious.
But, as he has every right, he's keeping Glamorgan waiting for an answer.
It will be a major shock to most Welsh cricket spectators — and this column — if he doesn't stay.
I see him back in the long term as county captain.
The one-year one-day contract for Chris Cowdrey never worked out satisfactorily.
They could have done with him, for example, in the NatWest Match with Northants at Swansea.
Matthew Maynard should make the ‘A’ tour as the first step of his return to Test status.
He has had an inconsistent side to handle for much of the summer.
But Stephen James, at his own quiet pace, has at times grated with encouragingly unruffled skill.
I saw enough of ex-Millfield boy David Hemp, in that extraordinary finish at Southampton when the teams played as long as they could in the twilight and Glamorgan were agonisingly close to victory, to believe he has a genuine future as a county player.
Talking of Hampshire reminds us that the left-arm spinner Ian Turner had to wait till August before getting a Championship match.
Then he had the fillip of immediately taking four Worcestershire wickets.
Both he and Shaun Udal were included.
Selection of spinners is a problem for many counties.
Turner could arguably find a more permanent niche with another side, through Hampshire have a high regard for his ability.
Sean Morris, who arrived at Southampton by way of Stowe School and Durham University, has been a heavy scorer for the 2nd XI and, like Turner, fully earned promotion.
He is a natural opener, and Paul Terry has dropped down the order to accommodate him.
Mark Ilott: stung into action
Like Tavaré and Bill Athey, for much of the summer, Mark Nicholas has discovered how elusive runs can be.
Another persistent neurosis for the county has been their running between the wickets.
Robin Smith goes into the dock — and so does Kevan James, less so.
Saddest sight at Portsmouth, by the way, was that of the disconsolate Bobby Parks after discovering he'd been left out once again, to make way for Adrian Aymes.
We mentioned Athey.
For weeks he could find no form.
Then suddenly the runs — and the hundreds — came back.
How Gloucestershire could do with them.
One can only hope that the £2 million restructured county ground at Bristol, where the old Victorian orphanages can give such a depressing aura to the ambience, will bring a corresponding resurgence in the fortunes of the team.
Early in the season, Tony Wright bravely predicted that Gloucestershire were set for a successful summer.
One looked at the team and found it desperately hard to agree.
But they've pulled off a surprise or two, Courtney Walsh has looked as good a bowler as anyone in the country and one or two new names, have emerged.
The trouble is that, with the club looking for immediate improved results, it is sometimes difficult to persevere for too long with newcomers.
Devonian Bobby Dawson — they must have fertile pastures down there, for that was where Roger Twose and Mark Lathwell came from — is a distinct prospect.
He's another Millfield graduate.
And if he hadn't gone after the runs for Gloucestershire, he'd probably have tried his luck as a pro footballer.
Before we leave Gloucestershire, it's been a memorable season for bee stings.
I was present at Kidderminster on the day that Mark Ilott started charging around the outfield in painful discomfiture.
But I missed the more dramatic sting inflicted on Gloucestershire's Mark Davies, by a bee which had gone up the trouser leg and reached the left-arm spinner's more intimate regions.
The frantic disrobing was captured by a blissfully prying TV camera and was regionally screened later that night.
It will become a classic no doubt for the blossoming off-cut industry, keeping Dennis Norden busy.
After the 9pm watershed, one presumes…
Warwickshire have been up there in the Championship frame again.
Roger Twose has every reason to bask in his maiden century in the competition.
It soared into a double, which is no bad way to do it.
He will surely end up the county's player of the year.
Several other counties are already regretting that he slipped through the net.
One relatively new name has been the left-arm seamer Mickey Bell, who arrived no earlier than June for a summer contract.
He has a useful pedigree in the Birmingham League, can come up with an awkward slanted delivery and hopes to be around at  Edgbaston next season.
Another bowler with similar hopes is left-arm spinner Paul Booth.
His scope has been modest this summer.
Indeed he has made not many more than 50 first-class appearances in a career which started with Yorkshire.
There has been some readjustment in run-up and an encouragement to bowl rather faster.
Interestingly, John Childs has been enlisted.
That has always been one of the most heartening aspects of county cricket: mutual help, irrespective of the teams they represent.
Ken Benjamin, the West Indian fast bowler, is currently the favourite as Worcestershire's 1993 acquisition.
His form impressed many during the ‘A’ team series with England last winter.
This has been a season of experiment for the county.
Phil Neale has more or less bowed out as a player and there is even speculation about whether he might still resurface with another team.
I don't rule it out.
Philip Weston, who has made steady progress, was named as captain of England Under-19 for the three-match series with Sri Lanka.
It's much too early to start thinking about Tim Curtis's successor — but Weston, according to the crystal ball, will surely be a candidate.
QUOTE:AS ESSEX 'S fielders lumbered around gifting as many runs as they could, Ilott was seen sprinting around the boundary as if disgusted by the whole charade.
This impressed the members until it was discovered he had been stung by a bee!
Charles Randall in the Daily Telegraph
The wagging right hand
Rob Steen ESSEX KENT MIDDLESEX NORTHAMPTONSHIRE SURREY SUSSEX
MUCH AS he has been donning the hornrimmed glasses and adopting his Clark Kent persona of late, Curtly Ambrose has few equals when it comes to persuading a cricket ball to move faster than a speeding bullet or leap tall batsmen in a single bound.
Mesmerised by that wagging right hand, the South Africans he blew away on that dramatic fifth morning at the Kensington Oval in April could certainly have done with a few chunks of green kryptonite.
Ditto those helpless Englishmen he skittled at the same venue two years earlier.
Curtly Ambrose: rumblings
All the same, rumblings of discontent have been detectable around Wantage Road over the past few weeks, prompting conjecture over a parting of the ways between Northamptonshire and their prized import, even though his contract still has a year to run.
For some time now, it must be said, the Antiguan superhero has been mumbling about hanging up his cape altogether.
An intensely private man, one can only assume the attractions of the year-round treadmill are wearing thin.
So too, apparently, is the patience of his summer employers, despite chief executive Steve Coverdale's insistence at the beginning of the season that expectations should be tempered.
Neil ‘Map’ Taylor of Kent: consistent as ever in his benefit year
While Ambrose earns wickets for his colleagues merely by dint of his presence at the other end, one timely intrusion at Chelmsford dispelled any notions of sloth.
On a turgid turner that had thwarted the seamers' efforts until the 199th over of the match, Essex required a further 29 to avoid the follow-on on the final morning with four wickets intact, only to be denied by a spell of 3 for 1 in 14 deliveries that ultimately allowed Nick Cook to give the hosts (and Britannic Assurance Championship leaders) a right old grilling in the second dig; but for Ambrose he might never have had the chance.
Where the situation goes from here is anyone's guess.
One man who has always known where he was going is Neil Taylor, the Kent beneficiary.
Providing a refreshing exception to the plethora of Goochies and Emberses, he has long revelled in the nickname of ‘Map’, one reflecting an uncommon knowledge of the circuit's quickest routes and choicest hotels.
The benefit system has many critics, and justifiably so, but here is one incontrovertible argument in its favour.
A belligerent bat and adhesive catcher, Taylor certainly enjoyed one of the more auspicious starts to a county career, taking a century off the Sri Lankans on debut in 1979 then claiming four Gold Awards in his first five Benson & Hedges Cup ties.
He has scented higher things — England ‘B’ v Pakistan and 12th man for the real McCoy against India, both in 1982, his first full season — and if the aroma has never led to mouthfuls of fame (due in part to a perceived shortage of confidence against high pace in his formative years) he has been a staunch servant through thick and thin.
A career average hovering around 40, a mark attained only by Woolley, Ames, Cowdrey and Benson among men of Kent, is scarcely something to sniff at.
If the air around the St Lawrence Ground is thick with optimism, the rise of  Mark Ealham has much to do with that.
Taylor's first captain, in fact, was Alan Ealham, rendering the presence of Junior in the present side a somewhat needless reminder of the onrushing years.
Stocky, adaptable and full of vim, Mark has all the hallmarks of the bona fide allrounder, wielding a stubborn blade in addition to the accurate seam-up that has already seen more than one class act tumble before a shrewdly concealed slower ball.
True, the run-up could do with some trimming, but there, quite possibly, is the all-purpose performer Kent always hoped Richard Ellison or Chris Penn might have evolved into.
Expectations were even loftier for Paul Farbrace during his stint at Canterbury.
The path to glory was mapped out.
Farewell Levett, Ames, Evans, Knott, Downton; come in the Flash from Ash.
Instead, Farbrace found his way blocked by Steve Marsh's superior batting and duly followed ‘Nobby’ to Lord's, where the same handicap has consigned him to 2nd XI obscurity.
Now Surrey, a dicky bird tells me, are making overtures.
Son of his father: Mark Ealham, son of former Kent captain Alan, was rewarded for a consistent allround season by the award of his county cap
From Middlesex's point of view this seems a hell of a waste.
Their predilection for keepers who can contribute in the middle order is understandable since this permits a full hand of bowlers, and Downton, of course, vindicated the policy in admirable fashion.
Keith Brown, by contrast, has exposed its shortcomings.
Batsman first, gloveman a distant second, his struggles at the crease this term cannot be unrelated to the additional burden of having to master the game's most demanding discipline while John Emburey and Phil Tufnell practise their wiles.
There are other examples that underline the folly of this increasingly popular practice: Alec Stewart's average in Tests in which he has picked up the gauntlets lags behind that of Jack Russell; Richard Blakey's batting has gone into reverse since he succeeded David Bairstow at Yorkshire.
Murmurings about the highly talented if slightly cocksure Neil Burns wending his way from Taunton to St John's Wood are encouraging, all the more so for Brown.
Not that the failure of Gatting and Co. to mount their anticipated bid for the Championship can be laid at Brown's door.
Had Norman Cowans, Ricky Ellcock and Angus Fraser all been healthy, the script would surely have taken its expected course; as it is, the Middlesex seam attack deserves that ‘pop-gun’ tag rather more than its national counterpart.
Yet, as I write, the differential between runs scored and runs conceded is wider than that of any other county.
So much for statistical quirks.
‘While our batting has been good, the bowling has been steady rather than dynamic, which is why we haven't been bowling sides out a second time,’ reasons Fraser.
‘We also played badly in two one-day games and got knocked out of the NatWest and B&H as a result.’
Happily, Fraser himself is making progress, albeit at a gentle rate.
That characteristically unerring line and grudging length have been intrinsic to Middlesex's record-breaking run in the Sunday slog, and, as that tentative pivot becomes progressively freer, he is fully aware that the next step is to press more firmly on the throttle.
Fraser's relief at being able to resume a career that looked destined for a premature encounter with the scrapheap is manifest.
‘But I've got to start performing.
I'm not 100% fit yet and my initial aim was just to get through a game, but I'm not  philosophical in that situation.
In fact, I've been bloody stupid at times, playing a couple of times when I shouldn't have.
People keep saying it's going to take time before I get back to where I was, but I want it to happen sooner.
Every time you think you've sussed this game it kicks you in the arse.’
In which case, Martin Bicknell's posterior must be feeling a little tender.
Can it really be only 18 months ago that the Surrey opening bowler was dispatching Martin Crowe in successive one-day internationals?
One shoulder operation and a season of water-treading later, this determined, self-assured competitor is once again strutting his stuff to destructive effect; quite why he was overlooked for the Oval Test escapes me.
Admittedly, Bicknell began the current campaign sluggishly as he experimented with an abbreviated approach, then reverted to the full Monty in the B&H quarterfinal against Lancashire to help set up a notable victory.
The marker has stayed back ever since and there have been plenty of reminders of his erstwhile self; enough, one trusts, to restore him to selectorial favour come tour time.
With Rudi Bryson challenging Richard Snell for the dubious honour of joining Hugh Page, Fanie de Villiers, Steve Jefferies and Corrie van Zyl among the ranks of ineffectual South African pace imports, Joey Benjamin's recent burst of form has also been instrumental in Surrey's surge from the Britannic basement.
How many players, one wonders have mustered a Championship-best with bat and ball on the same day?
Some four years after a belated introduction to the first-class fold at the ripe old age of 27, the quick from St Kitts did precisely that against Kent in a remarkable match at Guildford, then improved the bowling mark with 6 for 30 against Durham a fortnight later.
‘Boggers’(no, I don't know why, though I suspect it may have something to do with a haircut that bears a passing resemblance to a bogbrush) may have a couple of incisive seasons left in him at best, but opponents will rarely get a moment's peace when he combines with Bicknell and Waqar Younis next year.
Throw in the maturing spin of Neil Kendrick and James Boiling and The Oval could well have the recipe to end the famine.
Slowly but surely, Sussex are also assembling the requisite ingredients.
Peter Moores impresses more with bat and gloves every time I clap eyes on him; Martin Speight is beginning to weld patience and big numbers to his undoubted ability and bottomless well of self-belief; and if a fractured ankle has set the seal on Adrian Jones's dispiriting season there has been consolation in the imposing shape of Ed Giddins.
A 6′ 4″ natural athlete from Eastbourne who spent the winter slumming it as a ski-guide on the slopes of Meribel, he completed the over when Jones limped out of Lancashire's victory quest at Hove, then proceeded to halt the charge with a career-best 5 for 54.
Besides, any fast bowler brave enough to admit his hobby is conchology has to be a bit special.
Surrey fast bowler Martin Bicknell: back to his best, but not yet back in favour with the selectors
Talking of special, the premature and to Mark Waugh's county season is a cause for much regret, and not merely from an Essex standpoint.
Lax strokes against India last winter led to an unexpected blip in his Test fortunes, but then predictability is hardly a word one readily associates with the man whose one-time monicker, ‘Afghan’(the forgotten Waugh), should now be transferred to brother Steve.
Word was that Mark lacked the bottle to repel Ambrose and his cohorts in the Caribbean two winters ago: yet that didn't stop him from topping the Australian averages.
More than useful at manipulating the seam, dazzling in the field — the pirouette and throw that cut down David Smith at Southend had to be seen to be believed — Mark's elegant bat could prove as distressing for the patriot next summer as it has been enchanting for the connoisseur this.
Forget Kuwait, Evelyn and Auberon: here is the mother of all Waughs.
Paceman Ed Giddins: from skiing to Sussex
Three golden rules
Neil Hallam DERBYSHIRE DURHAM LANCASHIRE LEICESTERSHIRE
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE YORKSHIRE
ONE OF English cricket's most respected administrators once told me that there were three golden rules to be observed by a county recruiting an overseas player.
‘First: get somebody to check out the young strokeplayer and the promising offspinner who have been recommended to members of your committee.
Second: ignore them both.
Third: sign the biggest, nastiest, quickest fast bowler you can find and make sure he's good for a full season and won't go missing half the time.’
Durham, by that reckoning, got it all wrong when they signed a batsman as their overseas player in the knowledge that he would be available for only 3½ months of the five-month season.
But they will take a lot of convincing that any county has had better value from their ‘foreign’ recruit this season than they had out of Dean Jones before his early departure to join the Australian party to tour Sri Lanka.
‘He's been absolutely fantastic,’ says captain David Graveney.
‘I've never known a player with a more positive attitude, and that has been especially valuable with so many inexperienced lads in the squad.
Dean scored almost 1200 runs in first-class matches at an average around 70, and it was easy to see why he is regarded as the best one-day player in the world.
He looks to score off every ball and he's the best runner between the wickets I've ever seen.’
Jones, however, insists that it will be six months before he will be able to gauge whether his time with Durham was a personal success.
‘I joined them for selfish reasons,’ he admits.
‘I had gone through a poor year in Test cricket and wanted to play in England to check out my technique.
I'm glad Durham seem pleased with the way it worked out, but it will have been a waste of time for me if I don't do well in Sri Lanka and in the home series against West Indies.
It's certainly been great fun with Durham and they are working wonders.
I'd love to come back one day and see how such good youngsters as Simon Brown, Mark Briers, Paul Henderson, Stewart Hutton and John Wood are working out.’
What might dissuade Jones from returning is the relentless ‘grind’ of county cricket and a dislike of the three-day game.
‘In England you can play 17 days on the trot and that is bound to affect attitudes.
Back   home we play only 11 first-class matches, so players come out spitting and firing every time in the knowledge that they will have three or four days off afterwards.’
Spitting and firing are not the first words to spring to mind when Yorkshire's venerable left-arm spinner Phil Carrick is mentioned.
But he proved, when he joined the illustrious band of Yorkshire bowlers to take 1000 wickets for the county, that experience and craftsmanship still count for much in a game which seems to reserve its greatest acclaim for the lean, young gunslingers.
Carrick is — how shall we put it — built for comfort these days, and at 40 is in his 23rd season of county cricket.
He remains, however, one of the most artful and resourceful of spinners and a valuable counter-balance to the youthful talent in whom Yorkshire are placing so much faith.
Skipper Martyn Moxon explains: ‘I believe we have as many good youngsters coming through our system as anybody, and they are the future of the club.
For them to develop properly they need guidance and a good example, and you can't do much better than have somebody like Fergie in your setup — somebody who has done and seen it all.’
Carrick is on the verge of joining Wilfred Rhodes, George Hirst, Schofield Haigh, Ted Wainwright and Ray Illingworth in the White Roses' 10,000-run/1000-wicket club, and Moxon adds: ‘You don't get into that sort of company without being a very good player for a very long time.’
David Pennett, on the other hand, has been admitted to the company of Notts first-teamers in no time at all, after being winnowed out of Yorkshire's cricket academy and wondering whether he had a future in the game.
Notts' new cricket manager Mike Hendrick thrust the 22-year-old seamer into the senior squad while Andy Pick nursed a shoulder injury, and claimed: ‘The lad has got a chance of making it if he goes on working and improving.
He's keen, he hits the pitch with a bit of a nip, and best of all he's a good listener.
He wants to be a county cricketer and he's ready to take all the help he can get.’
Notts new boy David Pennett: ‘He's keen, he hits the pitch with a bit of nip, and best of all he's a good listener,’ says his cricket manager Mike Hendrick
BOY WITH A FUTURE CAMBRIDGE University, Sussex, Surrey and England lie in store for this youngster, who followed Big Brother into the Test side
Pennett owes his chance at Trent Bridge to Notts batsman Paul Johnson, who was impressed by his bowling in the Headingley nets while preparing for last winter's England ‘A’ tour.
Pennett was offered a one-season trial on Johnson's recommendation, and says: ‘It has so far gone better than I dared to hope.
I was disappointed that Yorkshire didn't want me, but quite a few players have made good careers for themselves after slipping through their net and I am determined to become another.’
One of the first lessons Pennett learned with Notts was what merciless mickey-takers cricketers are.
After claiming the scalp of Dean Jones, Pennett was so overjoyed that he ran the length of the pitch and locked Paul Pollard in an ecstatic embrace.
But when he claimed another wicket the entire Notts team fled in all directions and left him — arms outspread — to celebrate embarrassingly alone in the middle of the pitch.
They will certainly be happy at Trent Bridge if Pennett turns out anything like as well as another seamer who had to leave his native county to find success — a certain David Millns.
The former Clipstone Colliery linesman had his progress impeded by a string of top-class seamers during a frustrating period on the Nottinghamshire staff, and considered quitting the game before Ken Higgs recruited him for Leicestershire in 1990.
Now Millns is established as one of the most feared and effective fast bowlers on the county circuit, and he might well have been called up for England's final Test at The Oval but for injury.
Certainly Leicestershire's team manager Jack Birkenshaw has no doubt about the credentials of the 27-year-old quickie, whose career took off when umpire Allan Jones, a former fast bowler himself, advised coming in off a straight rather than a curved run.
Birkenshaw insists: ‘David has all the equipment to succeed at Test level.
The pressure won't bother him because he's not a nervous type, and with his pace and aggression he'd trouble the best batsman in the world.
He bowls a good yorker and unlike a lot of bowlers with real pace he doesn't overdo the bouncers.
What's more, he'll go on improving for some time because he was a late starter at 24 and he is still developing.’
Millns, who has signed a new five-year contract at Grace Road, was under scrutiny by England manager Micky Stewart during a victory over Essex before a foot injury struck him down, but he cannot have done his claims much harm with 5 for 67 to make him — at that time — the country's leading wicket-taker.
Now he's hoping for a winter tour, so he can emulate the achievement of his brother-in-law Andy Pick.
Derbyshire's 22-year-old batsman Chris Adams, who now holds the record for the fastest century in the county's history, is another with hopes of a place in the Australian sun this winter.
The former Repton schoolboy took only 57 minutes to reach three figures in Derbyshire's Britannic Assurance Championship match at Worcester, three minutes quicker than Stan Worthington's previous-best, against Notts in 1933.
With an unbeaten 75 off 38 balls in a Sunday League win over Warwicks at Leek in the same week, Adams revealed himself as one of the game's most destructive young batsmen, and he hopes these innings will earn him consideration for the England ‘A’ tour.
‘They usually come up with a couple of lesser-known names, and if I can keep the runs coming I like to think I might at least get a mention.’
Skipper Kim Barnett tells me: ‘There was a time when the opposition used to like me out of the way quickly because I had a reputation for getting after the bowling.
Now I reckon they are doing everything they can to keep me there as long as possible, because when I go they know they've got a real master-blaster like Chris coming in.’
Chris Adams, scorer of Derbyshire's fastest-ever century (57 minutes), at Worcester
In fact it was one of Adams's less-explosive innings which has given him the most pleasure this summer.
He explained: ‘It's great to clatter the bowling about when you get the chance, but I don't want to be thought of simply as a big hitter.
I've scored two hundreds against Worcestershire this season, and the one in May, when I batted for more than four hours and helped save the match, gave more satisfaction than that one in 57 minutes.’
There hasn't been much personal satisfaction for Neil Fairbrother during a Lancashire campaign bedevilled by injuries and under-achievement, but what more efficacious balm for his troubles than a century in the Roses match at Headingley.
Fairbrother's hundred was his fifth in first-class confrontations with Yorkshire — only Chris Lloyd with six stands above him in the Red Rose list — but it was his first three-figure score since he assumed the leadership as captain-elect midway through last summer.
First-team manager David Hughes believes, however, that this barren 12-month spell creates a false picture.
He explains: ‘It may look like a poor run for a player of Neil's calibre, but he's been out with a hamstring problem for much of the time.
He tried to come back too soon and made things worse but when he has played he's looked bang in form.
‘I'm just sorry that he's had this problem at a time when he would surely have had the chance to establish himself in the England side.
Nobody exactly dominated England's middle order, so I'm still confident he'll be on the plane to India, and I would like to think that Nick Speak, Graham Lloyd and Peter Martin will be on the ‘A’ tour.
They have all come on a ton and made a magnificent contribution in a difficult season for us.
Nick has become as consistent as any batter in the Championship; Lloydy has fulfilled everything expected of him; and Peter has shown as much potential as any seamer of his age.’
DEANO OPENS UP — POSITIVELY
RICHIE MEYER on the mental game, as viewed by young county professional DEAN HODGSON
A HUNDRED in your first innings of the season is sweet, and especially so if it's your team's third one-day match, and you've been left out of the first two because you are not regarded as a one-day player.
So, when Gloucestershire's Dean Hodgson opened up this season with a not-out B&H century, it was particularly satisfying.
‘Deano’ is England potential, one of the new highly-educated and articulate young pros due far more remuneration than county cricket can provide.
His entry in The Cricketers' Who's Who includes 11 O-levels (six As), four A-levels (three As); and a BSc (Hons) in Human Biological Sciences from Loughborough.
Since being born in Carlisle 25 years ago, he has come steadily south to realise his cricket potential: from Cumberland (at 20, he was their youngest-ever cap), briefly via 2nd XI cricket in Lancashire and Worcestershire, to Warwickshire.
After two years at Edgbaston, he surfaced at milder, if not exactly balmy, Bristol in 1989.
He enjoyed the freer expression and scored over 1300 runs (at 36.7) in his first full season.
Despite injury, his aggregate last year was 1101 at 30.
A few days before his chanceless century, Dean expressed a wish ‘to go on and make bigger scores.
I've made lots of forties and fifties but not the big hundreds that get you noticed,’ strangely adding, ‘I want to improve my fielding and establish myself in the one-day game.’
He modestly expressed no surprise at being omitted from the squad to play the opening round of one-day matches.
However, after two poor performances, he was drafted in against the tricky Minor Counties (who later beat Sussex).
Even though Jack Russell began crashing fours, Dean told me that he ‘honestly wasn't bothered.
I wasn't thinking about the hundred; it's great batting with Jack because he's so positive.
Then I got a short one outside the off stump — four, to go to 96.
I said to myself, I'll not get another like that, but I did the very next ball!
So I made it to 100 and we won the game shortly after.’
Despite Gloucestershire's poor showing in the B&H this season, no blame could be levelled at their No. 1, for Dean went on to register 54 and 80 against Sussex and Surrey respectively.
He followed up his impressive B&H campaign with a career-best Championship 124 against Yorkshire at Headingley, and was firmly established in the one-day side.
The way Dean got to his Minor Counties hundred supports his belief that the essential difference between club and first-class cricket is consistently better bowling on quicker and better pitches.
He expects the jump from county to Test cricket to be another step up in terms of bowling and concentration.
He reckons that ‘at times, some players coast, while at Test level, in a pressurised atmosphere, players pull out the stops 100% for all five days.
There are county players who average 35–40 and do exactly the same in Tests.
Others may average 65–70, yet won't do it in Test cricket.
Partly a mental inability to step up a grade.
Perhaps self-belief doesn't allow them to bridge that gap.’
Maintaining a concentration peak throughout a season is a problem.
‘There is a lot of travelling and a lot of cricket.
These things take their toll.
By September, perhaps there isn't the same drive as at the beginning of the season, with the early competitions.
I think there are ways round it, by being fitter and doing more training through the season.
After all, it's as vital to work as well then as at any other time.
This is something we all have to work on.
Jumping between one-day games and three/four-day games also doesn't help.’
But there's more to it than this.
Dean recalls three or four innings when even after more than four hours at the crease he felt relaxed and fresh.
‘Thinking back, I must have blocked out all other stimuli, and just concentrated on the ball in the bowler's hand.
Once, I couldn't remember how many breaks for rain there were or in which session I scored my hundred.
I can only liken this to a trance-like state which neither drains you of energy nor leaves you feeling elated afterwards.’
Dean also remembers innings where he has struggled, succumbed for a low score, and felt mentally and physically drained.
‘I'm not really sure why we have these ups and downs during the season.
Could be just the way you're thinking and feeling at the time, allied to a little bit of luck, a natural rhythm.’
This Bachelor of Science, a qualified cricket, tennis and soccer coach, knows a bit about bio-rhythms, but was he ‘prey’ to confidence?
‘Oh, yes, I think so, and I've seen other people not confident, go out there and play like it, and not get any runs.’
Dean reveals Northern grit but not doubt: not to the opposition or his own team-mates: ‘Obviously I have moments of self-doubt, but I don't believe it's right to show that.
I might feel it, but I won't show it.
If I'm feeling low, I actually quite enjoy facing somebody quick, who's in a position to threaten me.
Then you don't think about it.
Danger is a great thing for getting the body to work!
The more positive you are the better.
If you just try to defend and hold out against them, it wears you down.
You have just got to try and score.
If the adrenalin is pumping, I'm ready to play.
I'm not necessarily talking about hooking, just looking to score and utilise the gaps in the field, which can be very attacking in Championship games.
With three or four slips and gulleys, a short leg, a third man and a fine leg, there are only two or three men in front of the wicket!’
I suggested that Jimmy Cook was such an effective No. 1 because he played from the crease.
Dean agreed: ‘I had an opportunity to watch Jimmy a couple of times from short leg in my first season here, and I realised then that he doesn't go very far forward.
He moves forward minimally, to the right place, at the right time to maximise this.
I think I have changed from a front-foot player in the 2nds to a back-foot player in the first team — through necessity really.’
Poorly-prepared pitches damage confidence.
With really quick bowling, the state of the wicket becomes even more critical.
Until suffering a shoulder injury last season, Dean never worried about injury.
‘I don't think it's something you should think of.
It's a negative.
But we aren't made of steel.
Now I work harder on my fitness during the winter and prepare just that little bit better.’
His character continually emerges: ‘I'm a big believer in positive thought.
I've struggled for most of my career, and wouldn't have survived without self-belief.
Even if I've had doubt, I tried not to show it.
Otherwise you simply don't get opportunities in life!’
What does he least like about the game?
Predictably, excessive travel, the fact that county pros aren't better treated for the work they do compared to golfers or tennis players, and the lack of consideration for players in the winter.
‘It's a bind; a poor return for the hours the average county cricketer puts in.’
But Deano's no moaner, so when asked what he most enjoyed, he said with a grin: ‘I guess it's good, all the travelling!
Meeting new people, getting to other countries in the winter.
Enjoying the challenge really.’
Now, that's being positive!
Dr Meyer is a behavioural scientist interested in predator-prey relationships in wildlife and on the cricket field!
He is currently undertaking research into batting techniques against fast bowling.
Australians return to ‘Ceylon’
Gideon Haigh evokes an early tour to the beautiful island which has known no international cricket for five years
IT WAS ALMOST possible to put off those home thoughts as an expatriate Englishman in Ceylon in January 1914.
The latest gramophone discs had just arrived in Colombo, and one could join Harry Champion in the chorus of his You Ought to See the Missus in a Harem Skirt .
The philanthropic Karunatilake family were entertaining lavishly at their villa with luncheon, greasy-pole climbing, egg-and-spoon racing, and an elephant tug-of-war.
But the greatest bliss was the Australian cricket troupe fresh off SS Macedonia , the first from that country to pay Ceylon more than a fleeting visit.
It was even led by a genuine missionary: Reverend Ernest Frederick Waddy, one of a multi-collared brotherhood of gifted Sydney cricketers.
Nearly seven decades would elapse before Ceylon, as Sri Lanka, would earn Test status.
And the team Allan Border is leading there are missionaries again of a sort: cricket on the island lives hand-to-mouth, and political upheaval has repelled touring international sides for five years.
Australian cricketers commuting to and from England have breezed through the island since the beginning of such journeys in 1878, but usually with the attitude that if it is Tuesday it must be Trincomalee.
Ceylon was denied its one chance in 1884 of seeing the ‘Demon’ Fred Spofforth, for instance, because he had left his flannels on-board ship.
Prior to Waddy's squaddies from New South Wales, there had been a ritual banquet for the guests, a ritual beating for the hosts if they were flattered with a match, before locals returned to gramophones and garden parties.
And it would be another 55 years before an Australian team paused much longer than to browse the bazaars, while the nations have met just once in Test cricket on the island, in 1983.
Border's side would do well to approximate the sensitivity and skill the Reverend showed.
He was not utterly Reverend for a start: he kept bees, but he also boxed, ruggered and rowed with the same poise he showed as a raconteur.
And he was to play for Warwickshire between 1919 and 1922.
He'd been corresponding with a local cricket scribe for five years before the trip and had recruited two current Test cricketers in Roy Minnett and Gerry Hazlitt, the dashing Dockers, Cyril and Philip, and an adonis figure in Norman Ebbsworth.
Roy Minnett (left) and Gervys Hazlitt, two Australian Test players who went on the pioneering tour of Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) in 1914
The clergyman's one disadvantage was lack of prior intelligence.
References to Ceylon cricket in journals of the time were like the entry for ‘snakes’ in the legendary Irish encyclopedia: ‘There are no snakes in Ireland.’
Even that thorough cricketer-commentator Tom Horan had elicited no more from his 1882 visit than that the natives were ‘tall, straight and well-formed men very much in colour like a moderately old penny’ and ‘tricky traders’.
E.F.
Waddy's team were playing within two days of landfall, the crowd beneath marquees at the pretty Nondescripts ground witnessing what began as a routine round-up.
But then came the first of what proved steady and skilful resistance from Ceylon's crack bowlers, V.S. de Kretser and Cecil Horan.
The former bowled mean medium-pace, the latter with a venomous left arm, and they shared all 13 Australian wickets to fall in a low-scoring game that Waddy's men won by seven.
It was clearly going to be a little tougher than expected, but the visitors kept playing for hearts as well as minds.
After a trip up the coast to Galle for a reception, motorcade and exhibition game against a district XVIII, Ebbsworth began to show why it was appropriate he was born in Muswellbrook by shelling locals with five sixes and 14 fours.
Native rapture at the tour is revealed in the columns of the Ceylon Sportsman , which reported its every detail down to the Australians' results in social terms of tennis and golf.
Match reports purr with pleasure, capitalising especially brilliant feats for emphasis.
Horan and de Kretser cornered some of those upper cases for Ceylon in Colombo on January 7 when they mowed down the visitors in their second innings for 46 and inflicted a ‘pair’ of ducks on Waddy himself.
It may have been the sight of him bowling ‘from the asylum end’, but the brawny de Kretser took 6 for 14 and masterminded a four-wicket win for the Ceylonese XI.
Waddy had been Australia's 12th man against England in the fifth Test in 1907–08, having scored a century and a half-century against them for NSW in the previous match.
He was a picture of grace, but wasted no time in rehabilitating now with a chanceless 126 in the next match in Kandy against an Up-Country XI.
Ebbsworth again ran riot with ‘capital sixer’ upon ‘capital sixer’, running only eight of his 78 runs, and the team returned to Colombo to beat the Ceylonese and restore Australian pride.
The Reverend's side did not lose again, and silenced the handful of critics flushed out by that unanticipated defeat.
‘A high-class combination’, concluded the Sportsman loyally: ‘Those croakers who had likened the visitors to a fifth-rate team must now be hiding their diminished heads.’
If they weren't from shame they  might have been from Norman Ebbsworth: he finished the visit having hit 38 fours and 18 ‘brilliant sixers’.
The climactic contest with ‘All-Ceylon on a treacherous Galle pitch, exploited again by de Kretser and Horan, pinned spectators in their terraces.
Singleton seamer Bill Cameron, whose 50 tour wickets at fewer than six runs apiece must have made him wish his name was de Silva, hit the winning run with two wickets standing, before a lavish banquet in the Galle Face Hotel.
Waddy, in whose honour the tables had been drawn in an ‘E’ shape, toasted de Kretser and Horan's 54 wickets in four matches.
Horan was ‘as dangerous as anyone playing cricket’.
His team punctuated the evening by breaking into song to the accompaniment of the Goanese United Band, entering into ‘the spirit of the music with much gusto’.
The tone of the report suggests the hotel may have suffered something of a champagne drought after the Australians motorcaded out next morning.
Waiting for Waddy on the liner Orontes was his brother, Canon Percival Stacy Waddy, en route to Sydney.
He carried gloomy news of the European powder-keg that would detonate within five months, and neither would play again at home.
The Reverend, in due course, became Vicar of The Littletons in Evesham.
The Canon, somewhat more ambitiously, became Canon of Jerusalem.
All but a few of the team were destined for careers in uniform, and played little more.
The tragic Hazlitt would die of heart failure within 18 months at 27.
Allan Border might also have few cricket days left, but he and his team can, like Waddy's, sow much goodwill and good work in an isolated cricket outpost this month.
ALLAN BORDER leads the modern-day Australians in their three-Test tour of Sri Lanka.
Reports from the Tests will start in next month's issue of WCM
When St George was knocked off his horse
DAVID LLOYD'S hilarious tales from a lifetime of cricket, from fighting for his life in Tests to equally parlour club diners
TV COMMENTARY duties saw us at Headingley on a Tuesday followed by Cardiff on the Thursday.
Boycs asked me at Headingley if I had a big car.
I said, ‘Yes, it's a BMW 7 series.’
‘That'll do, I'll come to Cardiff with you.’
I thought to myself, ‘I haven't bought any tickets for the raffle but it looks as if I have won first prize.’
We set off en route to South Wales.
Geoffrey reclined in the front seat, put his famous Panama hat over his eyes, his feet on the dashboard, and said: ‘Wake me up at the hotel.’
Some way along the journey, we inexplicably found ourselves in a Tesco car park in Derby.
I was doing a three-point-turn manoeuvre to get us back onto the road when he woke up, lifted his hat and mumbled: ‘Where are we?’
‘Tesco's car park, Derby,’ I said.
He sat bolt upright and started ranting, ‘TESCO'S BLOODY CAR PARK, DERBY!
Derby, what are we doing in Derby?’
‘I think we are lost,’ I said meekly.
‘We are lost —we — it's you that's lost, you thick Lancastrian…etc, etc.’
With that Geoffrey promptly put the Panama back over his eyes and muttered himself nearly back to sleep again.
I say nearly because he woke as I stopped at the next petrol station.
He was bolt upright again.
‘What are you doing now?’ he asked threateningly.
‘Petrol,’ I said, ‘these things don't run off fresh air, you know.’
‘Exactly,’ he retorted, ‘that's why you should have filled up before we set off.’
He banged on and on: ‘Preparation, forward planning, attention to detail — it's just like batting.
Come to think of it you never did any of that when you were batting.
That's why you never got any runs.’
With that he bounced out of the car and steamed into the shop area.
He picked up a packet of mints and said tot he cashier: ‘That gormless Lancastrian out there will pay for these — he has got the brains of a chocolate mouse.’
When I went into the shop people were tripping over themselves and banging into things and I could hear them saying: ‘That's Geoffrey Boycott — Geoffrey Boycott, sat in that car.’
I paid for the petrol and the mints, and the young chap said: ‘It's Geoffrey Boycott sat in that car, isn't it?’
‘Yes,’ I said, ‘we're on our way to the Benson & Hedges match at Cardiff.’
I held my hand out to introduce myself and I said ‘My name is…‘
I didn't get any further.
He interrupted me with, ‘Oh, we know you — you're the chocolate mouse from Lancashire!’
JEEZ!
I KNOW WE'RE BLOODY SKY TV BUT WE DON'T HAVE TO KEEP SHOWING IT!
JOHN NIENABER masterminded the World Cup operation from the Australian end.
The coverage was excellent and went really well — until Ballarat.
England played Sri Lanka and the game was not in the schedule of the host broadcaster, Channel 9.
Of course, from this end, we had to see England in all their matches and so a local production company was hired for the day — and I mean local.
Channel 9 would usually have upwards of 12 cameras; we had only three — one straight at each end and one square at cover/midwicket.
Mike Gatting presented, and in the pre-match interviews he stressed that it was very, very hot, and I swear Gatt must have lost a stone just standing out in the middle talking about the pitch.
The match got under way and, in our earpieces back in London, we could hear the director talking to the cameramen out in Ballarat.
After a while John Nienaber called for a shot of the crowd from the side-on camera.
No picture came.
All that appeared was a shot of the sky with the occasional bird flying past.
The conversation then started to get interesting and we turned up the volume in London.
‘Camera 3, crowd shot,’ commanded John.
‘Three, crowd shot — not the bloody clouds — CROWDS — somebody get to three, he obviously can't hear.’
A production assistant hot-footed it round to Camera 3's position and came through with: ‘Jeez, boss, three's crook — he's fell over in the heat.’
‘Well prop the bastard back up again,’ said John, ‘we need pictures.’
IT USUALLY starts with a phone-call from someone whose first words are: ‘You don't know me…’
That is the signal to get the diary ready because you are going to be asked to speak at a dinner.
It could be anyone's dinner.
It is really surprising the number of obscure groups who will get together for a celebration.
It could be the Slaters’ and Tilers' Institute of Cheshire, Lancashire Floor-Coverers Association, The Duke of Gisburn's Light Cavalry Eleven's Re-Union Dinner, Haslingden Plunge Bath Attendants' Monthly Meeting, Wellingborough Skin Lifters' Society, or the like.
The majority of dinners are very pleasant affairs, but some can be absolute disasters.
The seasoned after-dinner speaker will know what to expect as soon as he enters the room and meets the organiser.
Recipes for disaster will probably take the following form: the ticket will say 7.15 pm for 7.45 pm, and at 8.30 pm ‘the lads’ are still attacking the free bar.
I wonder if I am at the right do and half-expect two boxers to make an appearance.
There are 23 raffle prizes and our MC goes through them all with full details of those donated them — a cool 30 minutes.
After the meal is concluded there is the auction, conducted by a, by then, very inebriated MC whom only Stanley Unwin would understand.
The time has wandered on to 11.15 pm and the only person that the august gathering has heard is the MC, but it is now time to introduce the first speaker, who needs little or no introduction.
Nevertheless he gets one.
One by one speakers come and go until, at last, it is my turn.
The MC, who by now is absolutely incoherent, announces a ‘pee’ break mainly because he wants one.
A further delay before I am on my feet and, in fact, it is now tomorrow.
I always start with the same line: ‘Mr President, Mr Chairman, distinguished guests, gentlemen, 18-handicap golfers, vagrants, vagabonds, tramps, plebs and solicitors, welcome to everyone.
I have been here that long I thought that I had already been on…‘
WHAT AM I DOING HERE, I COULD BE AT HOME BEING IGNORED BY THE FAMILY
I ATTENDED a very up-market company dinner and after the meal the chairman got up and said, ‘I hope you have all enjoyed the Thermal Lobsterdor this evening.’
THE THIRD Test on the 1974–75 tour was at Sydney and everything had been going well.
No broken bones or fatal injuries.
In fact the game was played in a jolly good spirit — until Dennis Lillie came to bat.
Dennis had given us a rough time in the previous two Tests and so I started to chat to him to get him in a favourable mood for when it was our turn to bat.
The usual things, like: ‘How's the wife?’ and ‘Good luck Dennis, enjoy your knock.’
Tony Greig obviously wasn't seeing the situation as I was and bowled him a bouncer first ball, which struck him on the point of the elbow.
I immediately asked Dennis if he was OK, and pointed out that I thought that the ball had jumped up from a good length.
Keith Fletcher, fielding at gully, shouted in that EastEnders' accent: ‘Well done, Greigy, give ‘im another.’
The atmosphere of the game suddenly changed.
Lillee reared round and said: ‘Who said that?’
‘I did,’ said Fletch defiantly.
We finished the day's play and retired to our hotel.
We were all together in the ‘team room’ watching the News when an interview with Lillee came onto the screen.
Now as England players we were not allowed to give interviews during a game, but it seemed that all the Aussie players had their own programmes.
It was either the ‘Ian Chappell Show’ or the ‘Jeff Thomson Show’or the ‘Rod Marsh Show’.
This one was certain to be the ‘Dennis Lillee Show’.
After all the usual questions about the game in progress, Lillie was asked: ‘How do you get on with the England team, what sort of blokes are they?’
‘The Poms are good sorts,’ he replied.
‘I get on well with them all.’
He then leaned forward and, looking straight to camera, continued: ‘Except that little weasel Fletcher.
I know you are watching and I will sort you out tomorrow.’
We all had a good laugh about it, but it was not so funny if you happened to be Keith Fletcher.
Australia made inroads into our batting and the moment of truth arrived when Fletch had to go out and bat.
No helmet, no visor, just his MCC cap with St George on his horse as the badge.
Lillee met him at the gate and escorted him to the middle.
‘Now it's my turn, ya Pommie b…‘
It was as if all Australia had heard the interview.
There was a tremendous crescendo of noise around the ground.
Lillee ‘threw the kitchen sink’ at him, as it were, but Fletch was very watchful and played superbly well.
Then it happened, that one false move that a batsman never wants to make.
Lillee bowled another bouncer which did not get up as much as Fletch anticipated and it hit him straight on the head as he took his eye off the ball.
I will never forget Geoff Arnold, the former Surrey and England fast bowler, jumping up and shouting: ‘Blimey, he's just knocked St George off his ‘orse!’
A COMEDIAN friend of mine, Mike King, tells a smashing gag about Farokh Engineer.
He says that Cedric Rhoades, the former Lancashire chairman, had noted that there were growing hostilities between the countries of India and Pakistan.
Cedric went to Farokh and said: ‘Is there any likelihood of your having to return home and fight for your country?’
Farokh answered, ‘Only if the fighting reaches my village.
Then I will have to go and protect my wife and children.’
‘Where is your village?’ asked Cedric.
‘Altrincham,’ said Farokh.
History Workshop
Huw Richard's series continues with an interview with a
‘revolutionary’— Ric Sissons
‘TO THE rest of the University 1st XI I was an aberration; the revolutionary who loved cricket.’
Ric Sissons's team-mates in the Sussex University teams of the early 1970s who christened him ‘Red Ric’ were clearly unaware of the fact that the far left have been no more immune to the game's charms than any other section of the community.
Henry Hyndman, Karl Marx's first English translator, narrowly missed a place in the Cambridge XI, and some accounts credit disappointment at this exclusion for his subsequent loathing of the ruling class.
Marx's son-in-law Edward Aveling was so great an enthusiast that his death was noted in Wisden , and nearer to our own times C.L.R. James attained guru status to West Indian followers of both Leon Trotsky and George Headley.
Sissons has packed an impressive range of activities into his 39 years — a post-university spell as a professional revolutionary, managing a newspaper edited by fellow cricket enthusiast Tariq Ali, and work for radical publishing houses in Britain and more recently Australia.
Ric Sissons: ‘revolutionary who loved cricket’
If radical politics have provided one consistent thread in his career, cricket has been another — going back to his early days in Derbyshire when he played for Littleover in the Notts & Derby Border League and was taught to bowl legcutters by twice-capped county coach Denis Smith: ‘I suppose I ultimately failed him because in my rebelliousness I refused to have a decent short haircut,’ he recalls.
His opportunity to bring the two threads together as a writer came in the early 1980s through the radical London magazine City Limits — which also gave WCM regular Rob Steen his first break as a cricket-writer.
Sissons recalls: ‘I began to write county cricket previews and review new books.
Subsequently I did a couple of feature interviews, one with Mike Brearley and another with C.L.R. James.
That really was a great treat.
I still re-read and enjoy Beyond a Boundary , finding something new, often appreciating a passage that had passed my by earlier.
CLR had also been a Trotskyist so I identified greatly with him.’
And CLR's conviction that cricket can only be seen truly in its social, political and historical context has pervaded Sissons's subsequent writings on the game, including three books —Cricket and Empire ,The Players and George Lohmann —The Beau Ideal .
He says: ‘My approach is the massive accumulation of facts, then putting the material into its correct social, political and historical context.
You have to see beyond the boundary otherwise it's a meaningless obsession.’
Cricket and Empire started life as film research commissioned by David Puttnam for a film on Bodyline that was never made — losing out to the unintentionally funny Australian TV mini-series many readers will remember from the early 1980s: ‘David wanted me to find the ‘smoking gun’.
I did discover that there were substantial government files on the Bodyline crisis.
I found the reference number.
Tragically the files had been destroyed.
This has been one of my great disappointments,’ he says.
But the project was not all frustration.
He met and struck a rapport with Brian Stoddart, academic historical adviser on the mini-series, who became his co-author on Cricket and Empire : ‘We had new information, and above all could place the incident in its broader social, political and historical context.
Bodyline only makes sense in the context of Anglo-Australian relations and the Depression of the 1930s,’ he says.
Since moving to Australia in 1983 he has enjoyed both the informal Australian approach to life and the outlook of writers like Stoddart and Richard Cashman: ‘They are much more challenging in their approach, less constrained by conventions,’ he says.
John Arlott pointed to the importance of Australian influences on his next and so far more important book,The Players .
This history of professionalism was prompted by material on the payment of players in the 1930s he found when researching Bodyline.
But his own political outlook was also vital: ‘Those influences made me want to write a history of the game's toilers, the hired labourers.
I wanted to know where they came from and why: how they were treated; and what had become of them.’
This view, he argues, had previously been unheard in the game's chronicles: ‘Basically the history of cricket has been written by the establishment and lacks any social context.
Cricket had been separated from the real world, taken away from daily life.’
His own research drew on anecdote and information from cricket annuals,Cricket —A Weekly Record of the Game — in his words ‘a fantastic source’— newspapers, memoirs, interviews and minutes and record books retained by Lancashire, Surrey and fellow-historian Peter Wynne-Thomas for Notts.
Lancashire gave him one of his most memorable finds (an Old Trafford cupboard crammed with old minute books) and Surrey his next subject (George Lohmann): ‘He was a rebel, but also a tragic figure.
Perhaps in his way he was the sort of cricketer I would like to have been if I had possessed the talent.
George knew he was a star.
The crowds loved him and he wanted to be rewarded accordingly.
He was also intelligent and articulate.
After nearly a decade down under he was overdue an entirely Australian subject — the Board of Control having disappointed him by refusing to let him write their official history: ‘This is the one major cricket book still to be written in Australia.
Too many skeletons in the cupboard?
Am I too radical?’ he wonders.
But his next book should still fill a substantial gap: a biography of C.T.B. Turner, one of the first great Australian bowlers.
And once again Ric is attempting to go beyond the normal boundaries of cricket-writing: ‘If I wanted to write a biography which was simply a record of CTB's achievements I would have finished it some time ago.
I am grappling with trying to get more of a sense of the man, his character, and how it was formed, the influences, the inner anguish.
This requires new skills and ideas.
As a reader I think there is too much superficial cricket autobiography and biography already available.
CTB has to make a distinctive mark.’
His output, he says, has been restricted by other activities and responsibilities.
The wonder is perhaps that he has time to do any writing and research at all after running two companies — Pluto Press (Australia) and PR agency Social Change Media — and with partner Stephanie Dowrick, also a writer, bringing up two children.
CTB will be published in 1993, and if its quality matches that of his earlier work, few readers will complain at a relative lack of writers with fewer outside commitments.
C.L.R James, radical activist and cricket enthusiast, would approve on both counts.
THE STRANGE DEATH OF THE SUNDAY LEAGUE
David Potter's ‘post mortem’
IT IS probable that, unless your particular county was involved, you will not be able to say which county won the Refuge Assurance League of 1988 or 1990, to take two years at random.
And yet many people will recall with astonishing vividness and clarity the heartbreaks of Somerset in 1976 and 1978, their triumph in 1979, the astute captaincy of Ray Illingworth in 1977, Barry Richard's consistent sparkle with Hampshire in 1974 and 1975, and Warwickshire's unexpected triumph in 1980.
These were the days when cricket put its best foot forward.
A game was televised in its entirety every Sunday on BBC2.
Granted this helped the swelling of the coffers of the tobacco company that was the sponsor, but it did have a tremendous evangelical effect for the game, proselytising many.
The enthusiastic among us could sit with out scorebooks, others could sit and listen to the expert commenting of two gentlemen sadly no longer with us, John Arlott and Jim Laker.
The outreaching into the non-cricket public was profound.
Quite a few of the ‘cricket is boring’ brigade of know-alls came to may house for Sunday tea, and went away entranced by a brilliant finish involving the last-minute heroics of a David Bairstow or an Eddie Barlow.
The garden used to go untended, the dog was unwalked; Sunday was cricket day.
But then in the early 1980s things began to go wrong.
The BBC decided to prune the Sunday League, and we had to share with a grand prix or a showjumping event.
In addition, the 1981 Australians played some of their Tests on a Sunday.
All this militated against the Sunday League, which seemed to shrink and yield in exposure and importance.
By the early 1990s the BBC had lost interest altogether, and the TCCB cynically sold the product to satellite broadcasting.
The result is a minuscule audience and little interest.
By 1992, the League could not even attract a sponsor, and it seems that, sooner or later, British Sky Broadcasting will also forfeit its input.
The 40-overs format is decried by quite a few, not all of them dyed-in-the-wool traditionalists, and it does have its limitations; but next year, it will be 50-overs-a-side, making it more like the current Benson & Hedges or NatWest layout.
What is far more important, however, is that the TCCB should make sure that it is indeed a national league by selling rights to the BBC, so that everyone can feel part of the competition.
It will be argued that the BBC will not necessarily show a game every Sunday.
Perhaps not: Wimbledon, Open Golf and even cricket itself in the shape of Sunday play in Test matches will all challenge for competition.
But there still remain a great deal of summer Sundays in which the massive latent cricket audience can be satisfied.
In particular, the month of August, with the possibility of an exciting finish to the Sunday League, and before all-conquering football really gets into its stride, seems to offer real possibilities.
As it is, the League seems to be dying on its feet, Cricket must realise that television (and that must mean terrestrial TV, to which millions have access) is the sine qua non ) of any sport if the sport is to thrive.
I was not the only person who felt betrayed by filthy lucre when the World Cup went to the satellite company.
And as for those who destroyed my Sunday all those years ago, I shall never forgive them.
THE ‘A’ TEAM
JONATHAN RICE plays the tantalising alphabetical game
WHAT A statistical thrill the first day of the fourth Test gave us!
I refer not only to the fact that the match started with two wides, courtesy of Chris Lewis; not only to the strange sight of an opening bowler in odd socks (Neil Mallender black left sock, white right sock); not only to the fact that England had no player with three initials for the first time since the third Test against New Zealand in 1990, the selectors having left out Salisbury and having sent get-well-soon messages to DeFreitas, Tufnell and Fraser; not only to the fact that Mallender joined the huge list of Test opening bowlers with a double ‘I’ in their name (a list that in recent years has included Dilley, Allott, Small, Williams and Ellison: expect Millns to add his name to the pile soon.
Lillee, Hall, Lindwall, Miller and Allen are greater names for the past); and not only that this is the longest sentence I've ever put together.
The first day also gave us the sight of an England captain losing the toss on his birthday, the first time this has happened in the history of Test cricket.
Two other England captains have tossed on their birthdays, and both times against Australia.
Peter May called correctly on Dec 31, 1958, and Ray Illingworth got Ian Chappell to guess wrong on June 8, 1972.
Gooch is actually the eighth England captain to play in a Test on his birthday: Mike Gatting did it twice, on June 6, 1987 and 1988, Mike Denness once on Dec 1, 1974.
Illingworth played birthday Tests in three successive years, 1971, 1972 and 1973, and May laid the foundations of a captain's hundred in a losing cause on his birthday at the end of 1958.
Len Hutton was on the way to a win against India on his birthday on June 23, 1952, the first time an England birthday captain had been on the winning side, and A.E.R.
Gilligan led his side against Australia on Dec 23, 1924.
The first England player to be captain on his birthday was W.G. Grace, on July 18, 1896, his 48th birthday, but Australia won.
S.J. Snooke of South Africa, who led his side to defeat against England over his 29th birthday, Feb. 1, 1910, was the first overseas player to be able to offer birthday cake at the tea interval, but the first captain to five himself a victory as a birthday present was the Australian H.L. Collins, whose 36th birthday fell on the fifth day of the seven-day third Test against England in January 1925, which Australia eventually won by 11 runs.
The 1924–25 series was the first in which the captains of each side had their birthdays while playing for their country.
For the record, Allan Border has had only one birthday at the helm, on July 27, 1989.
That was the first day of the fourth Test against England.
Border called wrongly but eventually won the match by nine wickets.
The day was more statistically memorable for Robin Smith's first Test hundred, coming an hour or two after brother Chris Smith's hundred for Hampshire against Gloucestershire at Portsmouth.
My favourite statistic of the match, however, is that six of the England team have the middle initial A. I cannot be bothered to check whether this has ever happened before, but I doubt it.
There are three Alans (Gooch, Mallender and Munton), an Andrew (Atherton), an Arnold (Smith) and an Ashley (Hick).
Maybe this is what England have been looking for, a team that looks symmetrical on the scorecard, at least.
If we drop Gower, Lewis, Pringle, Ramprakash and Stewart, we could have a complete side made up of people with the middle initial.
A. How about this team as a printer's delight?
G.A.
Gooch, M.A. Atherton, A.A. Metcalfe, R.A. Smith, G.A.
Hick, M.A. Crawley, S.A. Marsh (wkpr), D.A.
Reeve, T.A.
Munton, D.A.
Graveney, N.A. Mallender?
That still leaves T.A.
Lloyd, M.A. Garnham, D.A.
Leatherdale and N.A. Felton among others, not to mention N.A. Foster after October.
My XI would still have three Alans, as well as three Andrews (Crawley, and Marsh, as well as Atherton), two Anthonys (Metcalfe and Graveney), and one each of Alexander (Reeve), Arnold and Ashley.
We could even put together a pretty good team of M.A.s, and with M.A. Robinson at No. 11, Devon Malcolm would be in no danger of retaining his title of ‘possibly the worst No. 11 in Test cricket today’.
Is there any other team of middle initials to match the A match?
Well, the Cs looked promising to begin with, with R.C. Russell and C.C. Lewis to kick it off in style, but after finding a find opening pair in B.C. Broad and T.C. Middleton, and two more seam bowlers in M.C. Ilott and G.C. Small, I ran out of likely candidates, although two Kent discards, S.C.
Goldsmith and M.C. Dobson, could be in the running.
Eventually, I realised that the only side to match the As are the Js.
He is my J. squad: A.J. Stewart, D.J.
Bicknell, N.J. Speak, C.J. Tavaré, A.J. Lamb, J.J. Whitaker, D.J.
Capel, P.J. Newport, S.J. Rhodes (wkpr), D.J.
Millns, and M.J. McCague.
There's S.J. Base, R.J. Harden, K.J. Barnett, C.J. Adams, A.J. Murphy, R.J. Blakey, R.J. Maru, P-J.
Bakker (is his qualified for England?
Is his J a middle initial or half of a first initial?) and K.J. Shine, as well as A.J. Wright, R.J. Scott, P.J. Prichard and N.J. Lenham, so we could have two J sides with no trouble.
I'd still pick the As to seen them off though.
The Js look a little like Durham: loads of experience, but perhaps a little injury-prone.
The second day continued where the first day left off: four catches by Hick to equal the record for a Test against Pakistan originally set by the little-remembered spinner Jim McConnon of Glamorgan in 1954, and then my researches led me to the remarkable fact that John Birch, who played for Notts from 1973 to 1988, was known as ‘Bonk’.
By lunch we had seen an all-run six for Mike Atherton.
When did that last happen in a Test?
Excuse me while I dive back into my piles of daft statistics.
THE QUIZ
Compiled by Derek Lodge
SOME Test captains go out in a blaze of glory; some do not.
All these questions relate to a captain's last Test as captain, not necessarily to the last Test in which he played.
1.
His team dismissed their opponents for a record low score.
2.
His last Test was the longest ever played in Australia.
3.
He regained the Ashes, on his birthday.
4.
He completed his personal Test double, by scoring six runs.
5.
He made his 50th Test catch, in his last match.
6.
He caught five men, in his last innings in the field.
7.
He made the top score in the match, and his team won a unique tournament.
8.
He bowled Victor Trumper, and also enforced the follow-on.
9.
He say one of his batsmen score over 300 runs, without a double-hundred.
10.
His last Test (as a captain) was the first that his country played against those particular opponents, and he was the only right-hander among his team's top six batsmen.
11.
England's captain in South Africa 70 years ago.
Who is he?
Answers on page 56
WISDEN CROSSWORD
Compiled by David Peck
ACROSS
1.
He has places in Leicestershire and Somerset (5)
6.
Boycott — one of the colourful features of Somerset (5)
8.
See 10 across 
9.
A score, for instance, sited to have been just sighted (4)
10 & 8.
Member of Royal Family switched with South African Test cricketer (7, 6)
14.
A first for Derrick but a second for George (4)
15.
Call it a day after getting total (6)
17.
Less than one drink for New Road man (5)
18.
Description of political discussions with old man Mitchell (5)
DOWN
1.
One of a former battery of Hortons to plug electrical unit (5)
2.
Nominally Mullally (4)
3.
Look for a shot (6)
4.
That part of opponent's century which gets up your nose (5)
7.
Most expensive couple of deliveries before a break (7)
11.
Part of the bat market (6)
12 & 13.
Fully deal with topic in the appropriate position (5, 5)
16.
Give a score for Ilott (4)
HADLEE THE PEA
TEST cricket's leading wicket-taker Sir Richard Hadlee has been accorded the unusual honour of having a pea named after him.
The Hadlee Pea is a new variety of Blue Prussian pea; it is ideal for use in curries and stews, and as such is expected to prove popular in India.
Walsh: top of the pile
SEVEN months ago, Gloucestershire's Jamaican fast bowler Courtney Walsh — along with Jeffrey Dujon, Viv Richards and Gordon Greenidge — was omitted from West Indies' one-day squad to tour Pakistan and Australia and then later for the World Cup.
It seemed that Walsh had reached a career crossroads after taking 174 wickets in 50 Tests.
West Indies, following their dominance of the world cricket stage since the mid-1970s, were in the process of rebuilding, and new captain Richie Richardson, keen to make his individual mark, was clearly investing in the blossoming talents of the likes of batsmen Carl Hooper, Brian Lara, Philo Wallace and Keith Arthurton and bowlers Ian Bishop, Curtly Ambrose and Anderson Cummins.
However, since then, Walsh, Gloucestershire's beneficiary for 1992, has not only enjoyed the best Test match spell of his career but, in revitalised fashion, he has been the early pace-setter by some margin in the English first-class bowling averages.
‘It's the best start I've had at the beginning of an English county season,’ the 6′ 5½ ″ strike bowler admits.
Courtney Walsh of Jamaica, Gloucestershire and West Indies, caricatured by David Wallace
The early-season statistics certainly bore this out.
In his first four Championship matches, Walsh took 31 wickets at 9.51, including 11 in the fixture against Yorkshire at Headingley and successive five-wicket hauls against Somerset at Gloucester.
In the first round of the NatWest, he equalled his career-best performance in the competition with 6 for 21 as Cheshire collapsed to a 204-run defeat.
Walsh attributes his excellent form to the first real break he has had from year-round cricket: ‘Being omitted from the World Cup squad was a blessing in disguise.
It's the first chance I've had of spending a couple of months at home, leading a normal life and just doing things that are interesting to do.
Having a bit of a rest in the winter, I was able to relax a little bit more, so I think I came over a lot fresher than I normally do for the start of the season.
The weather has also been reasonably kind, so it's a bit of both really — with the sun on my back it definitely helps me to perform a lot better.’
But it certainly was not all rest and relaxation for Courtney Walsh over the winter.
Captaining Jamaica for the second successive season, he not only led them to Red Stripe Cup triumph (their third in five years), but, with the ball, he broke the tournament record with 36 wickets at 11.30.
‘We had a very good season,’ Walsh reflects, ‘not just because we've won something, but because you learn in the process, and it's very enjoyable.
We played some good cricket and managed to win the competition with a young and inexperienced team, which can only be good for the country.’
Of the young players coming up through the Jamaican ranks, Walsh rates in particular the 21-year-old left-hander Robert Samuels, opening batsman Delroy Morgan, and fast bowler Joel Grant, while Jimmy Adams has already made an impressive Test debut against South Africa.
Understandably, non-selection for the World Cup was a huge disappointment for Walsh, but his response was phlegmatic: ‘I didn't put myself under any pressure, because there's no point.
I've been left out of previous games, so I just took the disappointment with me.
I thought if I was a little bit fitter, fresher and stronger I would be able to do a better job — which is what turned out in the end.’
Selected for the historic first Test match against South Africa at Kensington Oval, Walsh admits he did not start too well (first-innings figures of 27–7–71–0 and dropping Andrew Hudson at long leg off Ambrose when the eventual centurion was 22).
On the final morning, South Africa were poised for victory, with 79 runs needed and eight wickets in hand.
‘Both Wessels and Kirsten were playing extremely well,’ Walsh recalls, ‘and we looked dead and buried.
However the guys didn't give up, and we just came out and turned the game around.’
For the record, although West Indies Man of the Match Ambrose finished with second-innings figures of 6 for 34, Walsh claimed the vital wickets of Wessels, Kirsten and Kuiper in an inspired morning spell of 11–7–8–4 —‘probably the best spell I've had in Test matches,’ he believes.
‘That morning was the best of my life as far as Test cricket is concerned.’
At Test level — and despite his present 178-wicket haul — Walsh is still probably an under-rated bowler.
Since his debut in 1984, he has largely been cast in the role of workhorse for West Indies, his seemingly effortless, languid approach to the wicket enabling him to bowl fairly long spells, even in hot and humid conditions.
And yet, over the past few years, he is probably regarded in the Caribbean as the West Indies bowler able to extract more movement off the pitch than any other and, certainly, during last summer's Test series against England, he and Ambrose were the leaders in the ‘unplayable delivery’ department.
With his height, Walsh is obviously able to exploit bounce even on rather flat surfaces, and his stock ball to the right-hander is that which cuts back in, usually from just short of a length.
His yorker may not be quite in the same league as the Waqar Younis toe-cruncher but, again because of his height, batsmen often fail to pick the length until too late and, with the inswing, the sight of middle and leg stumps splayed is not uncommon.
The Walsh inswinging yorker was a major factor in his remarkable analysis at Bath in 1989, when he produced figures of 16–4–19–7 (including 4 for 5 in three overs) in Gloucestershire's Championship match against Somerset.
But perhaps the main weapon in the Walsh armoury is his intelligent change of pace.
Gloucestershire and England wicketkeeper Jack Russell believes Walsh to be the hardest bowler he has kept to because of his variation: ‘You can never be stay in the right place — one ball will hit you in the chest and the next won't really come through.
You never settle with him.
He's a great cricket thinker and you never completely line him up.’
To compound the problems for the keeper standing back to Walsh is the fact that the ball swings and dips a lot after it pitches.
‘The ball he bowls is very awkward,’ Russell comments, ‘but he's certainly a quality bowler.
He generally hits the seam 19 out of 20 deliveries bowled.’
Certainly at county level Walsh has been among the most penetrative bowlers on the circuit since his debut here in 1984, and in that period his name can be bracketed with such as Sir Richard Hadlee, Malcolm Marshall, Neil Foster, Terry Alderman, Allan Donald, and Waqar Younis as the man most likely to top the end-of-season averages.
In 1986 he bagged 118 first-class victims at 18 apiece and, as long as he can maintain a fair degree of fitness this season, a second 100-wicket tally looks very much on the cards.
ENGLAND v PAKISTAN FOURTH TEST CORNHILL INSURANCE SERIES
England triumph in battle of suspicious minds
England drew level with Pakistan by winning the Headingley Test match in four days.
It was always going to be a tough encounter, with the likelihood of further displays of petulance based on the tourists' suspicion of the umpires.
DAVID FRITH reports:
THE CRUSADE for the adoption of television assistance for umpires' line decisions took a giant step forward on the final day.
England, needing 99 to win, should lost captain Graham Gooch in the fifth over when, as TV showed, Waqar Younis's throw to Moin Khan, the wicketkeeper, beat the sprinting batsman by 2′.
Umpire Ken Palmer had no more chance than any other human being of seeing to the inch whether Gooch had made it to safety in those split-seconds.
‘Not out’ was the verdict, and the Pakistan team and their supporters will point to that forever more as the cause of their defeat in this fourth Cornhill Test match.
Gooch went on to make a vital 37, lasting a further 24 overs.
and seeing England to the brink of victory.
But his run-out reprieve was only one element of a pervasive suspicion that seemed to saturate the Pakistan camp.
Throughout the match their numerous lbw and caught-behind appeals had been frenzied and desperate, their reactions to the refusal of all bar five of them being melodramatic in the extreme.
Had the operator of the giant video screen been allowed to go on merrily replaying the more explosive moments, there could have been rioting on the terraces, where already the stewards had their work cut out.
Chanting by ‘supporters’ of both teams was abusive and discordant enough.
When yobs threw a mutilated pig's head into the Pakistani enclave it was a surprise that the nastiest incident since the 1845 battle of Firozshah failed to erupt.
Nature irresistibly asserts itself, and no amount of talking by ICC match referee Clyde Walcott before the match was going to suppress the volatility of several of the Pakistan cricketers.
At the end, one of the least likely, a substitute, earned himself a fine, and that perennial problem child Moin Khan got a finger-wagging.
Test matches nowadays are concluding not with handshakes, smiles, celebrations and commiserations but disciplinary hearings.
‘Manhood’ seems to have been redefined.
The match ball, which plummeted from the sky into match judge Fred Trueman's eager hands, conveyed by a female member of the 4th (V) Battalion The Parachute Regiment's free-fall team, hardly left the ground as Chris Lewis bowled his early sighters after Pakistan had grasped the nettle by batting first.
Javed Miandad's XI was unchanged, but England had a side tailored for the imagined needs of Leeds, Russell, Malcolm and Salisbury making way for Ramprakash, Pringle and Mallender, with Newport (less than full fit) and Childs left out of the squad of 13.
Gooch later said he would have batted, but England will have been pleased with the overcast conditions on the opening day, which gave way to sunny weather when England batted.
Patrick Eagar's picture (right) shows Graham Gooch's bat short of the crease in the frantic later stages of the match.
BBC-TV's shot (above) is even more conclusive
Pakistan toiled to 165 for 8 by the 7pm close, and the terms for a low-scoring game seemed to have been set.
Sohail was taken at slip off a weak cut attempt, and Yorkshire-born Neil Mallender, 30, Northants 1980–86, Somerset 1987 to date, Otago 1983 to date, had his first Test wicket in his seventh over.
A popular, undemonstrative, workaday fast-medium seamer and swinger, he is known as ‘Ghost’ for his fair hair and eyebrows, though his features are a touch Jack Palance.
Great rewards lay ahead for him in his debut Test.
Almost 2½ hours were lost spanning the lunch-break, the light closing in and drizzle painting a sheen on the covers.
Then, within an hour of resumption, three more wickets fell.
Mujtaba, reaching forward, inside-edged Mallender, and Pringle, bowling with equally miserly accuracy, bowled the patient Ramiz through the gate and, in the same over, persuaded Miandad to pop a gentle bat-pad catch to Smith.
That made it 68 for 4 as the rain returned and 14 minutes nett went missing around the tea interval.
England's purpose-built attack was carrying out its duties to the letter, right down to Munton's strike soon after his delayed introduction.
Inzamam really had only himself to blame, reaching wide to drive and nicking to Hick, who held No. 1 of his record-equalling half-dozen catches.
Gooch had a bowl, but it was an hour before the next casualty, Akram sparing Salim Malik in a misunderstanding over a third run and taking himself off on the sad  trek back to the redbrick pavilion.
Moin soon played across Lewis and was taken by Hick at second slip, and then Mallender came back and had Waqar caught by the same fieldsman.
By the end, Malik had constructed an invaluable 57, watchful, skilled, determined.
His judgment was almost impeccable, and on the ground where he had been caught for 99 five years earlier (by Gower, the only current survivor from that England side), he now stood tall among the innings ruins.
The weather improved and the pitch, if anything, afforded slightly more reliable bounce on the second day.
England needed an hour to remove the last two wickets.
Mushtaq Ahmed held out for an hour-and-a-half for 11, standing by Malik while the biggest stand of the innings — 64 — was constructed.
Hick pouched his fourth catch with the ease of a Hammond, and Pakistan were denied a 200 total.
To the delight of the sober-suited committeemen and the pie-eyed slobs on the other side of the ground alike, no England wicket now fell for almost four hours.
Though Akram bent the ball around like a frisbee and Waqar exploited his own high-velocity repertoire of mayhem, Gooch and Atherton created a developing sense of well-being, albeit fragile.
They were not free of false strokes and near-misses, but, both being very practical chaps, they took their chances to score without hesitancy.
The 100 came in the 28th over, and for those who wondered how England could be doing so well after Pakistan's moderate success, the answer lay as much in England's two disciplined straight bats as in the departed cloud cover.
Gooch reached his half-century by pushing Waqar off his hip for four, and might have had four more had not the ball bobbled off the wretched Cornhill advertisement mat at straight-hit.
Atherton, his 20th Test, reached his 11th fifty, and, of anything, looked more at ease than his captain.
At tea England luxuriated in a scoreline of 130 without loss, and the first signs of Pakistani frustration at the rejection of appeals were already evident.
Their seventh century opening stand in 14 Tests together safely established, the openers were separated at last when the younger man was bowled by Akram, who pitched around leg and hit the off stump at sped.
Atherton might have been saved had he played forward, and yet his judgment against his previous 185 balls was almost unceasingly correct.
From 168 for 1 England added 48 more by the close, Gooch marching to 93 (220 balls), Smith 22 after an agonising few early overs.
Mushtaq, shortly before England took the lead, was inconsolable when Smith survived and appeal after padding up to a googly.
Without his moustache, the little spin magician looked more boyish than ever, prompting the thought that unless he cooled down he might benefit from six of the best from the carpet-slipper.
Waqar, too, was utilising the glossary compiled by latterday cricketers of hostile bent, for venting upon those opponents whose bats are too wide or whose luck is too gross.
In one over, Mushtaq embraced the universal tragedy of legspin: Smith was beaten by a beauty, and Gooch baseball-hit an offside ball into the bleachers for six beyond long-on to reach 90.
Then Waqar worked Smith over again, forcing him to duck two which scraped past his broad back, poor Moin getting his fingers stung again.
Came another short one, then something of full length, which Smith crashed to the cover boundary, raising a chorus of delirium from that sun-swathed, beer-fuming terrace.
Neil Mallender, Test cricket's new, benign ‘Jack Palance’ figure, fires down another accurate seamer at Headingley, where he made a record-breaking debut with eight wickets
That evening, Mike Atherton made a curious but nonetheless accurate observation when he said that it was nice to get in early when the ball's new and not moving around a lot .
What would Ray Lindwall have said?
But it is true that Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis come into their own most forcibly when the ball, one side at least, is slightly worn.
A fairly massive England score seemed assured as another full house assembled for the third day.
The batting list was long, with Hick at No. 7.
Within three overs Gooch had his century, his first against Pakistan, 17th in all, ninth in his 27 Tests as England captain, and for once he bore little resemblance to lonely General Gordon, whose last stand is immortalised by George Joy in Leeds Art Gallery.
It was a hundred almost of the grand stature of that which set up the historic victory here over West Indies a year ago, even if it was reached with a thick edge.
Pakistan ignored the chance of a new ball, and Akram was still making the old one deviate as much as perhaps 15 degrees.
Another century stand was posted.
Another century stand was posted.
Then came the crash, messier than anything which befell England in the Lord's Test.
Robin Smith (42) drove loosely to cover, and Aqib Javed, the ‘villain’ of Old Trafford, had his first wicket.
Soon, though, he had to leave the field with a recurrence of his leg injury, and Waqar (0 for 99 off 22 overs) returned perhaps a little earlier than might otherwise have been the case.
He speared a full-toss into Stewart's pads, out of the dark Press-box window, and what somebody calculated as the 27th appeal of the innings was answered to the Pakistanis' exquisite satisfaction.
Waqar himself directed a satsriakat of gratitude to umpire Kitchen.
The end of a 10-year drought: David Gower hits the winning runs and England have beaten Pakistan in a Test match for the first time since 1982
After almost seven hours at the crease, and gallingly at one minute past one, when the sniff of lunch was everywhere, Gooch fell.
Mushtaq, who had been spinning widely to Gower out of the rough, drifted a glorious topspinner through that doughty defence to unseat England's skipper for 135.
The world's No. 1 batsman, according to the ratings, was two days into his 40th year, and had once again set his side up for a further victory to help blot out the misery of 1987–89.
Without addition after lunch, England lost Ramprakash as Mushtaq completed his over.
It was the young Middlesex batsman's third successive Test duck (Sri Lanka, Lord's, ‘91 and Edgbaston this season), a grievous setback, and at the same time surely reassurance to the Pakistanis that, even with a sweep shot such as this, their appeals were being given due and fair consideration.
The end of a 10-year drought: David Gower hits the winning runs and England have beaten Pakistan in a Test match for the first time since 1982
Gower flicked Waqar to leg to raise the 300, but Hick now went, yorked absolutely, almost embarrassingly, by Mr Younis, who then fired a yorker into Lewis's boot.
It might just have eluded leg stump, but the lbw decision was given.
Later that over Pringle let a ball or two pass only to freeze in horror as his last snapped back to hit the off stump.
Mallender lasted four balls, Waqar bowling him with one which hardly got up, though the batsman was about to protect his chest.
So Waqar, with this old, old ball, under cloud cover, had taken 5 for 13 in 38 balls, and with Munton pad-batting Mushtaq, England's last six batsmen had made two runs between them, and the last eight wickets had dropped for a mere 28 runs.
Gower, in at No. 5, was left 18 not out, and for a time it seemed that the match had been swung.
But England had a lead of 123, if much than hoped for, and the light was about to become discouraging for batsmen once more.
Seven overs were nonsensically deducted between innings from the day's ration.
This decisive third evening went England's way.
Sohail was out again, cutting, and after tea Mujtaba gave Hick a comfortable slip catch.
(To the remark ‘The ball seems to be following Hick around’, Mike Brearley retorted: ‘It does when he bats, too!’)
Mallender than struck for a third time when Miandad could not resist one which moved away a little, Stewart gloving it with ease: 64 for 3.
Pringle and Mallender bowled demandingly after a rain hold-up of just over an hour.
Ramiz broke that 17-minute silence by reaching an 84-ball fifty.
But then he stroked Munton to square leg, where Atherton, a member of the 5–4 legside field, tumbled and held on: 96 for 4.
After a further bad-light stoppage Pakistan survived to 98 for 4, Malik, in 100th Test innings, 13 not out, Inzamam (had his great moment come?) 2.
The evening's entertainment concluded with yobbos trying to evade the patrol of hefty stewards to get to the pitch.
Some were tackled crushingly, some left breathless.
Even George Davis could have pronounced none of them innocent.
David Gower survives a caught-behind appeal off Mushtaq, provoking substitute Rashid Latif (centre, in cap) into a dash down the length of the pitch, where he hurled his cap to the ground.
His actions earned him a £115 fine
The pitch was holding as Sunday's play began.
The cracks were not widening, the surface was hard, but the sprig marks were deep.
Malik showed willing to attack from the start, driving Mallender through the covers like a rifle-shot, and treating Munton the same way.
No wicket fell for an hour, and Pakistan eased ahead.
The breakthrough came from an excellent left-hand catch by Smith at short leg, diving forward, to send Inzamam-ul-Haq back.
Malik reached another fifty, this time off a watchful 102 balls, but lost Akram, who top-edged Pringle to mid-on.
Malik made Lewis look fairly ordinary, and it took the return of Mallender to remove the seventh wicket, just on the stroke of lunch.
It came from a very smart left-hand catch by Hick, his sixth of the match, a reprimand by gesture to WCM for putting him down as having missed a catch (Aqib) in the Lord's Test which actually fell an inch or two short of Hick's fingers.
The last three wickets went down quickly after lunch, Mallender bagging his fifth of the innings to complete a distinguished debut, and Pringle his third.
Hick fittingly ended it all by racing in to run out Aqib, to leave Malik forlorn and a class apart, 84 not out, having steered his side to a lead of 98, 50-odd short of what Waqar said last evening would be enough for Pakistan to defend successfully.
Pakistan fielded three substitutes as England began their tantalising chase against the three Ws: Wasim, Waqar and the weather, which remained changeable.
Gooch and Atherton scampered urgent singles, and we were back again to agitated responses to lbw refusals.
In the fifth over came the controversy of the match as Gooch survived the run-out.
Atherton went in the eighth, lbw to one which Waqar whipped back at him as he played some way forward.
Then the Burewala Bombshell started to work Smith over, kicking a bouncer high over him then hitting him in the box, before having him caught for a duck, pushing to midwicket as he swung his body behind a fixed forward prod: 27 for 2.
Gooch watched Akram's bowling as closely as a surgeon at the operating table, the ball flashing across him at an acute angle against the backdrop of a dramatic dark-blue sky.
Waqar at the other end continued to fling down roundarm yorkers, until tea, when both sides drew breath.
The sunshine held out, and in the 10 overs following the interval only 19 runs were found in between Mushtaq's hollering and Moin's furious gesticulations.
Gower, when 7, was given not-out to a caught-behind appeal against Mushtaq, and substitute Rashid Latif suddenly took off down the middle of the pitch like some Keystone Kop, arms waving, perhaps stung by a bee or heavily influenced by a certain West Indies captain who patented an onfield war-dance.
Latif later copped a £115 fine.
‘I will not tolerate dissent,’ said referee ‘Jersey Joe’Walcott, who told the other chief offender Moin that it was time he ‘grew up’.
That wily old fellow Javed Miandad came out of it all with a commendation for trying to calm his prayers.
When Gooch fell to a close-in catch off Mushtaq, and that artist of mystery compelled a nervous and fatal parry at a wider one by Stewart in his next over, England tottered at 65 for 4.
Another wicket now and Pakistan would have had their thumbs on the jugular.
It was a striking scene: Ramprakash, facing ‘a pair’— or, worse, four ducks in a row — the sky darkening, time running out (would it rain all day tomorrow, the final day?),
Waqar about to return to the battle, Gower outwardly calm, than whom no Englishman would have preferred another to have been at this place at this hour.
The former England captain agreed to an adjournment as the light dipped most gloomily — though only, as it transpired, for 10 minutes.
Waqar slipped four byes under Moin, and Ramprakash at last scored from his 20th ball.
Not only that, but he went for a few shots, bravely teasing back the initiative from Mushtaq and Waqar.
At 5.45 pm Gower pulled Mushtaq for two and England had won their first Test against Pakistan for 10 years, and levelled the series, with one to play.
Salim Malik, dismissed for 99 in the 1987 Headingley Test, was Pakistan's saviour in each innings five years later, compiling 82 and 84, both not out
Thirty-one not out and 12 not out may not seem weighty innings, but Gower and ‘Ramps’, by their survival and assertion that Sunday evening in Yorkshire, left memory imprints which will not swiftly face.
And so a further chapter in England v Pakistan disgruntlement was written.
An  eminent writer in the Sunday Telegraph had recently used the word ‘cheats’ in respect of Pakistani cricketers and umpires, and during this Test match a correspondingly eminent Pakistani journalist fired off the same word towards the umpires who managed to maintain control of this noisy contest.
Both sides consist of a majority of decent men, but the histrionic hotheadedness of the few seems incurable and will be eliminated only by their omission.
A swinging full-toss from Waqar Younis accounts for Alec Stewart as England's dramatic first-innings collapse begins
Television assistance, with a third umpire, will not sort out the lbw and batpad disputes.
But it will render precise almost every judgment on run-outs, and that alone would clear away a lot of dirt.
How much longer do we have to wait?
Meanwhile, there are those who will cling to the cock-eyed view that the glorious uncertainty of the human eye in these matters is good enough.
Try telling that to a Pakistani.
And next time it might be the other side which suffers.
England's most successful opening pair since Hobbs and Sutcliffe?
Gooch and Atherton put on 168 in the first innings
HEADINGLEY TEST NOTES
ENGLAND'S win was their first over Pakistan since 1982 (also at Headingley), and their fourth in seven Tests against Pakistan at Headingley (Pakistan have won one, with two draws).
This was the 11th successive Headingley Test to produce a positive result: the last drawn match there was in 1980 (West Indies).
G.A.
Gooch, playing in his 98th match, scored his 17th Test century.
It was his first against Pakistan (prev.
HS 93 at Karachi, 1987–88).
During the second innings Gooch, who ended the match with 7529 runs, moved past C.H. Lloyd (7515) into 10th place on the alltime list.
G.A.
Gooch and M.A. Atherton added 168, a record for any England wicket against Pakistan at Headingley (prev. 135 for 3rd wkt, G. Boycott/B.L.
D'Oliveira, 1971).
It was also the highest for England's first wicket against Pakistan in England (prev. 124, G. Boycott/B.W.
Luckhurst, Lord's 1971).
G.A.
Hick equalled the England Test records for catches in an innings (four) and a match (six) by a fielder.
Those who had previously taken six catches in a match are: M.C. Cowdrey (v WI, Lord's 1963), A.W.
Greig (v Pak, Headingley, 1974), A.J. Lamb (v NZ, Lord's, 1983), A Shrewsbury (v Aust, Sydney, 1887–88) and F.E. Woolley (v Aust, Sydney, 1911–12); those who had taken four in an innings before are: L.C. Braund (v Aust, Sheffield, 1902 and v Aust, Sydney, 1907–08), A.P.F.
Chapman (v WI, Oval, 1928), P.H. Edmonds (v NZ, Christchurch, 1977–78), A.W.
Greig (v Pak, Headingley, 1974), A.J. Lamb (v NZ, Lord's, 1983), H. Larwood (v Aust, Brisbane, 1928–29), J.E.
McConnon (v Pak, Old Trafford, 1954), P.B.H. May (v Aust, Adelaide, 1954–55), P.H. Parfitt (v Aust, Trent Bridge, 1972), W. Rhodes (v Aust, Old Trafford, 1905) and F.E. Woolley (v Aust, Sydney, 1911–12).
Salim Malik became the fifth Pakistani to score 1000 Test runs against England, ending the match with 1161.
The others to achieve this are Mushtaq Mohammad (1554), Javed Miandad (1270 after this match), Zaheer Abbas (1086) and Hanif Mohammad (1039).
N.A. Mallender became the first England bowler to take five wickets in an innings on Test debut since N.G.B. Cook (v NZ, Lord's, 1983).
Mallender's eight wickets in the match is a new record for a bowler making his Test debut at Headingley (prev. seven, by H.J. Butler, Eng v SA, 1947, and F.S. Trueman, Eng v India, 1952).
The overall match attendance was 55,000, paying receipts of £760,000.
FOUR VERSIONS OF THE TRUTH
David Spiller glances at the newspaper coverage of the Headingley Test
THE TIMES The Guardian The Daily Telegraph THE INDEPENDENT
NOT LEAST among the fascinations of the recent Headingley Test was the differing coverage accorded to it by the four main daily newspapers.
I venture a comparison.
The four cricket correspondents are as varied in style and type as the bowlers in the Pakistan attack.
For The Times , Alan Lee is workmanlike and reliable, and is usually supplemented by a featured column from his predecessor, John Woodcock.
The Daily Telegraph has the studious Christopher Martin-Jenkins, and gives him a good deal more space than his competitors — a distinct advantage when it comes to conveying the feel of play, rather than merely recycling statistics from the scoresheet.
Jenkins is observant, and knowledgeable on strategy, as when the reports on Gooch's plans for containing Salim Malik, or draws one of the key post-match lessons that Pakistan paid in the end for their lack of a medium-pace bowler.
The Guardian 's piece is done by the former Middlesex fast bowler Mike Selvey.
Though hampered for lack of space (the Guardian gives its readers much the shortest shrift in this respect), Selvey provides a lively account, brimming with inside knowledge.
What is more, the hand which until quite recently had hurled cricket balls at opponents now settles into a fine, rhythmic prose style.
Sadly, for a fine newspaper,The Independent accords cricket their ‘Royal family’ treatment, and scarcely has a cricket correspondent at all.
Martin Johnson — lacking, equally, a feel for the game or for prose — concentrates with tabloid relish on peripheral scandals and schoolboy japes.
Not for Johnson the ball-by-ball descriptions of Pringle's notorious nine-ball over, which we find in the Telegraph .
He rarely alludes to details of play at all.
Even Gooch's six — the only one of the match — fails to excite a mention.
It is unsporting, and great fun, to look back after a match at the prophecies of the pundits.
Selvey, for instance, was the only one to predict the England team.
Jenkins admitted to ignorance, but covered himself by saying that the selectors did not know the team either.
At times the scribes contort their prose into uncomfortable postures to avoid the hazards of personal prediction.
This, Jenkins's prognosis of Thursday morning (‘I would put no-one off the official odds of 5–1 against England’) might just be construed as tipping an England win — if they won.
Lee is even more Machiavellian: ‘It is a safe bet that there are those in the Pakistan dressing-room who believe Javed Miandad was wrong to bat first,’ he declares boldly on Friday morning.
But no-one managed to eschew forecasts entirely.
‘Mushtaq's effectiveness has steadily declined as the tour has proceeded,’ Jenkins unwisely observed before Mushtaq's excellent bowling in both innings.
‘Defeat is unthinkable,’ wrote Johnson, on the Saturday, shortly before defeat became unthinkable.
The prize for prescience (a set of gold entrails) goes to Lee, writing on the eve of the match.
England would only win ‘if Gooch, on his 39th birthday, can reproduce last year's masterful, matchwinning century here against West Indies.
He is in the form, and I suspect the mood, to do just that.’
What of literary style?
The pitch had all four writers groping for similes.
For Woodcock it resembled ‘a doormat left out in the rain’; for Jenkins ‘a surface of sickly grey hue’.
Johnson referred, characteristically, to ‘the sort of bounce you would expect from a Scotch egg landing in a bowl of porridge’.
Not for the first time Selvey painted the best picture.
‘When the sky clouds over, the surface broods, pouts and stamps its foot like a child forced to spend its holidays indoors.’
There were other Selvey felicities: the sky was a ‘duvet of cloud’; Graeme Hick, the man with velcro hands’.
Jenkins sketched a portrait of Mallender's expression (‘like a Viking's helmet’), and, more riskily, described Inzamam as ‘a technical dwarf’.
From Johnson, though, came a relentless jumble of mixed metaphors — scarcely credible, except to regular Independent readers.
‘Given a pitch more worn than an umpire's eardrum,’ he wrote (if that is the word), ‘99 was not a straightforward target, and when the temperature was threatening to melt the mercury in the thermometer, Graham Gooch could scarcely have been more grateful for having buried the hatchet with Hampshire's intrepid aviator.’
There was much scope for the beguiling subject of cricket statistics.
The Times caressed us with recondite information: no Pakistani batsman had made a century at Headingley; Pakistan bowled their 100th no-ball in the series (Wasim Akram, not out 63).
But it was the Gooch-Atherton opening partnership of 168 which demonstrated the flexibility of numbers.
There were several important points to make.
Their partnership average of 69 was picked up by three of the four papers; and the fact that 69 was inferior, among English openers, only to the average of Hobbs and Sutcliffe.
The Times recorded that this was their sixth partnership of over 150; the Telegraph that it was their seventh century stand; while the Guardian made it the eighth.
Selvey crowned his observations with the final touch for statistical obsessives: the pair had also made two double -centuries.
The trouble, on the last day's play, allowed the four pundits to exercise their judgment and sense of fair play.
Jenkins was at his most po-faced here.
The Pakistan team ‘simply have to understand that petulant dissent is odious in cricket’.
Johnson thought they ‘remained convinced that the umpires were on some kind of personal mission to upset them’.
For the doves, Woodcock pointed out that such behaviour was by no means exclusive to the Pakistanis.
‘The wholesale pillorying of Pakistan after they had behaved unquestionably badly at Old Trafford was a good deal to self-righteous for my liking.’
And Selvey's summing-up was worthy of a high court judge: very frivolous, and most them marginal, but only five of the 34 wickets were leg-before and even those were of an apparently arbitrary nature: those given seemed to have no more merit than many that were not.’
I close with a momentous observation about illustrations.
Fewer than half of the 15 photographs of the match in the four dailies featured the ball.
Five were of players chatting or congratulating each other.
So much for action pictures.
ENGLAND v PAKISTAN FIFTH TEST CORNHILL INSURANCE SERIES
Pakistan's Gold Medal
Pakistan overwhelmed England at The Oval to take the Test series 2–1.
Again, their fast bowlers put in decisive performances.
Again, England's batting and bowling were found wanting.
DAVID FRITH reports:
GOLD MEDAL for Pakistan.
Silver for England, although their performance was hardly of bronze-medal standard.
‘We are the best,’ Javed Miandad claimed huskily.
And who could logically dispute it?
There were whiffs of controversy in the air as the obsequies were dealt with, but only because a couple of the reporters interrogated retiring manager Micky Stewart over possible suspicion of Pakistan ball-tampering.
They persisted with such vigour that he confusedly and confusingly hinted — by virtue of what he didn't say — that he and his England players might not have ben completely satisfied that Waqar and Akram were swinging the old ball through conventional means.
Pressed to state whether he was satisfied that nothing illegitimate had been taking place, Stewart was evasive.
And then he left the conference with the closing statement: ‘There's nothing at all in what I've said to suggest there is anything improper.’
Had he said this minutes earlier, the baying journalists would have been soothed into silence.
Those still with troublesome suspicions should have asked themselves how Pakistan's fast men could have survived the Cornhill Test series had they been doing something illegal to the ball while on view not only to alert umpires and batting opponents but to thousands of onlookers at the various grounds and before the probing eye of television.
Akram and Waqar have turned existing comprehension upside-down in that they are less dangerous with the new ball than with the old.
But, for all their youthfulness, they are widely experienced and shrewd, and possess not only uncommon physiques but rare bowling actions.
Waqar has always preferred to pitch well up, even before the new bouncer restriction, giving the ball a chance to swing over the greater distance.
He is very fast too, and his wrist action and grip are key factors in producing that lethal late inducker.
Akram's arm rotation, fast as a fan-belt, climaxes a bustling run-up leading to an unconventional delivery which taxes every sinew and ligament.
History has brought them together as a phenomenon without compare, and it is Pakistan's good fortune that they are surviving fitness scares long enough to bring many honours to their country.
Waqar Younis celebrates the key wicket of the England captain as the home side slumps in the second innings.
Younis finished the series with 22 wickets a new record for Pakistan in a series in England
Pakistan's 1992 London Test double, Lord's and The Oval, was completed inside 10 sessions, and had something in common with the first of their five Test victories in England: in 1954 there was unease at England's choice of players, Bedser and Bailey being rested, so complacent were the selectors in the face of this new Test entity from far away.
Fazal Mahmood (12 for 99) and Mahmood Hussain were the Waqar and Akram of their day — though dissimilar in method, being orthodox seamers — and not even a second-innings 7 for 56 by Wardle could save the Old Country.
England have long known that concessions can be made against no team.
And yet, for this crucial deciding match, they stopped short of picking the best XI for the circumstances.
Hick and Munton were dropped from the Leeds side and Tufnell and Malcolm restored.
But just what effect Pringle's presence was supposed to have eluded most people, and the absence of Lamb, back to his prolific, fighting best on the county circuit, must have been just what the touring team were praying for.
A further bonus came Pakistan's way with the dismantling of the highly successful Gooch-Atherton opening partnership, the Lancastrian moving down to No. 3.
So much for the self-inflicted handicaps.
Not since 1955 had the final Test of a full series at The Oval seen the sides arrive level.
Then, England managed a third victory over South Africa.
Now, the odds were on Pakistan.
The match seemed as good as settled by the first evening.
England threw away the advantage of first use of a good if not lighting-fast pitch by crashing from 138 for 2 to 207 all out just before 5.30 pm.
Prime Minister Major, who has learned much about smiling through adversity, beamed pleasantly through adversity, beamed pleasantly through most of the play from  his comfortable position next to the Pressbox on the ground where he was spent a large portion of his life.
Contrastingly, on the final day the journalistic gathering were honoured by a visit from General Zahid Ali Akbar, who made it clear that Mike Gatting would be welcome back in Pakistan if he were chosen for England's next tour there.
The BCCP president hoped this would be in 1994.
With these remarks came renewed hope that they would serve as rays of sunlight to nourish the fragile early growth of good relations between these antagonistic countries.
Philip Tufnell is welcomed back to Test cricket after his appendix operation by a Waqar Younis yorker that hit him on the foot
Gooch had much short stuff to content with.
He prefers to parry rather then duck and sway.
He even fetched a widish lifter from Akram to the midwicket boundary.
But much had to be dealt with around the mouth and collarbone ration, and his 50th innings as captain, in his 88th Test, closed with an awkward, hurried jab to short leg off the chest.
Stewart used the ‘tennis-ball’ bounce to advantage with some stirring boundary hits, but he too fell to a lifter, topping a pull to one of the two men placed deep behind square.
Waqar, relieved after only one over with the new ball, came on for the 17th over and soon caused umpire Shepherd to scowl as he bounced the ball into Atherton's left arm and Smith's helmet.
Eighty-nine for 2 at lunch left England with hope.
The third wicket saw 81 added, Atherton presenting a broad bat-face to Mushtaq Ahmed's spin mixture, before Smith fell to Mushtaq for the third time in seven Test innings.
He advanced on him only for an exquisite googly to dip and dart through the gap to bruise the off stump.
Robin Smith is deceived by Mushtaq Ahmed's googly and bowled, just as he was the one-day international at The Oval earlier in the season.
Mushtaq, soon to agree terms with Somerset, conceded only 47 runs in 24 first-innings overs
Gower settled in, and after an hour, square-cut Aqib juicily for his fourth four, only then to under-edge a cut and rather unluckily play on.
It was as if the bottom of a water-tank had been punctured.
This and six other wickets cascaded out while 25 runs were foraged.
Not oven at Lord's had the flood been so severe.
England then had  lost their last seven wickets for 58 in the first innings and eight for 67 in the second.
Just as macabre was the 8 for 28 collapse at Leeds.
Michael Atherton compiled a watchful 60 in the first innings.
Here he avoids a bouncer from his county team-mate Wasim Akram
Wasim Akram was the agent of destruction now.
Charging in from the Vauxhall end like a cavalier, he pinned Ramprakash's fixed pad with an inswinger of some velocity.
Snapping another one back, he found Lewis lbw too and, same over, turned Pringle inside-out and hit his off stump.
Mallender and Malcolm were easy meat for yorkers, and even Tufnell, who remained not-out, was knocked off his feet by a boot-crusher at the other end from Waqar.
Midst all this, Atherton, who had fought desperately hard for almost 4½ hours, made an allowable mistake when he wearily felt for a rare straightish and wider ball from Waqar.
While so many of his team-mates were scythed down, Atherton had found 190 responses to yorkers, bouncers and career out- and inswingers, outwardly serene, hopeful of lasting support, patient with the spin, brave against the fireballs.
His 60 was not only a gem but spared England gross humiliation.
Wasim Akram finished with 6 for 67 and an uncontrollable grin, and must have felt that this, of all his dramatic performances, must have won an important match.
Robin Smith kept wicket for the five overs remaining, Stewart having been among those hit painfully on the ankle or foot while batting.
Sohail and Ramiz made 16 untroubled, and that evening Akram expressed fresh concern that some were still complaining that he and Waqar must be ‘doctoring’ the ball.
Their ability to swing it, he stressed yet again, was ‘something to do with the grip’— but it was going to remain a secret!
Pakistan's superiority in the circumstances was no secret by the second evening, by which time they led England by 68 with six wickets in hand.
Two straight-driven fours by the spunky Sohail had left Mallender down on his knees for a count of five, and though Malcolm had shattered Ramiz's stumps in the 14th (and his second) over of the day and had Sohail well caught low down by wicketkeeper Stewart just before lunch, no wicket fell in the second session.
Pringle looked quite innocuous, and Lewis hardly less so.
Thoughts came of Salisbury, but his brief Test career is on ice.
Tufnell, who took 6 for 4 against West Indies here a year ago, switched to that pavilion end again, but could not break through, even when he trusted his more alluring flight.
That is…until he deceived Miandad on 49.
The Pakistan skipper sailed down the pitch, the ball spat away past the edge, and Stewart grasped it wide, as he had against Viv Richards in ‘91.
The difference this time was that the batsman had no touched it, so it was no catch.
The bails needed to be off in a flash but poor Stewart missed with his first swipe.
He broke the wicket on the backhand, but the nifty Miandad was back in safe territory by then.
It was not as catastrophic as it might have been.
Ten runs later Miandad was caught low down by bowler Lewis.
But Malik's first 11 runs, made with three handsome and businesslike shots in a Lewis over, but Pakistan in the lead, still  with only three wickets down.
Shoaib Mohammad — son of Hanif — had beavered away for just over three hours by now, displaying some pleasing strokes, not unduly encumbered by helmet and sizable rib-protector, seven centuries, three of them doubles, already quietly under his belt in 38 previous Tests.
It was probably England's good fortune that Inzamam was preferred to him in the four previous Tests.
Tufnell persuaded Shoaib to misjudge a forward prod, and even if the figures of Mallender and Pringle were fairly predictable, the amount of turn generated by Tufnell and the burst of speed from Malcolm kept English hopes alive at 214 for 4.
But the other six wickets were going to have to be captured fast, and in 26 further overs that evening none fell.
Salim Malik (38) and Asif Mujtaba (31) resumed against the new ball on the Saturday, the pitch-overs having hovered like Spitfires on the tarmac in October-like conditions.
A prompt start was possible.
Comprehensively bowled…
Ramiz Raja loses his off and middle stumps to Devon Malcolm, who finished with figures of 5 for 94
Smith was the latest to go off for examination of foot bruising, Nick Knight substituting briefly in the field.
From 275 for 4, Pakistan had added only three runs when Malcolm roared one through Malik and just flicked the off bail to the ground.
Half-an-hour later Akram touched him to the keeper, and as lunch loomed, another gutsy and valuable Mujtaba innings, this time of 50, cam to an end as Smith scored a spectacular direct hit from midwicket.
Waqar's macho drive to mid-off gave Malcolm his fourth five-wicket haul.
Wicketkeeper Rashid Latif marked his Test debut with a stylish 50
But England's latest problem was new boy Rashid Latif, he of the frantic cap-throwing episode at Headingley, who now, having kept wicket with a dexterity to which Moin, whom he now replaced, could never aspire, began to bat with the attractive aplomb of a Dujon.
Wearing a baggy green cap and showing not the slightest tension, Latif went for his strokes as if it were a charity match.
His fifty came from only 85 balls with a back-cut following a flowery on-driven four off Mallender.
Then, having lost Mushtaq, he threw caution completely to the wind and spooned to cover.
Pakistan's 380 meant a lead of 173 and almost certain success.
Any whether worries were eased by a gradual lifting of the gloom as England went in again.
The second effort was even more dismal than the first.
By tea they were 55 for 3, the dreaded Waqar Younis having cast aside Stewart, Atherton and Gooch.
Atherton might have gone first ball, lbw, but somehow survived, only to be hit on the helmet as he became airborne against Waqar.
He would have been hearing Tubular Bells had the ball not struck glancingly.
He soon went similarly to his first-innings dismissal, held by the keeper.
Umpire Bird called Waqar for a second over-shoulder-high bouncer to Smith in his next over, and signalled what he had done with laudable clarity.
Gooch, though, England's loyal and reliable banker, went for his second modest score of the match, a choker of a dismissal in that he was held down at second slip at 3.43pm, three minutes into interval time.
On the Saturday at Headingley he was bowled when the plates were already on the table, though it was easier to take with a personal score of 135.
Right after tea Gower became Waqar's fourth victim when he left an off-side laser-beam alone which changed course slightly and struck the off stump: 59 for 4.
Ramprakash's response was to place some bold and beautiful drives, and Smith banged a tiring Waqar twice through the covers by way of relief after his drawn-out duel with Mushtaq.
The legspinner beat the outside edge many a time in the ongoing psychological  thriller of the summer.
A male streaker ran on, jumped the stumps, and wondered what to do next without being quite as perplexed as England's batsmen, and while four policemen carted his away, and the oh-so-clever scoreboard operators put runs on the board before they were even completed, Ramprakash creamed Mushtaq through the covers as a prelude to one of the most anguished dismissals of the series.
Mushtaq's googly hit his pad nowhere near the bat and was somehow perceived, from front on and midst all the din as the ball bounced off vertically, to have brushed his glove.
Out he went, head shaking briefly, slowly and sadly, England 92 for 5, and the young Middlesex batsman wondering if, contrary to what so many have believed, he was born to be a Test cricketer.
Mark Ramprakash's unlucky run in Test cricket continued when he was given out caught by the helmeted Asif Mujtaba at short leg in the second innings.
Despite the confident appeals, the bat seemed to be a long way away from the ball
For the last hour or so Lewis ground it out with Smith, the Notts man restrained to the tune of eight runs in 19 overs, Smith reaching a 101-ball fifty.
The weather was England's last realistic hope.
Despite a wild night meteorologically speaking, play began on time, and England's last five wickets fell for 37, the ignominy of an innings defeat only narrowly being escaped.
Lewis couldn't stand it any more and ran out to a flatter legbreak from Mushtaq, the nimble Latif completing the stumping.
Pringle's feeble push forward failed to save his off stump.
With the scores level, Akram then had Mallender caught at slip via a rebound and bowled Tufnell next ball.
Malcolm stoically prevented what would have been the first Test hat-trick in England since 1960, but soon became Waqar's record 22nd wicket of the series, leaving Smith a gallant 84 not out in four hours of great determination, to finish on the high note upon which he started the series, since which there had been much disappointment.
With two runs needed for Pakistan's second series success in England, Ramprakash bowled a grotesque and eloquent bouncer, called ‘wide’, and a long-hop which Aamir Sohail cut to the boundary as the Zindabad s rang out.
It clinched Pakistan's second £8000 victory purse of the Test series, adding to the £50,000 Tetley Challenge prize for winning eight county matches.
And now the Pakistan Cricket Board, with England's laughable £1000-a-man ‘hardship bonus’ from their last tour of Pakistan as a precedent, announced that Javed Miandad and his men would be receiving a ‘considerable’bonus (£2000 each?) as well, principally for the hardships foisted upon the players by the irksome English tabloid newspapers during this tour.
All kinds of scores were being settled, it seemed.
For the moment, it was left to England to capitalise on their 2–0 lead in the resumed one-day series, with three matches to come in a fortnight.
Beyond that, half-a-winter in India, a home Ashes series, then a visit to West Indies.
No-one in the England camp was prepared to say whether there was less longing for the next tour of the Caribbean or to Pakistan, where the proposed 1996–97 series seems safely enough into the future.
END THIS BALL VANDALISM
E. M. WELLINGS objects to the inconsistencies over what a bowler may or may not do to the ball
IN CRICKET these days it's one damn thing after another.
Trouble never goes away: trouble about umpires, trouble about time-wasters, trouble about pitch fixing, trouble about fast bowlers aiming to knock the batsmen's blocks off, and never a satisfactory solution.
The game is even troubled by bowlers who vandalise the ball.
The villains are scuffing one side of the ball.
Tut, tut, and again tut.
There's a crime for you.
Heinous.
Or is it?
Memories being short, it may be forgotten that until comparatively recently a spin bowler was allowed to rough up the ball in the dust to help his grip.
That was the case throughout my pre-war playing days and for many years afterwards.
Then the wiseacres — so-called — decided that bowlers could continue to polish one side of the cherry to aid swing, but spinners could no longer remove the shine on the other flank.
Cricket is not noted for consistency, as some of its laws indicate.
There is the one-sided lbw law.
And there is the leg-bye law, which is utterly cuckoo.
Just imagine going into a court of law to argue a case depending on its provisions.
How could judge and jury be impressed by a law which allows leg-byes to be scored only if the bowler has beaten the batsman, in other words when the latter plays and misses?
Just one more law hard to argue in court.
In 1930 spectators during the second Cambridge innings in the University match at Lord's were entertained by an unusual sight, when Oxford took the second new ball.
At one end fast-medium bowler Hill-Wood vigorously shone the ball on his trousers, only to see Ian Peebles at the other end undo his work by rubbing the shine away in the dust.
Now we have the strange state of affairs by which half the ball may be vandalised — spinners should undoubtedly regard ball-shining as vandalism — but not the other.
A clear case of general myopia in the cricket legislators of the time.
It would have been interesting to listen to their discussion, trying to understand their arguments, for I'm hanged if their decision makes an ounce of sense to my mundane way of thinking.
The now illegal practice of scuffing one half of the ball is no longer designed to allow the spinner to grip the thing, but to assist swing bowlers.
The theory is that the greater the difference between polished and scuffed sides the more the ball will swing.
How much more do they want?
The most dangerous balls swing only enough to beat the bat or graze its edge.
Indian fast bowler Manoj Prabhakar: picking the seam — or cleaning it?
How many of the bowlers who work furiously at rubbing holes in their pants do actually swing the ball?
Not many, I suggest.
The lanky West Indians rely not on lateral movement but on speed and bounce, as to England's Malcolm and numerous others like him, who do not give the ball enough air in which to swing.
At the time of the contrasting attentions given to the ball at Lord's in 1930 it was worth polishing it during only a few early overs.
On the bare pitches and unwatered outfields of the day the shine was soon removed beyond restoration.
Bowlers subsequently were more likely to be tearing leather whiskers off the ball.
One benefit was that players looked cleaner and smarter in the field without the now familiar red smears.
Given the new ball, I used to turn the front of my trousers over and polish it there.
Nothing to show when the material was unfolded.
The direction of swing is decided by the position of the seam in relation to the line of flight, and I have always thought it more important than polish.
I have also believed that with the right hand turned sideways, spin produces outswing better than polish, and, with the new ball, I always spun one or two balls in that way during the very first over.
Q
Quite apart from any question of how polishing and scuffing influences the behaviour of the ball, is there any reason why any interference with its state should be allowed?
Rather than turning a blind eye to the polishers and legislating against the scuffers, we should more logically allow no interference…on either side of the ball.
Tampering with the seam is much the most harmful form of ball vandalism.
I remember a case midway between the wars at The Oval, while playing for Surrey 2nd XI against Buckinghamshire.
After the second day's play the ball in use was locked in the Oval safe and sent to Lord's the next morning.
The seam had been so thoroughly picked that it had a sharp edge.
Since the culprits are no longer with use, they may be named: left-arm spin bowler Frank Edwards, and the Bucks skipper who prompted him, Walter Franklin, one of the best wicketkeepers of the day.
They had quite a reputation for sailing close to the wind.
Edwards used to take a nail onto the field with which to assail the seam, but that was not the only close sailing in which they indulged.
It was necessary to watch them closely.
While I was batting Franklin took an offside ball to which I offered no stroke and broke the wicket.
He himself repaired it, and I re-repaired it.
As built by Franklin the outer stumps were so slanted away from the middle that the balls were only precariously balanced.
A case requiring action by the umpire before the batsman needed to correct the wicket?
Certainly, but knowing that captains had to make official reports on the umpires after each match, only the foolhardy would go against such an influential skipper, who had played six times for the Gentlemen against the Players.
It is easy to understand the hulk, whose only cricketing merit is the ability to bowl faster than others, aiming at the batsman's head.
Not having the craft to beat him, he resorts to force.
It is, however, difficult indeed to understand the two Bucks players adopting questionable tactics, least of all a childish device to enlarge the wicket.
They were very good cricketers.
Edwards also played in the Gentlemen v Players classic, for the professionals in 1925.
In the South he was just about as deadly in the Minor County cricket as Sydney Barnes was in the North.
Bucks were champions in 1925, and that time Edwards outdid Barnes.
His 62 wickets at 7.28 put him top of the Minor County averages.
LAST RESORT
TAKE notice, Lord's: Southend has found
A vast, idyllic cricket ground
With bright pavilions, seats galore,
And standing room for thousands more
Who see beyond the rail displayed
The finest carpet ever laid.
For here the roller's awesome might
Compounds the surface day and night,
The liberal watering of which
Ensures a run-responsive pitch,
While perfect drainage, nothing less,
Removes all troublesome excess.
However, problems can begin
About the time the tide comes in,
When fishermen a vigil keep
For batsmen caught out in the deep,
But if unspotted, no-one frets:
They always turn up in the nets!
A Shropshire lad
Ralph Dellor's Minor Counties round-up
YOU REMEMBER Alvin Kallicharran?
Born in Guyana; 66 Test matches and 31 one-day internationals for West Indies; captain of West Indies nine times.
It might come as something of a surprise to learn that he is now considered to be an Englishman.
At least, the cricket authorities have deemed him to be so, even if A.E.
Housman might not readily recognise him as a Shropshire Lad.
‘Kalli’, who proved to be such a success with Warwickshire between 1971 and 1990, has been signed on by Shropshire to play Minor County cricket now that he is English-qualified by residence.
Shropshire ‘new boy’ Alvin Kallicharran
Shropshire did have the services of the former Worcestershire seam bowler Paul Pridgeon at the start of the season, but a breakdown in mutual respect ended that relationship.
Kallicharran, who turned 43 in March, has been playing club cricket for Gloucester City this season, and made his debut for his new county on August 5 against Devon, the leaders of the Western Division of the Minor Counties championship.
It could be termed a quiet beginning, with scores of 38 and 35 along with a wicket with his offbreaks as the two sides drew.
Taking the headlines in that match was Devon's Nick Gaywood, who scored 117 in the second innings to take his season's aggregate past 1000 in championship and knockout cricket for devon.
That is a notable performance when the county have played in only seven championship matches, three Holt Cup games and a NatWest match.
Devon had been romping away with the section, but by the beginning of August had seen their lead whittled away, with Oxfordshire emerging as a growing and serious threat to their supremacy, 20 points behind but with two matches in hand.
Devon lost the services of Peter Roebuck just as he was becoming a key member of their side.
After 17 years of first-class cricket with nothing more serious than a broken finger or two, he chased a ball into the outfield while playing for Devon against Berkshire at Reading and fell awkwardly, breaking his ankle.
He still managed to get up the stairs in the pavilion to help launch Berkshire's new sponsorship, but then perhaps he thought that the name of the sponsors — the Head Partnership — was far enough removed from his own problems to be of no concern.
Devon suffered their first defeat of the season at the hands of Dorset, with Roebuck recording a pair as Julian Shackleton took 7 for 57 in Devon's second innings.
The son of the legendary Derek and himself a former Gloucestershire player, Shackleton also took 5 for 13 to bowl out Cheshire for 80 in their second innings as they lost to Dorset at Dorchester.
Earlier Geoff Miller had two five-wicket hauls for Cheshire in the same match as his side, despite the defeat, kept in contention.
Another notable individual performance in the West Country came from Simon Wherry, with 172 not out for Cornwall against Wiltshire.
Even then Cornwall lost the match by five wickets as Wiltshire maintain an interest in the outcome of the Western Division and Cornwall continue to frighten teams in the Eastern Division, who fear that so many Cornish defeats produce a points inflation in the Western Division.
NatWest qualification is confined to the top 12 points-gatherers in Minor County cricket, irrespective of the division in which the counties play.
There could be a real dogfight for those places, with every point won in the last few matches of the season becoming vital and only Cornwall themselves totally out of the reckoning.
Hertfordshire would appear to have little to fear in that direction, for they led the Eastern Division by 16 points with two matches to play.
Their nearest two rivals, Lincolnshire and Cumberland, had only one match to play, while Suffolk perhaps represented the biggest danger to Hertfordshire, 18 points adrift but with three outstanding matches.
There will a lot of cricket played in the remaining matches, with only three points separating five teams from second to sixth in the table.
Perhaps Lincolnshire's fortunes in the concluding matches will depend on the bowling skills of their captain, former Yorkshire batsman Jim Love.
In his first two seasons with his new county he did not progress beyond the ‘also bowled’ section of the averages.
That should change this year, for in the first innings of Lincolnshire's match against Norfolk, Love put himself on to bowl his offbreaks and took 6 for 18.
We began with the Shropshire Lad, but we have to end with the Lincolnshire Poacher.
Obituary
Johnny Martin
ONE OF the last of a now all but extinct breed, Johnny Martin bowled unorthodox slow left-arm in eight Tests for Australia during the 1960s, and was, when his aggressive batting was taken into account, as great an entertainment package as almost any cricketer to come out of NSW.
Small and unceasingly chirpy, he grew up on the central coast, near Taree, one of 10 children of the manager of Burrell Creek's post office and general store, which Johnny himself ended up managing.
He died on July 16 after a heart attack, having survived one 20 years earlier, and had bypass surgery in 1984.
He was 60.
Born in Wingham on July 28, 1931, John Wesley Martin (whose mother was related to 1890s Surrey and England fast bowler Tom Richardson) first went down to Sydney at 15, and saw Bradman and Barnes score 234 each against England in December 1946.
His imagination was fired.
Over the next few years his local reputation spread, and in 1953–54 he joined Sydney grade club Petersham, catching the overnight train to the match each Saturday and returning home that evening.
Buzzing his curving chinaman (googly), appealing alternately softly and urgently, bustling quickly back for the next one, and batting with great vigour (he hit 166 sixes for his grade club), Martin was eventually chosen for NSW in 1956–57.
A promising Rugby League career was shelved.
He was to play through to 1967–68, trying his luck in one season (1958–59) with South Australia, for whom he took 7 for 110 against Peter May's MCC side without earning Test selection.
Lindsay Kline, the Victorian of similar style, was preferred.
He had toured New Zealand with the young 1956–57 Australian (non-Test) side returning there three years later, again under Ian Craig's captaincy, and in 1961 his travels were extended with a season at Colne, in Lancashire, where he took 70 wickets at 12 and hit 706 runs at 35.
By now he had become a Test cricketer, having played in three of the exciting 1960–61 Tests against West Indies (and substituted in the field in the tied Test at Brisbane, his first, at Melbourne, being the 500th Test match, and bringing him poignantly what were to remain best batting and bowling performances in an eight-Test career.
Going in at No. 10, he raced to 55 off the bowling of Hall, Watson, Worrell (whom he hit for six) and Ramadhin, before Valentine bowled him as he went for another big hit.
He and Mackay put on 97 in 72 minutes, extending Australia's total to 348, which proved enough for a seven wicket victory after West Indies failed to avoid the follow-on.
Martin the ‘little favourite’, gives the ball a real tweak…
…and gives it a hammering in his alternative mode as batsman
Martin's greatest achievement came in West Indies' second innings.
They were 97 for 2, still 70 behind, when he bagged three of the most illustrious wickets Test cricket has even had on offer in the space of only four balls.
Kanhai made a mess of an attempted pull and was caught; resuming next over, Martin found the edge as a languid Sobers propped forward, to be caught by Simpson at slip; and after playing the hat-trick ball, Worrell was also caught by Simpson completing a ‘pair’.
These were the only wickets Martin took in the match, but his allround contributions would probably have earned him the Man of the Match award had such been on offer in those days.
He failed to take a wicket at Sydney in the next Test, and helped Gibbs to a reciprocal three wickets in four balls by falling to the first he received.
Dropped for the Adelaide Test, he returned for the final contest, at Melbourne, where 90,800 attended on the second day, and though he did little of note, he was with Mackay at the end as Australia scraped in by two wickets.
‘Little Fav’(he seemed everybody's favourite, with his bouncy, cheerful disposition) had to wait three years before his next Test appearance, though he continued to bamboozle many a batsman in domestic cricket.
In 1962–63 he took a career-best 8 for 97 for NSW v Victoria at Sydney.
Next season, when he made his sole first-class century (101 against WA at Perth), he played in the second Test against South Africa, at Melbourne, and took four wickets.
Disappointment at further omission was offset by selection to tour England in 1964, though he played in none of the Tests, and was troubled by a recurring shoulder injury.
His 35 tour wickets came at 32.40, and he averaged 19 with the bat, his top-score 70 coming at Taunton.
Martin played in two Tests in India and one in Pakistan on the way home, in front of massive crowds, picking up eight further wickets and playing a few useful tailend innings; but there was only one Test appearance to come, and that was at Port Elizabeth on the 1966–67 tour, the final Test, after Martin had taken 11 wickets in the Griqualand West match and six in the South African XI match at Pietermaritzburg preceding the Test.
A duck (his third in Tests) and 20, and no wickets in 22 overs came as a muted farewell, even if all in attendance had Graeme Pollock's three-hour century to remember the match by.
Johnny Martin, the ideal tourist, had gone on the Cavaliers' tour of India and South Africa in 1962–63.
When he retired in 1968, he had spun out 445 batsmen at 31.37, 17 times taking five or more wickets in an innings.
His 17 Test wickets had cost almost 50 apiece, though he had not been an extravagance, conceding no more than 2.7 runs per six-ball over.
His 3970 — mainly breezy — first class runs had come at 23.77.
So much for figures.
He was one of cricket's precious characters , whose skill was rare and whose attitude was just what the game has always needed.
Trevor John Cox — June 5, in Birmingham, aged 60.
Prominent Midlands coach and administrator: Warwickshire CA, Midlands Club Cricket Conference, Midland Counties Cricket Umpires Association, Worcs Under-19s.
Ed.
King Edward's, Birmingham.
Captain then president Old Edwardians; closely connected West Bromwich Dartmouth.
John (Minshull-) Fogg — July, aged 71.
Daily Telegraph schools and club cricket correspondent since early 1970s, sub-editor since 1968.
Author of The Haig Book of Village Cricket (1972).
The Old Stager says…
BASIL BANKS eavesdrops on one of the club cricket's self-styled experts
‘THERE ‘e goes again!’ muttered the Old Stager, as the Computer Programmer was caught in the slips for 32 in our last match of the season.
The Baptist Minister's Son gripped his bat handle and prepared for action.
‘Pray for me, boys,’ was his departing request.
‘That's only our first wicket,’ said the Butcher's Assistant.
‘Oh, we still got ‘im ,’ said the Old Stager contemptuously, indicating the Smallholder, our other opener still in the middle, who stood looking modestly and determinedly at the bottom of his raised bat, as if to say: ‘Now it all depends on me.’
‘Ow many's ‘e got? 3!
If it's one o’ 'is bad days, ‘e'll finish on 5; if it's one o’'is gold-star days, ‘e'll be 3 not aht at the end o’the innins.’
‘Not a bad shot, though,’ observed the Captain, getting ready to clap the retiring batsman.
‘But where's the doggedness, the stickability, what gets a ‘undred?’ complained the Old Stager.
‘Ow many centuries ‘ave we notched up this year?
Answer me that.’
‘Only the one,’ admitted the Unemployed Electrician, while the Captain modestly ignored the conversation and spread his hands to applaud the Computer Programmer's efforts.
‘Pathetic!’ said the Old Stager disconsolately.
‘And that one ‘undred was only because the grahnd sloped like the north face of Iverest of ‘e ‘ad only to tap the ball and it got up faster speed than any fielder.’
Saying which, he joined in the clapping half-heartedly, without looking.
The Computer Programmer threw his bat down, in the reckless manner allowed only to one who knows he's done a good batting job and is respected by his fellows.
‘Great stuff,’ said the Captain.
‘Nice way to end the season.’
‘If yer don't git in line fast enough ivery time yer'll never git a ‘undred,’ was the Old Stager's greeting in praise of the innings.
‘What's it like to get 300 in a Test match, I wonder,’ mused the Accountant.
‘Like Gooch, I mean.’
‘Doggedness and stickability,’ replied the Old Stager.
‘But there's a better example than Gooch — he was agin India with a very limited attack.’
‘But you have to admit his batting has some merit,’ said the Captain.
‘Oh, it's meretricious, I grant yer,’ conceded the Old Stager, ‘but not reelly like the others what's got 300 in Test matches.’
‘Have you ever seen 300 scored in a Test?’ asked the Butcher's Assistant.
‘Course I ‘ave, boy.
Saw ‘Utton git ‘is 364, did'n’ I? 300 overnight ‘e was and then next day ‘e swep’past ‘Ammond and Bradman's records!
Not a Surrey man, ‘Utton wasn't, but by gawd ‘e ‘ad doggedness and stickability.
I give ‘im that.’
‘So Surrey don't ‘ave all the records then?’ said the Van Boy, a little insolently.
‘Look, boy, if yer want to be edicated I'll tell yer,’ responded the Old Stager, calm in his rage.
‘There's five Englishmen what's got 300 in Tests — four before Gooch.
Only five in all — and two of 'em was Surrey men.’
‘Andy Sandham, o'course,’ mocked the Van Boy, ‘and —?’
‘Sandham's 325 and John Edrich's 310.
Two aht o’ five.
Yer want to learn a bit, boy.’
The Van Boy must have felt suitably educated, because he said nothing and silently tossed a tennis ball from one hand to the other.
‘And what's more,’ said the Old Stager hotly, ‘if yer want to go to yer 250 scores, there only six further English names in that list of two of them was Surrey men: P.B.H. May and Kenny Barrington.
That's…four aht o’ 11 all told, even including Gooch.’
‘Well done, sir,’ called out the Captain, as the Smallholder advance to 4.
‘That's 36%,’ said the Accountant to the Old Stager in awed tones.
‘Is it?
Yes, well, I expect it is.
And I daht if yer'll find another cahnty with 36% ‘owever ‘ard yer searches.’
‘It's 36.36%, in fact,’ added the Accountant.
‘Point three six,’ repeated the Old Stager, settling back into his deckchair in satisfaction.
‘There you are, then.
That's what Surrey done for English batting — 36.36%.’
‘But Surrey never ‘ad bowlers like Trueman and Botham,’ said the Van Boy, fighting a desperate rearguard action.
‘There yer wrong again, boy.
You look at the top 10 English Test wicket-takers — four o’ 'em Surrey men.
Four!
Laker, Lock, Bedser and Willis.’
‘Willis?
I thought Willis played for Warw —’ began the Accountant.
‘Willis played for Surrey long before ‘e joined any other cahnty,’ said the Old Stager crushingly.
‘That's where ‘e learnt ‘is craft.’
The team was stunned into silence, apart from some detached clapping as the Smallholder ran two leg-byes.
‘What's four outa 10?’ demanded the Old Stager of the Accountant.
‘Forty per cent exactly.’
‘Right!’ said the Old Stager, leaning back and gazing at some passing clouds.
‘That's 36.36% and 40%,’ he said dreamily.
‘There's doggedness and stickability for yer.
That's what Surrey done for English cricket.’
‘It's bad luck for all them blokes in the other counties what never ‘ad Sandham and the rest to ‘elp ‘em,’ commented the Van Boy.
‘It's good luck for the game, boy, that there was some able to develop their skills elsewhere.
Arter all, it wouldn't be no fun if one cahnty won the Championship all the bloody time, nah, would it?’
BOOK REVIEWS
All reviews by David Frith
Analysis of a decline
ENGLAND TEST CRICKET: THE YEARS OF INDECISION 1981–92 by Neville Scott and Nick Cook (Kingswood; 224pp; £14.99)
GRAHAM GOOCH, the man who dragged English Test cricket out of its stupor, smiles from the dust jacket, his face symbolically dripping sweat.
Inside, the book analyses the defects in the system in this country where more first-class cricketers (too many?) practise than in any other, and where one Test humiliation followed another either side of the isolated bright patch in 1985.
It reads like a government White Paper, and contains just about as few laughs, examining the decline, identifying causes, allocating blame.
England's cause has been hampered by injury, a problem not unique in any one country, and by political bans, which have hit England most severely.
There are ‘cultural’ reasons for England's falling-behind.
The Press is also blamed for undue influence on selection (though surely this is the fault of those who allow themselves to be influenced?).
Crucially, though, failure has stemmed from the harsh way in which some of the more valuable players have been treated.
A year after the tragic loss of Ken Barrington, Keith Fletcher was dumped, the ‘first sign of the irresolute thinking which was so to bedevil the decade’.
Might Tavaré have been a better choice as captain (than Willis) in 1982?
Fowler was cast aside after scores of 49, 201, 2 and 69.
Foster was often dropped irrationally.
And Gatting, whose controversy had a ‘historic, purgative effect on English Test cricket’, was punished, in essence, because ‘being awake after midnight is a moral offence’.
The authors pinpoint the ailment of ‘easy answers and one-off solutions’ to which the selectors have so often resorted.
It was unfair to drop players who had given their all against West Indies and to bring in others against Sri Lanka.
And the lowest of low points was the use of five captains in seven Tests in 1988–89.
The Ashes summer of ‘89 saw almost everyone who could speak English getting a game.
The atmosphere in the England dressing-room then was of ‘resigned aimlessness’.
On the field, the recurring problem was the inability to turn critical periods to advantage: never more obvious than in the 1990–91 Ashes series: this in a decade when failure, far from being excused, was despised, claim Scott and Cook in the most questionable of their conclusions.
What makes Gooch different?
Probably, it is suggested, his ability to leave Championship thinking behind.
There is no reward for a draw in the count game, or penalty for defeat.
In Test cricket it is a very, very different matter.
THE ZEN OF CRICKET: Learning from Positive Thought by Tony Francis (Stanley Paul; 166pp; £14.99)
THE SPECTATOR, and even the onfield adversary, can little suspect what goes on inside a cricketer's head.
For some, this is the most fascinating aspect of the game.
The mental strain is readily and universally underestimated.
And yet cricket is, according to most informed estimates, played every bit as much in the mind as with the eyes, hands and feet.
Tony Francis has gathered data mainly about modern cricketers: their fears, their inspirations, their strategies for survival and success.
A tightly-constructed study of the game's intricate psychology emerges, easy, compulsive reading, pegged firstly by analyses of the swashbucklers such as Botham, Compton, Miller and Dexter, then by the king-size competitors Greig and Viv Richards, then by the worriers, the Huttons, Barringtons, Boycotts and Amisses.
The mixture will leave young cricket-lovers wondering whether they want to ascend to the spotlight or make do safely with their humdrum jobs.
Incisive comment stiffens almost every page.
Brian Close showed no fear, but that didn't mean he didn't feel any.
Dexter felt more pressure on the golfcourse.
(He also felt that Gubby Allen's ranting and raving’ in the Old Trafford dressing-room in 1961 was ‘disgraceful’and ‘undermined morale’during the crisis hours of that memorable Ashes Test.)
Greig's 1976, ‘grovel’ remark, the author believes, was hyped out of all proportion: it was only ‘pre-match baloney’.
West Indies' motivation since that year is well dissected: ‘Caribbean communities are increasingly eager to rid themselves of the images of slavery and servitude.’
The batsmen of England, Australia, India and New Zealand have been the patsies.
The mental scrutiny intensifies: Chris Smith warns against letting home-life become too cushy: ‘learn how to be loving and gentle at home but flick another switch when playing cricket’.
Bob Simpson believes a bad trot is always about to end — not that it is bound to be extended.
The Gooch-Stewart philosophy is compared with that of Gower.
The stimulus which carried Boycott and Steele along might be of help to others who took on the world from modest beginnings.
Greg Chappell came out of a bad patch when he realised he was playing innings in his head before they happened.
Richard Hadlee's brush with mental and physical breakdown is well enough known but makes a fitting climax to these tales.
Hypnotherapy is examined, and while Alec Bedser is sincere in his assertion that he never needed extra motivation (and also in his justified bellyache that Hutton never gave him enough credit), the need is unquestionably there in many cases, and modern sports-thought seeks to help.
An engrossing, provocative book, it is marred in places by errors of considerable weight.
England have not won ‘16 out of 92 Ashes Tests’ since the war.
Shackleton the cricketer was Derek, not Len.
Barrington was not dropped after his 256 (not 258) against Australia.
And a quotation from Tyson is spoilt by the transposition of ‘animal’ into ‘arrival’.
In keeping with the book's leitmotif, however, let's ignore all that and focus instead on the rich images of Lamb in shock at the lunch interval after weathering 22 bouncers among the preceding 24 balls; of Dexter losing interest after fielding all day in 90 degrees at Karachi; of the normally taciturn Peter May sounding off about the regime which followed him as chairman of selectors; of the ‘terror of spin’ and the West Indian ‘throat-theory’reign of terror, attributed in part to the meatiness of their backsides.
Not least fascinating is the suggestion that deep breathing could render valium superfluous.
OTHER TITLES RECEIVED
THE KINGWOOD BOOK OF CRICKET edited by Alan Ross (Kingswood; 572pp; £16.99)
THE THIRD edition of what started as The Cricketer's Companion (1960, revised 1979) is even fatter, the original contents ‘undisturbed’, though necessarily reset.
This classics such as Tom Brown's Last Match and Dickens's Dingley Dell v All Muggleton are spread before a fresh generation, as are essays on legendary players by writers of quality.
Some of it is 18th-Century material, some of it very recent, and almost 100 pages are devoted to verse, understandably given the editor's pedigree.
Five Arlott pieces are succeeded by Byron, Lewis Carroll, Conan Doyle, Alan Ross himself, and many more, with Gavin Ewart recognised among the moderns.
A magic carpet of a book.
SPORTS BEAT: Headline-Makers, Then and Now by Dudley Doust; foreword by Harry Carpenter (Hodder; 240pp;
£14.99)—
Highly readable chapters on a variety of sportsmen by an American-born who strung three outstanding cricket books together a decade ago.
Brearley, briefly; Viv Richards smouldering; Botham belligerently; Crowe coolly; and an insight into ‘Rags’ Randall, 1978–79, worth the cost of the book in itself.
All is dwarfed at the end, though, by a chilling report and follow-up on the 1972 Munich Olympic massacre.
MERROW CRICKET CLUB: 50th Cricket Week 1992: A History
(from Jerry Arnull, 10pp; £1 + 30p p&p)— Summary, from limited records, of a felicitous cricket week which began in 1933 and has seen some fine performances.
Bryon Butler and the late Cyril Webb have been conspicuous figures of the past 20 years.
THE 1992 MILLER GUIDE TO SCOTTISH  CRICKET ed.
Neil Leitch (from Scottish Cricket Union, Caledonia House,
South Gyle, Edinburgh; 152pp; £3 incl p&p)—
After events at Chelmsford on April 30 poor Scotland probably need a guide-dog more than a Guide .
New president Ralph Laing is welcomed and the death of administrator Robin Prentice is mourned.
Johnny Everett, Iain Philip and Alastair Storie are the Cricketers of the Year (the last two having broken Scotland's first-wicket record of 301 v MCC); Mark Harper is Overseas Cricketer of the Year.
South African Omar Henry profile.
A bit of history.
And an extraordinary photo of Jim Govan being yorked in the Lancashire match.
IRISH CRICKET ANNUAL 1992 ed.
John Elder (from Irish Cricket Union, 144pp; £4+£1.50 p&p)—
Optimistic survey of cricket throughout the island, the highlights being MCC, Middlesex (NatWest) and West Indians matches, and tour of Zimbabwe.
South Leinster were Interprovincial champions; Downpatrick won the Schweppes Cup.
Other areas covered, plus Who's Who, records, and report on the tangle over Raman Lambda's registration, which led to court action.
TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF TOURING 1969–1989:
Hull Zingari Cricket Club by David Fairbank (from the author,
96pp; £3+£1 p&p)—
Twenty years of club tours to the Midlands, Kent, Herts and Essex recorded for the delectation of those who enjoyed them.
Full scorecards.
NZ's Ken Rutherford features in 1985 tour (and is wrongly credited with the fastest 300 in first-class cricket).
Happy days.
Why did they end?
IAN GREIG BENEFIT 1992
(Surrey CCC; 96pp; donations in the vicinity of £5 incl. p&p)—
Sincere and knowing tribute from the PM launches a bright collection of essays flavoured by Surrey, Sussex, South Africa, rugby, family, etc.
Array of contributors includes players, commentators and groupies, with handsome illustrations.
ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF THE RIBBLESDALE CRICKET LEAGUE
1892–1992 by Alan West (from the author, 133pp; £5.35 incl p&p)
Stretching from the Ribble estuary up to Settle in Yorkshire, the catchment area has produced a galaxy of good club  cricketers , enhanced by some eminent pros: popping off the pages are names like Larwood, Ted Mc Donald, Paynter, Dempster, Parkin.
Top batting output comes from les Warburton (1356 at 193 in 1949), with Aftab Baloch next.
Don Wilson is the best of the homegrowns.
Peter Sleep has left his mark too.
General history is followed by items on the leading clubs.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF YOUNG CRICKETERS 1992 YEARBOOK ed.
John Steer (from  76pp; £2 + 50p p&p)—
Doings of the worthy junior organisation: Surrey topping the 35-Counties competition, Graham West of Lincs scoring 200no, but NAYC struggling somewhat against Young Australia at Sleaford in May ‘91.
OUT OF BOUNDS by Mike Seabrook (GMP; 297pp; £7.95 pb)—
‘Take care of your sweet self, love, and think of me occasionally.’
No, not a Test cricketer leaving on tour, but Graham, disgraced schoolmaster, to his 18-year old boyfriend and cricket club team-mate Stephen.
‘Gay’ triangle, horrified father, some violence, some graphic passages, bits of batting and bowling, the whole of a none to subtle plea for understanding.
MY EARLY LIFE by Graeme Hick (Pan; 188pp; £5.99 pb)—
Paperback of the autobiography reviewed WCM May ‘91, with the chance missed to update to embrace that first taste of Test cricket.
‘If I fail initially in Test cricket,’ he wrote, ‘I'll be relying on the Worcestershire players and Basil D'Oliveira to pick me up when I get back to New Road.’
HEADS OR TAILS?
Lancashire Captains 1865–1991 by Roy Cavanagh; foreword by Jack Bond, statistics by Rev.
Malcolm G. Lorimer (from the author, 122pp; lim. edn 1000; £7 incl p&p)—
Red-rose leaders, 72 of them, are honoured, 26 in detail, from E.B. Rowley to N.H. Fairbrother, most them successful or otherwise in accordance with the strength of their teams.
Peter Eckersley stands out as particularly inspiring; Ken Cranston, who once hit 289 for Liverpool Pilgrims, seems underestimated by posterity; Harry Pilling captained once and saw his side make 33 and 501 against Northants in 1977.
The Mac Larens, Bonds and Hugheses, all gleaners of greater glories, get their due too.
CRICKET IN WORCESTERSHIRE 1992 from W.F. Jones, 132pp; £3.50 incl p&p)—
Yearbook covering the cricket of young and old below first-class level in the county of tranquillity.
MORE CRICKET EXTRAS by David Rayvern Allen (Guinness; 128pp; £6.99)—
Another in the handbook series, collating oddities not always from major cricket countries.
Politicians, lunatics (‘Don't stump me.
I am Nebuchadnezzar and I can strike you dead.’),
actors (including Chaplin), cricketers and cricket-writers provide snippets of humour that mix into a rolling chuckle.
Some of the better-known punchlines are missing (A.E.
Knight/Walter Brearley and Paul Gibb/ice cream), and Engel's quote on p77 is ruined by a misprint.
But Gatting (‘Vindicated?’
‘I don't think the Press are vindictive.
They can write what they want.’),
Conrad Hunte (to young South African blacks: ‘Learn to dream.’),
and the chap who insisted he would be the perfect neutral umpire because his maternal grandmother was Swiss carry the day.
CRICKET: Technique, Tactics, Training by Doug Ferguson; foreword by Keith Andrew (Crowood; 96pp; £8.99 pb)—
Colourful and lucid guide to all physical aspects of the game by an NCA coach; well illustrated; ranging also across tactics and fitness.
VIDEO REVIEW
CRICKET: THE MATCHWINNERS presented by Richie Benaud; produced by John Bodnar (BBC; 122 mins; £10.99)
FROM THE treasury of BBC moving pictures comes a further production of classic action, all set on English fields, all in colour except the first sequence (the Oval Test of 1968), all pleasant, positive viewing.
Those who carried their counties or their countries to victory are featured to the exclusion of all else, and the result could serve as a visual aid to motivation.
The butchery of Clive Lloyd and Viv Richards may, for all we know, have led to the need to replace the Mound Stand at Lord's after the fusillades of sixes.
As Greg Chappell swims to 125 not out at The Oval in 1977, in torrential rain, the wail of You'll Never Walk Alone is heard.
Botham and Willis at Headingley, 1981, is a mandatory inclusion — the greatest match of all?— while the majesty of Majid Khan in 1974, at Trent Bridge, was a discerning piece of selection.
Greenidge thrills again; Gower and Ellison demolish Australia in ‘85; Hadlee's skill is shown, lest we forget; Imran, Marshall, Steve Waugh, Marsh and Taylor, Trent Bridge, ‘89, DeFreitas in the NatWest final of 1990, all manoeuvring their sides to success, fortunately — for themselves and for us — recorded safely for ever more.
Perhaps the more you watch the more you see.
One who was there on the day and has watched the film many times now suddenly notices that Snow, at The Oval, 1968, has his foot on the pitch as he fields at silly mid-on while Australia slide to oblivion against Underwood.
And yet Gooch's 154 not out last year at Headingley, even though the flood of fours distorts, remains somehow the most impressive.
HAMPSHIRE v KENT BENSON & HEDGES CUP FINAL
Marshall's memorable medal
Norman de Mesquita reports on the 21st Benson & Hedges Cup final
IN A LONG and distinguished career, Malcolm Marshall had won almost everything, but not a winner's medal in a Lord's cup final.
Now, thanks in no small measure to his own contribution to the Hampshire cause, he has one; and the only disappointment is that the climax of the match was watched by only about 8000 people, as the weather caused it to be carried over into the second day.
Some will say that is fortunate, as the weather forecast for the weekend made it seem likely that it could have been the first ‘one-day’ final to span three days.
Mark Benson won the toss for Kent and, as is customary these days, put Hampshire in But 11 o'clock on a July morning is very different from 10.30am in September and, while it was cloudy, there was nothing like the assistance the bowlers will expect to find at the start of the NatWest Trophy final later in the year.
And, while Igglesden was economical, Ealham proved too wayward and his first five overs cost 23.
Terry and Middleton have become one of the country's most reliable opening partnerships, so it was something of a surprise when, in the 19th over, Middleton was leg-before to Hooper for 27 with 68 on the board.
Terry was bowled by Igglesden five overs later, his 41 including five fours.
This brought Gower in to join Smith, and these two forged the most productive partnership of the innings, adding 85 in 20 overs.
Smith was in fine bludgeoning form, but Gower showed restraint, collecting two twos and 25 singles in his 29, which came off 52 deliveries.
Conditions were far from ideal for batting, with the light never better than moderate: there were two interruptions during the stand; one for lunch and a second, lasting 27 minutes, for rain.
Bobby Parks catches the stump as Kent's Steve Marsh is bowled, one of three wickets for highly-rated Hampshire offspinner Shaun Udal
Gower, eventually fell to Fleming, the second lbw victim of the innings and the first of two wickets for the Old Etonian.
But he was very expensive and conceded 63 runs in eight overs, which made one wonder why left-arm spinner Davis, whose five pre-lunch overs cost only 18, was not asked to bowl again in the innings.
After Gower came Nicholas, anxious to do well having missed last year's NatWest final because of injury, and he hit about to great effect.
He planted Fleming over the square-leg boundary for the first six of the day, and hit two fours in his brisk 25.
Marshall then joined Smith, who had been content to play the minor role while  Nicholas was in, but who then hit the day's second six, also off Fleming, this one a mighty blow over long-on.
Sadly, Smith was out 10 short of his century: run out, responding to an unrealistic call by Marshall.
The West Indian made amends, hitting a four in each of the last two overs and reaching 29 not out from 22 balls when the innings ended at 253 for 5.
By this time the light was dreadful, and it was quite a surprise when the Kent innings started, but only eight deliveries were bowled before the umpires decided that the conditions were not good enough, and we all trooped home through the fine drizzle and semi-darkness.
Very early on Sunday morning, before 9 o'clock in fact, Trevor Ward must have known that the portents were not good.
He tried to get into the wrong car-park and was, inevitably, confronted by a Lord's gateman who succeeded in making far from happy.
He left the ground via a close call with an ambulance and came very close to running over your correspondent.
He looked no happier when the Kent innings resumed, playing and missing several times before getting a touch to a magnificent Marshall delivery and providing Bobby Parks with the first of two catches.
Incidentally, how nice it was to see Parks keeping wicket for Hampshire.
Nothing against Adrian Aymes, but Parks had returned to the side when Aymes was injured a month before and, while Aymes will no doubt play in another Lord's final in the future, Parks is nearing the end of his benefit year.
But spare a thought for Rajesh Maru, who had played in every B&H and NatWest match so far, but was omitted for the final.
It must have been Maru's 0 for 61 at Canterbury in the NatWest two days earlier which swung things in favour of Jon Ayling.
Ayling it was who dismissed the dangerous Taylor, caught at the wicket chasing a wide one, and Kent were some way behind the asking rate with only 43 for 2 on the board after 20 overs.
Their main hope lay in the less-than-brilliant Hampshire ground-fielding, which was in complete contrast with the way Kent had performed on Saturday.
Countless runs were saved by the Kent fielders, but Hampshire seemed to be wilting under the pressure with two boundaries coming in the 33rd over — both thanks to fielding errors.
An elated Hampshire team celebrate victory in the Benson & Hedges Cup final
Just in time, Hampshire pulled themselves together, and two vital wickets fell just before lunch.
Benson was bowled by James — reward for an accurate and economic spell — and Hooper, the one man who surely could have swung things Kent's way, was bowled by Udal off his pads.
The afternoon started with some bold blows by Fleming, but he was spectacularly caught by Nicholas, leaping high at mid-off, and the last wickets fell for the addition of only 30 runs in four overs.
Marshall took two of them, Davis with the help of a stunning slip catch by Gower.
Connor bowled Ealham, who had hit the only six of the innings, and grabbed two stumps; one for himself and one for Marshall.
With his 29 runs at a vital stage of the Hampshire innings and three wickets for only 33, Malcolm Marshall might have been both a logical and romantic choice for the Gold Award, but Micky Stewart gave it to Robin Smith, whose 90 was by far the highest and best innings of the match.
PLAYER OF THE TOURNAMENT TO MARK the 21st anniversary of the Benson & Hedges Cup, a special trophy was created for the most consistent player of the 1992 tournament.
The winner, with 38 points (two points for every 10 runs, five points for each wicket, three points for each catch or stumping), was Northants fast bowler Curtly Ambrose .
The trophy is a gold-plated sterling-silver replica of a unique, antique plaque showing a village cricket scene, complete with beer tent.
The original was acquired recently by sporting-trophies specialist John Bowles, who is trying to trace its origins: ‘It was originally made in Birmingham in 1891 and was obviously part of a very important piece of cricketing silver,’ says Bowles.
Joey Benjamin: career-bests with bat and ball for Surrey at Guildford
Led by Jimmy Cook, Transvaal take the field at Lord's on July 19, becoming the first South African team to play at cricket's headquarters since 1965
JULY COMPETITION
A HEALTHY postbag indicated the interest in the Gray-Nicolls competition in our July issue.
The England ‘A’ sweater of Hugh Morris deceived many entrants, while his Glamorgan and England colleague Steve Watkin also posed a few problems of identification.
The winner, drawn from those who correctly identified the two players, was David Weaver of Egremont, Cumbria: he wins a Gray-Nicolls giant cricket bag, filled with a 5-star bat and a pair of leg-guards and gloves from the ‘Test Opener’ range.
Two runners-up also receive prizes: a Gray-Nicolls 5-star bat goes to Paul Lancaster of Wigan, while Matt Dobson of Lincoln will receive a pair of ‘Test Opener’ batting gloves.
Alistair Brown (left): 175 for Surrey v Durham.
Trevor Ward (right): 85 and 118 for Kent against Glamorgan