

In Bangladesh
Communication breakdown compounds suffering
The death and destruction wrought by the cyclone which struck Bangladesh on 29 April was tragically compounded by the total breakdown of the country's communication system.
The Bangladesh National Council of Churches — long-time colleagues of the WACC — wrote that all telephones, telexes and cables were out of order for a week.
Roads and railways disappeared under the flood waters, cutting off vital supplies of food, water and medicines.
‘We may never know the exact number of deaths.
Government reports estimate that 125,432 people have died, but one daily newspaper puts the loss at over 505,500,’ wrote the council's general secretary, Rev Subodh Adhikary.
‘Sea water up to 15 feet deep washed away entire families, along with cattle, crops and stocks of food,’ he said.
‘The question of burying loved ones became a severe problem because there were more corpses than survivors in some of the coastal islands.
‘State radio and TV had broadcast warnings four days before the cyclone, but moving whole communities is not easy in the coastal areas, where the cyclone struck,’ he added.
National Council of Churches, 395 New Eskaton Road, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Sri Lanka's new media bill sets unprecedented goals
Sri Lanka has recently proposed sweeping changes in its media legislation, which would give the country an open, democratic, people-based media environment, unmatched by any other nation in the Third World.
A spokesman for the Sri Lankan government in London told Action that this is the first known attempt anywhere in the world to translate the values of the New World Information and Communication Order into a legal form on a national scale.
He added that several other governments have requested copies of the draft bill from the Sri Lankan government.
The legislation is presented in the form of the Media Commission Bill, which Neville D Jayaweera, WACC's former director of Studies and Planning, helped to draft in his capacity as consultant to the President of the Republic.
In an interview published in Sri Lanka's The Island newspaper, Mr Jayaweera outlined three unique characteristics of the Bill:
‘First, the members of the Media Commission will represent the interests of both the government and the opposition, as well as various professional and sectoral interests.
‘Secondly, the Commission is answerable only to Parliament, and to no other group nor individual.
Not even the President of the Republic can issue directives to the Commission.
‘Thirdly, for the first time, we have a legal framework prescribing that people have a right to balanced information and the right to communicate.
That includes the right to know the truth concerning a matter; the right of reply — both through the
public and private media; the right to privacy; and, most importantly, that journalists are guaranteed protection of life, profession and property.
They are also guaranteed the right to secrecy and to protect their sources of information.
‘These are all, by any criteria, unique characteristics,’ Mr Jayaweera said.
The new legislation will prevent both government and private concerns from controlling any media against the interests of society.
‘The Media Commission provides for the broad-basing of ownership and for the breaking up of cartels and monopolies.
If they find that one person or company is buying up too many newspapers — as has happened in Britain, for example— the Commission can stop that process, Mr Jayaweera said.
Asked why this kind of legislation has not been attempted earlier, Mr Jayaweera pointed out that ‘any legislation is the product of historical, political and socio-cultural forces.’
‘A bill like this was attempted some 25 years ago by the then Minister of State Mr J R Jayewardene, but it was not acceptable to the then government.
‘Which goes to show that the time was not ripe.
Now, however, a series of social upheavals since 1970 have wrought changes in the consciousness of the people.
There is a greater awareness among people in authority.
‘Then, of course, the cataclysmic events of of 1989 and the recommendations of the Youth Commission, which attributed the debacle partly to the loss of credibility in the media, have all been determining factors.
‘I think President Premadasa read the signals correctly, and realised that if people's needs were to be met, media had to be both liberated and liberalised.
‘I think that in any case technological developments ensure that there is no point in trying to propagandize or conceal, because people have access to the truth — at least, in theory they have access to more data that will enable them to determine what the truth of a matter is — through satellites, facsimiles, etc.
‘The access to information, at many levels, is already guaranteed by technology, so any government that doesn't recognise this is acting very imprudently,’ Mr Jayaweera said.
Sri Lanka's existing network of community-based newspapers and periodicals stand to benefit substantially from the proposed new media legislation.
(Photo: Panos Pictures)
CentCom to debate new WACC programme
One of the most important tasks for WACC's Central Committee this year is to authorise proposals for a new study and action programme which would guide all WACC's activities over the next four years and prepare the organisation for its second world congress in 1995.
CentCom, which is made up of 26 representatives of corporate members from WACC's seven regions, meets in Toronto, Canada, 28 June — 4 July.
Also on the Committee's agenda will be a research proposal on the globalisation of Cable News Network, the US-based television news service which leapt into worldwide prominence through its coverage of the Gulf War.
This year, for the first time, there will be a one and a half-day open seminar preceding CentCom, with the aim of raising WACC's profile in North America.
The seminar is being organised by WACC's North American regional association and hosted by The United Church of Canada under the theme ‘Legacy: 500 Years of Evangelization in the Americas’.
Courses & Conferences
Latin American/Caribbean members focus on social movements
‘Christian Communication and Social Movements’ will be the main theme of a seminar to be held in conjunction with the next assembly of WACC's Latin American and Caribbean regional association (WACC-LA/C).
The seminar, to be organised in Santiago, Chile, 4–8 October, will draw on the rich variety of communication experiences and social movements currently flourishing in Chilean society.
The main aim of the seminar is to mobilise Christian communicators to participate in grassroots social movements which reflect WACC's Christian Principles of Communication and which respond to local needs.
The event is also designed to continue the process of follow-up to WACC's international Congress in the Philippines (1989), which called on communicators to ‘enter into a new phase of dialogue with related organisations and all people of good will to achieve a common understanding of communication in the service of free, just and peaceful communities at the local and international levels.’
WACC members in the region have been invited to contribute their reflections on the conference theme under four selected sub-themes.
These are: Popular Communication; Cultural Animation; Communication and Pastoral Work; Communication and Mass Media.
The contributions will provide the raw material for group discussions during the seminar, and will form the basis of strategies and plans to be implemented by WACC-LA/C over the next three years.
The study documents and conclusions will be published as soon as possible after the seminar.
For further information, write to Marcia Cruz Piva, Caixa Postal 5002, 09734 Rudge Ramos, SBC-SP, Brazil.
International group to meet in Singapore
The 22nd annual conference of the International Institute of Communications (IIC) will be held in Singapore on 26–28 September 1991.
The conference will deal with five major themes: international news in the post cold war era; waves versus wires — the future of mobile communications; changing structures for broadcasting and telecommunications; competition and quality — serving the public; and electronic education.
Participants from over 35 countries are expected to attend.
The IIC provides an independent  forum for debate on communications issues and evaluates the influence which governments, economics, politics and cultures have on the use of communications globally.
International Institute of Communications, Tavistock House South, Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9LF, UK.
Tel (71) 388 0671.
Fax (71) 380 0623.
IICLDN G.
Planning for world radio conference ‘92
Preparations have begun for the World Administrative Radio Conference (WARC ‘92) which will be held in Spain in 1992.
WARC ‘92 will be crucial for radio communication at the turn of the century.
High on the agenda will be to achieve international agreements on dividing the transmission bands for high definition satellite television (HDTV) and on defining the introduction of satellite radio broadcasts.
In addition, the conference plans to assign supplementary frequencies for the steadily rising demands of mobile satellite and other mobile communication services.
For further information, write to the International Telecommunication Union, Place des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland.
Tel (22) 7305111.
Fax (22) 7337256.
Pacific computer layout and design workshop
Fourteen publishers in Papua New Guinea (PNG) and the Solomon Islands plan to take part in a computer layout and design workshop to be held in Madang, PNG, 6–12 October.
Organised by WACC's Pacific region and hosted by the Divine Word Institute, the workshop aims to equip local publishers to take over responsibility for the layout and design of their own publications.
Hitherto, this has been contracted out to independent designers.
WACC members from communication organisations in Rabaul, Port Moresby, Wewak, Wabag, Lae and Goroka in PNG and from Honiara in the Solomon Islands will take part in the workshop.
It will be led by Brian Martin of Electronic Studio, a computer training group from Australia.
Participants are already familiar with the software to be used in the workshop — the PageMaker layout system and the FreeHand drawing and typography programme.
The course is specifically designed to hone their skills to a professional level.
The Divine Word Institute, a WACC member, offers diplomas in communication arts, including print and broadcast journalism.
It also offers courses in audio visual production, including video, and public relations.
Divine Word Institute, P O Box 483, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
Tel 822937.
Fax 822812.
Dance in Jerusalem
The International Christian Dance Fellowship (ICDF) is practising its steps to prepare the way for the ICDF conference to be held in August in Jerusalem.
Under the theme of ‘Preparing the Way’, leaders in dance and movement ministries will come together on 22–29 August ‘to seek a vision for the next ten years’ and to launch ICDF as an organisation.
The programme will include workshops on Healing and Worship; Prophecy and Intercession; visiting locations in Jerusalem for prayer and celebration in movement; preparing choreography for public concerts.
Applications should be sent immediately to International Christian Dance Fellowship, 11 Amaroo Crescent, Mosman, NSW 2088, Australia.
Tel (2) 960 1510.
Fax (2) 451 7175 (Attn P Jones).
Women's health gets priority in Argentina and Uruguay
‘Health is a woman's whole life.
Nothing is unrelated to health,’ says Carola Caribe of the Women's Permanent Workshop (Taller Permanente de la Mujer) in Argentina.
It is this conviction that led her to team up with the Plenary Foundation for Uruguayan Women to launch a multi-media project on the subject of women, mental health and sexuality.
The aim of the project, which is supported by WACC, is to produce resource materials for awareness-raising and education among women in marginalised areas of Buenos Aires and Montevideo.
Three booklets and three audiovisuals are being produced from a wealth of materials collected from workshops organised throughout Argentina and Uruguay during the past two years.
The Permanent Workshop works closely with the Centre for Christian Studies in Argentina and the Women's Alliance for Theology, Ethics and Ritual in the USA.
Its publications reach over 300 women's groups in Argentina, and it organises regular workshops on women and religion and alternative communication.
The Plenary Foundation has working links with the Women's Christian Association, the YMCA and the Ecumenical Women's Group of Uruguay.
Its main objective is to promote the full participation of women in the political, cultural, economic and social life of the country.
The Foundation organises over 30 workshops each year, reaching some 180 women's groups.
It produces a number of publications covering health, education, law and other issues affecting women in Uruguay.
The Women, Mental Health and Sexuality project seeks to address problems caused by the lack of educational and health resources among the poorer sectors of society.
The economic crisis prevailing in Argentina and Uruguay and throughout Latin America is reflected in increasing levels of teenage prostitution, drug abuse and domestic violence.
It is also evident in the growing numbers of unmarried mothers and single parent families.
These issues will be explained and illustrated in the new booklets and audio visuals, which are designed for use by women activists and community leaders in discussion groups and workshops.
Taller Permanente de la Mujer, Casilla de Correos 100, Sucursal 3, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Fundación Plenario de Mujeres del Uruguay, Uruguay 1555, Montevideo, Uruguay.
‘Your health is your right’(Illustration: Isis Boletín)
US Church raises tobacco issue
‘Aggressive marketing of tobacco in the Third World has led to an increase in sales by 2% a year.
These smokers pay a high price.
Besides facing increased risks, smokers in some Third World countries spend enough money on tobacco to feed a family of two or three.’
These alarming statistics, published in the World Vision magazine, have prompted members of the USA's United Church of Christ (UCC) to bring the issue of Third World tobacco markets to the attention of the UCC constituency and other Church organisations.
Dr Beverly J Chain, director of the UCC's Office of Communication and former member of WACC's Central Committee, has circulated information on the issue in an effort to raise awareness among people who are ready to take steps to tackle the problem.
The course of action for concerned citizens, however, is not yet clear, mainly because of the question of choice and free will.
‘We (in the USA) could organise stockholder resolutions and protests about this as we have done with the Nestle company and others on the use of infant formula in developing nations where such distribution has a negative effect on the health of children,’ writes Dr Chain.
‘I suppose tobacco dumping has not become an issue in the same way because adults have a choice,’ she adds.
It is clear, however, that any further delay in finding a way to address the problem will only encourage the present trend to increase — leading to even more deaths and disease each year.
The following excerpts from the World Vision article set out some of the facts:
‘By conservative estimates, 2.5 million people around the world die each year from smoking cigarettes.
A growing number of these casualties live in the developing world.
‘Ironically, the tobacco epidemic of the developing world is directly linked to growing health concerns and declining smoking rates in the United States and other developed countries.
‘To sustain healthy profit margins, multinational tobacco companies have turned to the Third World for new customers.
The article points out that public health advocates in the USA have called on church groups to oppose the exploitation of human lives for a profit.
It quotes Dr Michelle Block, director of the Women versus Smoking Campaign, who is calling for a ‘grassroots campaign by church groups’, urging them to galvanise public opinion.
Dr Beverly J Chain, director, United Church of Christ, Office of Communication, 700 Prospect Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44115–1100, USA.
Tel (216) 736 2222.
Fax (216) 736 2223.
Africans unite to promote independent press
Locally produced news sheets play a vital role in the lives of these Zimbabwean farm workers.
Recent initiatives in African journalism aim to promote the development of community newspapers.
(Photo: AV Service, Immensee, Switzerland)
A group of publishers and journalists from 38 African countries has called on the United Nations to declare censorship a grave violation of human rights and has asked African governments to free journalists who have been jailed for their professional activities.
They had come together to attend a major seminar on the development of an independent and pluralistic African press, held in Windhoek, Namibia, 29 April — 5 May.
Members of WACC's Africa Region took part in the seminar, and Horace Etemesi, the coordinator of WACC's Africa programme, represented the London office as an observer.
The seminar was organised by UNESCO with the aim of highlighting the situation of the press in Africa, lifting censorship, and encouraging the development of non-governmental newspapers and magazines that reflect the different points of view within the communities that they serve.
The issue of censorship took a prominent place in the seminar discussions.
In a background paper, Dr Paul A V Ansah, director of communications studies at the University of Ghana, outlines the situation in Cameroun:
‘Concerning censorship in normal times, Cameroun appears to hold the record in the details of its application.
When a newspaper is ready for printing, a photocopy of each page is sent to the Ministry of Territorial Administration in Yaoundé.
The material goes to the Reading Bureau, then to the Director of Public Freedoms, then to the Deputy Director for Political Affairs.
‘Each official makes notes on the articles and a resume of comments is then sent to the Minister for Territorial Administration.
If he approves, each page is stamped and signed by the Deputy Director for Political Affairs.
At the end of the seminar, the participants issued the ‘Declaration of Windhoek on Promoting an Independent and Pluralistic African Press’.
They defined independent press as a press free from governmental, political or economic control.
By pluralism, they meant the end of monopolies of any kind and the existence of the greatest possible number of publications reflecting the widest possible range of opinion.
They point out that in Africa today, despite the positive developments in some countries, journalists and publishers are victims of repression.
They are murdered, arrested and censored.
Today, at least 17 journalists are in African prisons, and 48 have been killed between 1969 and 1990.
The Declaration outlines proposals for the lifting of censorship, the maintenance of press freedom, and for the funding and support of non-governmental publications.
The ‘Declaration of Windhoek on Promoting an Independent and Pluralistic African Press’ is available from UNESCO, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, France.
South African service groups join forces
Some 17 Christian organisations which share the vision of social transformation in South Africa have pledged to work more closely together, particularly in the areas of communication, research, training projects and resources.
The Institute for Contextual Theology (ICT), which is supported by WACC, coordinated their first meeting in Johannesburg earlier this year.
Participants agreed to share information and resources, review regional training programmes, and cooperate wherever possible.
They identified three main aims:
— Promoting and planning a coordinated and structured approach to the use of available resources in the  propagation of the prophetic Church and its values;
— Developing effective machinery which can counter right-wing theology and State propaganda;
— Developing an analysis of society and the Church which will isolate the key tasks which should be taken up by the prophetic sector in the Church.
Among the organisations that make up the network are: Institute for the Study of the Bible (Pietermaritzburg); Theological Exchange Programme (Athlone); Crisis Care (Chatsworth); South African Council of Churches Library (Johannesburg); Association of Committed Theologians (Braamfontein); Catholic Youth (Pretoria); Diakonia (Durban); Christian Research, Education and Information for Democracy (Johannesburg); Ecumenical Centre Trust Resource Centre (Durban); and one organisation from Maseru, Lesotho, has joined the network: Transformation Resource Centre.
For further information, write to Noel Stott, Institute for Contextual Theology, P O Box 32047, Braamfontein 2017, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Tel (11) 339 2513.
European TV producers seek quality in worship programmes
Some 40 producers of religious television programmes from 16 countries in Eastern and Western Europe have agreed on practical steps to stimulate the production and exchange of high quality worship services in Europe.
Among their plans are:
the publication of details of worship services to be broadcast in Europe in the bi-monthly bulletin The Coproduction Connection;
the promotion of short announcements and articles on religious programmes in TV magazines;
the preparation of a list of training possibilities for religious TV producers working in Eastern Europe;
the organisation of a second opportunity to meet together in 1993.
They outlined their plans at an initial workshop on ‘Television and Worship’ which was held in Lage Vuursche, Netherlands, 27 April-2 May.
The workshop, which was the first of its kind to bring together producers from both Western and Eastern Europe, was organised by WACC's European Region in cooperation with the Lutheran World Federation.
It was also supported by the Dutch Christian Television company IKON TV, NCRV Radio of the Netherlands and the media commission of the Dutch Missionary Council.
The workshop dealt with the challenges of presenting worship, in various forms, on television.
This is of particularly lively concern in those Eastern European countries where the churches have only recently gained access to the mass media.
During the workshop, participants shared reports on the status of religious broadcasting in their respective countries.
The following are brief summaries of their reports:
Soviet Union
Regional stations owned by the different republics broadcast religious programmes representing various denominations.
The national TV network also carries religious programmes.
Formats are mainly worship services and information.
Hungary
Hungarian national television offers 4 hours and 45 minutes each month to the churches.
The majority Roman Catholic Church fills half of the airtime and over 30 Protestant denominations share the rest.
Czechoslovakia
The churches work together to produce a one-hour programme each week featuring church news, a Bible story for children and personal interviews.
Every month there is a live transmission of a church service.
Federal Republic of Germany
Deutsche Fernsehfunk (DFF), the name of the public TV network of the former German Democratic Republic, will disappear this year, but it is unclear how the system will be organised in the future.
The ‘Länder’(regions) of the former Federal Republic retain their own regional studios, and the remainder of the Republic might follow suit.
Estonia
Estonia's population is mainly Lutheran, and the religious programming covers church services, talk shows and religious music.
The programmes are noted particularly for the high quality of choral singing.
This article is compiled from a report prepared by the four members of the workshop's organising committee: Wim Koole, Daan Buddingh, Norman Hjelm and Peter Gottschalk.
The full report is available from Wim Koole, editor of The Coproduction Connection, Nic Maeslaan 6, 1399 GB Muiderberg, Netherlands.
Tel (2942) 1768.
Fax (2942) 2241.
Illustration from cover of Satellite Television Europe by Richard Collins
Community radio group gives priority to eastern European countries
EURORADIO
Eastern Europe was the focus for new resolutions at the Third Congress of the European Federation of Community Radios (FERL) held in Austria in May.
Under the theme ‘Marginalisation or contacts across frontiers — the role of independent media’, participants passed a resolution to ask the Romanian government to issue provisional licences to community radio stations.
They also authorised FERL to approach the former East German authorities of Thüringen, now one of the new ‘Länder’(regions) in Germany, to ask them to include provision for community radios in their legislation.
In addition, FERL will issue a request to the Belgian authorities to consider retaining the licences they had intended to withdraw from community radios.
Of the 300 participants at the congress, over one third came from eastern European countries.
Fédération Européenne des Radios Libres, BP 42, 04300 Forcalquier, France.
Tel (33) 9273 1058.
Fax (33) 9273 7106.
Orthodox radio for Russia
Russia's first radio station for Orthodox believers was inaugurated this week.
Called Radonezh (after the location of the famous Holy Trinity monastery founded by St Sergius), it will initially broadcast three days a week in Moscow province and in the near future will also be beamed to the Leningrad and Novograd provinces.
Finance for the station is being provided by the new Commercial Bank for Social Development.
From the Tablet 
Photos focus international attention on Peru's poor
Peasant leaders in Cuzco, Peru, prepare to confront bureaucracy.
(Photo: TAFOS)
Peru is suffering from two epidemics: one is the recent and widely reported outbreak of cholera which has infected over 200,000 people.
The other is the less publicised but equally tragic daily reality of poverty and disease which affects the lives of millions of Peruvians.
It is this quiet, persistent ‘epidemic’ that is the focus of a current photographic exhibition which is designed to bring international pressure to bear on the Peruvian government.
The exhibition is mounted by TAFOS (Talleres de Fotografía Social — Social Photography Workshops), a non-profit organisation based in Lima which documents life in Peru by putting cameras into the hands of people who experience poverty firsthand.
The exhibition which was launched in London in June will tour seven other cities in Europe and the USA, showing aspects of daily Peruvian life.
Unlike most photographic exhibitions, however, the impact of the images is made even more powerful by scenery and artefacts from Peru.
The exhibition floor and walls are strewn with boulders and bricks, shovels and picks, mining helmets and ladders.
There are brooms leaning against a fireplace, and a picture of the Sacred Heart with a red light burning beneath.
There are jugs and ceramic bowls, hats and shawls.
There is a hand-painted wooden cross.
There is bread and wine.
TAFOS, a member of WACC, was set up by Enrique Larrea of Peru and Thomas Müller of Germany.
‘In ten years TAFOS has grown to comprise eight workshops in small communities across Peru,’ said Mr Müller.
‘While people hosting our exhibition are chiefly interested in art,’ said Mr Larrea, ‘TAFOS’main concern is education — for people both inside and outside Peru.
‘We train ‘alternative’ photographers at our centres in Puno, Cuzco and Lima, and encourage the use of photos in grassroot and mass media, and in schools and community groups.
‘Photos are also a vital means of education where illiteracy is high and where marginalised people, like the Quechua Indians, do not understand the Spanish language,’ he added.
‘Photography has developed into a weapon of resistance in the constant struggle for survival,’ Mr Müller said.
‘The debate on poverty has ground to a halt since the new  government came into power and TAFOS must get it going again.’
Los Talleres de Fotografía Social, c/o CEA-PAZ, Apartado 11–0764, Lima 11, Peru.
Books & Resources
WACC-Pacific launches newsletter
Pacific Forum is the WACC Pacific regional association's own newsletter.
First published in April, it will appear three times a year.
The newsletter gives information about media training courses being offered in the Pacific.
It also gives news of WACC-PAC meetings and assemblies.
This is the first regional newsletter since 1988 when Rowan Callick, former editor of The Times of Papua New Guinea, edited WACC-PAC News.
The first issue of Pacific Forum includes an article on ‘National Communication Policies in the Pacific and the Role of the Church’ by Fr Diosnel Centurion of the Divine Word Institute in Madang, Papua New Guinea.
There is also an article on the national communication system of Tuvalu.
The next issue will appear in September and the editor, Rose Koian of the Liturgical Catechetical Institute in Papua New Guinea, invites Pacific readers to send in news items and feature articles by mid-August.
Pacific Forum, c/o editor Rose Koian, Liturgical Catechetical Institute, PO Box 347, Goroka, Papua New Guinea.
Magazine looks at social communication in Uruguay
‘Crisis in the Uruguayan press’ is the lead story in a new quarterly magazine launched in May by the Institute for Communication and Development of Montevideo.
The magazine is entitled Teorema: Comunicación Social y Desarrollo (Theorem: Social Communication and Development).
The lead article reacts to the closure of 18 newspapers and periodicals since the end of 1989 — four years after the restoration of democracy in Urugyuay — and asks what the root causes are.
‘A country which loses publications is losing something much more important,’ writes the editor.
Other articles in the issue cover consumer rights, photography, and the role of non-government organisations in social development.
A bibliography at the end of the magazine suggests books and resources for those who require further information on the subjects covered in the issue.
Teorema: Comunicación Social y Desarrollo is available from the Instituto de Comunicación y Desarrollo, Avenida 18 de julio 1431, Apto 601, 11200 Montevideo, Uruguay.
Tel (2) 911646.
One year's subscription costs US$10 in Latin America and US$15 elsewhere.
Anglicans relaunch newsletter
The Compasrose is the new expanded quarterly newsletter replacing Anglican Information which provides news about the Anglican Communion worldwide.
Published in London, the first issue of The Compasrose (the logo of the Communion) provides a full photo feature of the enthronement of the 103rd Archbishop of Canterbury, the Rev George Carey.
It also features the work of the Anglican Peace and Justice Network which recently made contact with the landless people of Pelotas, Brazil.
The newsletter gives of news of audio-visuals produced by the Anglican Communion, including one called ‘On the Move’, a thirty minute video which ‘captures the rich evangelistic, liturgical and cultural diversity in Anglicanism’ as it prepares ‘to move more deeply into the Decade of Evangelism.’
The Compasrose is available from Anglican Communion Office, Partnership House, 157 Waterloo Road, London SE1 8UT, England.
Tel (71) 620 1110.
Fax (71) 620 1070.
From Genesis to Revelation through Asian eyes
How does a Thai Christian view Pentecost?
In what way would a Burmese interpret the parable of the lost coin?
What would the baptism of Jesus look like to a Balinese?
These are just some perceptions of the Bible offered in The Bible Through Asian Eyes.
It is a new collection of modern art by professional Asian artists.
The book is a collection of over 100 modern colour prints by professional artists from 18 Asian countries.
The Bible Through Asian Eyes has been compiled by Dr Masao Takenaka of Kyoto, Japan and WACC member Rev Ron O'Grady from Aotearoa-New Zealand who together founded the Asian Christian Art Association in 1978.
‘Christianity is alive and well in Asia and this is seen in a lively appreciation of the arts,’ say the editors.
‘Many Asian churches have been willing to encourage artistic expression and the flowering of the arts has in turn enriched the faith and life of ordinary Christians.’
Each artwork is reproduced in full colour on a single page with a Biblical quotation accompanying it.
There are reflections and poems on the theme of the painting by Asian writers, making the book suitable for an illustrated meditation or talk.
Each work includes bibliographical information on the artist.
The Bible Through Asian Eyes is published by Pace Publishing.
Copies may be obtained from the Christian Conference of Asia, Communication, 4/F 57 Peking Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
Tel (3) 7233217.
Fax (3) 3699895.
Community radio stations mushroom in Argentina
Since the Argentinian government started issuing provisional licences to non-authorised radio stations in 1986, over 2,300 stations have sprung into being.
Since that date, however, the government has dragged its heels over permanent legislation, and is giving preferential treatment to  commercial stations from which it collects taxes.
‘The only way to resolve the problem is to introduce a new law and open competition for licences,’ says Rafael Arrastía, president of FARCO (Federación Argentina de Radiodifusoras Comunitarias — Argentinian Federation of Community Radios).
FARCO, which was set up in July 1990, represents 212 community radio stations and 17 community television stations.
It aims to promote community broadcasting and to press for legislation.
Mr Arrastía's inspiration for FARCO grew our of his dissatisfaction with Argentina's national networks and his increasing conviction that radio can be used very effectively to unite and strengthen marginalised communities.
Following six years as a broadcaster with the major networks, he left in 1988 to work with the communities in one of the most disadvantaged areas of Buenos Aires —‘Villa Miseria’.
The loudspeaker radio system he set up became a great success and became a model for others throughout Argentina.
In addition to encouraging local radios, FARCO has developed links with community ventures in other countries through AMARC (the French acronym for the World Association of Community Radios).
WACC helped Mr Arrastía to take part in AMARC's fourth world conference in Dublin last year, where he was elected alternate vice president for Latin America.
He has also been appointed as one of the organisers of AMARC 5 in Mexico in 1992.
Rafael Arrastía, president, FARCO, Defensa 979 — 4 C, 1065 Capital Federal, Argentina.
Tel (1) 361 4887.
Fax (1) 6134992.
Action goes desktop
This issue of Action newsletter is the first to be typeset, designed and laid out on desktop publishing (DTP) equipment which has recently been installed at WACC's offices in London.
In addition to providing flexibility of design, the equipment will considerably reduce monthly production costs.
The DTP equipment will also be used to produce brochures and other publicity material.
South African institute seeks editors
The Institute for Contextual Theology (ICT) in South Africa, a WACC member, is looking for two more editors to work on its new monthly magazine.
The Managing Editor will be responsible for accounts, budgets and funding of the magazine, including administration, advertising, marketing and distribution.
Applicants must be qualified and experienced in accountancy and office administration.
The Production Editor will be responsible for layout, design and subbing.
Applicants should be qualified and experienced in magazine production and desktop publishing.
Some experience of journalism is also required.
Applications and curriculum vitae with the names and telephone numbers of two referees should be sent immediately to The Media Officer, ICT, PO Box 32047, Braamfontein, South Africa 2017.
Tel Fax (11) 339 3704.
People
Neville D Jayaweera, WACC's former director of Studies and Planning, has been appointed Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary for Sri Lanka in the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden, and based in Stockholm.
Prior to his new appointment, which began 5 June, Mr Jayaweera served as Consultant to the Sri Lankan President, Ranasinghe Premadasa.
His responsibilities included drawing up new media legislation reflecting the values of the New World Information and Communication Order.
He was also consultant to the Presidential Task Force on Human Rights.
Nancy Mwendamseke, executive director of the East African Venture Company, Tanzania, has been named to the Honor Roll of church people around the world who have made an important contribution to literacy.
The Honor Roll was inaugurated in September 1990 by the National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA.
Mrs Mwendamseke, who represents the Africa Region on WACC's Central Committee, teaches communication skills at grassroot level in Tanzania.
Tim Bascom is the new Manager of Publishing Services with the David C Cook Foundation in Elgin, Illinois, USA.
He succeeds Larry Brook, who continues working with the Foundation on a part-time basis in conjunction with establishing his own consulting firm.
Mr Bascom joined the Foundation in 1987 and has served as editor of Interlit magazine and conducted training in Africa and Asia.
Melba Maggay has left her position as director of the Institute for Studies in Asian Church and Culture in Manila, Philippines, in order to dedicate more time to writing.
She has considerable experience as a journalist and poet, and is currently completing a narrative drama for Christmas.