

1995 Congress theme: Communication for Human Dignity
WACC defines priorities for next five years
Education is a vital element in the worldwide struggle for dignity.
Above, students in Taiwan learn to produce their own community newspaper through which to voice their opinions and concerns
Ethics, religion, culture and education are the four key elements of a new Study and Action Programme which will guide WACC during the next five years and shape its second international congress in 1995.
The theme of the ‘95 congress will be Communication for Human Dignity.
The precise date and location will be decided during the next few months.
WACC's Central Committee (CentCom), which met in Toronto, Canada, 29 June -5 July, launched the five-year programme and also authorised over 200 communication projects, seminars, studies and publications to be carried out during the coming year.
The total budget for 1992 will be approximately US$3.8 million.
The five-year Study and Action Programme is the first of its kind to be launched by WACC.
(See pages 4, 5 and 6 for a summary of the programme).
It embraces the whole spectrum of WACC's activities, including areas which were identified as priorities by over 450 communicators attending the Manila congress in 1989.
These areas include: communication and human rights, communication ethics, communication and theology, communication and development, and media education.
The Gulf War and the way it was portrayed in the world's media was the focus of much discussion during the meetings.
As a result, the Central Committee decided to write an open letter to WACC members and colleagues, urging journalists and broadcasters to use the mass media to promote peace, justice and international understanding (a copy of their letter is enclosed with this issue's Special Report).
The Central Committee directors pointed out that the issue of peace is also an integral part of WACC's new Study and Action Programme.
The programme will promote a ‘peace culture’ in which mass media systems should play a leading role.
Religious media course at Moscow University
The largest school of mass communication in the Soviet Union, Moscow State University, will start a five-year course specialising in Religious Communication in September this year.
The first intake of students was screened in early July (see caption above).
Among the applicants were several candidates for the priesthood or diaconate of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Others were high school graduates who are keen to become religious affairs correspondents or religious broadcasters.
‘We shall emphasise religious broadcasting by radio,’ Professor Yassen N Zassoursky, dean of the Faculty of Journalism said.
‘I still have problems with religious broadcasting on television,’ he remarked.
‘Television in the Soviet Union has a more worldly quality and is more spectacular than the intimate voice of radio.
This is why we shall give religious sound broadcasting priority,’ Professor Zassoursky added.
The new Department of Religious Communication is one of 12 chairs in which the faculty is organised.
Others specialise in Radio-TV, Foreign Press, Book Editing, Photo Journalism, etc.
Although students belong for the entire five years of study to one particular section, much of the teaching is done cross-sectionally.
For example, all students now have to take a course in the history of religion, which is another sign of change in the religious climate of the Soviet Union.
The Faculty of Journalism, located in Karl Marks Prospekt, facing Red Square, has some 2,400 students and a full time teaching staff of 120.
Two thirds of the teachers are women.
WACC will respond positively to the invitation of Dean Zassoursky to cooperate closely with the new Department of Religious Communication and the Faculty of Journalism in general.
The screening board for candidates wishing to enrol as students of religious communication met on 5 July at the Faculty of Journalism of Moscow State University.
They are (from left to right): Ms Lilya Kalaschnike, a staff member of the Faculty, Father Johan Sviridov, deputy head of the Department of Catechetics in the Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, Prof Yassen Zassoursky, dean of the Faculty of Journalism, and Dr M Zhurinsgeye member of the Supreme Soviet working group on legislation.
Courses & Conferences
Indian institute features marketing
The Indian Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (ISPCK) will focus on marketing and distribution in its annual publishing course, to be held at the ISPCK's Publishing Institute in Delhi, 18–30 November.
The residential course will be a combination of talks, demonstrations and hands-on experience.
In addition to marketing, there will also be sessions devoted to ‘The editor's role in the publishing house’, ‘General management of a book publishing enterprise’, ‘Tips on evaluating manuscripts’, ‘The relationship between writer and editor’ and ‘Desktop publishing’.
Some scholarships for the course are available from WACC.
For further details, contact The Publishing Institute, ISPCK, Post Box 1585, Kashmere Gate, Delhi 110006, India.
Tel (11) 251 7353.
Fax (11) 291 3692.
Post-graduate journalism training in Europe
In preparation for 1992, when European trade barriers will be removed, the Robert Schuman Institute of Journalism is setting out to dissolve cultural barriers and unite students from all over Europe.
It offers a nine-month workshop in print, radio and television journalism to graduates at its training centre in Brussels.
Training also includes a strong historical and doctrinal perspective since ‘Europe has drawn its dynamism, its art, its care for education and health for all’ from the Christian faith.
The Institute produces a newspaper, Carrefours, in 12 languages.
Applicants for the course should be between the ages of 22 and 27 and should be able to read and write English and French.
Institut Robert Schuman-European Media Studies, Rue de l'Association 32–34, 1000 Bruxelles, Belgium.
Tel (2) 217 2355.
Fax (2) 219 5764.
Moscow University hosts seminar on communication ethics
‘From State to market — the ethical implications’ was the title of a seminar held on 6 July at the Faculty of Journalism of Moscow State University.
The contribution of the World Association for Christian Communication to the seminar was a paper entitled ‘Neither state nor market: Ethical reflections on active citizenship in public communication’.
It was introduced by Michael Traber, WACC staff director of Studies and Publications.
Professor George Gerbner of the Annenberg School of Communication, Philadelphia, USA, addressed the seminar on the ‘Ethics of cultural policy’.
He pleaded for new ways of ‘creating and experimenting with community and citizen participation in local, national and international policy-making.’
Prof Gerbner emphasised the ‘sharing of experiences, lessons and recommendations, and gradually moving toward a realistic democratic agenda.’
The Moscow seminar was indeed an experience in sharing ethical reflections between 15 members of the teaching staff of the Faculty of Journalism, the editor of the weekly magazine Journalist, Dimitry Avraamov, and the president of the Union of Journalists of the USSR, Eduard M Sagalayev.
Other participants from the West were Professor Kaarle Nordenstreng of Tampere University, Finland, and Philip Lee, editor of the WACC journal Media Development.
Voicing the concern of most soviet participants, Prof Zassoursky asked: ‘Will the media include the public under the new conditions of the market economy?
Or will they lose them by excluding them?’
Edward Sagalayev underlined the fact that the media had been the main contributors to glasnost and perestroika.
He asked: ‘Is the Soviet press now selling itself for money?’
Summarising the WACC paper, which was co-authored by Ann Davies, Michael Traber explained ‘that it is neither state-directed nor market-driven mass media which can fill the current void in the USSR and elsewhere.
It is rather the creation of new public spheres in which citizens, including media workers, can play a full role in their community, and in the community of communities.’
French broadcasters look forward to 1992
‘The discovery of the Americas (500 years in 1992) and its consequences’ was the theme of a seminar organised earlier this year in Montpellier, France, for radio producers by the Conference of Protestant Churches in Latin Europe (CEPPLE).
WACC supported the seminar, which was attended by 15 participants from Spain, Portugal, Italy, Switzerland and France.
They are all involved in the production of Protestant radio programmes for national, local and private radio networks.
In his report on the seminar, François Bouneau of the French Protestant Radio Service called for ‘a critical celebration that could open avenues of hope for the people of Latin America as well as helping us to reconsider our relationship with Third World nations.’
CEPPLE (Conférence des Eglises Protestantes des Pays Latins d'Europe), c/o Service Radio — Fédération Protestante de France, 47 rue de Clichy F — 75009, Paris, France.
The leaders of three major Catholic media organisations visited WACC in July.
From left to right: Fr Henk Hoekstra, president of OCIC; Fr Jean-Marie Brunot, president of UCIP; Rev Carlos A Valle, WACC's general secretary; Fr Colm Murphy, general secretary of UNDA; and Ole van Luyn, WACC's coordinator for Europe.
The group discussed ways in which the four organisations might work more closely together in the future, including preparations for the WACC-sponsored Consultation of International Christian Communication Organisations which was postponed earlier this year.
It will now take place during the second week of November 1992.
OCIC and UNDA are the international associations for film/audio visuals and radio/TV respectively.
UCIP is the international Catholic union of the press.
Demand increases for media training and education
Communication education continues to be a priority for WACC, particularly in Third World countries.
Over 25% of the 109 projects approved by the Central Committee for implementation in 1992 involve training of some kind.
A large number of projects are devoted to informal, grassroot communication education programmes designed to help improve the quality of life for thousands of people living in marginalised communities throughout Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Others include more formal courses organised by training centres and institutions.
There are also a number of projects which concentrate on the production of materials and resources for educational use.
The regional distribution of the 109 projects is: Africa: 31, Asia: 20, Europe: 3, Latin America: 39, Middle East: 9, Pacific: 5, inter-regional: 2.
WACC's budget for 1992 is approximately US$3.8 million.
This covers the project portfolio, plus almost 100 other activities which form part of WACC's Study and Action Programme.
(Please see pages 4, 5 and 6).
The Programme includes publications, studies and seminars, many of which also have a major training component.
WACC welcomes new members
The following organisations have been welcomed as corporate members of WACC:
Deadline for new projects
The next deadline for submitting project applications to WACC's General Secretariat is 15 February 1992.
They will be reviewed by the regional associations and submitted to the Central Committee at its next meeting (26 June to 2 July 1992).
WACC launches international Study an Action Programme, 1991–1995
A major Programme of Studies and Action was launched in July this year by WACC's Central Committee.
The Committee is formed by 26 directors who represent the interests and concerns of WACC's seven regional associations.
The Programme is to concentrate on six main themes: 1) Communication Ethics; 2) The Right to Communicate; 3) Communication and Religion; 4) Communication, Culture and Change; 5) Communication Education; 6) Women's Issues.
Following is an introduction to the Programme and an outline of the concepts and priorities for the theme ‘Communication Ethics’.
Information on the remaining five themes will be published in subsequent issues of Action newsletter.
Introduction
Since its inception, the World Association for Christian Communication (WACC) has grappled with policy issues.
At a time when it had not yet developed a project portfolio, it was concerned with such questions as how to set up a broadcasting system which would serve society as a whole rather than merely serving governments and the ruling elites.
WACC also debated the role of religious broadcasting in an increasingly secular society.
But to find answers to such policy issues WACC had to initiate a process of study which included gathering information and purposeful reflections.
Yet situations in the world of communication, both regionally and internationally, change rapidly.
So do information technologies, and power structures.
The same holds true for the Church.
Old priorities gradually move down the list while new ones surge forward.
It is therefore necessary to take stock of one's position at regular intervals.
Yet the fundamental principles remain.
The following outline of a programme of study, reflection and action is firmly based on WACC's ‘Christian Principles of Communication’, which ‘set out the corporate agenda for WACC’.
It also tries to implement the proposals made in ‘Communication and Community — the Manila Declaration’.
Among its specific recommendations for study and action are: the right to communicate, NWICO, traditional communication and alternative media, media education, communication studies in theological education and empowerment of women through communication.
Each of the six main sections of the programme starts with a brief analysis of the situation, and then responds to it by proposing a series of study processes.
The programme is conceptual in nature, that is it is mainly concerned with ideas.
In addition, it lists the priorities on which work should concentrate.
The programme should guide WACC in the ensuing years and prepare its members for the second World Congress in 1995.
Its theme, ‘Communication for Human Dignity’, sums up what this  programme of reflection and action is all about.
The tradition
WACC was involved in ‘forum’ activities before the word ‘forum’was officially designated to denote WACC's research and advocacy programmes.
At one time it was called ‘frontier issues of communications’, where frontier was meant to indicate WACC's presence and involvement at the forefront of contemporary thought and action.
One of these frontier issues was the concern for a New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO) which WACC embraced in 1980, albeit with some reservations.
At a later stage new communication technologies and their assumed or actual benefits and pitfalls for the Third World captivated WACC's attention.
In the mid-80s two new focal points emerged: curriculum development (mainly for professional media education) and the Intercultural Panel (investigating group communication and community activism).
The final, narrative report on the Intercultural Panel has recently been published in book form in Manila and New Delhi.
WACC's Forum programme in the 80s was also influenced by WACC-commissioned research on communication and development (1979 -1984).
The research results were later published in the book by Paul Hartmann, B R Patil and Anita Dighe, The Mass Media and Village Life — An Indian Study (Sage, New Delhi, 1988).
The book has been hailed as a benchmark in the debate on communication and social transformation.
Other Forum activities were started but not brought to significant conclusions.
The programme on communication and theology, for example, produced some excellent results in Latin America, North America and Europe.
Some papers have been published, others are now being sifted, with a view to making them available to WACC's constituency.
WACC also showed a certain interest in the problems of the ‘electronic church’, both in North and South America.
But there was no need to break new ground.
Studies were already available or were published with the support of, or in association with WACC, including those by Peter G Horsfield, Hugo Assman and Stewart Hoover.
Three traits have characterised WACC's Forum activities.
Firstly, they are action-orientated, that is, they are not merely academic studies, but feed into WACC's practical communications programme.
Secondly, they show a clear bias towards the problems and prospects of developing countries.
And thirdly, they have an advocacy function.
WACC's Forum task is to propagate certain issues and concerns to various target groups which try to influence policy makers on different levels.
Finally, in the years leading up to the Manila Congress 89, WACC's Forum programme was absorbed by a host of preparatory meetings in the regions and by the preparations for the Congress itself.
As Congress approached, several hundred questionnaires and letters were scrutinized in which would-be participants expressed their interests and priorities.
On the one hand it showed that various themes which WACC had pursued corresponded with needs expressed.
On the other hand the input suggested a shift in emphasis, for example in the interest expressed in media education and in the role of communication studies in theological education.
WACC's Central Committee, meeting immediately after the Manila Congress in October 1989, decided to streamline the Forum programme.
This evidently happened under the influence of the Congress and its Manila Declaration.
The four principal areas identified by CentCom 89 were: 1) Communication and Human Rights/Ethics; 2) Communication and Theology (particularly the introduction of communication courses in theological education); 3) Communication and Development; 4) Media Education.
In the run-up to the next World Congress in 1995, these four areas should be expanded to include other relevant global and regional concerns like communication for peace, communication in ethno-religious conflicts, and the importance of culture in the process of social change.
The Programme is meant to study, and act upon, the cultural environment as a whole.
The total human habitat, including the natural environment, is now threatened by exploitation and greed.
This programme of study and action should be understood to be part of the wider conciliar process for Justice, Peace and Integrity of Creation, which was initiated by the World Council of Churches.
How the programme works
Forum is a global and integrated programme.
But what does that mean?
And how does it relate to WACC sponsored projects?
Firstly, the Forum programme is global in the sense that it takes place in all the regions.
It is integrated in that the activities of each region are seen as part of a global process, i.e. the experiences and insights of each region are fed into, and compared with, those of other regions.
The programme thus expresses the reality that we are citizens of one world and are members of a world association committed to international solidarity and regional diversity.
Secondly, no component in this programme should be seen in isolation.
Each interrelates with all the others.
For example, communication ethics and the right to communicate have theological roots.
The issue of communication as a human right is also related to development and inevitably leads to a process of conscientisation and media education.
Likewise, professional education must be assessed from the perspectives of human rights and developmental needs.
These considerations may then lead to an emphasis on training in alternative journalism and to the demand for alternative media and a concomitant emphasis on media education.
Thirdly, the Forum programme is integrated in terms of the organisation of its activities.
It includes the creation of panels of concerned scholars in various fields and disciplines, the commissioning of articles and books, the study of grassroots activities, the assessment of popular resource materials and the evaluation of projects as stimulus and challenge to theory.
Resources are developed both in the regions and by WACC staff (also through Media Development and Action).
But the point is that a great variety of inputs and outputs are employed and interact with each other.
Policies are set by WACC's Central Committee, which also allocates financial resources and reviews the programme year by year.
WACC's General Secretariat coordinates the worldwide process and tries to integrate the entire programme both horizontally and vertically.
This is admittedly no easy task, but it stimulates WACC to be vigorous and alert and makes it truly global.
Projects and Forum
It has often been stressed that there should be more interaction between Forum and Project sectors.
Many of the criteria which guide project support are, in effect, a result of such interaction (see ‘Project Policy Issues’ in WACC's Annual Report 1989).
The experiences gained from work with grassroots projects have, in particular, been the subject of study.
On the other hand, such issues of Media Development as ‘Video for the People’(4/1989) and ‘Radio — the Sound of the People’(4/1990) have been of direct relevance to communication practitioners.
They serve, like other WACC publications, a process of policy formation, which is at the heart of both Project and Forum activities.
The relationship between Projects and Forum can, perhaps, best be explained by some examples.
Various experiments in grassroots or democratic communication took place in South Africa, some of which were once supported by WACC while others are still being supported.
At first they were almost spontaneous attempts in participatory communication, and part of the people's ‘cultural struggle’.
WACC was able to make these activists familiar with the Latin American concept of ‘comunicación popular’, which is essentially communication of, by and for the people to initiate socio-political change.
This input led to policies and strategies based on theoretical insights first gained in Latin America.
In the Philippines, WACC conducted a series of seminars on the NWICO and curriculum development.
This set in motion a host of coordinated activities, among which was the study of grassroots/traditional communication for the Intercultural Panel.
This, in turn, contributed to the formation of a network called People in Communication (PIC) which works on policy issues and communication education: some of these activities are now supported as projects by WACC.
A third example refers to training.
Over the years WACC has given scholarships to persons who needed training as documentalists.
These month-long training courses took place at IDOC in Rome (also a WACC supported project).
Documentalists who met there set up their own network, INTERDOC, working on different issues, and exchanging information with each other.
What started with scholarship support from WACC's Training Assistance Programme (TAP) led to a computer-based network of alternative documentation centres, some of which are, once again, WACC projects in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Middle East.
Similarly, WACC's Forum programme of women's consultations has led to the organisation of several women's networks and specific women's projects in the regions.
Communication Ethics
The end of superpower rivalry, the consequences of the Gulf War, the economic decline of the South and the environmental crisis have, among several other factors, created a sense of emptiness and helplessness which demands new ethical initiatives.
In some parts of the world the situation is referred to as the post-modern age or ‘el postmo’, indicating the absence of new values in the wake of the bankruptcy of old ones.
There is a widespread belief that the Age of Enlightenment has run its course.
Similar ideas are expressed vis-à-vis the mass media and information technology.
The monopolisation of media power, the trivialisation of contents, the growing gap in technological infrastructure both between and within nations and continents, the concern for the misuse of data, etc. have now almost reached a point of no return.
Thus the very foundations of our communication culture and its structures need re-examination.
Ethics are ignored either with silence or with disdain by the exponents of media deregulation/reregulation or the managers of transnational communication/culture industries.
The alarming increase in media oligopolies has led to a subsequent decline in any need for public accountability on the part of media corporations.
Ethics have been downgraded or diluted or made to fit into narrow understandings.
The coverage of the Gulf War has been a prime example of the neglect of media ethics.
There is a growing expectation, not least from WACC's friends in Eastern and Central Europe and the Soviet Union, that our Christian association should make a substantial contribution to the ethical debate on communication.
Similarly, there are voices from theologians, politicians and concerned citizens in many parts of the world and of many different persuasions expressing the need for a new ‘public philosophy’ and a new ethos of public morality in the 1990s.
Ethical considerations also underpin policies and programmes working towards the democratisation of public communication, let alone such questions as violence and peace, sexual harassment and human dignity
Public ethos -public communication
These two concepts are interlinked and condition each other: if you question one you question the other.
WACC's Forum programme questions and intends to influence the mass media in order to influence public ethos, that is, the code of values by which a society lives.
It therefore approaches and studies the mass media from a number of perspectives, such as cultural premises, the potential for change and the evolution of normative values leading to a ‘new order’.
This may be done through media education, grassroots actions, alternative models of media and other methods.
But all this should be accompanied by a process of systematic reflection.
Principles
While procedural ethics (often enshrined in press codes) remain important, the real need today is to rediscover and cultivate the fundamental principles on which procedural norms rest.
Such  proto-norms are: concern for the truth, respect for the absolute value of human life, solidarity with the poor, the oppressed and marginalised, and the realisation that communication is a fundamental human right.
Mikhail Gorbachev coined the phrase ‘universal human values’, which transcend ideologies and cultures.
The exploration of what these values are and what they mean has hardly started, but it should become a primary focus of communication ethics.
Religious public ethics
All religions have developed a body of moral norms.
However, some religions including the Christian churches, have in the last few centuries emphasised individual morality to the neglect of public morality.
There is now a growing conviction that the religious sources for a new public ethos have to be mobilised again.
What are these specific sources?
How can they be utilised in ‘secular’ and multi- faith societies?
How can religious consciousness, and Christian faith in particular, be regained for the public good?
Is there now an erosion of purely ‘humanistic’ public ethics in favour of those which are nourished by religion?
How can our understanding of public ethics be translated into Christian communications practice?
Ethics and communication policies
Communication policies are changing rapidly, yet there is a need to assess them constantly from an ethical perspective.
There have even been instances when politicians were ready for a re-evaluation of these policies (Philippines, Papua New Guinea, for example), in which, fortunately, WACC members and staff were able to play a part.
However, little work has been done on, for example, the ethical foundations of the public service model of broadcasting, or the basic ethical guidelines for policy formation.
The recent experiences in Eastern and Central Europe and the Soviet Union have shown the lack of such guidelines.
The goal, therefore, is to work out a theoretical framework of communication ethics which can be related to the formation of policies in different cultural and political settings, concentrating, as noted above, on the positive aspects of ethical norms and motivations rather than negative restrictions.
Professional ethics
This has been the traditional field of communication ethics.
Yet the changes in the media themselves or the changed context in which they operate pose new challenges.
The ethical dimensions in WACC's media education and professional education programmes should be further strengthened.
Equally, more attention should be paid to the professional ethics of media workers in the churches themselves.
As many media workers would acknowledge, professional ethics in church-related media work are almost uncharted territory.
This in itself is astonishing.
What are the main ethical problems of church-owned media, and what would their own codes of ethics look like?
Books & Resources
WACC-LA/C launches bulletin
The Latin America/Caribbean Regional Association of WACC (WACC-LA/C) has launched a new regional bulletin, WACContacta, which combines both Portuguese and Spanish.
The bulletin carries news of WACC-LA/C meetings and events, as well as other activities related to communication.
The June issue gives information about the next regional assembly which will be held in Santiago, Chile, in October this year.
It also encourages assembly participants to submit samples of video footage on social movements in their respective countries.
These will be assembled onto one tape and copies will be made available to participants at cost price.
WACContacta, the bulletin of WACC's Latin America/Caribbean Regional Association, is available from the WACC-LA/C Secretariat, c/o CAVE, Caixa Postal 5002, 09735 Rudge Ramos SBC-SP, Brazil.
Cuban award for video
The video ‘500 Years Later: The Return’, directed by Ecuadorian film-maker Hernán Cuéllar and produced by the Latin American Council of Churches, was awarded the Caracol prize at the 12th Film and Video Festival of the National Union of Cuban Writers and Artists.
The video looks back on the occupation of Latin America by Europeans and draws attention to the present situation of the millions of people throughout the continent who are suffering poverty and disease.
Consejo Latinoamericano de Iglesias, Casilla 85–22, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 561539 and 568373.
Fax (2) 504377.
Telex 21150 CLAI ED.
A handbook for the ‘spririted journalist’
‘As a journalist, you must start with listening to the stories of ordinary people and not only to those branded as newsworthy.
Observe, search and constantly evolve better ways of gathering and writing data, but always with empathy and respect for people and events.’
With this paragraph in the preface to Newsletter Writing and Production Handbook for the Spirited Journalist, editor Alfonso B Deza sums up the philosophy of the handbook.
Published by the Asian Social Institute (ASI) in Manila with the support of WACC, the handbook is designed to complement ASI's newsletter workshops but it can also stand alone.
‘The rudiments of newsletter writing and production are presented in a very personal manner, and as simply as possible, to guide you through various levels of journalistic skill.
Self-help guide questions and exercises are presented after each major section’, Mr Deza says.
The sections cover news writing, feature writing, interviewing, editing and newsletter production.
They also include a critique of conventional news values and a list of professional ethics.
The handbook concludes with an account of the creation and development of two news sheets in remote rural areas of the Philippines.
Newsletter Writing and Production Handbook for the Spirited Journalist, edited by Alfonso B Deza (74 pages), is available from the Asian Social Institute, 1518 Leon Guinto Street, Malate, Manila, Philippines.
Tel (2) 596266.
Future strategies for broadcasting in Europe
In his book The Future of Christian Broadcasting in Europe, Canon Peter Elvy looks beyond the current debates surrounding media legislation and works towards a longer-term communications strategy for the churches.
Basing his research for the book on over 100 interviews, Canon Elvy concludes that one of the major stumbling blocks for Christian broadcasting in Europe is that ‘Christians in the European media are suffering from a lack of questions’.
‘Therefore my purpose in this book,’ he writes, ‘is not to state conclusions but, like a radio interviewer, to ask why and what and how, and thus to re-open a file that has perhaps been prematurely closed.’
Canon Elvy encourages the churches to respect European values and also to be careful in distinguishing between the terms ‘communication’, ‘publicity’, ‘image-building’ and ‘information’.
In the foreword to the book, the chairperson of WACC's European Region, Dr Hans-Wolfgang Hessler, looks ahead to Europe after 1992 when many of the existing commercial, political and cultural barriers will have been removed.
He writes:
‘Today's changes in Europe are creating access for many more millions of people who, for generations, under the pressure of political conditions, had completely lost connection with the Christian tradition and the Christian community.
These new possibilities confront the churches and Christian groups with an extraordinary communal task.’
The Future of Christian Broadcasting in Europe (147 pages) costs £3.50 and is published by McCrimmon Publishing Company Ltd, 10–12 High Street, Great Wakering, Southend-on-Sea, Essex SS3 0EQ, UK.
Tel (0702) 218956.
Fax (0702) 216082.
Latin American video
The Foundation for Independent Video and Film (FIVF) of the USA has published its first Directory of Film and Video Production Resources in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This is an indexed guide listing over 400 film and video production organisations, production-related services and individual producers in the region.
The Directory costs US$10 plus $2.50 for postage, and is available from the Foundation for Independent Video and Film, 625 Broadway, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10012, USA.
Tel (212) 473 3400.
Tri-continental meeting stimulates media networks
The recent ‘South/South’ initiatives, which are helping to link networks of communication organisations in Africa, Asia and Latin America/Caribbean, will enable groups such as the Belize Rural Women's Association to share their experiences of community theatre with similar groups in other parts of the world
Communication organisations in Africa, Asia and Latin America/Caribbean are planning to work more closely together on research and training programmes following a tri-continental meeting held in Lima, Peru, earlier this year.
The event was hosted by the Latin American Institute (IPAL) in cooperation with the African Council on Communication Education, the Asian Mass Communication Research and Information Center and UNESCO.
Several WACC members took part in the meeting, whose theme was ‘South/South cooperation in the field of communication’.
Its main objective was to review communication activities on every continent, especially those relating to research, documentation and training, and to explore areas of cooperation between regional organisations.
In addition to developing a lively network among the participants, the meeting has also helped to alert government organisations to the importance of communication issues and policies.
The Peruvian Parliament, for example, was prompted to hold a conference on ‘Communication and Democracy’ in cooperation with non-governmental communication organisations, including IPAL.
IPAL's director, Rafael Roncagliolo, addressed the conference, which was the first of its kind in the history of Peru, attracting leading politicians and communication policy-makers.
Rafael Roncagliolo, Instituto para América Latina (IPAL), Apartado Postal 270031, Lima 27, Peru.
Tel (14) 617949.
Fax (14) 617949.
Hans Ott dies
After a long and painful illness, the Reverend Hans Ott died in Berne, Switzerland, on 21 July.
He was 50.
Mr Ott had served as general secretary of Brot für Alle (Bread for All) for 17 years, and was a long-standing friend of WACC.
In a recent letter of condolence to his family, the Council of the Federation of Protestant Churches in Switzerland praised the strength of his personality, his many abilities and his Christian commitment in the area of development.
WACC staff changes
Five members of WACC's General Secretariat staff have assumed new responsibilities over the past few weeks.
The Reverend Horace Etemesi is now regional coordinator for Latin America/Caribbean in addition to his existing position as regional coordinator for Africa.
Ramón Orellana has been appointed evaluation officer and will work closely with the Forum Sector.
Pradip Thomas has been named studies coordinator and will be responsible to Michael Traber, director of studies and publications.
Dr Thomas retains his responsibilities as regional coordinator for Asia.
Anne Watson has become information assistant working on Action newsletter.
She was formerly assistant to Ole van Luyn, WACC's funding director.
Ms Watson succeeds Toireasa McCann who has moved to Cork, Eire, to study traditional Gaelic music.
People
The Reverend Hubert Hoskins, a life member of WACC and editor of The Christian Broadcaster during the 1960s, died in England earlier this year.
The Christian Broadcaster was the journal of the World Association for Christian Broadcasting, which merged with the Coordinating Committee on Christian Broadcasting in 1968 to form WACC.
Hans Peter Gohla has been appointed as executive director of the Catholic Media Council (CAMECO) in Aachen, Germany.
He succeeds Fr Marcel Vanhengel, who will maintain contact with CAMECO as a consultant with the Aachen-based group Media Development Consultants.
Mr Gohla formerly worked with the Christian agency Miserior.
The Reverend Théo Buss, French language press officer with the World Council of Churches' Communication Department, and editor of its publications SOEPI and Mensuel, is leaving the WCC to become pastor of a parish of Switzerland's national Protestant Church.
The parish is in Meyrin, Geneva.
Mr Buss, who has worked with the WCC for nine years, will not be replaced immediately, pending a restructure of the Communication Department and its publications.
David Busch has been appointed executive officer of the Australian Religious Press Association (ARPA).
Mr Busch has worked with the Uniting Church in Queensland and South Australia.
He currently edits ARPA's news service, Religion-Watch, and is the Tasmanian associate editor of Church and Nation.
The Reverend Dr Tom Tuma, a writer and educator, has been appointed the new provincial secretary of the Anglican Church of Uganda.
Dr Tuma has written and edited several books including Building Uganda's Church and A Centenary of Christianity in Uganda.
He was formerly professor of Religious Affairs at Makerere University, Kampala.
The Reverend Carlos Tamez, a Presbyterian pastor from Mexico, is the new general coordinator of Alfalit Latinoamericano, based in Costa Rica.
CentCom ‘91
SPECIAL REPORT
Valle calls on churches to speak out against media abuse
‘In the horrendous experience of the Gulf War, we have seen, as never before, what manipulation of communication really means,’ said WACC's general secretary, the Reverend Carlos A Valle, in his address to WACC's Central Committee.
Mr Valle spoke of the ‘global proportions’ of censorship and he urged churches to take a more prominent role in denouncing ‘lies, which, at a worldwide level, are silencing the truth.’
He pointed out that the media coverage of the Gulf War ‘created a fantasy instead of informing the public of the real situation.
The media avoided referring to the human tragedy of war.
Air strikes were ‘surgical’; bombs were aimed at ‘military targets’.
‘Television rarely showed human casualties, and although over 200,000 Iraqi soldiers and civilians died, these statistics gained very little mention in the press, and they certainly did not penetrate the conscience of the rest of the world.
‘The diabolical element of any power which tries to be all-embracing appears here in its entirety.
When the enemy is shown as a non-person, non-existent, the result is to display a general scorn for human life.
‘It is this type of censorship that has brought a dehumanising character to the proceedings, and communication has made this blatantly obvious.
‘Perhaps now is the time for us, as Christians, to reflect on our contribution to this non-communication.
We have probably often been guilty of viewing censorship as something that must be imposed from time to time.
We have enforced questionable criteria, appealed to divine authority and given ourselves the right to make our own interpretation of it.
‘Boundaries that attempt to protect life and its development are at the root of the Ten Commandments.
It is those boundaries that mark the borders between that which humanises and that which dehumanises.
‘Jesus stresses that love of God and love of one's neighbour are summed up in the Ten Commandments.
But He adds an unexpected dimension to the love of one's neighbour: love of one's enemy.
It is a matter of seeing the enemy as a human being created by God and who needs to be transformed and not destroyed.
This dimension is almost totally ignored when jingoism and greed are at the root of our understanding of rights and power.’
Finally, Mr Valle urged Christians to ‘work together for communication that expresses an ethic of justice and promotes life, respect for human beings and their culture, and the development of true community.’
Taking a break from discussions on the role of the media in the Gulf War are (from left to right): Rev Randy Naylor (Canada), Midori Suzuki (Japan), Rev James Massey (India), Pradip Thomas (WACC's Asia Region coordinator), Kevin Engel (Australia) and Rev Carlos A Valle (WACC's general secretary).
Help us dismantle myths, urges Native Canadian
The Reverend Stan McKay, a Native Canadian, has called on Christian communicators to help dismantle the myths that continue to denigrate aboriginal people throughout the world.
Addressing a seminar on ‘500 Years of Evangelisation in the Americas’, held prior to WACC's Central Committee meeting, Mr McKay stressed that ‘the era of mission is over and the experience of healing must begin'.
‘In their work overseas, for example, the North American churches emphasise the need to respect other cultures, but in their own back yard, the oppression, restrictions and lack of communication continue,’ he said.
Moves towards healing in that context were made in 1986 when The United Church of Canada apologised to the Native people and confessed that they had ignored the wisdom and riches of their spiritual traditions.
The Native people acknowledged the apology, but made it clear that cultural oppression still prevails in many parts of North America.
‘As many as 50,000 aboriginals in Winnipeg, where I live, are dying without cultural identity,’ Mr McKay said.
But they will not give in.
‘The stories of my people go beyond oppression and the degeneration of society,’ Mr McKay added, citing recent occasions in Canada when aboriginal communities have asserted their rights over ancestral land which was destined to be taken over by local developers.
The cases have gained wide press coverage and raised public awareness of aboriginal concerns, but it is an uphill struggle.
‘It happens in so many countries…aboriginals are oppressed in Australia, Peru, Paraguay, Bolivia, Brazil, Guatemala, Japan and the Philippines.
What I talk about relates to the global image of what Good News means,’ Mr McKay said.
He blamed the ‘unceasing hunger for materials things’ for many of the problems that exist, and stressed that wholeness and interdependence are vital elements in the healing process, which he called ‘circles of healing’.
‘The Church has not been much involved in the circles of healing.
Liberation theology is such a circle, but the theology does not really reflect the aboriginal spirituality,’ he said.
AFRICA
In 1989 we pointed out that: ‘Africa is changing.
In South Africa, Mandela has been released.
The state of emergency has been lifted and in part some of the  segregation has been stopped.
Namibia is now independent.
It seems that this trend will continue, and many African countries have been forced to accept democracy to foster economic and political justice for all.’
The wave of change continued throughout 1990.
In Cte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Cabo Verde, São Tomé & Principe, and in Benin, elections have underlined the importance of the process of peaceful change that started early in 1990.
Nevertheless, the moves towards positive change are being frustrated both by threats from right-wing activists, and by sectarian conflicts.
These are causing massive suffering and loss of life in Angola, Ethiopia, Liberia, Mali, Mozambique, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Togo and Zaire.
Within this context, WACC's African Regional Association (WACC-AR) has chosen the theme ‘Communication and Human Rights in Africa’ for its regional assembly in September.
The human rights issue is also a priority of the region's animation programme, which is carried out on a voluntary basis by the officers.
One of the first initiatives in the programme was a workshop on ‘Communication for Development’, organised in Angola in July this year for Portuguese-speaking countries.
The Church of Jesus Christ has played conflicting roles in shaping the lives of Africans.
Many church leaders have been speaking out in favour of changes that would make African societies more participatory.
Last year, church leaders in Benin played a major role in the political debate that opened the door to current democratic changes.
In Mozambique, the church has been playing a positive role in the process leading towards peaceful change in that country.
In Kenya, the participation of Christians in the political debate is symbolised by the brutal death of Bishop Muge.
Such a sacrifice is just one among many that occur every day on the continent.
The churches in Africa are showing an increased awareness of social and economic issues.
Three current examples of activities in this area are: the Kenyan National Council of Churches' debate on the debt crisis; the programme on street children run by the Ecumenical Documentation and Information Centre for Eastern and Southern Africa; and the All Africa Council of Churches' discussion on family, work and migration (Lesotho).
Representing WACC's concerns in Europe at this year's Central Committee were, from left to right, in front: Wim Koole (Netherlands) and Rev Eric Shegog (UK).
Standing behind: Dr Hans-Wolfgang Hessler and Murri Selle (Germany); Ole van Luyn (WACC's coordinator for Europe); Sytze van der Werf (Netherlands).
EUROPE
Europeans are not used to change on a major scale.
Structural change is something we Europeans associate with other regions — Latin America, for example, or Asia.
In the last two years, however, Europe has experienced massive changes in its economic, political and social life.
And this trend continues.
Yugoslavia and other parts of Eastern Europe are undergoing democratic change, while unrest continues in the USSR.
There have also been significant changes in broadcasting.
The national broadcasting organisations have been threatened by deregulation which has encouraged the growth of private satellite and cable channels.
At the same time the democratisation process in Eastern Europe has provided opportunities for the churches for which they have neither experience nor expertise.
Not surprisingly, the agenda of the European Regional Association (ERA-WACC) has been largely influenced by these changes.
For the first time, the region's Executive Committee and the Standing Committee met in Moscow.
The theme of the Standing Committee was how communicators in general, and Christian communicators in particular , had responded to the opportunities created by glasnost.
Among the projects carried out by ERA-WACC during the year were: a colloquium held in Moscow on the MacBride Report, entitled ‘Europe speaks to Europe’; a conference on communication ethics (also held in Moscow); a worship workshop for TV producers in western and eastern Europe; and the setting up of a European Women's network.
The region has continued to develop projects to assist professionals working in religious broadcasting.
These include: The Coproduction Connection newsletter for TV producers; the Prix Farel competition for French-language TV programmes; radio workshops in northern and southern Europe; and media awareness training seminars.
Looking to the future, preparations have been made for the International TV Week which will be held in Bolzano, Italy from 17–23 May 1992.
Plans are also in hand for a major conference in 1993 entitled ‘Europe after 1992’, which will examine Europe's relationship with the Third World.
In sub-regional terms there are two main concerns.
One is a major commitment to the communication needs of the Protestant minority groups of southern Europe.
The second is the need to address the communication requirements of the churches in Eastern Europe.
ASIA
It was another busy year for WACC's Asian regional association (AR-WACC).
Besides a number of activities which took place at a regional level, many more were carried on throughout the year by its corporate and personal members.
Overall emphasis was laid once again on the training aspect of the work of member organisations.
As regards membership, the region now has 93 corporate members and 56 personal members.
A number of other institutions have recently applied for corporate membership.
The region is taking an active role in fund-raising by identifying potential donors, developing the concept of local sponsorship for seminars and projects, and exploring the ‘commercial’ possibilities of funded advertising in special publications and the AR-WACC Newsletter.
AR-WACC has decided to establish a computerised communication data bank for the Region.
It will include information on key resource persons in particular communication fields, communication agencies, secular media training institutions and funding foundations.
Four issues of AR-WACC Newsletter were brought out by the AR-WACC Secretariat last year.
Our Newsletter has proved a very effective link and channel of communication.
The region's Women's Desk has already entered the second year of its life.
In its first year, along with various activities aimed at creating awareness with regard to the issues facing women in the region, the Women's Desk successfully conducted two mass media seminars in Indonesia and Hong Kong.
Some 13 out of 16 participants attending the WACC seminar at the 1990 Frankfurt Book Fair came from the Asia Region.
One of the aims of this seminar was to train the future trainers, and AR-WACC intentionally combined this concern of theirs with the Frankfurt Book Fair.
As a follow-up, three workshops on bookselling are being held in Asia from April/July this year to early 1992.
Animation work continues in the region on a volunteer basis.
Dr Judo Poerwowidagdo (former chairperson of AR-WACC) visited groups in Korea, Japan and Indonesia in May/June 1990.
The present secretary, Augustine Loorthusamy, undertook animation work in India, Malaysia and the Philippines.
These activities have helped many of the WACC-related communication agencies to revitalise their activities.
During 1989 and 1990 media awareness training (MAT) workshops were held in India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Hong Kong.
Under this programme, AR-WACC brought out a newsletter which carries information about MAT events.
An Inter-Regional Consultation on Global Communication and Justice and various seminars covering themes such as ethno-religious conflict, senior management and publishing are among the other major activities which will take place during our current working year.
MIDDLE EAST
This year Middle Eastern life was dominated by the Gulf War.
Each country was affected by the unprecedented military build up, the collapse of the precarious economy and the human suffering.
For years, the region has been torn apart by armed conflicts.
The  existing refugee problem has now reached immeasurable proportions
Despite tremendous effort from the international media to cover the war, it seems that Middle Eastern dynamics are still not understood.
Unless serious attempts are made, the region and Christian witness in it are heading towards catastrophe.
A recent report from the Middle East Council of Churches states:
‘In pursuing their war with Iraq the United States and its allies seem to have made the traditional error of interpreting Middle East politics with a map in hand.
Borders, passports and state institutions exist, but they often obscure deeper passions and identities.
Maps do not portray the existence and aspirations of Palestinians, Armenians, Druze, Souryanis, Assyrians, Bedouin, Kurds and many others for whom the real map of the Middle East is written on the heart, where identity and hope are nurtured generation after generation.
‘The states that make up the contemporary Middle East are like beads on the ‘masbaha’, or worry beads, so common in the region.
The Gulf War, like a knife, cut the string, and the beads are dropping and bouncing around on the ground.
They will be very difficult to pick up and restring.
‘Wars in the Middle East resolve no dispute and settle no injustice — they simply sow the seeds of frustration and discontent that lead to more and more costly wars.’
Concerns, apart from the humanitarian, had to be shelved and communication limited to reinterpreting news channelled via western media.
Highly sensitive inter-community relations further deteriorated.
The indigenous media need more than ever to promote lasting peace with justice, through ecumenical and interfaith dialogue.
It is imperative to project the true image of the Middle Eastern churches to other faiths who may equate us with the West and a potential western-led crusade against Islam.
Despite political division, the churches unite in their membership of the Middle East Council of Churches, and continue to play a leading role in a part of the world whose institutions are most important.
Priorities now include effectively responding to regional developments, supporting Christian witness and the pursuit of respectful dialogue with Islam and Judaism in the interest of a shared future.
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Our Regional Executive Committee meeting was held in Castries, St Lucia, 9–15 March in an effort to strengthen our relationship with the Caribbean area.
We agreed that there needs to be increased participation and representation of Caribbean peoples, their needs and perspectives.
We also learnt that information must be made relevant to the local context.
This means that methodologies from one area are not necessarily transferable.
Throughout the Latin America/Caribbean region, we feel that this is the time to consolidate a long process which we began in preparation for the Manila Congress in 1989.
We have reformulated the issues which grew out of the theme ‘Communication for Community’ as ‘Christian Communication and Social Movements’.
In our region, communication is a function of social space.
Historically, where social space for community has not been allowed to exist, the community has responded by creating this space through the articulation of social movements.
In these critical times, we feel that WACC must learn from and accompany this process.
As regards our membership, we have four new corporate and seven new personal members in the region, bringing us to a total of 84 corporate and 26 personal members.
Our ongoing channel for keeping our members informed is our newsletter WACContacta, which is published four times a year.
With the aim of strengthening our relationships with WACC members in other regions, the region's chairperson, Rev Hilmar Kannenberg, travelled to Angola in July of this year to participate in a conference on communication and development with the Portuguese-speaking churches of Africa.
In the area of media education, a number of institutions in our region continue to make important contributions.
These include UCBC (Brazil), CENECA (Chile), CCC (Caribbean), CELEP (regional) and ILPEC (Central America).
The issue of women in communication has historically been an important issue for us because of the sexist structure of Latin American and Caribbean society.
The Caribbean Conference of Churches is developing a programme to address this concern.
In addition, there will be a conference for women communicators prior to our assembly in Chile in October.
For further information, contact Glaucia Betts, WACC-LA/C Secretary, Caixa Postal 5002 5002, 09735 Rudge Ramos SBC-SP, Brazil
NORTH AMERICA
North American communicators are developing a policy statement on justice and international communication for the National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA (NCCC) and its members.
The statement is being coordinated by Intermedia, the international communications division of the NCCC.
Associated with this policy statement is the plan for an inter-regional consultation with Asia, and a seminar on ethics and theology as they relate to communication.
All of these efforts are designed to help develop stronger constituency education on communication issues.
Within North America itself, a major development has been the growth of the Vision Interfaith Satellite Network (VISN).
This is the most significant single interfaith ecumenical project to take place in the United States.
The US was pleased to join Canada's own interfaith network, VISION TV, in providing significant alternative faith and values programming in North America.
Funding for general ecumenical efforts has decreased as denominations see the need to pull back and develop their own ministry rather than provide cooperative support.
Fewer dollars equals less support for internationally related communication projects.
The big question for us is: ‘What is the role for the North American Regional Association (NARA) of WACC?’.
NARA has had difficulty defining itself programmatically because members who are part of denomination staffs struggle primarily with their own immediate projects rather than the more distant and less easily defined communication tasks of WACC.
No matter how much we do in developing our own media projects in this continent and around the world, we will still only be one small voice in the vast ocean of communication media.
At the same time we attempt to listen carefully to the voices of the marginalised minorities in our culture.
Many of these people are already a part of the media structure, yet we piously declare our messages of communication prophecy without first knowing whom we are even speaking to.
Admittedly North Americans have done much less than we should in our management of free enterprise communication.
We have done many injustices in the name of freedom which have enslaved entire cultures to the technologies and interpretations of our world view.
Yet as we religious communicators no longer have the clout we once had, the result is that we are talking primarily to ourselves.
We tell important stories of individual faith journeys without an understanding of the structure of the communication myth-makers in North America.
If WACC is to have a significant impact on global communication, there must be much more dialogue with the creative and economic forces which are at the heart of the system.
Distributors of American TV and film productions, writers and other principal leaders in the industry must be brought into the dialogue.
But in order for that to happen there must be a significant commitment to understand and struggle with the reality of the North American communication system and its impact on the rest of the world.
To be full participants in our global communication culture we must face the current reality and agenda in North America in a very straightforward manner.
Without taking this risk, the potential for our prophetic communication role to fall into the abyss of irrelevance is very great.
PACIFIC
WACC's Pacific Regional Association (WACC-PAC) has 30 corporate members from 8 countries.
Most of our countries are very small and are widely scattered.
Thus, communication is a problem.
Air fares are the most expensive in the world; for example it costs more to travel from Fiji to Papua New Guinea than from Fiji to Canada.
In the last five years, the Pacific Region (often called the ‘Christian Continent’ as almost 90% of its population are professing Christians) has faced many problems — political, social and economic.
It is against this background that we operate.
Soon after the last Central Committee our Chairman resigned to move to London.
The Vice-Chairman was unable to fill the vacant position so an interim administration was formed to take us to the next assembly.
This year our General Assembly approved a three year training programme concentrating on five areas:— media awareness, creative and feature writing, video production and resource management, radio drama writing and production, and the use of group and traditional media.
In the second half of 1991 we will start to implement some of these in workshops, consultations and visits.
The first will be a workshop on strategy for media education in the South Pacific and is scheduled for October.
A ten-day desktop publishing workshop will be held in Papua New Guinea also in October.
There are other activities planned for 1992 and 1993.
Perhaps the most exciting development has been the Animation Programme.
Its first phase ended in late 1990.
Feedback has shown that a lot was learnt and all are keen to see the programme continue — possibly in a slightly modified format.
Looking to the future, we are working towards members sharing resources and working more closely together.
The Pacific is unique in that it is made up of small island states with very limited resources and the way ahead is to work together.
Our Regional Association has been through difficult times, mainly due to isolation and communication problems.
But in this age of fax machines and satellite communications many of these difficulties will be overcome.
A Letter from WACC's Central Committee
Toronto, Canada, 5 July 1991
The Central Committee of the World Association for Christian Communication (WACC) met in Toronto, Canada, 29 June — 5 July.
Our meeting began with a seminar on ‘Legacy: 500 Years of Evangelisation in the Americas’ which focused on the conditions and concerns of the aboriginal peoples.
Together with colleagues from North America, we were challenged by a Native Canadian theologian to share our faith in ways which affirm our common humanity and do not destroy other cultures.
In the aftermath of the short but horrible war in the Persian Gulf, we discussed the issue of censorship and the manipulation of information.
The Gulf War and the way it was reported by the world's media, raises crucial questions for all who are concerned with justice, peace and truth.
First, the coverage of the war was blatantly manipulated by political and military authorities.
We heard, for example, of ‘precision bombing’, but little of the 200,000 people who died in tragic circumstances.
The right of people to know the human cost was overruled on the dubious grounds that this information could help the enemy.
The real reason, we believe, was to maintain public morale and support for the war.
Second, such censorship changed the public's perception of war itself.
The lack of human stories led to a sanitised, sterile picture of what was really happening.
So war was seen as a scientific and technical procedure where, for example, the deaths of many citizens were absent from the television screen.
Third, the war reminded us that where the combination of manipulation and censorship is used to exercise control and power it leads to a dehumanisation of both the controlled and the controller.
War is the ultimate failure and peace the ultimate aim of public communication.
We believe that mass media and other forms of communication must contribute to peace, justice and understanding.
This means building up a peace culture in which mass media systems should play a leading role.
In formulating plans for the future, WACC's main concern is to create conditions which will increase the chances for peace with justice for all.
This is our hope.
This is our plan.
It was against this background that WACC's Central Committee considered WACC's priorities for the next five years.
These were identified as follows:
1.
Communication Ethics
Christian communicators have a prophetic function to raise the ethical dimension of communication policies and practices.
Are they, for example, based on our concern for the truth, respect for the absolute value of life, our solidarity with the poor and the marginalised and with the realisation that communication is a fundamental human right?
Another goal will be to identify the ethical principles which can create a new public ethos and how these can be mobilised and translated into Christian communication practice.
Ethical guidelines are needed to undergird national policies for information.
At the individual level we must also pay more attention to the professional ethics of those working in the media, including church-based workers.
2.
The right to communicate
There is a basic need for human beings to communicate.
This is necessary not only for the individual but for the development of society.
Human rights in general, and the right to communicate in particular , are founded on the concept of participation in democracy.
It is WACC's view that these issues raised in the New World Information and Communication Order remain of vital importance to both North and South.
A programme will be initiated to focus the tension between ‘professional power’ versus ‘people's power’.
Less formally educated people can acquire professional competence.
To offset the trends towards monopolies in the media WACC will continue to promote alternative communication technologies such as those used at the grassroots, for example, community radio and computer networks.
Priority will also be given to cooperation with many social movements which have played a major part in the struggle for democracy in different parts of the world.
This process will build upon existing networks and create new ones.
3.
Communication and religion
Recent WACC programmes have concentrated on communication and theology, the electronic church and the role of communication studies in theological education.
The values implicit in television programmes and advertising have often usurped religious themes and messages.
For many, television now meets the religious needs previously met by the Church.
Therefore we need to study in greater depth the role played by television and other visual media in contemporary society.
Churches worldwide must take communication more seriously.
WACC supports these attempts to explore alternative forms of religious communication, especially the use of religious symbols.
The need for communities of faith to develop deeper awareness of, and responsibility for, the media was stressed in the Manila Declaration of 1989.
In this period of evangelism Christian communicators must ask themselves how the media can most appropriately present the Good News of the Gospel.
WACC continues to build upon developments in the field of theology and communication, and extend its initiatives in this area to include more countries.
4.
Communication, culture and social change
These three terms signal one of WACC's central concerns.
WACC has long studied the relationship between communication and socio-economic change.
In the future, the culture factor should be more dominant in the debate.
We plan to examine more carefully the relationship between development communication and people's action where new communication paradigms are emerging at the local level, with ‘new languages’ and new symbols.
We must continue to study the new centralised global environment at both the theoretical and the practical levels.
We need to examine, for example, why people from different cultures enjoy watching Dallas, and why young people almost everywhere enjoy pop music.
We also need to examine how communication technology and economic systems create political and cultural dependency.
5.
Communication education
For many years WACC's communication education work has focused on curriculum development, professional education, a training assistance programme, a programme of animateurs and media literacy.
This will continue with particular emphasis on developing regional resources for the teaching of communication and for training in  alternative media work.
6.
Women's perspectives
In all its programmes WACC will encourage full and equal participation of women in public communication.
It will empower women with the skills and knowledge necessary to achieve this end.
WACC will continue to support women's alternative media, monitor the way women are portrayed by the media, press for inclusive language and develop women's networks.
7.
Communication for human dignity
WACC works with ecumenical agencies that share its aims.
New initiatives between WACC and the World Council of Churches include an agreement between the general secretaries of the two world bodies to explore ways of working together.
Our vision of the Christian family and the human family leads us to join with others in breaking down the barriers which separate us.
Communication for Human Dignity was chosen as the theme for WACC's 1995 World Congress.
Place and preparatory plans will be on the agenda for the next meeting of the Central Committee.
The Central Committee believes that the implementation of its programme for the five years can help create the conditions for real peace — reconciliation, harmony, well-being, mutual respect, a sense of community and inter-dependence.
Such a search for peace and human dignity must be our aim as Christian communicators.