

WACC-Europe appoints animateur
Gianna Urizio, a television producer with the Federation of Protestant Churches in Italy (FCEI), has been appointed Animateur for WACC's European Region.
Starting in January, Ms Urizio, will devote four months of the year to developing networks among Christian communicators in Italy, Spain and Portugal.
For the remaining eight months she will continue her TV production work with FCEI, which has been a member and partner of WACC for several years.
The decision to focus mainly on Latin Europe stems from a long-held conviction by WACC-Europe members that the regional association needs to encourage more members and more communication activities in southern Europe.
Economic, cultural and language differences have traditionally tended to divide and isolate portions of Europe, and WACC hopes that the appointment of Ms Urizio will start to help redress the imbalance within its own fellowship.
Ms Urizio brings to the new position several years of experience in different areas of communication.
A graduate in sociology and education at Florence University, she has for many years contributed articles to Protestant and ecumenical newspapers and currently writes a monthly survey on television for the journal Confronti.
At the local community level, Ms Urizio has devoted much of her time to working with a grassroots action group in an underprivileged area of Rome.
She is deeply involved in women's movements, both in Rome and at a national level, and is the co-founder of an ecumenical women's group.
Ms Urizio has worked with the FCEI since 1977 and has also taught at various mass media seminars and courses in Turin.
WACC-Europe is the third regional association to appoint an animateur.
The Pacific Region has benefitted from an animateur since 1987 and Latin America/Caribbean since 1988.
WACC-North America announces new plans
WACC's North American Regional Association (NARA-WACC) will appoint a part-time assistant and launch a membership drive in a bid to respond more effectively to regional needs.
At the NARA-WACC annual assembly in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, on 2 December, NARA members pledged to become more actively involved in WACC's global programme of activities, including the development of financial support.
NARA-WACC renewed its commitment to lobby for justice in communication policies and activities worldwide, and agreed to share resources and strategies with like-minded organisations and individuals.
The NARA-WACC assistant will be appointed during the next few months.
For further information contact John L Peterson, Chairperson, NARA-WACC, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Commission for Communication, 8765 W Higgins Road, Chicago, Illinois 60631, USA.
Tel (312) 380 2952.
Kenyan churches launch political education scheme
The National Council of Churches of Kenya (NCCK) has launched a programme of ‘Education for Participatory Democracy’ to help Kenyans participate as fully as possible in the country's transition to democratic rule.
On 3 December, the governing party, the Kenya African National Union (KANU), announced its decision to end its ten-year rule by reintroducing multi-party politics.
The NCCK welcomed the decision and said that it signalled a new era of reconciliation, justice, tolerance and brotherhood.
It also acknowledged that democracy is easier to declare than to achieve, and stressed the importance of effective education and information systems in the country.
The NCCK's General Secretary, Rev Samuel Kobia, said the Kenyan people need to know their rights and obligations in a democratic environment, as well as having access to information concerning their country's affairs.
The NCCK plans to organise discussion groups and seminars on the subject of election procedures and the issues that are likely to be most important at election time.
Asked by the All Africa Press Service why the NCCK, which groups together over 35 Protestant churches in Kenya, is taking such a leading role in the democratic process, Mr Kobia said:
‘We believe that truthfulness, participation, accountability and freedom of choice in its broadest sense, are some of the ethics of democracy and are at the same time biblical values.
This is what Jesus taught and practised.
He calls us to do likewise.’
WACC has worked closely with the NCCK's communication department for several years, and will continue to support its new initiatives, particularly in the area of publications.
WACC is specifically supporting the development of a new NCCK magazine following the banning of Beyond in 1988 after the ruling party had objected to its criticism of government malpractice during elections.
In the new climate, the need for a new ecumenical voice is even more pressing, and careful thought is being given to the most effective format and content for the new magazine.
National Council of Churches of Kenya, P O Box 45009, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 338211.
Journalism Fellowship Offered
The annual Stoody-West Fellowship in Journalism is again offered this year by United Methodist Communications, USA.
The $6,000 grant is designed to assist a Christian working as a religious journalist, or planning to do so, in undertaking accredited training.
The fellowship was set up in memory of Dr Ralph Stoody and Dr Arthur West who worked in Methodist public relations and information for more than thirty years.
Applications for the next academic year should be in before 30 March 1992.
Application forms are available from The Fellowship Committee, United Methodist Communications, 1901, 475 Riverside Drive, New York NY 10115, USA.
‘Voice of Africa’ under threat of silence
The Panafrican News Agency (PANA) is in danger of closing because many African governments are not paying their contributions.
PANA was founded in 1983 to provide alternative sources of information to the major western news agencies.
It is supported by about 50 member states of the Organisation for African Unity, but has always struggled with economic problems.
Courses & Conferences
Communications for church growth
The supporting communications required for church planting will an important part of the agenda at the ‘Baptist International Conference on Establishing Churches’(BICEC) to be held in England, 23–27 March 1992.
The conference is being organised by the Baptist World Alliance and is primarily geared to the Baptist perspective, though the conference organisers would welcome participants from other denominations attending the meeting.
Baptist International Conference on Establishing Churches, Dr Derek Tidball, Department of Evangelism, Baptist Union of Great Britain, 129 Broadway, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 5RT, UK.
In Europe
Christian TV Week includes private stations
For the first time the Christian TV Week, co-organised by WACC's European Regional Association and UNDA (International Catholic Association for Radio and Television), will be open to private, commercial broadcasters as well as public TV stations.
During the Week (17–23 May 1992) an international European jury of media experts and the participants will view and assess some of the religious programming broadcast in Europe during the last three years.
The jury will present up to five awards in recognition of excellence in Christian programming in the region.
The Week will bring together some 300 TV personnel from all over Europe.
Representatives from eastern Europe will be attending for the first time.
The TV Week occurs every three years.
The 1992 meeting is the eleventh such event and is to be hosted by RAI, the Italian public TV station, in Bolzano, Italy.
For further information contact Ms Murri Selle, WACC Europe, Lachnerstrasse 20, 8000 Munich 19, Germany.
Tel (89) 1678 1315.
Fax (89) 1678 1323.
Pakistani group wins education award
The Adult Basic Education Society (ABES) of Pakistan has been awarded the UNESCO Award 1991 for non-formal basic education.
ABES has pioneered adult literacy in Pakistan and the government has now adopted its programmes.
ABES is also involved in a creativity arts training programme, which is supported by WACC and run in cooperation with the Catholic Commission for Social Communications and the Church of Pakistan in Lahore.
The programme is intended to provide communication training for people working in health and medical education, community and pastoral work.
Adult Basic Education Society, Nirali Kitaben, 6 Empress Road, Lahore 5, Pakistan.
Communication education for ministry
A seminar on ‘Communication Education in Ministerial Formation’ will be held from 30 April to 7 May 1992 at the World Council of Churches' Ecumenical  Institute in Bossey, Switzerland.
The seminar is open to people involved in mass communication and theological training from around the world.
WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos Valle, will present an overview of the role of communication.
The other two main areas of study will be communication and theology, and an opportunity to assess and learn from the experiences of those working in the field.
The seminar is being organised jointly by WACC and the World Council of Churches' Programme for Ecumenical Theological Education (PETE).
PETE is directed by Dr Judo Poerwowidagdo of Indonesia, the former Chairperson of WACC's Asian Regional Association and member of WACC's Central Committee.
The aim of the seminar is to act as a follow-up on the Consultation on the Practice of Communication Education in Theological Seminaries which was held in Seoul, Korea, in 1989.
Dr Judo Poerwowidagdo, PETE/ Bossey, WCC, PO Box 2100, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland.
Tel (22) 791 6345.
Fax (22) 791 0361.
Cameroon media support development education
The Communication Department of the Cameroon Evangelical Church (Eglise Evangélique du Cameroun-EEC) integrates its media and information activities with the extensive health and education programmes run by the Church.
The Department, which is supported by WACC, was set up in 1987.
It has five units: radio, TV, video, press and group communications.
Radio is the most important means of passing on information in Cameroon, with 10 provincial stations broadcasting to every village in local languages.
Each station offers air-time for religious broadcasts.
The EEC makes four programmes a week for the national and provincial networks.
Some of the programmes are church services and meditations, others concentrate on development and health education and encourage local people to train as ‘roving reporters’ in rural areas.
TV is a late-comer to Cameroon, but is growing in popularity.
The EEC's Communication Department shares over two hours of programming each week with the Catholic Church and the Moslem community.
Video arrived some considerable time before the formal introduction of TV.
The EEC is struggling to provide alternative video choices to programmes imported from the USA and other western countries.
The main activity of the press unit is to publish L'Appel, a quarterly magazine which aims to provide information and encourage discussion on issues of current importance in the country.
L'Appel is one of the very few Protestant magazines in French-speaking Africa, and there are plans to make it monthly.
The Department's group communication activities focus on informal education in rural areas.
This programme complements the teaching in the EEC's formal schools.
It runs over 150 primary and nursery schools, and 12 secondary schools teaching agriculture, commerce and industry.
Health care is also a major activity of the Church.
It runs five hospitals and 27 dispensaries with a total of 2,500 beds.
Established in 1845, the EEC is the oldest church in Cameroon.
It comprises 700 parishes in the French-speaking part of Cameroon, with over a million members, two-thirds of whom are women.
The Cameroon economy is largely based on agriculture, and a large proportion of the EEC's education work is directed towards farmers.
Many  families suffer from lack of water and other basic needs.
Another important aspect of the EEC's communication work is to bring these needs to public attention — at national and international levels.
Department of Communication and Information, Eglise Evangélique du Cameroun, P O Box 89, Douala, Cameroon.
Tel 423611.
Ugandans call for media freedom
Catholic journalists and broadcasters in Uganda have proposed that the country's new constitution currently under preparation should guarantee media freedom.
The proposal was contained in a document submitted to the Ugandan Constitutional Commission by the Catholic Journalists and Broadcasters Association (UCJBA).
The Commission is currently preparing the new constitution which will be introduced in 1993.
The document advocates free access to information, as well as free expression.
It suggests that licenses should be given to independent radio and TV stations which would encourage high professional and technical standards.
It calls for the reform of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting so that all telecommunication activities fall within its mandate.
The UCJBA also advocates that the new ministry should be enabled to operate freely, on its own initiative.
A further recommendation is for the setting up of an independent body of journalists that would abide by an agreed code of conduct.
At present, there is no organisation in Uganda to represent the needs of media personnel.
Instead there are many sectarian-based bodies so that a united front is not available to assist in the reformation of the media scene in Uganda.
After almost 20 years of suppression due to the civil war and military regimes, President Yowei Museveni is trying to bring in a more open, humane government which allows freedom of expression.
In this more tolerant environment several newspapers representing different shades of opinion have already sprung up, especially in the urban areas.
Nevertheless, some editors and journalists who suffered under the previous heavy press clamp-down are still practising self-censorship, fearing that intolerant government officials may continue to stifle their voices.
By David Musoke, a journalist based in Kampala, Uganda.
Seminar on human dignity to precede CentCom in Quito
WACC will hold an open, one-day seminar on ‘Communication for Human Dignity’ before its next Central Committee meeting in Quito, Ecuador, 26 June — 2 July 1992.
The theme will be approached from a Latin American perspective, and representatives from some of the region's many indigenous groups have been invited to lead one of the sessions.
CentCom's local hosts, the Latin American Council of Churches, is among a rich variety of Quito-based church and development organisations that are involved in communication.
The seminar theme was chosen in preparation for WACC's second international communication congress in 1995, which will focus on the same topic.
Next year, WACC's Middle Eastern regional members will approach the theme from their own perspective at a seminar which will be organised to precede WACC's 1993 Central Committee meeting in Cairo, Egypt.
For further information on the Quito seminar, please contact the Latin American Council of Churches, Casilla 17088522, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 561539 and 568373.
Fax (2) 504377.
WACC makes initial contacts with Christians in Kampuchea
For the first time, WACC has made contacts in Kampuchea, a country whose tragic political situation made it unapproachable by outside groups for many years.
Last December, Pradip Thomas, the Coordinator of WACC's Asia Region programme, visited the capital, Phnom Penh, and met people who were involved in Kampuchea's reconstruction process.
His meetings were arranged by the World Council of Churches which is one of the few non-government organisations represented in the country.
Signs of the Pol Pot regime were evident everywhere, both physically, in the devastation of cities and countryside, and emotionally, in the memories of people who have lived through agony that is beyond human understanding:
‘Almost everyone I met had lost at least one relative, some had lost several, and families had been scattered hundreds of miles apart,’ said Mr Thomas.
Phnom Penh is a chaotic city.
It was evacuated by Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge in 1974 and when it was safe to return, in 1979, people settled anywhere they could.
‘Kampuchea has rich natural resources, but trade has been monopolised by the Khmer Rouge for so many years,’ Mr Thomas said.
The Japanese have come to Phnom Penh in large numbers, taking advantage of the massive trading vacuum.
He added that it would take many more years to establish a healthy pattern of development, especially since there is no communications infrastructure.
The road, rail and telephone systems are damaged and run down, and the government holds tight control over information.
This consists mainly of one daily newspaper, produced on an old typewriter and a Gestetner copying machine in three languages — Kampuchean, English and French.
Mr Thomas reported optimism, however, that the situation is opening up under the new coalition government that came into being a few months ago.
The coalition took over from the Vietnam-backed Hun Sen government which rescued Kampuchea after the demise of Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge in 1979.
Although the Hun Sen years were relatively stable, Kampuchea suffered acutely from lack of foreign aid, since the USA refused to have anything to do with a Vietnam-supported regime.
Other western countries fell into step with the USA and the ASEAN bloc.
A further setback for Kampuchea is an unnatural imbalance in the population; for every seven women there are now only three men since Pol Pot had wiped out practically a whole generation of men.
An estimated three million people disappeared.
All religious activity had been brutally stopped, and it was only in 1985 that Buddhism — the majority religion — was allowed to re-enter the country.
In May 1990, the small Christian population was given the right to worship openly.
Mr Thomas met with the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the Kampuchean Christian Committee which comprises 43 house churches and about 3,000 members throughout the country.
He said that they lacked Bibles and any kind of literature and hopes to arrange some provisions from Christian publishers in surrounding countries.
In the meantime, Christian activity is mainly focussed on responding to emergencies.
The local office of the World Council of Churches runs a refugee camp for displaced Kampucheans and is struggling to meet their basic needs.
Mr Thomas stressed that this is the area that WACC-Asia needs to concentrate on in the months to come.
For further information, contact Dr Pradip Thomas, Coordinator of WACC's Asia Region programme, WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
WHO CALLS THE SHOTS
Medai women press for equality
Equal opportunities should be given to women media professionals, and women should be involved in media policy-making on the same basis as their male colleagues.
These are two of the final resolutions of an international conference on women, media and advertising, entitled ‘Who calls the Shots?’ which took place in Manila, Philippines, last year, bringing together more than 150 participants from 25 countries.
The resolutions, which have recently been published, call for a more just media environment in the Philippines in particular, but are intended to be used worldwide.
They advocate the removal of sexual stereotyping and the degrading portrayal of women from programming and advertising.
The resolutions also call for more airtime for programmes dealing with women's issues, and for the introduction of media education in schools.
The resolutions have been  targeted to everyone involved in the media and media-related professions — particularly women's groups, advertising agencies and public legislators.
The conference was organised by the Women's Media Circle Foundation which is a group of Philippine women who have produced and broadcast radio and television programmes for women since 1986.
Women's Media Circle Foundation, Inc, 96 Maningning Street, Teachers Village, Quezon City, The Philippines.
Tel (2) 921 3809/2222.
Fax (2) 921 0955.
Media to aid women's development in China
An unprecedented seminar in China last year saw Chinese women joining with the media for a national seminar on ‘Women and Development’ and ‘The Role of the Media’.
It was organised by the All-China Women's Federation and All-China Journalists' Association under the auspices of UNESCO.
The aim of the seminar was to identify problems facing women in China and to discuss how the media can promote women's development.
Thousands attend grassroots media festival in Colombia
More than 10,000 people attended a grassroots communication festival that was held recently in Colombia by the Latin American Grassroots Communication Centre (CEPALC).
Some 150 representatives of 18 communication organisations gathered in the town of Fusagasugá, 60 kms south-west of Bogotá, to make music, perform drama, and display videos, photographs and other works of art.
The festival lasted four days and was the seventh of its kind to be organised by CEPALC.
‘It was a truly enriching experience.
Groups from indigenous, farming and marginalised communities throughout Colombia shared their skills, their visions and hopes with thousands of people,’ said CEPALC's Coordinator, Amparo Beltrán Acosta.
She added that the festival had been attended by more people than ever before, and that by celebrating it in a smaller town, away from the more sophisticated attractions of Bogotá, the festival had a more genuine, grassroots character.
The participating organisations had all received training through CEPALC's communication education programme, which is supported by WACC.
The centre uses a participatory methodology, where each organisation chooses the appropriate training based on its particular needs.
Before training begins, CEPALC provides several introductory workshops on grassroots communication.
These ‘taster’ workshops help trainees to recognise the advantages and disadvantages of different media.
When an organisation decides the kind of training it needs, CEPALC tutors work alongside trainees at their workplace or location of their choice.
CEPALC is a non-profit-making organisation which has been working since 1978 to serve the communication needs of grassroots groups in the towns and rural areas of Colombia.
Centro Popular para América Latina (CEPALC), Apartado Aéreo 28462, Bogotá, Colombia.
Chilean community radio gains strength
Community radio is mushrooming in Chile's new, more democratic environment, but there is still widespread confusion over its legal status.
Existing commercial broadcasters claim the new stations are illegal.
Community broadcasters, however, argue that current legislation does not apply to them as they do not interfere with any existing broadcasting signals.
The community broadcasters are in a stronger position than ever before to establish credibility at a nationwide level.
They now have support from the recently-formed National Association of Community Radios (ANARAP), which represents their interests and aims to meet their training needs.
WACC is supporting ANARAP's initial training programme which starts this year.
ANARAP's main objective is to facilitate grassroots participation in the democratic process by helping groups to set up and operate community radios.
ANARAP acts as a resource centre, offering support and advice, and provides training in all aspects of radio work.
ANARAP is also committed to campaigning for a better legal environment for community radios.
It strives to publicise the general issue of communication structures in a democracy, drawing special attention to legislation pertaining to radio.
Part of its campaign involves strengthening contacts with policy-making authorities and liaising with others to prepare a joint proposal for new radio legislation.
Other plans include promoting the exchange of programmes between community radios in Chile and other Latin American countries, and the publication of a news bulletin for ANARAP members.
ANARAP (Agrupación Nacional de Radio Popular), Casilla 355, Santiago 11, Chile.
Tel and Fax (2) 223 2669.
Mexican TV network covers Spanish-speaking world
Erasma García glanced up from making tortillas to study the US military press briefing on the 12-inch screen of her second-hand Sony television.
‘I don't really understand what they're talking about,’ she said, ‘but now it's the only thing on in the morning.’
Like most wooden cabins in this Tarascan Indian village in the state of Michoacán, 480 kms west of Mexico City, Mrs García's sports a TV antenna.
No matter how remote the locale, television is rearing its talking heads all over Mexico.
Seven out of every 10 Mexican homes are within the range of television signals, and 96% of those homes are tuned to a channel in the communications empire of the Televisa Corporation.
Mrs García's perfect reception of a press briefing taking place halfway around the world is testament to the long reach of Televisa's ECO network.
Its 24-hour-a-day, satellite-directed tentacles now wrap themselves around the entire Spanish-speaking world from the USA to the southern tip of Argentina and across the Atlantic to Spain in an effort to duplicate the success of the North American Cable News Network in the English-speaking world.
Televisa administrators project that this year the organisation will become the fourth largest presence in Europe.
Currently, Televisa is the largest communications corporation in the developing world.
According to Miguel Alemán Velasco, a former 17% owner, by the turn of the century Televisa will be the world broadcast leader with a potential audience of 600 million Spanish-speakers.
However, the corporation's near-monopoly of the market and its close association with the long-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) do not endear it to the nation's dissidents.
Demonstrators often protest outside its studios.
Intellectuals are appalled by the lowest common denominator mentality of the popular soap operas, and there are constant complaints that 40% of Televisa programming emanates from the USA.
From an article by John Ross in Latinamerica Press.
Books & Resources
Latin American students focus on communication
The Universal Federation of Student Christian Movements in Latin America and the Caribbean (FUMEC-AL/C) has published a working document on communication issues.
Over 100 pages of essays and statements are designed to encourage reflection and discussion among young Christians throughout the region.
Included is WACC's statement on Communication and Community, and the Lima Declaration on Communication which was issued at the end of a major consultation organised by WACC and the Peruvian-based Latin American Institute.
The document also carries an article by the theologian Hugo Assmann on the ‘electronic church’ in Latin America, and an essay on the right to communicate by the Panamanian journalist Gerardo Sotelo.
Documentos 4 is published by FUMEC-AL/C in Spanish only and is available from FUMEC-AL/C, Departamento de Prensa y Comunicaciones, Casilla 17–21–967, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 541204 and 544804 ext 6 & 7; direct: 544099.
Fax (2) 568664.
Censorship kills in Myanmar
‘Nowhere is ARTICLE 19's message that censorship kills more brutally illustrated than in Burma today’, states the preface to State of Fear: Censorship in Burma (Myanmar) which was published in December by ARTICLE 19 as part of its series of Country Reports.
The report was compiled by Martin Smith, a journalist, documentary-maker and writer on South East Asia and a specialist on Myanmar.
State of Fear records the mechanisms by which a cloak of secrecy has increasingly enveloped Myanmar, and documents the history, traditions laws and practice of censorship since 1962, when a military coup brought General Ne Win to power and ended the parliamentary era.
The editorial states that ARTICLE 19 has published this report to focus attention on Myanmar's worsening human rights situation and to galvanize world opinion to press the current authorities (the State Law and Order Restoration Council), to honour the democratic and other rights of the Burmese people.
‘As long as repressive laws remain on the books, a state of fear will prevail, and censorship will allow many thousands more to be imprisoned, tortured and killed,’ the editorial says.
ARTICLE 19 is a non-governmental organisation which monitors the compliance of individual countries with international standards protecting freedom of expression.
It takes its name from Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: ‘Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression’.
State of Fear: Censorship in Burma is one of the 28 ‘Country Reports’ that have been published since 1989 by ARTICLE 19.
Each report costs £3 and can be obtained from ARTICLE 19, 90 Borough High Street, London SE1 1LL, UK.
Tel (71) 403 4822.
Fax (71) 403 1943.
Churches in Latin America launch ecumenical news bulletin
The Latin American Council of Churches (CLAI) has marked the advent of 1992 with the launch of a new bulletin.
To be published monthly in English and Spanish, Latin American Ecumenical News covers a wide spectrum of church news from all denominations as well as social and political issues facing the region.
Items included in the inaugural issue are a  retrospective look at political and religious events affecting Latin America during 1991, an article on the region's diminishing health services and a calendar of ecumenical activities for 1992.
The newsletter is edited by Andrea Rivera Cano, former Vice-Chairperson of WACC's North American Region, who recently left her position as Communications Director of the World Council of Churches' New York office to work with CLAI at their headquarters in Quito, Ecuador.
CLAI also produces another regular newsletter, Rapidas, which covers more specifically church-related issues and concerns.
Latin American Ecumenical News, Information Service of the Latin American Council of Churches, Casilla 17–08–8522, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 561539 and 568373.
Fax (2) 504377.
WACC launches publications catalogue
WACC has published its first Publications Catalogue which will be updated annually.
The 1992 edition supplies a digest of all books and publications that are currently available from the General Secretariat in person or by post.
Information listed includes WACC's Statements on Communication, the themes covered in recent issues of the journal Media Development, and titles published under the Communication and Human Values book series.
Each item carries a brief description and price details.
The catalogue includes an order form.
Copies of the Publications Catalogue can be obtained from WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
Fax (71) 735 0340.
Mass media in the Caribbean
Mass Communications in the Caribbean by John A Lent combines a history of the region's mass media with a survey of the current communication scene.
In Part 1 of the book, Mr Lent groups individual countries according to their common language and settlement patterns, providing a general overview of each country's print and electronic media.
In Part 2, he discusses the mass media from various topical perspectives — information technology, national development, research problems, education and training, popular culture, and trends.
Mass Communications in the Caribbean by John A Lent, published by Iowa State University Press, hardback, 398 pages.
John A Lent is Director of Third World Media Associates, 669 Ferne Blvd, Drexel Hill, Pennsylvania 19026, USA.
Press review reveals economic censorship
More than 20 journalists were killed or wounded while covering the horrific conflict between the Serbian and Croatian republics, according to the 1991 World Press Freedom Review.
These are just some of the many examples of journalists facing danger and oppression that are documented in the Review, which is published annually by the International Press Institute.
The Review also points out that, in addition to the physical risks facing journalists, 1991 can be characterised as the year in which economic censorship hit especially hard.
‘This phenomenon is best illustrated in the fledgling democracies of eastern and central Europe.
Here, while journalists strive earnestly to shed their previous role as mere mouthpieces of dictatorial regimes, they are forced to face up to the enormous financial difficulties involved in surviving in the market-place, without the comfortable support they formerly received from the state.’
The Review covers some 90 countries, which are listed alphabetically with a resumé of the press and general media situation in each country.
World Press Freedom Review is a special issue of the IPI Report, the monthly bulletin of the International Press Institute, Dilke House, Malet Street, London WC1 E 7JA, UK.
Tel (71) 6360703/4.
Fax (71) 580 8349.
Using media for development in Africa
Communication Processes: Alternative Channels and Strategies for Development Support is a collection of papers presented at a seminar in Kenya on development communication.
Published by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) in Canada, the papers were prepared by media theoreticians and practitioners from across the African continent who met to discuss the use of media to relay development information.
Topics covered include ‘Development Through Radio: The Zimbabwe Experience’ by Mavis Mayo from the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation; ‘Rural Newspaper Fora’by Francis Kasoma of the Department of Mass Communication, University of Zambia; and ‘Television Advertising for National Development’by Farag Elkamel from the Centre for Development Communication in Egypt.
The seminar was organised jointly by IDRC and the African Council for Communication Education (ACCE).
The book was co-edited by Kwame Boafo of ACCE and Nancy George from IDRC.
Communication Processes: Alternative Channels and Strategies for Development Support is available from IDRC, 250 Albert Street, PO Box 8500, Ottawa, Canada K1G 3H9.
Tel (613) 236 6163.
Fax (613) 238 7230.
Women's media network celebrates decade
Fempress, a Latin American women's communication network, has recently celebrated its tenth anniversary.
The initial aim of the network was to provide information about women working in grassroots organisations, health care and politics.
Today, from its headquarters in Santiago, Chile, the group publishes a substantial monthly bulletin entitled Mujer/Fempress.
The bulletin includes articles from other publications as well as those written by its own correspondents throughout the region.
It provides a forum for Latin American and Caribbean women to exchange ideas and information.
Mujer/Fempress is an important resource for many women's groups both within and outside the Latin American region.
At present, some 1,300 women's groups receive the publication.
The January 1992 edition is being mailed out with a special 60-page supplement on the history of the feminist movement in Latin America.
Mujer/Fempress is available in Spanish only from Fempress, Casilla 16–637, Santiago, Chile.
Tel (2) 2332129 and 2332457.
Fax (2) 2325000.
UK media awareness bulletin published
The Media Awareness Project (MAP) has launched a monthly bulletin for its membership.
Based in the UK, MAP is an ecumenical organisation that aims to increase media awareness, to encourage critical dialogue with media practitioners and to recognise the underlying values in the media and evaluate them from a Christian viewpoint.
MAP works towards its objectives by publicising issues in the monthly bulletin as well as by organising seminars for media consumers of all ages throughout the UK, and producing resource packs.
Although MAP works specifically in the UK setting, its ideas and strategies may be relevant and useful to other national contexts.
The Media Awareness Project, 24 Tufton St, London SW1P 3RB, UK.
Tel (71) 222 5533.
Video commemorates life of German prophet
Travelling Cloudburst, a video celebrating the 100th anniversary of the birth of Martin Niemoller, the German theologian, has been released.
Produced by Igelfilm in Germany, the film examines Mr Niemoller's prophetic stance on topics which are as relevant now as they were in his lifetime.
Among them are war and nuclear armament, attitudes towards the ‘Third World’, and the role of the Church in the next  millennium 
Prominent Third World church leaders, including Archbishop Desmond Tutu of the Anglican Church of South Africa, a holder of the Nobel Peace Prize, contribute to the programme.
The video will enable viewers to ‘learn anew and query the meaning of Martin Niemoller's questions and insights regarding the future of the Christian world,’ say the film producers.
Travelling Cloudburst is available from Igelfilm GmbH, Friedensallee 7, D-2000 Hamburg 50, Germany.
Tel (40) 390 3403.
Fax (40) 390 3607.
Worldwide network encourages community radio in Africa
The growing interest in community radio in Africa is one of the most exciting current developments in the work of AMARC, the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters.
On a recent visit to WACC's offices in London, Lisa Vinebohm, the editor of AMARC's newsletter InteRadio, said that AMARC is responding to an increasing number of requests from Africans to help set up community radio stations.
The growth of such radios has been slow throughout Africa because of government control of communication networks.
But political changes in several countries have opened up opportunities for alternative broadcasting channels.
From its international headquarters in Montreal, Canada, AMARC serves a network of African radio producers and, along with partner organisations on the continent, is developing training materials and resources appropriate for specific countries' needs.
In addition to Africa, AMARC is particularly active in Latin America, where community radio is very popular.
It also has lively networks in Europe and North America, and is receiving good responses from some Asian countries.
‘Key issues for AMARC are popular participation in radio, the democratisation of communication, freedom of expression, and radio programming which involves communities and reflects their cultures and values,’ Ms Vinebohm explained.
‘We are also getting more involved in development work by encouraging non-governmental organisations to use radio more effectively in their development activities,’ she added.
Although AMARC was formally established as recently as 1988, it has gained a worldwide reputation for its community radio conferences, which have been taking place since 1983.
InteRadio, published three times a year, is the focal point of AMARC's network.
It is produced in English, French and Spanish and mailed to AMARC members in 120 countries.
A major task this year will be to prepare for the association's fifth world conference, to be held in Mexico, 20–27 September.
The conference theme, ‘All the Voices’, reflects the potential of community radio stations to reinforce the cultural diversity of peoples, and to provide a voice for those whose right to freedom of expression has been denied for centuries.
AMARC 5 will be an important occasion for Native radio stations which are engaged in the  struggle for recognition and respect for indigenous peoples.
Lisa Vinebohm, Editor of InteRadio newsletter, World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC), 3575 Boulevard Saint Laurent No 602, Montreal, Quebec H2X 2T7, Canada.
Tel (514) 982 0351.
Fax (514) 849 7129.
Telex 063670997.
People
Bonnie Brennan, former Information Officer of the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops (CCCB), has won the Pioneer Award presented each year by WACC's North American Broadcast Section.
The Award honours pioneers in the development of Christian communication in North America.
During her 28 years with the CCCB Ms Brennan worked with local and national representatives of all the major Christian churches in North America to help further the development of religious broadcasting.
Ms Brennan took early retirement last year and is now working as a freelance writer and consultant.
Sr Janice McLaughlin has returned to her native USA to take up a new appointment as head of the Communications Office of the Maryknoll Sisters in New York.
Sr McLaughlin spent 22 years working in Africa — 10 of them in Zimbabwe.
In addition to her work with the Zimbabwe Foundation for Education with Production, Sr McLaughlin was a doctoral student at the University of Zimbabwe for the last three years, completing a thesis on ‘The Catholic Church and the Zimbabwe War of Liberation’.
She has been a friend of WACC for the last 20 years.
Wole Adelekan has been appointed Projects Coordinator of the Christian Communications Congress, an interdenominational organisation based in Ibadan, Nigeria.
The Congress was formed in 1988 as an an association of professional communicators.
It organises seminars and educational programmes on a wide range of current issues.
Rev Dr Paul Collins is the new Specialist Editor of Religious Programmes with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's (ABC) radio network.
Dr Collins, who is based in Melbourne, succeeds David Millikan.
The ABC is a corporate member of WACC.
Bishop Fortunatus Lukanima of Arusha, Tanzania, has been elected Bishop  responsible for AMECEA (the Association of Member Episcopal Conferences in Eastern Africa) as well as Chairman of the Tanzania Episcopal Conference's Social Communication Department.
Howard Giles of the University of California, USA, is the new editor of Human Communication Research, published by the International Communication Association.