

WACC-Asia meets to tackle ethno-religious conflict
Communicators and peace activists from conflict-ridden Asian countries have called for stronger links between groups striving for ethno-religious understanding in the region.
They were attending a seminar entitled ‘Communication and the Upsurge of Ethno-Religious Conflicts in Asia: Towards Intercultural Understanding and Community’.
The seminar, which was sponsored by the Asian Social Institute (ASI) and WACC, was held in Manila, Philippines, 9–14 February.
Participants proposed plans of action at local, national and sub-regional levels to encourage interfaith dialogue and to develop ways of documenting and disseminating people's experiences of ethno-religious conflict.
During the seminar, they paid particular attention to the socio-cultural, political and economic factors behind ethnic and religious tensions in Asia, and zeroed in on how communications and media systems exacerbate or maintain these conflicts by perpetuating false notions and misleading stereotypes of ethnic and religious groups.
In analysing the upsurge of conflict along the lines of ethnicity and religion, the group found that ‘local cultures have emerged or are starting to emerge for the restoration of what they think was stolen from them — their autonomy, their language, their culture.’
They also saw ethno-religious conflicts as ‘more often the result of causes other than religion’.
Ethno-religious conflicts were also primarily linked with certain groups' obsession with power.
‘Economic and political groups in dominance often make use of majority and minority religious groups and issues for their own ends,’ participants agreed.
‘Major religions also exhibit dominating tendencies, and these tendencies are a result of the exclusivity of such religions.’
The countries represented were Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Myanmar and Malaysia.
Rev Carlos A. Valle, WACC's General Secretary, Dr Chandra Muzaffar of ALIRAN, Malaysia, and Dr Kim Yong Bock of Korea were among those who participated.
The Asia Regional Association of WACC plans to conduct sub-regional workshops on the theme later this year.
From a report by the Asian Social Institute
Asian Social Institute, 1518 Leon Guinto Street, Malate, Manila, Philippines.
Tel (2) 596266.
Fax (2) 594376.
L America prepares for news agency
The organisers of a church-based news agency planned for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALC) have decided to offer a series of news writing and editing courses for future correspondents later this year.
WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association (WACC/LA-C) will be responsible for all training programmes.
No date has been set for the launch of the agency, which will depend on the setting up of a continent-wide computer network.
Preparations also include two consultations for church leaders and communicators and for technicians which will take place in 1993 with the aim of drawing up clear guidelines for the agency.
There are already a number of church-based, alternative news agencies in Latin America, but most cover one particular area of the region.
‘Latin America and the Caribbean need a news agency with high professional and technical standards, which is politically and economically independent, and whose aim is to promote justice and peace,’ says its consortium of supporters.
The consortium includes WACC/LA-C, whose Chairperson, Dafne Sabanés de Plou, is President of the consortium.
Other members are the Latin American Council of Churches, Lutherans in Communication, the Council of Evangelical Methodist Churches in Latin America, and the Caribbean Conference of Churches.
For further information, contact Fernando Oshige, Secretary of ALC (Agencia de Noticias América Latina y Caribe),,.
Communicators pledge joint action against global injustice
A group of 25 communicators, sociologists and people from the religious communities of North America and Asia have agreed on specific plans to work together for a more just global communication environment.
Seven Asian countries and the USA were represented at the recent eight-day Consultation on Global Communication and Justice, held in Quezon City, near the Philippine capital Manila.
The purpose of the meeting was to take a hard look at the issues of global communication and justice, and to devise a plan of action to change communication policies in structures of government, development agencies and religious institutions.
After the meeting, the North Americans acknowledged that: ‘We recognise more clearly what our nation, along with other western powers, has done through its communication resources to dominate other cultures and…serve the interests of transnationals rather than those of people.’
At the same time, the Asian participants acknowledged the need to extend and deepen their dialogue with people of different faiths and cultures and to ‘rediscover the latent power of the media in preaching the Good News of justice, freedom and peace.’
The North Americans in particular were strongly influenced by the first part of the consultation — a 24-hour ‘live-in’ visit to marginalised communities around Manila.
For most, this was their first exposure to extreme poverty.
They left with a strong commitment to share their experiences at home and to campaign even more vigorously for concrete action by the North American governments and churches.
Both the Asian and the North American participants issued public letters to each other outlining plans for future action to be taken in their respective regions.
A planned Asia-North America forum will provide a platform for the ongoing discussion of communication issues.
See page 4 for excerpts from statements by the Asian and North American participants.
The Consultation on Global Communication and Justice was sponsored by Intermedia, a unit of the National Council of the Churches of Christ, USA and WACC's Asia Region in cooperation with the Christian Conference of Asia, the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA, the Asian Social Institute, the Manila-based network People in Communication, and the Philippines National Council of Churches.
Courses & Conferences
Media and theology
The Institute for Higher Theological Education (ISEDET) of Argentina, will hold a second consultation on communication education in Latin American seminaries in Buenos Aires, 6–10 July 1992.
Participants will review the proposals outlined during the first such consultation, held in Buenos Aires in July 1990, and discuss ways of putting them into practice.
The meetings form part of a series of regional consultations sponsored by WACC.
Instituto Superior Evangélico de Estudios Teológicos (ISEDET), Camacuá 282, 1406 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel (1) 632 5039 and 631 0224.
Fax (1) 613 4992.
 Communication and theology summer school
The Oxford Centre for Mission Studies is offering a Summer School on Theology and Communication in Oxford, UK, 6–11 July 1992.
The school brochure states: ‘The technology of Christian mass communication is exploding.
Such technology comes out of, expresses and is controlled by the West.
The shape of the Gospel communicated in this way is affected by its originating culture.
What are its strengths and weaknesses for the churches in the Two-Thirds world?
What is the relation between such communication and the growth of the Church, Christian love, and sustaining preaching and pastoral care in the churches?’
The Oxford Centre for Mission Studies is also running a one-year course in Theology and Communication in conjunction with Oxford University.
It is a degree-level course (Oxford University Certificate in Theology) and begins in September 1992.
For further information contact The Oxford Centre for Mission Studies, P O Box 70, Oxford, OX2 6HB, UK.
Tel (865) 56071.
Fax (865) 510823.
Chinese explore right to communicate
The Department of Journalism and Communication of the Chinese University of Hong Kong has announced a seminar on ‘The Right to Communicate’, to be held in Hong Kong, 16–19 June 1992.
Supported by WACC, the seminar will examine how the concept of the right to communicate is understood and practised in the four Chinese societies of China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan.
The seminar is co-organised by WACC and the Department of Journalism and Communication at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
French-speaking Canada's media culture
The Office des Communications Sociales of Montreal, Canada, is holding the first national conference on the Church and communication in Cap-Rouge, 4–6 June.
Some 150 communicators are expected to attend and the theme will be ‘Christians in a Media Culture’.
Office des Communications Sociales, 4005 rue de Bellechasse, Montreal, Quebec, HIX 1J6, Canada.
Tel (514) 729 6391.
Fax (514) 729 7375.
Drama school open to all
The UK-based Christian drama organisation, Radius, will hold a Summer School in Swanwick, UK, 31 July-7 August 1992.
The School is a working course for those interested in drama as a means to a deeper and wider understanding of life in the world today.
The course theme will be ‘All things come together for good’, and the week will include classes on movement, creative drama, acting, mask and improvisation.
The course is open to people of all nationalities and religious affiliations, and the minimum age is 15 years.
Summer School, Radius, Christ Church and Upton Chapel, Kennington Road, London SE1 7QP, UK.
Tel (71) 401 2422.
Christian journalism and migration
The Communication Committee of the Lutheran Minority Churches in Europe (KALME) will focus on the theme ‘Christian journalism and the migration process in Europe’ during their assembly in Rome, Italy, 18–25 October 1992.
The working language will be German.
For information, contact Christa Rothenbühler, Lutheran World Federation, P O Box No 2100, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland.
Tel (22) 791 61 11.
Fax (22) 791 64 01.
School gives hope to South Africa's children
A progressive inner-city school is helping black South African children to overcome their under-developed state education system.
The Model School is the latest part of the programme run by the Open School which is based in Johannesburg.
It was started in January 1991 with 51 pupils, after three years of preparation.
The Model School is seen as an attempt to implement the successful education programme that the Open School operates, into a full-time, fully fledged inner city school.
The method used is one where the development of skills and ideas takes precedence over the accumulation of academic facts for their own sake.
The Open School has been operating in Johannesburg for more than 20 years.
It was started as a response to the existing state education system in place under apartheid, in which ‘black children were educated in a way geared to keeping them as a docile, compliant labour force’, according to a colleague of the School.
One of the main difficulties facing the management and teachers at the Model School is to overcome public distrust.
Inner city schools are often regarded as corrupt in their intentions and management.
Another major hurdle for the Model School is to encourage parents to participate in their children's education.
Many of the children enrolled at the School need substantial remedial help in order to recover from previous years spent in poor primary schooling.
The aim of the Model School, say its founders, is ‘to produce children who are aware of their surroundings and the greater world.
Children who can discuss, form opinions and make deductions, find information and apply it where necessary.’
With these aims in mind the Model School operates a curriculum composed of English, Mathematics and Integrated Studies.
One third of each day is devoted to the core curriculum.
The remaining two thirds are spent in stimulating ideas, planning, and creative activities so that growth in skills and concepts goes hand in hand with increased knowledge.
It is seen as vital that a climate of tolerance is fostered in the School.
Children are encouraged to support one another, recognising that each has their own strengths and weaknesses.
Pupil assessment is continuous so that the child's future educational needs can be determined.
The Model School is just part of the overall programme operated by the Open School.
The other areas are the Central Programme and the Community Programme.
All of which have been supported by WACC for some years.
The Central Programme offers children a wide variety of workshops to attend.
Each Saturday nearly four hundred children participate in classes in dance, music, English, maths, the media, drama, computing and martial arts.
1991 saw the first time that the Open School was able to run a summer holiday programme which culminated in the performance of dance, music and drama work done by the children.
The other major element in the Open School's activities is the Community Programme.
This is aimed at the wider community and particularly at adults.
Unemployed people are given training opportunities in the hope of helping them find work.
The Open School is also involved in health care education at a local clinic.
Using the thematic approach, plays are performed addressing health issues, thus conveying the message in an accessible form.
All activities are constantly assessed and evaluated by staff.
A board of trustees and some parents are involved in decision making at all levels, as well as the full-time management and teaching staff.
The Open School's approach of learning more fully through experience will help enable Johannesburg's black children move on from being the victims of apartheid to grasping and using the challenges now facing them in the changing South Africa.
The Open School, PO Box 11046, Johannesburg 2000, South Africa.
Tel (11) 833 1927/8.
Fax (11) 838 1732.
Dutch journalist's retirement benefits WACC scholars
A Dutch radio journalist has donated his retirement gift to WACC to be used to assist two African church workers to attend a media training course in Nairobi, Kenya.
Jan Zindel has worked with the Netherlands Christian Radio Association (NCRV) for more than 30 years and is committed to the development of media skills, particularly broadcasting, in Third World countries.
The two students are Patrick Boateng, the Christian Communication Director of the Gospel House Fellowship Centre in Ghana, and Ephraim Muhadi, Youth Adviser of the East African Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends, Kenya.
They are being supported under WACC's Training Assistance Programme (TAP) to study media production.
The media production course is organised by the Communication Training Centre of the All Africa Conference of Churches in Nairobi.
The Centre is a corporate member of WACC.
The course offers basic all round training in communication theory, particularly geared to the African context.
It also provides professional skills in the use of radio, video and print media for religious, cultural and educational programming.
TAP scholarships are open to staff of church-related groups, and applications are processed throughout the year.
For further information, write to the Training Assistance Programme, WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Consultation on communication and justice
(Continued from page 1)
Participants at the Manila consultation stressed the need to put their words into action.
The two groups, representing Asian and North American communicators, pledge below to strive for a more just global communication environment.
Asian communicators define challenges
The awakening of the Church in Asia needs to be sustained.
It needs to maintain the dialogue between the culture of the Church and the culture of the people.
It needs to understand more deeply the issues that confront the peoples of Asia.
It needs to rediscover the latent power of the media in preaching the Good News of justice, freedom and peace.
As Christian communicators in Asia we place ourselves at the service of those challenges, well aware that we need to conscientise people as much as we need to be conscientised.
We commit ourselves to maximise the potential of communication in the task of nation-building and the Church's mission.
How we are to rise to the challenge is articulated in our plan of action, which follows:
1.
We intend to undertake a process of study that will lead us towards new paradigms of mission and service and of communicating the Gospel in an inter-religious context.
2.
We intend to persuade the Church to engage in policy studies with the aim of developing people-oriented policies for the communication task.
We seek cooperation from the Christian Conference of Asia (CCA), the Federation of Asian Bishops' Conference (FABC), the Asia Region of WACC, and other Christian institutions in Asia.
3.
We intend to strengthen our programmes of media education and training at regional, national and local levels.
4.
We call to our colleagues in the North American region to seriously consider exchange programmes between North American and Asian communicators for training, conscientisation and participation.
We also urge them to consider incorporating communication in the theological studies programme of seminaries in their area.
5.
We intend to establish an Asia-America forum where communication issues can be discussed.
OUR RECOMMENDATIONS
a)
The CCA and the FABC engage in study to develop an ecumenical policy on mission and communication.
b)
WACC participate in such study.
c)
Groups and agencies support the Asian Ecumenical News Service, an alternative news agency in the region.
d)
WACC's Asia Region coordinate network-building in Asia for information, personnel exchange, studies and training.
e)
The national ecumenical bodies and churches adopt communication as a major overall priority in its missionary agenda.
f)
The churches and communication centres support the grassroots initiatives in the development of an alternative mode of communication.
g)
The churches, seminaries and educational institutions develop an appropriate curriculum on mission and communication.
h)
The churches support the development and production of materials that utilise appropriate technology.
i)
We engage in dialogue and common discussion with peoples and groups of other religions and cultures in order to realise the vision of a whole and just communication order in Asia.
j)
We regard as priority communication in solidarity among the struggling peoples in Asia, especially women and ‘Dalits’.
For further information, contact Augustine Loorthusamy, Secretary, WACC's Asia Region, Asian Social Institute, 1518 Leon Guinto Street, Malate, Manila, Philippines.
Tel (2) 596266.
Fax (2) 594376.
The Asian countries represented were India, Hong Kong, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Republic of Singapore and Sri Lanka.
N Americans see new perspective
This consultation has enhanced our appreciation of the depth and power of indigenous communication and peoples' communication.
From this experience we have come to a new recognition of the marginalisation of North American cultural and ethnic groups.
We recognise North America as cultural dominator.
We export not only form and content but western economics-based theories of media regulation that serve the interests of transnationals rather than those of peoples.
Therefore, we pledge ourselves to the following:
1.
We will work to help the churches transform their view of what communication is and should be.
2.
We will challenge the North American churches to adopt as a primary mission priority the issue of solidarity and participation with victims of cultural domination.
3.
We will encourage the churches to integrate communication as central to all peace, justice and advocacy agendas.
4.
We recognise the need to strengthen the voices of those in North America who are marginalised by the dominant culture and to provide access for their participation in both mass and alternative media.
5.
We will make a new commitment to critical viewing skills education and critical media analysis.
6.
We will work to enable the churches to confront the government and communication industry power centres in order to reform and establish just communication policies that protect and promote justice and the peoples' interests.
7.
We will continue to encourage dialogue with theologians and the Church to further develop and integrate a theology of communication and culture based on the Manila Declaration, the WACC Principles of Communication, the St Lucia Consultation on Communication and Development and this meeting.
8.
We will work to incorporate communication as process into curricula of our semin-aries and continuing pastoral education.
Finally, we plan to draft a letter to the churches of North America, communicating the meaning and effect of this Consultation…so that its learnings and imperatives and resulting activities can be brought to bear as powerfully and quickly as possible.
For further information, contact Rev David Briddell, Director, Intermedia, Room 670, 475 Riverside Drive, New York, NY 10115–0050, USA.
Tel (212) 870 2227.
Fax (212) 870 2030.
In North America
Seminarians challenged to seek new approach to media education
‘As we come to grips with the communication process, we comprehend the human being.
And until we touch our essence, its infinity and finitude, the mysteries of the communicative bond cannot be grasped.’
This was Professor Clifford Christians' challenge to theologians discussing the role of communication studies in theological education.
He criticised the ‘mouldy conventions which govern ecclesiastical use of the media,’ referring to the insensitive, instrumental use of new communication technologies which has tended to characterise attitudes in seminaries and churches in general.
Professor Christians, Research Professor of Communication at the University of Illinois, Urbana, was the main speaker at the first North American Consultation on Communication in Theological Education.
Some 30 seminary professors attended the meeting at Yale University, New Haven, USA, 21–23 February.
It was co-sponsored by WACC and Yale Divinity School as part of WACC's global series of consultations on the topic.
Another speaker, Michael Traber, WACC's Director of Studies and Publications, said: ‘It is the task of the mass media and theology to read the signs of the times and to interpret the changes that occur in the world in order to make sense of them.’
‘Dr Traber added that ‘for both the media and the theologians, the problem of how to see the world with new eyes should be tackled first by a removal of ideological blinkers which have been worn for so long.’
In an address on ‘The Cultural Environment and Media Education’, Professor George Gerbner of the Annenberg School of Communication in Philadelphia also stressed the need to gain a genuine, unblinkered understanding of the world before any attempt is made to engage in or to teach communication.
The participants voted to set up an Association for Communication and Theological Education to carry forward the discussions held at Yale.
The Association will be coordinated by WACC's former President, Dr William F Fore, who convened the Yale consultation and is a Visiting Lecturer in Communication at Yale.
Other participants at the meeting included WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, and John L Peterson, Chairperson of WACC's North American Regional Association.
Further information and a collection of descriptions of communication courses in seminaries is available for US$20 from Dr William F Fore, Yale Divinity School, 409 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
Fax (203) 432 5756.
Indian cable TV booms
The Gulf War has given an enormous boost to the cable television industry in India.
During the period of the war, and afterwards, entrepreneurs bought dishes to hook into AsiaSat, beaming TV programmes via Star TV, based in Hong Kong, from Europe and the USA.
They wire up a neighbourhood, and each television owner pays an initial fee of about US$20 and a monthly subscription of about US$2.50.
In return, the owner normally receives two films per night, several international news broadcasts, and many popular shows.
Up until now there is no law preventing anyone from setting up a cable TV network, and the cable operator pays nothing to Star or any other channel.
Church of England considers advertising
The Church of England has set up a working party to investigate the possibility of placing advertisements on radio and television in a bid to attract more people to the Church.
The working party was set up by the Church's Communications Committee and is headed by Canon Colin Semper, former Head of Religious Radio at the BBC.
As part of its brief, the working party will examine the moral and ethical considerations of launching an advertising campaign.
These include issues such as the morality of the Gospel being seen in a consumer context, and the Church spending its funds in this way.
The working party will also look at ways in which advertising could be coordinated so that different church groups would complement and not contradict one another.
Rev Eric Shegog, Director of Communication for the Church of England, said that he hoped the working party would be able to report back in the autumn of 1992.
Mr Shegog is Vice-Chairperson of WACC's European Regional Association.
Rev Eric Shegog, Director of Communication, Church of England, Church House, Great Smith Street, London SW1P 3NZ, UK.
Tel (71) 222 9011.
Fax (71) 799 2714.
Computers update German church
‘The benefit of new communications media and electronic data processing, shows that the Church can be up to date too’ said Christian Schwarz-Schilling, the German Minister for Postal Services, at Credo-Bit ‘92.
Credo-Bit ‘92 was the first conference to be devoted to the application of computers to theology and the Church.
It ran from 1–3 February in Friedberg, Germany, and brought together 300 ministers and church workers, manufacturers and scientists.
The congress was organised by ‘Pfarrer und PC’(Priest and PC), an ecumenical group of some 600 members.
Half the participants were ministers and a quarter worked in parish administration.
The first chairperson of the organisation, the evangelical church minister Detlof Rose, considered the congress to be a success and pointed out that it had raised critical questions with regard to the Church and its use of modern technology.
From Evangelische Information.
Pfarrer und PC, Wohrder Schulgasse 2a, 8500 Nuremberg 20, Germany.
Books & Resources
Chinese Christians launch news service
As communication between Chinese Christians and Christians from around the world has grown over the last few years, the need for a regular English language update of information on Church life in China at all levels has been expressed in many quarters.
This is the reason behind the launch of Amity News Service, published bimonthly by the Amity Foundation based in Hong Kong.
This publication, say its editors, will try to meet that need, through news and feature articles on the activities of individual Christians, local churches and Christian organisations in China.
The first issue contains reports from the fifth national Chinese Christian Conference, held in Beijing in January.
The conference took ‘Running the Church Well’ as its general theme.
Amity News Service is available worldwide by fax or airmail from the Amity Foundation Overseas Coordination Office, 4 Jordan Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong, Tel (852) 723 8011.
Fax (852) 366 2769.
Impact of video in L America
The Institute for Latin America (IPAL) has joined forces with the Foundation for New Latin American Cinema to produce its latest book entitled El Impacto del Video en el Espacio Audiovisual Latinoamericano.
The book is based on research on the impact of film, TV and video in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
Impacto del Video en el Espacio Audiovisual Latinoamericano,(79 pp, cost US$8) is available from IPAL, Aptdo Postal 2700031, Lima, Peru.
Telephone and fax (14) 617949.
Christian meditation group publishes media catalogue
‘Christian Meditation Media is experiencing considerable success’ since its launch in December last year, say its founders.
Christian Meditation Media is the publishing arm of the World Community for Christian Meditation.
Listed in its first catalogue are books, videos and audio cassettes aimed at Christians already meditating and those new to the discipline.
The Community's international centre is in London, with national centres in thirteen countries worldwide.
The Community has more than 15,000 members.
Its bulletin, Christian Meditation Newsletter, containing spiritual articles and meditation news from around the world, is published by the community four times a year.
The community is looking at possibly following up on this initial media enterprise by becoming involved in the sponsorship of drama and the visual arts.
Other plans include working more closely with different faith groups.
Christian Meditation Media, 23 Kensington Square, London W8 5HN, UK.
Telephone and fax (71) 937 4679.
Decade of encouragement for Indian art
The Indian Christian Art Association (ICAA) is celebrating more than ten year's work encouraging and bringing together Christian artists from throughout the country.
These first years of the Association have been spent in identifying Christian artists in India and establishing contact between them.
The Association, through many workshops and seminars held over the years, has supported artists who express their Christian faith through their art.
Painters, sculptors and poets are among those who have benefitted from their membership in the ICAA.
The membership of the Association totals more than 700 across the country.
The ICAA has also organised many exhibitions, bringing Christian art to a far wider audience than it experienced previously.
Naomi Wray, an American artist, missionary and founding member of the ICAA has seen the work of Christian artists improve dramatically since the founding of the Association.
This, she believes, is due in part to the interchange of ideas that the Association facilitates.
The ICAA publishes a newsletter, Pratima, which keeps members in touch with local and national ICAA activities.
It also provides a forum for discussion and prints papers that are presented at seminars and conferences organised by ICAA.
Recent articles include a personal history of ICAA by Naomi Wray and ‘Silent Voices of the Prophets’, an examination of art as the universal voice.
The Indian Christian Art Association, 216 Dhoble Bhuvan, 4th Floor, R. No. 48a, Kazi Sayed Street, Mumbai 400 003, India.
People's power through folk media
Folk Media and Development Communication: Myths and Realities records and interprets, in a narrative form, how groups of people in three countries tried to bring about social change through traditional or ‘people's’ communication.
Villagers and fisherfolk in Manila (Philippines), West Bengal and Tamil Nadu (India), and in Mexico used their own resources rather than technology to achieve particular results.
The book shows that heightened social awareness, reliance on people rather than technology, and belief in self rather than‘experts’ or ‘professionals’can enable people to take their own decisions about matters which affect their daily lives.
Written by WACC's former Director of Research and Planning, Neville Jayaweera, the book is the report of a six-year global programme sponsored by WACC.
It has proved to be a major benchmark in the evolution of the policies of WACC.
For over 15 years, in the 1950s and 1960s, WACC relied mainly on mass media for achieving social change.
By the mid 1970s, however, faith in the effectiveness of mass media had fallen sharply, especially in Third World countries.
‘Far from helping Third World governments to realise their development goals, excessive reliance on mass media had, in fact, generated consumerism and a new individualism which, in turn, had stimulated demand to a degree that was beyond the capacity of the economy to absorb,’ writes Mr Jayaweera.
‘It became clear that it was not possible to achieve desirable social change in the Third World by treating people as if they were isolated objects, living outside a social context.’
WACC's folk media programme revealed that traditional forms of communication can be harnessed for effective social change when adapted and backed by a strong motivation and social consciousness.
In Mexico, for example, barley growers in Tlaxcala used posters and pamphlets to reinforce changes of consciousness within their communities.
This enabled the barley growers to organise themselves effectively to protest to the authorities about their loss of land, and to challenge the monopolistic price-fixing of ‘middlemen’.
The book describes the experiences of other oppressed groups in Mexico, of outcast (Dalit) communities in India, and of fisherfolk fighting for their rights in the Philippines.
In addition to the hundreds of peasants and fisherfolk who took part in the project, key collaborators include David Briddell (USA), Ricardo Avilez (Mexico), Augustine Loorthusamy (Philippines), Sarah Mathews, Sanjib Sarcar and Felix Sugirtharaj (all from India).
Folk Media and Development Communication: Myths and Realities by Neville Jayaweera is published by the Asian Social Institute (Manila) and the ISPCK (Delhi) in cooperation with WACC.
It is available in paperback (140 pages) from WACC.
Cost: £8 plus £3 for postage and packing outside the UK; £1 within the UK.
Australia publishes media handbook for Christians
The Anglican Information Office in Australia has published a handbook for Christians using the media entitled Ears to Hear, Eyes to See.
The book is a collection of professional advice which is both practical and tested, say its publishers.
Chapters cover areas such as leader writing, subediting, using local radio and reviewing books and films.
There are also chapters on the law and understanding the secular press.
The Anglican Information Office, a corporate member of WACC, has produced this new publication to follow up on Getting into Print which it published in 1975.
Ears to Hear has a broader scope which encompasses radio and television journalism.
Ears to Hear, Eyes to See: A Handbook for Christians using the Media (paperback, 128 pages) is available from the Anglican Information office, PO Box Q, 190 Queen Victoria Building, Sydney NSW 2000, Australia.
Media resources for social change
A video designed to introduce school children to the basic issues of Third World development, a handbook entitled Organising for Social Change, and a multimedia guide to community participation are just three of the products described in A Catalogue of Development Resources (Media Services), published by Private Agencies Collaborating Together (PACT).
Produced three times a year, the Media Services Catalogue offers training materials and media resources for use by international development organisations and activists.
The most recent issue contains more than 150 resources.
The catalogue is designed to be ‘a convenient one-stop service for cutting-edge, user-friendly resources critical to building the capacities of the poor and the institutions which serve them,’ say its publishers.
Included are books, papers, videos and other materials under headings such as Advocacy and Pluralism, Nonformal Education and People's Participation.
PACT Media Services, 777 United Nations Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA.
Tel (212) 697 6222.
Fax (212) 692 9748.
Telex 424272.
Video develops
‘Video is possibly the most versatile and cost-effective medium that can be used for development communication, extension and training,’ says Matthijs de Vreede in his book Video for Development.
The publication advocates the use of video as a tool for development, providing the reader with ideas and suggestions concerning the various uses of video and general guidelines concerning choosing the right equipment and staff training.
Chapters cover areas such as production, script writing, project design and using video for development education.
The book is published by the African Council for Communication Education as part of their Africa Media Monograph Series.
Video for Development (paperback, 98 pages) is available from AACE, PO Box 47495, Nairobi, Kenya.
Telex 25148 AACE.
Arts programme assists rural development in Pakistan
Young artists are the focus for the Creativity Arts Training Programme in Lahore, Pakistan.
The programme's aim is to encourage the use of the creative arts in the spiritual and physical development of individuals, communities and society.
The key to the Programme is to train young people, already involved in development work, and maximise their effectiveness by using art, music and drama.
The Programme's current activities are supported by WACC and include two, week-long, residential workshops and six shorter sessions.
Pakistan is one of the world's poorest countries.
Although development is taking place it is mainly benefitting the middle and upper class communities.
Life for most people is very difficult.
The mechanisation of agriculture and industry is cutting work opportunities, so in many cases living standards are declining.
The worsening condition is evident in the poor life expectancy and literacy statistics in Pakistan.
Maternal and infant mortality rates are among the worst in Asia, while literacy figures, especially in women, are getting worse year by year.
Pakistan society is structured on conservative Islamic lines with little official sanction for the arts and communications in general.
There are few opportunities for youth to train in media skills.
The Arts Training Programme workshops are unique in Pakistan, springing from discussions at a ‘New Technology’ workshop, organised by WACC's Asia Region in 1987.
The workshops foster creativity and innovation, aiming at applying new skills and insights in healthcare, literacy and development programmes.
They are fully ecumenical, with participants and resource persons from Roman Catholic, Protestant and Muslim groups.
There are very few facilities for the encouragement of effective communication in either church-related or general community development work.
Ideas, materials and methodology used all tend to come into the country from outside.
Both the Workshop and the current Training Programme are initiatives jointly organised by the Catholic Church's Commission for Social Communication (WAVE Studio), the Church of Pakistan and the Adult Basic Education Society (ABES Audio Visual Section).
WAVE studios are the largest producers of Christian audio cassettes in Pakistan, and ABES coordinates adult literacy and community health programmes for church, NGO and government projects.
Both WAVE and ABES studios are corporate members of WACC.
Catholic Commission for Social Communications WAVE Studios, PO Box 909, Lahore 54000, Pakistan.
Tel (42) 306640.
People
Richard Sakala has been appointed Special Assistant to the President of Zambia, Frederick Chiluba.
He retained his position of Director of the Africa Literature Centre in Kitwe until 31 March, and the Centre is now looking for a successor.
Mr Sakala was formerly Editor-in-Chief of the Africa Church Information Service, based in Nairobi, Kenya.
He also served as Secretary of WACC's African Regional Association for some years.
Dr Ingmar Lindquist is the new Director of the Church of Finland's Information Centre which celebrates 25 years of existence this year.
He succeeds Anneli Janhonen, who has moved from Helsinki to Geneva to head the Information Department of the Lutheran World Federation.
Père Raymond Pichard, the ‘father’ of French religious television died in February.
He was a pioneer in the Catholic Church after the Second World War, before permission was granted to televise the mass.
Instead, Fr Pichard broadcast educational TV programmes presenting the form and meaning of the mass in an easily accessible way.
In 1950, he represented France at the Informal International Conference of Christian Broadcasting in Chichester, UK, which was one of the forerunners of WACC.
Edward Cumberbatch has been appointed interim General Secretary of the Caribbean Conference of Churches (CCC) for the period March 1992 to October 1993.
He succeeds Reverend Allan Kirton, who completed nine years in the service of the CCC.
The Caribbean Conference of Churches is a corporate member of WACC.
Patrick Gilbert, General Secretary of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), has taken premature retirement for health reasons.
Mr Gilbert is a former trustee of WACC.