

Churches help Eritreans develop media policy
The provisional Eritrean government has acknowledged the need to develop an effective communication policy in the months before independence in May 1993, and it is looking for guidance from the churches and international organisations such as WACC.
Eritrean officials held discussions with local Christians and with representatives from the All Africa Conference of Churches at a seminar on ‘Communication and Development’ which was supported by WACC and held in Asmara, Eritrea, 1–7 November.
Effective communication will play a vital role in the referendum planned for April 1993, when citizens will vote for or against an independent Eritrea.
Voting is expected to be massively in favour of independence.
In May 1991, after 30 years of bitter civil war, Eritrea broke away from Ethiopia, but has to wait for the referendum officially to declare itself an independent state.
This two-year transitional period has caused all kinds of problems for the people of Eritrea.
It is difficult for them to obtain overseas development funds, and it is even hard to mail a letter to another country because Eritrean stamps are not yet internationally recognised.
On the positive side, however, the months leading up to independence offer time to discuss the future direction of the country and to draw up specific plans.
A national communication policy will be a key element in future planning.
Emphasis will be given to media training schemes and also to considering the establishment of a public broadcasting system.
Participants at the seminar also agreed that a communication policy should strengthen the national culture and the unity of the country as well as ensuring the freedom of the press.
Eritrean media expert Hanna Simon summed up the feelings of the group: ‘We believe the media still can and should be a means of national mobilisation for the tasks of reconstruction, but it also has to be a forum for national debate and the free airing of different views,’ she said.
‘Moreover, it has to provide the population with accurate and balanced information about important developments in the country, the region and worldwide,’ she added.
Participants were particularly inspired by the lead given by Namibia in defining communication policy (see pages 4 and 5 of this newsletter) and in placing it at the service of justice, freedom and democratic growth.
Namibia's example has encouraged the Eritreans to press ahead with their own policy and to respond to the widespread need for media training.
There are plans to set up an Eritrean Communication and Development Institute to serve as a national training and production centre.
The institute will be run jointly by government, churches and non-governmental organisations.
Close cooperation between Christian and Muslim leaders is essential for national unity, and both faith groups are challenged to do all they can to ensure that belief in one creation and one God is a force that unites people rather than dividing them.
For further information, contact Mehret Gebreyesus, All Africa Conference of Churches Training Centre, P O Box, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 441483, 441338, 441339.
Fax (2) 443241.
Telex 22175 AACC.
Valle urges realistic approach to 1993
WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, sends this New Year's message to all the Association's members and friends:
‘The year 1992 symbolises the continued brutalising and marginalising of people throughout the world,’ affirmed our Central Committee after its meeting in Quito, Ecuador, last June.
This is not a sign of pessimism, but rather of realism.
The dream of making this world into a global market can only come about by perpetuating injustice.
As the Uruguayan author Eduardo Galeano wrote: ‘Incapable of combating poverty, the dominant culture combats the poor and blesses the violence of power.’
That's why some people think that communication is needed — to convince us that it is better to ‘have’ and not to ‘be’; that happiness is to possess, to compete and to succeed no matter how.
But that is domination, not communication.
Genuine communication is participatory, liberating and it creates community.
So let us look at 1993 realistically, but also from the perspective of our commitment to authentic communication.
WACC's Central Committee has declared its pledge ‘to work with marginalised people in our own regions to foster human dignity’.
This is the challenge that awaits us and that should find us united in our ministry of communication.
Pakistan's Christians fear fundamentalists
Christians in Pakistan are living in increasing fear for their lives following the deaths earlier this year of two men at the hands of Muslim fundamentalists.
The Christian Conference of Asia, a WACC member based in Hong Kong, alerted WACC to the killings which were reported in the newsletter of the Pakistan Christian National Party and Christian Organisation for Human Rights.
One report described the life of writer, poet, broadcaster and school teacher Naimat Ahmer, ‘who always talked of peace, justice and democracy’.
He was stabbed in broad daylight by a young Muslim.
The report added that the almost total blackout on the issue in the press ‘speaks volumes for the apathy, fear and misguidedness currently existing in this country’.
The second victim, Tahir Iqbal, was found dead in jail in Lahore, where he was detained on alleged charges of blasphemy.
Human rights groups are calling for a postmortem to ascertain the cause of his death.
Bishop Samuel Azariah, Executive Secretary of the National Council of Churches of Pakistan, has condemned the deplorable situation regarding human rights in the country, particularly the right to choose one's own faith and to worship freely.
Pakistan Christian National Party and Christian Organisation for Human Rights, Yasin Street, 8/A Hall Road, Lahore, Pakistan.
Courses & Conferences
Magazine editors in Middle East to meet
The Communication Department of the Middle East Council of Churches (MECC) is holding a seminar for Christian magazines in Limassol, Cyprus, 29 March-2 April 1993.
The title of the seminar, which will be supported by WACC, is ‘Communication for Human Rights and Social Transformation’.
This will be the first ever opportunity for editors of Christian magazines in the Middle East to meet to share their common concerns and examine their role in the Church and in society.
Some 20 editors will take part.
The main aim of the seminar is to encourage the exchange of information concerning content, readership and distribution.
This would be between the magazines and also with MECC.
Other objectives include: sensitising editors of Christian magazines about fundamental issues such as human rights, social change, and justice and peace; exploring new participatory ways of communicating the Christian message that would lead to both spiritual renewal and social transformation; promoting the ecumenical objectives and priorities for inter-church and inter-religious understanding in the Middle East.
Fax (5) 324496.
The countries to be represented at the seminar include Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine and Syria.
Communication Department, Middle East Council of Churches, P O Box 4259, Limassol, Cyprus.
Tel (5) 326235 and 326022.
Seminar promotes social change in Asia
People in Communication, Inc,(PIC) has announced plans for its second seminar on ‘Communication and Social Change’, which will be held in Manila, Philippines, 18 April-13 June 1993.
The seminar, which is supported by WACC, is designed for community organisers, church workers, trainers and others who are involved in grassroots development and communication work.
It aims to give participants a combination of theories, knowledge and skills in communication which are necessary in planning, implementing and evaluating development programmes.
The course is divided into four mo-dules: Philosophy of Communication and Social Change; Understanding of Socio-Cultural Realities; The Practice of Communication for Social Change, and Planning for Back-Home Application.
The seminar combines various methods of instruction, including audio-visual presentations, analyses of different types of communities in Asia, video and drama workshops, and community field practice.
For information, please write as soon as possible to Girlie Danseco, People in Communication, 3/F Sonolux Building, Ateneo de Manila Campus, Loyola Heights, 1108 Quezon City, Philippines.
Tel (2) 965 953.
Fax (2) 921 7534 and 965 953.
Alternative media promoted in Asia-Pacific
The Asian Mass Communication Research and Information Centre (AMIC) is organising a seminar on ‘Alternative Media’ in Singapore, 16–20 March 1993.
Co-sponsored by WACC, the seminar aims to document and highlight outstanding efforts in using alternative media for development programmes in the Asia-Pacific Region.
The organisers hope to encourage participants to create networks for the exchange of information on the development and use of alternative media.
They also aim to motivate development and communication planners and programme administrators to pursue the systematic use of relatively low-cost but effective media in national or local development efforts.
Twenty participants from the Asia-Pacific Region will be invited to the seminar.
They include activists who have successfully experimented with alternative media; development programme policy-makers from both government and non-government sectors; representatives of non-government organisations working in grassroots areas; and communication professionals and researchers.
Asian Mass Communication Research and Information Centre, 39 Newton Road, Singapore 1130.
Tel 2515106.
Role of books in human rights struggle explored
In countries where literacy rates are relatively high, books play an important part in the struggle for human rights.
In most of those countries, however, writers and publishers on human rights issues are confronted by censorship, harassment and violence.
This was one of the conclusions of a seminar entitled ‘Books as a tool for human rights’ which was organised by WACC and sponsored by the Association of Churches and Protestant Missions inn Germany (EMW) before the Frankfurt Book Fair which took place in October.
Fifteen writers and publishers from 13 Third World countries attended the seminar.
Horace Etemesi, Pradip Thomas and Rebecca Rivera represented WACC's General Secretariat.
Delegates from Latin America were particularly aware of the risks involved in addressing human rights concerns.
One presentation quoted a Guatemalan activist: ‘Publications have a positive but delicate role.
For example, a book about human rights in the context in which we live can be considered subversive because it disagrees with the vision of those in authority.’
In some other countries, such as the southern African nations, the situation has been similar to that of some parts of Latin America, but there has been more freedom in recent months.
In Asia, both India and the Philippines have active human rights publishing lobbies, and there are three specialist organisations in Japan.
In the Pacific, the oral tradition outweighs the small amount of human rights literature that exists in the region.
The participants from the Middle East revealed that human rights publishing is regarded as a ‘western concept’, and that critical writers are often victimised.
Very few books on human rights are published in sub-Sharan Africa, both because of the fear of reprisals and because of economic constraints.
Economic barriers to book publishing remains constant throughout the Third World.
Newsletters and pamphlets are always more accessible to more people.
There is a worldwide trend for Christian organisations to espouse human rights issues, and WACC is not alone in supporting an increasing number of publishing houses working in that field.
Right to communicate has low profile in Africa, say specialists
The various African charters on human rights drawn up in recent years have all failed to capture the importance of the right to communicate and the right of free expression, according to a group of leading communicators who met in Cairo, Egypt, 16–17 October.
The group, which included some 30 journalists, media teachers and lawyers from throughout Africa, came together for a seminar on ‘The African Charter on Human and People's Rights and its Impact on Communication Policy and Practice’.
The seminar was supported by WACC and hosted by the African Council for Communication Education just one week after an earthquake had devastated some of the most deprived areas of Cairo.
Discussions centred on one particular charter, the African Charter on Human and People's Rights, which specifically mentions the right to communicate and receive information.
The seminar aimed to assess the impact of the Charter on communication policy and practice in Africa.
It was generally agreed that the right to communicate was rarely upheld in African countries.
While some participants argued that values such as freedom of the press and freedom of expression were ‘western’ ideas which robbed Africa of its authenticity, others reacted sharply by arguing that it was high time to consolidate democratic societies which are founded on inalienable rights.
Participants also discussed the possibility of launching a major research project on the theme, and made plans for a book on communication and human rights in Africa.
The book would include issues such as traditional values and ethics, the new information technologies, the African Charter and national communication policies, women in traditional and modern communication environments, ethnic and cultural minorities, participatory and alternative ways of communication for human rights, media education, and the legal foundations of the right to communicate.
From a report by Heinz Hunke, Director of the International Documentation and Communication Centre (IDOC) in Rome.
Tel (2) 227043, 216135 and 215270.
For further information, contact Dr Kwame Boafo, African Council for Communication Education, P O Box 47495, Nairobi, Kenya.
Multimedia site chosen for women's conference
A multimedia complex on one of Thailand's most beautiful campuses, Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University (STOU), is the location for the International Conference on Women Empowering Communication, which will be held 12–17 February 1994.
The Conference Planning Committee approved the location, which is on the outskirts of Bangkok, during its recent meeting in London.
The Committee also noted that Bangkok is home to many women's action groups and will provide good opportunities for local participation and field trips during the conference.
The Planning Committee was convened by WACC staff member Teresita Hermano, who is organising the conference in cooperation with ISIS International and the International Women's Tribune Center (IWTC).
The Committee includes: Marilyn Carr (UNIFEM), Margaret Gallagher (independent consultant), Marilee Karl (ISIS, Rome), Elizabeth Martinez (ISIS, Manila), Vicki Semler (IWTC), Julienne Munyanesa (WACC-Africa Chairperson and WACC Central Committee's representative on the Planning Committee), Doris Hess (WACC consultant), and staff members Mary Luz Rivera and Ann Shakespeare.
The STOU campus is equipped with training centres where the conference activities will be held.
The university has its own printing press, radio and TV studios with portable equipment and computers, some of which will be available to the conference.
A pre-registration form for the conference is enclosed with this issue of Action.
Namibia's communication policy is first of its kind in Africa
Namibia is the first African nation to implement a communication policy which is founded on the principles of justice, participation and the two-way flow of information.
Following its independence from South Africa in March 1990, Namibia established a Ministry of Information and Broadcasting with the aim of ensuring that the country's media ‘are free and able to fulfil their traditional roles of public enlightenment, education and entertainment, and also to imbue the Namibian people with a goal that reflects their aspirations towards the building of a healthy democracy’.
A long-standing friend of WACC, Daniel Tjongarero, was appointed Deputy Minister for Information and Broadcasting and has played a major part in drawing up Namibia's information and communication policy.
Mr Tjongarero was formerly Director of Communication with the Christian Council of Namibia.
Most of the Council's former staff are now employed by the government, both because of their professional expertise and their ability to publicise important issues in a sensitive way.
Their skills and courage were well tested under South Africa's apartheid regime, when the Christian Church was one of the few groups that managed to get their voices heard.
Some of them are involved in drawing up legislation which is based on the new communication policy.
For example, a recent act of Parliament has for the first time enabled citizens to own and operate radio stations.
Following are excerpts from the Namibian government's new policy for information and communication:
Media and Society
This document seeks to define the policy position of the Namibian government on a number of issues concerning the media and society.
They include the following: the extent to which the freedom of the press and other media is guaranteed and protected; the pattern of media ownership allowed; the structure of the country's mass media; the technology required to ensure rapid and effective generation, processing and dissemination of information at all levels of society and beyond the nation's borders; the extent to which the public has easy access to the media channels for meaningful, two-way communication; and the degree to which the media, besides being a watchdog of public interest vis-a-vis the government, foster the nation's political and cultural awareness and promote the values and aspirations which the nation has chosen to project as its identifying characteristic in the community of nations.
Freedom of the Press
The freedom of the press and other media is one of the fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Namibia.
However, in exercising their press freedom, media practitioners have the responsibility of conforming to the values subscribed to by Namibian society.
The government notes with some satisfaction that Namibia's practitioners of the media have initiated a process for bringing about some accountability by voluntary adoption of a journalistic code of ethics and the establishment of a Media Council, which is a self-regulating body.
The press, as well as performing its role as the watchdog, must not be coy when it is called upon to turn the critical eye on itself.
Media columns, in which journalists take a critical look at themselves, seem to be conveniently missing from the Namibian press.
In addition, the Namibian media have not always been prepared to accord members of the public and government officials the right of reply and the rectification of inaccurate or deliberately distorted stories.
The government's information policy must protect the interests of both the institutions of mass media (owners and operators) and the public (readers, listeners and viewers).
While the government does not foresee the need for pre-censorship of publications, films and video cassettes, it is the intention of the government to enact appropriate legislation to provide the framework within which an assessment could be made of the suitability of any publication, film or video cassette for public and private consumption with regard to obscenity and offending of religious convictions.
Media Ownership
The government does not have any intention to suppress the existence of multiple and autonomous initiatives regarding the ownership and operation of the mass media.
Namibia is fortunate to have vigorous private participation in the print media, including newspapers, magazines and books.
The government also intends to allow private organisations and individuals to own and operate the electronic media — radio, television, video and film.
Keeping this in view, and yet ensuring the freedom of the press, the Government considered it appropriate to achieve the necessary balance by establishing its own newspaper that is national in character and content.
This is in line with the need for the democratisation of information in society.
Furthermore, while the Constitution guarantees freedom of expression and freedom of the media, it does not make explicit provision for free and equal access to the media for all citizens — an equally desirable objective.
This is a major problem in Namibia, where almost all the private media are urban-oriented, reflec-ting mostly the interests and viewpoints of the urban elite while wittingly or unwittingly neglecting those of the rural inhabitants who constitute a greater percentage of the country's total population.
It is this skewed nature of the existing private print media that has called for the participation of the government in the ownership and operation of the print media in this country.
The Print Media
As pointed out before, in Namibia the press is largely in private hands.
This means that, besides being a watchdog to protect the public interest, it strives to return profits on investments through sales and advertisements.
However, there is a large consensus of opinion that the Namibian press suffers, to a significant extent, from a lack of fundamental investigative journalistic skills, which quite often results in poorly researched reports and unsubstantiated comments.
Another problem is its political partisanship, which has led to reporting which is quite often libellous.
Namibia needs the contribution of its press to support the task of unifying the country's different racial and ethnic groups into a cohesive nation.
It was, partly, against this background that the government decided to launch a state-sponsored newspaper to act as a unifying factor in the nation, and help in the effort to improve the quality of print journalism in the country, besides helping to bring government policy and other activities to the awareness of all citizens.
Book publishing is another important aspect of the print media to which private organisations and the government should pay serious attention.
Book publishers should help to foster mass literacy through the development of books in both English and indigenous languages.
The Electronic Media
Radio and television are national institutions of mass communication whose reach and influence are enormous; so is their potential to promote national objectives.
In addition to entertainment, radio and TV can also play a vital role in advancing the aims of education.
These media, which are for the present time state-owned, are therefore expected to devote a significant amount of air-time to the running of radio schools and the promotion of mass adult literacy education, as well as the study of other basic subjects.
At present, radio is the only communication medium in the country which has achieved a mass audience.
It is the main medium on which the government relies to communicate its message to the public, especially to rural communities.
As to entertainment, radio and television should promote the development of Namibia's own cultural heritage through research and comprehensive coverage of our people's artistic creativity — the visual, literary and dramatic arts.
In giving patronage to Namibia's artists, the media would be fostering a vital symbiotic relationship between media practitioners and culture creators, the two social groups which should be the critics of the nation's political and socio-economic life and the conscience of our society.
Within the field of electronic media, the film medium has the most universal appeal and impact.
Film is capable of rising above the limitations of language and other cultural barriers.
As Brend Shehu, a Nigerian film specialist, has remarked, its creative power of visual and audio effects can create a ‘community’ among an audience of various ethnic, linguistic, racial and religious backgrounds.
Film is, thus, a potent medium for fostering cultural awareness among the Namibian people, and this becomes particularly important when we recognise the fact that every society expresses its soul through its culture.
Namibia Press Agency
The government established the Namibia Press Agency (NAMPA) as a publicly funded news service in order to provide more comprehensive and balanced coverage of the country in both the local and world media.
NAMPA's main and regional offices are now fully operational, equipped with a computerised ‘send and receive’ system.
For any news agency to survive and to make its name among the mass media, which constitute its major clients, it must adhere to the highest ideals of journalistic accuracy and objectivity.
It must also strive to be first with the news, especially that emanating from within its national boundaries.
Training and Research
Namibia's media institutions cannot play an effective role in the process of nation-building and development if they are not staffed with knowledgeable and skilled personnel, nor can they hope to be successful in their general functions to inform and enlighten the Namibian public without adequate professional training and research.
While financial resources and technical equipment are of great importance in the effort to establish and operate an adequate information and communication capability, it is skilled personnel who constitute the most critical factor.
Therefore, the government recognises media training as an important priority.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has organised and is implementing a series of training programmes and retraining workshops for Namibia's aspiring and practising communicators at senior, intermediate and entry levels of broadcasting and print journalism.
Conclusion
In pre-independence Namibia there was no substantive department of information.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had, therefore, to be set up from scratch.
In the first year after independence, this task was completed by the formulation of policy guidelines, the establishment of administrative units and specialised media agencies, the drafting and classification of job descriptions for the required personnel, the identification of appropriate technology, and the organisation of media courses and workshops.
The Ministry's most notable achievement has been the transformation of the country's broadcasting corporation from a little relay or propaganda outlet of the South African Broadcasting Corporation into a Namibian broadcasting organisation.
A good beginning has been made regarding the production of local programmes.
The content of the NBC programmes has ceased to be lifeless with the newly acquired freedom to debate facts and events without fear of reprisals.
A series of courses, seminars and workshops are being organised to improve the technical skills and professional competence of the NBC staff.
These, too, have contributed to the qualitative changes in the NBC programmes.
The government is also in the process of acquiring additional television trans-mitters in the coming months to expand television broadcasting to all parts of the country and, thus, meet the educational and cultural needs of the population.
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Private Bag 13344, Windhoek, Namibia.
Books & Resources
Review of India's health published
The role of communication in conveying health messages is one of many topics covered in the book, State of India's Health, which is produced by the Voluntary Health Association of India (VHAI).
The comprehensive publication covers all aspects of the subject, including nutrition, health services, environment, women and health, legal issues, disability and mental health.
Each of the chapters is written by specialists, such as Chandra Kannapiran and Indrani Ganguly.
Their chapter on health education emphasises the importance of effective communication, and in particular, the need for sensitivity to different cultural traditions.
‘The most effective communication strategies and the messages that need to be disseminated can only be decided after taking into account the behaviour patterns of the community,’ they write.
The authors also point out that much more work needs to be done to maximise the use of educational materials.
Since only 39 per cent of India's population is literate, the government authorises the production of posters and other aids which are mailed to over one million addresses.
However, most of the material produced does not reach the people for whom it is meant, mainly because of poor communication between the producers of the materials and the health workers.
Voluntary groups such as VHAI are working to overcome these problems through research and by strengthening channels of information.
It is also calling for more effective use of the mass media, including TV radio and print, in putting across health messages.
WACC maintains contact with a number of VHAI workers.
VHAI is a non-profit federation of over 3,000 organisations working in the field of health and community development.
It develops and distributes appropriate educational aids and publishes several newsletters and journals.
State of India's Health (hardback, 414 pages) is available from Voluntary Health Association of India, Tong Swasthya Bhawan, 40, Institutional Area, South of IIT, New Delhi 100016, India.
Tel (11) 668071, 668072.
Fax (11) 6885377.
Ethnic minority media examined worldwide
Ethnic Minority Media: An International Perspective, edited by Stephen Harold Riggins, is the latest publication in the ‘Communication and Human Values’ series developed by WACC and the Centre for the Study of Communication and Culture (London).
The book focuses on the challenge of ethnic survival and empowerment and discusses the positive role that ethnic minority media play in the process.
Examining print and broadcast media, as well as linguistic and cultural diversity, the contributors provide a broad international sampling of case studies spanning a variety of ethnic minorities and countries, each representing a different set of cultural, political and economic conditions.
Case studies include the United States (Hispanic and Native), Britain (Welsh), Ireland (Irish), Canada (Native), Australia (Aboriginal), Israel (Romanian), France (Occitan and Basque), Greenland (Inuit), Chile (Native) and Algeria (Berber).
Editor Stephen Harold Riggins points out that minority media entail unexpected paradoxes: ‘Minority empowerment is in itself paradoxical.
On the one hand, the unique group identity of a relatively marginal population is revitalised from within and the politics of multiculturalism are advanced.
‘But on the other hand, at the same time, the minority is likely to become more integrated into national life, because short of reaching total political independence, a high level of assimilation seems to be a prerequisite for achieving empowerment.
‘The control of one's own media in the context of civil peace requires voluntary outside intervention, professional training, and efficient communication channels with the state and population at large.’
Ethnic Minority Media: An International Perspective, edited by Stephen Harold Riggins, is published by Sage Publications.
It is available to WACC members at the special price of £8 from WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
Fax (71) 735 0340.
Videos highlight social and religious issues
Interreligious encounter, trade in Native Taiwanese children and the Church in South China are the themes of three documentary films which have recently been produced by Kuangchi Program Service.
‘Pilgrims in Dialogue — Paths to Interreligious Encounter’, is a 65-minute video showing the cooperative efforts of Buddhists, Christians, Muslims and Hindus in bringing peace, development and harmonious living to their communities.
It draws on the powerful experiences of groups in Japan, Sri Lanka and the Philippines.
‘The Selling of Chen Chen — Trade in Native Taiwanese Children’ documents the life of a 13 year-old Native Taiwanese girl who was sold by her father when she was 11 and forced to work as a prostitute.
The programme also explores the role of the family, school, sex houses, the customers, the police and the social environment.
The third film, ‘Waiting with Xavier — Glimpses of the Church in South China’, looks back to the arrival of Christianity in China 400 years ago, through St Francis Xavier, and explores the current life of the Catholic Church in Guangdong Province, South China.
The Kuangchi Program Service, which is a corporate member of WACC, is an ecumenical organisation based in Taiwan.
‘Pilgrims in Dialogue’(65 minutes; available in English, Mandarin Chinese and Spanish), ‘The Selling of Chen Chen’(30 minutes; Chinese with English voice over) and ‘Waiting with Xavier’(30 minutes; Chinese and English) cost US$35 each, including study guides, and may be obtained from Kuangchi Program Service, P O Box 24–42, Taipei, Taiwan.
Tel (2) 7712136.
Fax (2) 7712246.
Comic strip portrays colonisation
500 Años de Colonización — Que Celebren Ellos!(500 Years of Colonisation — Let Them Celebrate!) is the title of a comic strip, published in the form of a book by Acción Ecuménica (Ecumenical Action), one of WACC's corporate members in Venezuela.
The artist and author, Alfonso Santoni, traces the history of the past 500 years from the point of view of the indigenous and black populations of Latin America.
The introduction to the book states: ‘The artist shows us two ongoing tragedies in the life of our Indo-African-America: the internal divisions and the existence of those who collaborate with the invaders.
‘This book is a call to readers to recognise the profound value of the  resistance of the indigenous peoples and the Afro-Americans.
‘It is important to recall all this to memory, but above all, it should lead to a commitment to the continuing struggle for justice and for life.
‘May the others celebrate oppression!
As for us, we will continue to celebrate our modest victories on the road towards liberation.’
500 Años de Colonización — Que Celebren Ellos! by Alfonso Santoni is available in Spanish only (cost: US$15, including postage) from Acción Ecuménica, Apartado Postal 6314, Carmelitas, Caracas 1010-A, Venezuela.
Tel (2) 811548.
Fax (2) 8611196.
Third World video catalogue published
The latest edition of Cine & Media, published by the International Catholic Organisation for Cinema and Audiovisual (OCIC), is a special multilingual catalogue prepared for the Third World Forum of Educational and Religious Video.
The Forum was supported by WACC and held at Driebergen, near Utrecht, the Netherlands, in October.
The catalogue gives details of the 38 exhibitors, including their addresses and brief descriptions of the work and objectives of each organisation or film/video production house.
There is also a list of productions screened during the event, with synopses, technical details and contact addresses.
Cine & Media usually appears bimonthly in three separate editions — English, French and Spanish.
Cine & Media: Third World Forum of Educational and Religious Video is available from OCIC, Rue de l'Orme, 8, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.
An annual subscription to Cine & Media costs US$20.
Tel (2) 7344294.
The booklet Angola: The Possible Peace provides a concise analysis of the country's history and an assessment of its prospects for the future.
It asks what Angola's place in the regional political order is likely to be.
Indian Christian handbook planned
A handbook on Christianity in India will be published in early 1994.
India Christian Handbook will provide information on denominations, missions, Christian institutions and organisations involved in ministries such as accommodation, education, literature, media and welfare.
The handbook will identify trends and issues within the Indian Church.
It also aims to describe the role of Christianity in a pluralistic, multifaith society.
Several WACC members are taking part in compiling the handbook, which has a 17-member editorial council representing most of India's major denominations and institutions.
India Christian Handbook, P O Box 1426, Bibvewadi, Pune 411037, Maharashtra, India.
Tel (212) 425382.
Fax (212) 436451.
Women organise to combat violence
Freedom from Violence — Women's Strategies from Around the World, is a new publication from the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
It tells the stories of women organising to combat gender violence in Sri Lanka, India, Pakistan, Malaysia, Thailand, Sudan, Zimbabwe, Mexico, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile and the USA.
From a cross-cultural perspective, Freedom from Violence, shares their sources of inspiration and common threads of agreement about what needs to be done to confront the violence in women's lives in all its aspects: physical, social, economic, cultural and legal.
The book includes facts and statistics on gender violence and gives a list of organisations and publications dealing with the subject in different countries.
UNIFEM is represented on the planning group for WACC's International Conference on Women, to be held in Thailand in February 1994 (see article on page 3).
Freedom from Violence — Women's Strategies from Around the World, edited by Margaret Schuler and published by UNIFEM, is available from Women, Ink, a new project jointly established by UNIFEM and the International Women's Tribune Centre to market and distribute development materials.
The address is Women, Ink, 777 United Nations Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA.
Tel (212) 6878633.
Fax (212) 6612704.
Fiji's Christians rise to video and television challenge
In most parts of the world, the churches are often accused of responding too slowly to the challenges imposed on society by the media.
In Fiji, however, Christians have been preparing themselves to play as full a part as possible in the media scene, especially in video training.
Fiji's Christian Family Video Society (CFVS) has offered alternatives to the existing fare of video imports for several years.
Last year in particular, it saw the introduction of TV into Fiji as an opportunity to redouble its efforts to ensure that the medium is a positive influence in the country, rather than a threat to culture and moral standards.
‘Television has already begun changing people's lives,’ said CFVS Director Fr Larry Hannan in an interview with Fiji's Daily Post.
‘As it expands into the rural areas, it will have an even greater impact on traditional values and patterns of life,’ he said, adding: ‘The late advent of TV into Fiji may be a blessing in disguise.
It allows a choice that other countries do not have.
Fiji can learn from the mistakes of so-called developed countries and set its own standards and policies.’
Fiji's government is in the process of defining those standards, and a recent call from the Attorney-General for better guidelines from the country's Film Control Board has met with widespread support from all sectors of the population.
The leading newspaper The Fiji Times echoed his call in its own editorial columns and has helped to bring the issue of the use and abuse of media to a wider public than ever before.
Within this context, the Christian Family Video Society has planned a programme of training and education to help people evaluate and use the media in a constructive way.
In September, WACC supported a series of seminars organised by the CFVS on film and video awareness.
‘The aim of the seminars was to help people in leadership, especially teachers, to become aware of the advantages and potential of TV and video, as well as the hazards and limitations,’ Fr Hannan said.
‘We discussed the power of the media and the way in which they condition people's ways of thinking, their idea of reality and their values.’
The Christian Family Video Society was formed in 1985 and WACC has supported its activities since 1989.
Its training programme is a natural offshoot of its main task, which is to supply family videos through its three rental shops.
The CFVS is an ecumenical venture, run by the Roman Catholic and Methodist churches, and the Salvation Army.
Christian Family Video Society of Fiji,
P O Box 12733, Suva, Fiji.
Tel (679) 303158.
People
Herbert José de Souza has been awarded Brazil's National Human Rights Prize.
Mr de Souza is the Director of IBASE, the  Brazilian Institute for Social and Economic Analysis, which is supported by WACC.
In his message of congratulations, WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, wrote: ‘We welcome this award as a recognition of your courage and commitment in the field of human rights, and we trust that it will inspire other groups and individuals who are engaged in the struggle for justice, both in Brazil and throughout Latin America.’
Sr Pierre-Elise Gafah is the first woman to head the Secretariat of CEPACS, the Communication Commission of the Catholic Bishops' Conferences of Africa and Madagascar.
As Executive Secretary she is responsible for the overall communication planning of the Roman Catholic Church in Africa.
Her office is in Accra, Ghana.
A native of Togo, Sr Pierre-Elise studied and practised journalism, was the founder of the Catholic bookshop in Lomé, and later became Director of the Audiovisual and Pastoral Centre of Togo.
WACC has had contacts with CEPACS for many years.
Romeo Celiz, 64, Director of the Philippine Lutheran Hour, was shot and killed by an unidentified gunman on 6 November.
He had been Director of the Lutheran Hour, which has long-standing contacts with WACC, since 1990.
He is survived by his wife Aldea and four children.
Carol Becker, Director of Communications with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA), has resigned, citing budget constraints and changes in the nature of the job.
She has been replaced by Eric Shafer, who will serve as Acting Director until a permanent Director is found.
Ms Becker has headed the Communication Department, which is a member of WACC, since the new church's beginning five years ago.