

News
That Mouse is a bore
Disneyland opened in Europe last month, in case you didn't notice.
What an dazzling occasion: the floats, the fireworks, the celebrities, but above all the marketing and PR.
What a model for the art world.
We wouldn't be surprised if David Mellor at the newly created British Ministry for the arts, tourism, heritage, media and sport (see this page) hasn't already booked his ticket.
Actually, some areas of the art world seem already to have got there.
In this issue you can read about Auvers-sur-l'Oise where many of the Impressionists lived and painted, which has decided to give its tourists the hyperreal experience of walking through ‘Dejeuner sur l'herbe’ and travelling in the padded compartments of a nineteenth-century train with Monet landscapes outside.
Memphis, Tennessee, has created the WONDERS [sic]exhibitions series.
This has already given the Southerners ‘Rameses the Great’, ‘Treasures of the Hermitage’, and ‘Splendors of the Ottoman Sultans’, and this month there opens an exhibition on the Etruscans from the Vatican museums.
The full might of American marketing know-how has been put behind these shows, with stickers, package tours, bill-boards, radio commercials all pulling in the masses: culture and profit, say the city fathers.
The curators of the grand US museums like the Metropolitan look down their noses at these shows, but the citizens of Memphis are pleased as can be, because before WONDERS they just felt out in the boondocks.
This way they at least get a chance to see good, moving, beautiful and interesting things, to lengthen their sense of history (notoriously short in the US).
Who are we to judge and belittle the nature of their experience merely because the profit-motive has made it possible.
Has lavish French State patronage got any closer to the nub of the matter, which is how to create the most civilised world possible for its citizens, in which their minds, spirits and creativity can develop to their greatest potential?
Many critics think not, including two distinguished commentators in these pages (see p. 12).
The answer must be that it is much less important by what mechanisms people come across art than what they themselves bring to the encounter.
If undemanding schooling methods, supplemented by hours in front of cretinous, discontinuous TV programmes, have given them a thirty-second attention span, poor linguistic skills, therefore poor conceptualising and critical powers, and a craving for instant entertainment, then it will not matter what cultural policy a government adopts.
In this respect, the French government is right to have made the Minister of Culture also Minister of Education (although whether they have done it for the right reasons, and with the right man is another matter).
Certainly, a director of a major British museum confided to this paper that he wished museums were linked to education rather than the new multibranched Ministry of National Heritage.
The question is whether David Mellor knows that mere fun gets boring very quickly; that excellence, whether in the media, sports or arts can be achieved only through difficulty, through painstaking work, through seriousness; that people cannot be conned for long.
They know the difference the real and the pretend: a real Matterhorn and Disney's magic mountain.
Our newspaper watches for such shifts of the perception in the world of art, right across the world.
French government policy
Lang's two hats
The new double post of Ministère de l'Education Nationale et de la Culture meets with some scepticism
PARIS.
‘Teaching is my profession’, said Jack Lang on French television the day after his appointment last month as Ministère de l'Education Nationale and confirmation as continuing Ministre of Culture.
The Socialist Minister has not missed an opportunity to remind those who regard him only as a tireless champion of culture that he is a qualified professor of international law.
He has always worked hard to present himself as a rounded political being and flung himself into debates on law and public safety, the environment and unemployment.
This has all been good training for his new post.
That he has been able to combine both ministries would be surprising were it not for the fact that he has worked as an active Socialist besides having a good track record in cultural affairs.
As is widely known, Jack Lang is a staunch supporter of President Mitterrand, an important factor in the current protective government formed by Pierre Bérégovoy around the head of State.
Lang's success at a ministerial level has not a little to do with the excellent relations he has with the President on both a personal and political plane.
Lang, in fact, has been able to raise culture to a position of preeminence within French politics.
The cultural budget, which stood at FFr3 billion in 1981, is now FFr13 billion (£1.3 billion; $2.3 billion) thirteen years later, precisely because he could count on the unconditional support of President Mitterrand, who is not only an acknowledged lover of both the arts and literature, but also requires an element of grandeur to be orchestrated and injected into large-scale projects (see p.12).
Grands projets apart, it is the philosophy of art for the people, both in large cities and in small communities, the encouragement of creativity, and the promotion of French culture worldwide that are the reason for the proliferation of museums and contemporary art centres and for the resurgence of the film and record industry.
The accusation of going in too many directions at once, of increasing bureaucracy in the Ministry and of mixing the essential with the marginal has been one frequently voiced against Jack Lang.
After an exuberant and spectacular mandate, returning to his previous post in 1988 after an absence of nearly two years, he concentrated his efforts on saving the national heritage, creating a body of trained curators for French museums, and encouraging patronage of the arts without abandoning his penchant for popular adulation (of which his orchestration of the celebrations for the bicentenary of the French Revolution is the prime example).
Lang has also played a part in the admission of rock and graffiti to the cultural fold and given a helping hand to the young unemployed with subsidies for their participation on archaeological digs.
It is precisely among the eighteen to twenty-five years old electorate, which urgently needs to be won over to the Socialist cause before next year's parliamentary elections, that Lang is the most popular Minister of the decade.
Reaction among professors and students to his recent elevation have been subdued.
Worried by the reforms made by his predecessor Lionel Jospin, those directly affected fear any tendency towards publicity seeking by a ‘Minister of Cultural Education’ who, it seems, has not yet succeeded in shaking off his image as a lightweight.
Circulation of works of art
Switzerland may start controlling its art market
Smuggling and money laundering through art cited as reasons
GENEVA.
Switzerland, which at present imposes no restrictions whatsoever on the free circulation of works of art, may soon lose its status as one of the world's most liberal countries in the field of art trade.
The Office Fédéral de la Culture, which is the nearest equivalent in Switzerland to a Ministry of Culture or an Arts Council, has just presented a report to the Swiss government, calling for new legislation controlling the import and export of works of art, and encouraging the authorities to sign the 1970 UNESCO convention.
One of the reasons put forward by the report as justifying strict new import controls is the increasing role allegedly played by Switzerland as a transit centre for objects of doubtful origin, as well as the fact that the art trade has reportedly become a choice vehicle for money laundering, a subject about which the Swiss are especially sensitive.
The report expressly cites the Swiss free port systems (the one in Geneva is particularly well known) as allowing controversial dealings, out of reach of any official control.
Another topic touched upon by the report is the unfortunate departure of the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection, formerly based in Lugano.
The report seems to concede that no export regulation could conceivably have prevented this collection from leaving the country, and also acknowledges that one of the main reasons why Baron von Thyssen, and other great collectors such as Heinz Berggruen, chose to bring their art collection to Switzerland in the first place was, and remains, the great freedom offered by the Swiss legal system.
The report nonetheless considers that some sort of control is necessary, and also favours the introduction of a legal pre-emption right on works of art regarded as being of national importance, and which risk leaving the country.
The report is fair in stating its case in favour of such regulations, without concealing the disadvantages which these new rules would undoubtedly bring about for the Swiss art market.
In any event, the report's recommendations are unlikely to be implemented in the near future, because the Federal Parliament is not constitutionally empowered to pass legislation in cultural matters; the legislative competence in this matter rests at present exclusively at cantonal level.
The measures suggested by the report would therefore require a constitutional change, which usually takes at least three to five years to carry through.
London
Britain creates a ‘Ministry of Fun’
David Mellor heads new Department of National Heritage with seat in Cabinet
LONDON.
The arts will have a higher profile in the fourth Conservative term, with David Mellor heading a much enlarged department (which for the first time is allocated a place in the Cabinet), flanked by one junior Minister, Robert Key.
The Conservative manifesto announced the surprising decision to create a Department of National Heritage, as proposed by the former Minister of the Arts, Tim Renton, before the election last month.
This department will have responsibilities for the Office of Arts & Libraries (OAL), in particular for the Arts Council and the national museums, adding to them the Home Office responsibilities for the broadcasting services' legislative framework and the BBC in particular.
The film industry and the export of works of art, so far primarily the joint responsibility of the OAL and the Department of Trade and Industry, have long been candidates for transfer to an enlarged arts department.
Although the built heritage is to be included, it is expected that planning and listing will remain with the Department of the Environment.
The new department could include in particular local authority funding for the arts and responsibility for English Heritage.
Key elements of the new department will be the introduction of a national lottery and of a Millennium Fund.
The Conservative's election manifesto promised that lottery funds will be additional to existing government spending and that the Millennium Fund resources will be used for a number of long term projects including restoring the fabric of great buildings.
Once Tim Renton let it be known that he was not seeking reappointment, David Mellor became a strong candidate, not only for his passionate interest in classical music and football.
As Minister of State at the Home Office (1989-90) he handled the deregulation of broadcasting legislation.
He became Minister for the Arts in July 1990 and although he was in this post only a few months, he made a distinct mark.
He pursued the reform of the Arts Council, in particular increasing the control of the centre over the newly created Regional Arts Boards.
He won a substantial increase in the arts settlement for 1991/92, giving the Arts Council a 11% rise and the national museums and galleries a 8.5% rise.
He introduced the Enhancement Fund worth £7.5 million ($13.05 million) over three years.
As Chief Secretary of the Treasury from November 1990 he is said to have been crucial in ensuring a record settlement for the Arts Council for 1992/93.
On the other hand the arts lobby which has wanted such a department for a long time, is now worried that Mellor, known for his dynamism, strong views and unceremonious manners, could take an interventionist and populist approach, particularly in relation to the Arts Council.
When proposing this fusion of functions, Tim Renton stressed that the prospective department was not modelled on the French Ministry of Culture; it will doubtless develop rather ad hoc at the outset and its role, number of staff and size of budget will depend crucially on the views of the new Minister.
The junior Minister, Robert Key, a teacher by profession and a member of the Chorus of St Martin-in-the-Fields, sat on the Select Committee on Education, Science and the Arts and the Conservative Back bench Committee on the Arts and Heritage.
Merion, Pa.
Barnes seeks to change statutes to allow tour of its paintings
Eighty paintings may go to Washington, Paris,
Tokyo and Philadelphia if the indenture banning loans is lifted
MERION, PA.
Preparations for the first tour ever conducted of works from the Barnes Foundation are advancing.
Barnes officials say they expect to send about eighty paintings from one of the world's finest collections of Post-Impressionist and early modern art to tour four museums: the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., a museum in Tokyo, the Musée d'Orsay in Paris, and the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
The tour set for twelve to eighteen months starting in summer 1993 and sales of a catalogue with colour reproductions of Barnes works, are expected to bring in funds for renovating the foundation's gallery building and bringing its operations up to modern standards.
Projections foresee $7 million of revenue from the tour.
This ambitious project faces a major legal obstacle.
According to an indenture to the will of Albert C. Barnes, the eccentric collector who established the foundation to conduct art appreciation classes based on his extraordinary assemblage of paintings, the foundation is specifically forbidden from loaning any works of art.
On 1 April, lawyers for the Barnes Foundation petitioned the Montgomery County Orphans Court for permission to amend the section to the indenture banning loans.
Barnes officials are seeking to change the language of the indenture to permit works to be loaned only when the foundation galleries are closed for purposes of renovation.
Renovations planned at the Barnes are scheduled to coincide exactly with the planned tour.
The Barnes petition also asks for the indenture to be amended to allow the Barnes to invest its endowment more flexibly, raise the gallery admission fee from $1, and hold fundraising events on the foundation premises.
Barnes officials say these changes would help shoulder rising costs of security, staff and conservation.
Curiously absent from the petition is any mention of amending the ban in Barnes' will on using any reproductions of works from the collection made after Barnes' death in 1951.
In early 1991, Barnes trustees cited those same urgent financial needs when they petitioned the Orphans Court for permission to amend the indenture's ban on selling works of art from the collection.
Barnes president, Richard Glanton, a Philadelphia lawyer, sought to raise money for building repairs by selling up to fifteen works from the collection, which holds masterpieces by Cézanne, Matisse, Renoir and Seurat.
He shelved that petition after the Barnes deaccessioning bid was condemned almost unanimously by museum officials, art historians and the press (see The Art Newspaper, No. 15, February 1992, p. 1).
Glanton's current plans for the Barnes depend entirely on a favourable judgment from the Orphans Court.
A tour would provide crucial marketing for a proposed Barnes catalogue, originally intended as a book on the Barnes treasures, to be published by Alfred A. Knopf of New York, an imprint of Random House.
The National Gallery has emerged as Glanton's strongest ally.
The entire Barnes collection has been examined by National Gallery conservators, and the National Gallery has agreed to arrange for the tour's transportation and insurance.
It has also offered to store works that will not be travelling, and to coordinate every stage of the Barnes exhibition, all without charge.
(The National Gallery will also consult on the publication of the catalogue, a task it will share with the French Réunion des Musées Nationaux, with whom the Barnes has also negotiated.)
When the current petition for amendment of the trust indenture was made public, Glanton also circulated a letter, dated 24 January 1992, from National Gallery director J. Carter Brown, detailing the gallery's willingness to assist the tour, and endorsing the Barnes trustees' ‘active course to assure the institution's future’.
Even with the credibility and power of the National Gallery's support, the Barnes Foundation faces additional legal challenges if it ever hopes to take part of its collection around the world.
The foundation is now being sued by the Violette De Mazia Trust, an organisation funded by the estate of Albert C. Barnes' former assistant, who headed the foundation's educational programme.
The De Mazia trust charges that the Barnes trustees were acting on behalf of Lincoln University when they awarded publishing rights to Alfred A. Knopf.
In his will, Barnes gave Lincoln, a small black institution in rural Pennsylvania, the power to name four out of five trustees to the foundation board.
The De Mazia trust alleges that the selection of Knopf, among a number of publishers seeking publishing rights to the Barnes collection, accompanied the award of $2 million to Lincoln from the Samuel I. Newhouse Foundation.
S.I.
Newhouse is the owner of Knopf's parent company.
That lawsuit is currently in the discovery stage.
Lincoln University, and the benefits it might gain from a Barnes tour, were also cited in J. Carter Brown's 24 January letter, now appended to the Orphans Court petition.
Pennsylvania law, however, prohibits any consideration of Lincoln University in decisions made by Barnes trustees.
Lincoln's role in determining the future of the Barnes is bound to be contested bitterly.
Students of the Barnes education classes are also opposing the tour in its current form.
Besides revealing that many of the collection's frames were damaged when National Gallery conservators removed paintings for examination, the students say that a plan to store works not included on the tour in either the National Gallery or the Philadelphia Museum of Art would bring the foundation's art classes to an end.
Barnes' will specified that the foundation be established as an educational institution, a mission that will be eliminated when the paintings go on tour, the students say.
The students add that much of the financial information provided to the court by the Barnes Foundation is either inaccurate or misleading.
One student, Nick Tinari, has been banned from the Barnes grounds for a year for trying to document violations of Barnes' will.
His grievances will be heard by the Orphans Court on 1 May.
As the scheduled tour dates approach, legal fees are mounting for all sides of the Barnes dispute.
No one expects the petition to amend the indenture to Barnes' will to get a court hearing before June.
So far, that legal impasse has kept the proposed sites in Japan and France from officially signing on to the exhibition tour.
Venice
Solution to Venetian churches crisis in sight
The churches should remain open for two hours each day
VENICE.
Last month we reported that Venice's churches might have to be closed except during services because of a shortage of funds to pay for custodians.
Venice's parish priests were called together on 2 April by Don Aldo Marangoni, head of the city's Ufficio Chiese (Churches' Department) to discuss their action in protest at the city administration's failure to provide adequate financial support.
Since then developments suggest that the affair may well be resolved amicably.
At the meeting it was decided to carry out a detailed analysis of the needs of each church 128 in all, of which fifty or so are of prime artistic interest and to calculate precisely the costs involved.
It would, in any case, have been difficult to obtain unanimous support for the complete closure that Don Aldo Marangoni was advocating.
It now seems that a solution to the problem may be found in Law 145 of 10 February 1992, which allocates funding worth L65 billion (£30.1 million; $52.2 million) to be spent over the period 1991-93 on experimental projects to improve the use of museum resources.
The Venice Soprintendenza certainly does not intend to miss out on such an opportunity and has already come up with a proposal, ‘Dal Museo alla città’(From Museum to City), which it estimates would cost L3.8 billion (£1.76 million; $3 million).
The plan centres on the Galleria dell'Accademia, but also includes the city's eleven most interesting churches, namely the Frari, with its Titian masterpieces, and the church and adjoining Scuola of San Rocco, which houses the most important cycle of paintings by Tintoretto.
If this goes ahead, visitors to the Accademia will be able to consult a computer to find out which churches contain further works by the artists featured in the museum itself.
The first stage of the project would, however, be to install security systems and adequate lighting in churches which still lack such equipment.
Finally, there are plans to provide custodians a sore point to enable the churches to open for two hours a day.
A reply from the Ministry is expected within days, and all the signs are that it will be positive.
The clergy will view a positive outcome as a signal of good will, encouraging them to keep their buildings open.
The church authorities would then draw up documentation and illustrative material on the works of art concerned, with emphasis given to their religious significance.
The churches and the Assessorato alla Cultura (cultural affairs department) last collaborated in 1988, at the time of the Veronese and Palma Giovane exhibitions when they then worked together to produce two small but well-researched publications on works by the two painters housed in the various churches, with suggested itineraries for visits.
The initiative was not continued, but it now looks as if a new partner has been found in the shape of the Venice Soprintendenza.
Further decisions are evidently being postponed until an answer has been received from Rome.
Lyon police track down Pont-Aven faker
PARIS.
Police in Lyon have broken a large scale forgery ring which produced oil paintings and drawings attributed to modern masters including Utrillo, Chagall, Dérain and Dufy valued at ‘several million francs’ according to an early official statement.
Jean-Luc Baland, age thirty-three, from Blois in the Loir-et-Cher, was arrested on 31 March at Paris's Orly airport and charged on 3 April with ‘forgery and use of fakes, fake certificates and handling fakes’.
Police are now eager to interview Baland's uncle, a sixty-five year old French national and painter living in the U.S. Police enquiries began in March 1989 with the seizure of a Utrillo painting ‘Impasse Traînée à Montmartre’ and a drawing by the same artist ‘La maison de Mimi Pinson’at Bourg-en-Bresse following charges brought against a local auctioneer, by Jean Fabris, chairman of the Association Maurice Utrillo and the man who possesses the ‘droit moral’over Utrillo's work the right in French law to defend an artist's reputation, particularly in the courtroom.
Investigators went on to discover a drawing also entitled ‘La maison de Mimi Pinson’ at an auctioneer's in Limoges in central France.
Three more drawings were then seized at an art dealer's in Lyon in December 1989.
All proved to be fakes, as did their certificates of authenticity which purported to be those of Paris art expert, Paul Petridès.
His gallery on the faubourg Saint Honoré is now run by Gilbert Petridès, the son of Paul, who continues to sell and authenticate Utrillo works in collaboration with Fabris.
Police who searched the house of Baland in Blois after his arrest are reported to have found a wide range of forgeries including four Chagall drawings, four works by Dérain, ten by Dufy, two by Jean Cocteau, a Camille Pissarro and eighteen drawings described as being by ‘Maîtres de l'école de Pont-Aven’.
They also came across Matisse sketches and two fake stamps imitating those of well known art experts.
Moscow
Who get's what in the post-Soviet fall-out
New law may remove all of central museum funding.
The Chairman of the Russian International Culture Fund threatens to emigrate
MOSCOW.
On 19 February, the Russian Supreme Soviet suspended the Agreement on Returning Cultural and Historical Treasures to Their States of Origin.
The agreement, which was drawn up in fairly obscure terms, proposed that the now-sovereign states of the former USSR should return to each other works of art on the basis of whose territory they were created on, the nationality of the artist, or just on the principle of ‘I want it, it's mine’.
Alongside a parliamentary enquiry, journalists and specialists are conducting their own: it turns out that the issue of claims and the possible division of the cultural heritage of the CIS member states was first raised in December 1991.
At a meeting of CIS Ministers of Culture in Minsk on 27 December 1991, possible claims between the former republics were laid out.
Apart from Ukraine, everyone pointed out that such claims are inopportune and dangerous.
Nonetheless, on 14 February, at the Minsk meeting of CIS heads of government, the presidents signed the now infamous Agreement on the Partition of Culture.
Art specialists all agree that it is effectively impossible to put an idea like this into practice.
However, a group of assessors under the President of Ukraine and President Kravchuk himself are obviously of a different opinion; they are credited with the authorship of the agreement.
According to Ravik Smirnov, Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Cultural Commission, the Georgians have already requested the return of knives and weapons from the Kremlin Armoury; Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan have asked for the return of carpets, the Armenians lay claim to the seascape painter Ayvazovskiy, while the Ukrainians want the Cossack Blades.
Ukraine has also laid claim to the late thirteenth-early fourteenth-century Monomakh Crown, considered to be the oldest Tsarist crown.
Although even specialists cannot agree on when, where and for whom this unique object was made, Ukraine has decided the issue in favour of Vladimir Monomakh, who was a citizen of Kiev, the Ukrainian Capital.
According to Nikolay Gubyenko, former USSR Minister of Culture, claims have already been lodged or could be lodged for 3,017,128 works of art.
On the subject of the Agreement and the ideas of its authors are concerned, Gubyenko uses language not usually printed in the press.
The proposal has evoked both indignation and humour with suggestions as to how art treasures can be divided by their national characteristics.
For example, in order for Ukraine to get hold of Scythian gold, the republic not only has to declare its citizens the direct descendents of the Scythians, but also to prove that the remarkable Scythian objects at present held in the Hermitage were made by natives and not by itinerant ancient Greek craftsmen.
Many have also expressed anticipatory sympathy for the Mayor of St Petersburg, Anatoliy Sobchak, who will have to send the symbol of the city, the monument to Peter I, ‘The Bronze Horseman’, to Paris, home of the sculptor Falconet, while he sends the granite base to Finland.
However, an event which followed this has caused genuine horror among museum staff and the public at large.
The cause of their horror is a law being prepared behind the scenes by a parliamentary group, entitled ‘Law on the Activities of Museums and Museum Organisations on the Territory of the Russian Federation’.
A conference attended by representatives from many of Russia's museums assessed the law as yet another example of the amateurism and dilettantism in cultural policy, typical of the new Russian authorities.
The measures proposed would disrupt the entire state museum system, and would threaten museum collections.
The most dangerous clause in the draft is on self-provision for museums, under which any museum can be closed by the authorities if it cannot finance itself.
The law envisages practically no central financing for state museums.
If they do not find resources, museums will have to disband, sell or hand over collections.
It is not hard to imagine what could happen to collections like those at the Tretyakov Gallery or the Pushkin Museum of Fine Art, which have been faced with unbelievable problems reconstructing their buildings.
At the end of the conference the participants decided to make a collective appeal to Boris Yeltsin which warns of the extreme seriousness of the situation and of the danger that government funding for Russia's museums could die out.
It transpires that this particular law was discussed with the heads of the Moscow University Zoological Museum and two provincial museums without the Russian Ministry of Culture knowing anything of it.
Academician Dmitriy Likhachev, the highly-respected Chairman of the Russian International Culture Fund said: ‘If such a policy towards culture continues, I will have to apply for citizenship in a foreign country, because it is not worth living in a country whose government has an attitude to culture like ours.
I will make my views known to the world community and to UNESCO’.
Scotland
Japanese consortium plans to ship Minto House, stone by stone, to Japan
HAWICK, SCOTLAND.
Minto House is being sold to a Japanese consortium whose intention is to dismantle it and ship it to Japan.
Concern is being expressed in British architectural conservation circles that this may open the floodgates for the network of ‘seek and find’ agents for Japanese buyers to divest Scotland and Wales in particular of many important monuments.
The Japanese demand, said one agent, is ‘insatiable’, particularly when the price of such buildings is miniscule in comparison with first rank Old Masters and the final visual effect more immediate.
This case is not without its tragi-comic precedent.
The substantial remains of Milton Lockhart, an elegant William Burn house of the 1840s in Lanarkshire were bought by another Japanese consortium and transported to Japan's Hokkaido Island be rebuilt as ‘Santa's Castle’ in ‘Santaland, an absolutely unique[sic] theme park, much better than Disneyland’.
Its stones remain in their crates.
One of Scotland's more interesting ruins, Minto stands for the moment in unspoilt Scottish Borders scenery, which could never be ‘replicated’ in Japan.
The work of William Adam and W.H.Playfair, it boasted an impressive circular staircase and outstanding plasterwork.
Lord Minto commented to The Art Newspaper, ‘Infinite years were spent trying to find potential ways of preserving Minto house, but there was next to no interest whatever.
The prospect of this building being used as an example of the Western style of life in the East is very welcome, in addition to prolonging its life.’
Douglas Connell of the Edinburgh solicitors Dundas and Wilson acting for Lord Minto, comments: ‘The name of the Japanese consortium involved with Minto cannot be disclosed, at their request.
We have been involved in the negotiations leading to Minto House's rebuilding as the focal point of a major leisure development in Japan.
Their intention is to recreate the ambience of the house in its Edwardian heyday.
London
The art world loses James Byam Shaw
LONDON.
James Byam Shaw CBE, the distinguished and much loved art historian and connoisseur of drawings, died 18 March.
Born in 1903, the son of a painter and brother of an actor, he was one of the first staff of the Courtauld Institute when it was founded in 1933.
Shortly afterwards, however, he joined the dealers Colnaghi, where he remained until his retirement in 1968.
The text published here was written by Ralph Edwards, the famous acting Keeper of Furniture and Woodwork at the Victoria and Albert Museum, in the volume of James Byam Shaw's articles, many on Italian eighteenth-century drawings, published by Colnaghi on that occasion.
Mr Byam Shaw also catalogued the paintings (1967) and drawings (1976) collection of his old college, Christ Church, and the Italian drawings of the Lugt Collection in Paris.
Gratitude for the invitation to pay a brief tribute to Jim Byam Shaw on his retirement from active participation in the affairs of his famous firm must be tempered for an old friend by reflection on the difficulties that any such tribute involves.
There is the danger that it will verge on unmixed eulogy, a veritable paean of praise, owing to an embarrassing lack of material for even the mildest fault-finding that might serve to give it an edge.
To inject a little infusion of vinegar, and at the same time stick to the truth, must seem to those who know Jim intimately to be an almost impossible feat.
One could wish that to celebrate this moving occasion (for it is at least a partial farewell) a master of verbal portraiture were at hand; though so elusive is personality, so unlike the impression that the same person may make on different observers, we might well have no great faith in the verisimilitude of the sketch, if produced.
Done in the Jamesian manner, Jim would doubtless find himself credited with psychological subtleties and complexities of which he is quite unaware; but still one might hope that the writer would succeed in suggesting the highly distinctive flavour of his talk, his inimitable way of retailing a diverting anecdote leisurely and with a modicum of circumlocution, from which in due time the point of the story is sure to emerge.
It has often been sharpened a bit on the way.
And such a master would certainly take note of the manners and appearance that help in some degree to reveal the character.
He would dwell on the unfailing courtesy and forbearance under provocation (which I myself have had cause to admire); nor would he ignore, as being unworthy of mention, that equally unfailing sartorial elegance (stamped indelibly on the memory if one never saw him again) which makes J.B.S., as it were, a living reproach to the slovenly habits of our inelegant age.
As for his qualities and accomplishments, they cannot be altogether passed over in what is intended to be, however inadequate, a whole-hearted tribute of affection, admiration and regard.
None will dispute that he is in the forefront of English connoisseurs and art historians.
A scholar who wears his wide learning lightly, he is gifted with catholic, fastidious taste and a devotion to art that ‘burns with a pure flame’.
And not least among his endowments is the command of a prose style which makes what he writes a pleasure to read.
The full extent of his generosity to museums and galleries (leaving that to individuals out of account) is known only to those who have, or had, charge of them.
Modest, charitable in his judgments, never censorious, Jim may be thought to carry tolerance almost too far (it is time he was convicted of some venial fault).
On his courage and sense of public duty there is no need to enlarge.
Though approaching early middle age, on the outbreak of the last world war he at once abandoned his pursuits for active service and very hard service it was to be.
I have now made the mistake I had resolved, if it were possible, to avoid, and heaped more praises upon him than he will patiently bear.
A panegyric does not really go far to explain why his semi-retirement will be widely deplored.
But we may be confident he will not lapse into indolence nor renounce the activities in which he excels.
The most recent outstanding event in Jim's distinguished career was the publication of his definitive catalogue of the collections of Christ Church, Oxford, on which he had been engaged for several years, coinciding with the opening of the new galleries to contain them.
His friends will hope that as an Honorary Fellow he may long maintain his close association with that great foundation; that with greater leisure he will increase his production and that his visits to Colnaghi's will not be rare.
It is hard to imagine the place without him.
The Hague
Japan gets a taste of old Holland for $1,657 million
THE HAGUE.
On 16 March Prince Constantijn of the Netherlands and Prince Mikasa of Japan formally opened the Dutch Royal Palace of Huis ten Bosch in Nagasaki, Japan (see p. 1).
Or rather, they opened an exact replica of the Royal home, whose original is still securely on its site just outside The Hague in the Netherlands.
Nagasaki Holland Village Huis ten Bosch is a project which deserves a neologism all of its own.
With investment standing currently at Y220,000 million (£952.4 million; $1,657 million), Japan is obviously taking Dutch culture seriously.
Seriously enough that is, to attempt a genetic transplant of a high concentration of Dutchness in the form of a complete theme-city, with canals, windmills, gabled houses and monuments such as the 112 metre high late Gothic Dom-tower of Utrecht, all of them exactly reproduced with an astonishing attention to detail and accuracy.
It is, in the words of its financial adviser Sohei Nakayama of the Industrial Bank of Japan, the project's main financiers, ‘the first time that a corporation has decided to found and manage a whole city’.
Situated on the coastline of Omura Bay near the City of Nagasaki, the town of Huis ten Bosch covers an area of 1.5 million square metres and has risen from the ground in less than eight years.
The planners, a fifteen-member committee combining Japanese and Dutch know-how, selected a site on which they specifically avoided the arbitrary jumbling together of a few replicas.
Instead they have imaginatively reconstructed the imaginary town's historical development over eight centuries: from the time that the first stone buildings would have been erected, through the period of canal-building and land-reclamation in the seventeenth century, to the twentieth century with its emphasis on the development of ‘a comfortable urbanity’, exemplified by turn-of-the-century villas.
The undertaking was the dream of Yoshikuni Kamichika, its president, who, on a visit to Holland had been impressed at the way the Dutch had managed to retain an ecological balance despite their economic growth.
According to Kamichika, Japan has eyes only for its technology while it continues to ignore the increasingly urgent problems posed by unbridled economic growth, such as pollution and cultural estrangement.
Huis ten Bosch is an attempt to combine leisure with a wish to teach a greater respect for the relationship between nature and culture.
Among the other museums on site, several rely on technology for a 3D animation theatre or a trip through the universe.
One museum houses the illusionistic prints by the Dutch artist Escher, while another concentrates on the cultural exchanges during three centuries between the Dutch and the Japanese.
Incongruities include not only hills surrounding the village and the pristine buildings.
The corporation in charge of the project, Huis ten Bosch Co.
Ltd., have imported twenty-four Friesian horses to cart the endless stream of tourists from one place to another.
Each team is accompanied by an assistant whose only function is to quickly scoop up any droppings.
The replica of the Royal Palace is magnificent.
Set in beautifully reconstructed formal gardens in accordance with the date of the original built in 1645, it houses a museum in which the Netherlands Office for Fine Arts has been contracted to stage several temporary exhibitions of Dutch art.
Bring back the armoured car to St Petersburg
Since 1937 the Marble Palace, a masterpiece of early Russian classical architecture designed by Antonio Rinaldi between 1768 and 1785, has been occupied by the Lenin Memorial Museum, although it has never had any links with Lenin.
The unique marble hall, which gave its name to the palace, was screened with boards that served as exhibition stands for the photographs, diagrams and models.
The inner courtyard of the Palace was adorned by an armoured car, ‘The enemy of Capitalism’, on a pedestal; it was from this armoured car that Lenin addressed the people of Petrograd on his return from emigration in 1917.
Early this March, this armoured car was quietly transported to the Artillery Museum, and the exhibition stands were dismantled.
Has justice triumphed? not quite.
Some curators of the Russian Museum are not rejoicing over this ‘victory’.
It seems that it was a hasty decision to take away the armoured car, which had become inseparable from the city's history.
Moreover, some young post-modernist artists had intended to use it in their performances.
The disappearance of this monument of totalitarian art is disturbing.
The monuments in Moscow to the revolutionary leaders which were taken down after the attempted coup last August have not been placed in the Museum of Totalitarian Art, as was stated.
Today one can still see these severely damaged sculptures scattered unprotected around the new Tretyakov Gallery building.
Thankfully in St Petersburg the monuments have survived in situ only the armoured car is missing.
But if artists and art critics go on nursing their grudge against everything Soviet and do not combine their efforts in order to organise a museum of Soviet culture, which would highlight the Soviet variant of Socialism, this artistic phenomenon will inevitably disappear like the notorious armoured car.
Arm's length or arm's twist
In her article on British arts funding (The Art Newspaper No. 17, March 1992, pp.1 2) Giulia Ajmone Marsan drew attention to a threat from a Tory Minister for Arts to the Arts Council's freedom from political control.
I wonder if any of your readers noticed in The Times of 10 March how Lord Armstrong of Ilminster of the Victoria and Albert Museum's Trustees, quite casually assumed that the independence of our national museums had already been similarly compromised?
Lord Armstrong wrote in his letter: ‘We do not apply the arm's length principle to the national museums and galleries, and we are not on the whole much troubled with allegations of political interference in curatorial or Museological policies…’.
Was the V. & A.'s Chairman trying to tell us something about the government's degree of responsibility for the staff restructuring plans announced by the V. & A.'s Director and rashly endorsed by himself in 1989?
So many allegations of political interference did those restructuring plans prompt that the then Arts Minister, Richard Luce, felt it necessary to reassure the Commons (27 February, 1989) that although he supported the aims of the proposed restructuring, he believed responsibility for management of National Museums should be delegated to chairmen and directors.
To delegate power and to grant independence are two very different things.
By now denying that the arm's-length principle applies to national museums Lord Armstrong makes me wonder how he interpreted his new role when he moved from being Mrs Thatcher's Cabinet Secretary to being her choice as Chairman of the V & A. If he saw himself as dutifully executing government policy over the V & A's restructuring it is understandable that he did not subsequently feel constrained to resign, nor to dismiss his director, when it had become clear to the museum's staff that the essence of the restructuring separation of research from ‘object-management’ had been abandoned as unworkable.
I am not stating that Lord Armstrong was obeying government instructions over this much ridiculed staff restructuring: I am asking if he was.
He owes his staff, fellow trustees, and the public an unambiguous answer as to whether he or the government was responsible for that disastrously mistaken museological policy.
Meet the Impressionists at Auvers-sur-Oise
PARIS.
As part of its expanding programme of cultural tourism, the Val d'Oise region has decided to exploit a theme with immense popular appeal: Impressionism.
In the last forty years of the nineteenth century three generations of artists chose to live and work in the area, including Daumier, Daubigny, Corot, Renoir, Cézanne, Berthe Morisot and Pissarro, not to mention Van Gogh, who died at Auvers-sur-Oise in 1890.
Thirty kilometres from Paris, it is this village of 6,000 inhabitants which is to be the scene of an ambitious project in illusionism which seeks to recreate the world of the Impressionists.
Starting in the summer of 1993, it is estimated that it will cost the local authorities some FFr130 million (£13,402,061; $24,123,709).
The focal point is the château of Auvers-sur-Oise, built in the Italianate manner in 1635 for Zannoby Liony, banker to Maria de' Medici and her court, and later transformed into a French-style residence.
The château, together with its gardens, terraces and belvedere, recently restored by the State on the basis of eighteenth-century documents, will provide the setting for the first part of the itinerary, while a new basement building is to accommodate the second stage.
Beguiled by state-of-the-art techniques (of the kind deployed for ‘Cités-Cinés’, which captured the public imagination five years ago), architects and stage designers, experts from the worlds of cinema and advertising, as well as art historians, will create a series of typical settings, which were or could have been subjects for Impressionist paintings.
Visitors will find themselves in a ‘salon de peinture’ and overhear the opinions of detractors and supporters of the Impressionist movement; they will be ushered into a middle-class apartment; will walk the streets of Paris with their long-gone artisan workshops; peep into the fitting-room of a milliner; and cross the Pont de l'Europe, near the Gare Saint-Lazare, where they will recognise the quality of light captured by Monet in his paintings, filtering through the smoke of the locomotives.
Information is conveyed in an entertaining fashion, with brush strokes projected one after the other onto easels dotted about the technological countryside, as a way of illustrating the impressionist technique.
New York
Artists go to the movies
The life and death of Andy Warhol will soon be a minor motion picture…but can we take more than fifteen minutes of it?
NEW YORK.
Four years ago an enterprising film producer arrived in Hollywood, having just acquired the film rights to a book on the life of Andy Warhol.
The story seemed to have everything to meet the commercial demands of Hollywood.
There was a rags to riches tale about the son of immigrants who went to parties with the rich and famous, a recognisable name, and even a dead body.
But in his first meeting with a studio executive, the young would-be producer met with incredulity.
‘Who wants to watch a movie about a queer who painted a soupcan?’ the executive demanded.
Andy Warhol not commercial enough?
Today, however, things may be changing not only is the Warhol story going to be made into a film and shown on television, but half a dozen projects about modern or contemporary artists are now either being made or planned.
Arne Glimcher, owner of the important Pace Gallery, has just made his directorial debut with ‘The Mambo Kings’, an $18 million adaptation of the novel by the Cuban-American Oscar Hijuelos an extravaganza set in a 1950s New York of Latin supper clubs and parties.
Julian Schnabel, whose work shows in Glimcher's gallery, has written a screenplay based on the life of the late graffiti artist and Warhol protégé, Jean-Michel Basquiat.
Robert Longo, with several music videos under his belt, is looking for feature films to direct.
Another would-be director is the painter David Salle.
Why the migration from SoHo to Southern California?
Cynics will automatically suggest that with the market at a low point, the art celebrities of the 1980s will naturally gravitate to the obvious locus of celebrity: Tinseltown.
Artists and art businessmen bored with the ease of success in the previous decade might be coming West in search of a greater ‘challenge’, filmmaking.
Also, cash-bloated film and television tycoons formed one important group of new collectors of contemporary art in the Eighties, and since the entertainment business is often the last industry to feel the pinch of a national economic recession, artists may also be retreating to the comfort of their remaining sure sources of income.
Needless to say, Hollywood doesn't give away presents without asking for something in return.
If an artist or dealer gets a ‘development deal’ to prepare projects, the studio executive/collector paying his bills is likely to have special access to the artist's future works.
A Vogue writer recently called Glimcher the ‘personal shopper’ for the agent Michael Ovitz, a collector and head of CAA (Creative Artists Associates).
Besides, in a place of militant social-climbing, it doesn't hurt to be seen poolside with recognisable New York artists.
Still, getting ahead in the movie business may turn out to be harder than selling works by the hundreds in the boom market of the late 1980s.
Writing and directing films are skills acquired over time, time invested by few of these artists and dealers.
Also, their efforts are invariably seen as vanity projects.
That seems to be the general consensus on Arne Glimcher's ‘Mambo Kings’, a film with all the pretention and incompetence of a self-confident novice.
One critic simply warned Glimcher: ‘Don't close the gallery yet’.
Glimcher's power however ensures a preemptive silence from detractors within the art world.
‘Even if they think it's a piece of trash’, said one dealer who begged not to be identified, ‘they'll all be too afraid to say it’.
The movie business has turned a bit more reticent about the art world since Glimcher's folly.
‘The money people will have learned their lesson after the Arne Glimcher flop’, said a journalist now working on a script about another art world story.
‘Glimcher killed the market for art people to direct’.
One artist who seems not to believe that is Julian Schnabel, screenwriter of the Basquiat-inspired scenario entitled ‘Build a fort, set it on fire’.
Schnabel originally intended to collaborate on the film with the Polish director Lech Majewski, who is said to have interviewed around one hundred Basquiat acquaintances and written the screenplay's first draft.
Now, after at least two more rewrites and little interest from European or American sponsors, a new incarnation of the script is promised, this time with Schnabel proposed as the screenwriter and director.
‘Another ego trip’, comments a Hollywood insider.
‘He should just go back and learn to draw’.
Still, there may be more working against that film than Schnabel's will to direct it.
The story, which producer Keith Addis describes as ‘impressionist and authentic’, is opposed by Basquiat's father, who administers Basquiat's estate.
Basquiat père was shocked at the depiction of his son's drug addiction in press accounts of the artist's death, and the elder Basquiat's lawyer says the estate may sue to stop the film, invoking laws in at least thirteen American states that enable an estate to stop the showing of a film because of objections to the exploitation of a physical likeness on the screen.
Gerard Basquiat has successfully kept a Channel 4 documentary about his son from showing on American television, although the producer of the film ‘Shooting Stars’ removed entire sections that had offended the father.
As the Basquiat project founders, others advance, notably ‘Warhol’, which its producer says will be financed by the huge cable firm Home Box Office.
Stars under consideration for the lead include John Malkovich and Willem Dafoe.
At least two lives of Jackson Pollock are also in the works, as is another script about the collector Joseph Duveen.
The journalist Robert Katz had been trying to interest producers in a film adaptation of his extensive account last year in Esquire magazine of the battle between Willem de Kooning and his daughter.
Katz lost interest when producers insisted that David Salle be the film's director.
The journalist is currently writing a screen adaptation of his recent book Naked by the Window, an exclusive account of the death of Ana Mendieta (the wife of sculptor Carl André), who fell from a New York balcony.
André, accused of pushing her, was acquitted on murder charges in a controversial trial.
Tales of art martyrdom with the deaths of Warhol, Basquiat and Mendieta following a roadmap sketched by van Gogh seem to have elicited the greatest interest in Hollywood.
After all, the most successful movie about an artist was ‘Lust for Life’.
These also seem to be the stories enticing actors Madonna, for example, is said to be preparing a screen version of the life of another anguished martyr: the tormented Mexican painter Frida Kahlo.
‘All the Vermeers in New York’ by Jon Jost, a film-maker whose sensibility couldn't be farther away from Hollywood, examines the folly of seeking to transfer one's attraction to a work of art toward a real person.
A stockbroker looking at Vermeer's ‘Portrait of a Young Woman at the Met’ suddenly finds himself alongside another woman whose face resembles the painting.
Life, predictably, never measures up to art.
The film includes one sequence where, à la Peter Greenaway, Jost composes a shot intended to reproduce a painting, in this case the multiple white hues of ‘Young Woman with a Water Jug’.
A sub-plot in ‘All the Vermeers’ offers the anguish of a drug-addicted artist, pressed for cash just when the market is turning downward.
His dealer, played by the art dealer Gracie Mansion (who has since closed her gallery), offers a memorable observation: ‘I'm used to shows that sell out before the wine's open’.
There are encouraging signs, however.
One is a new documentary, by the independent filmmaker Bette Jane Cohen, about the Los Angeles architect John Lautner, a former assistant to Frank Lloyd Wright.
Lautner is best known for his pioneering of biomorphic styles, either in roadside, fast-food structures or on hillsides in the western United States.
‘The spirit in architecture: John Lautner’ could have simply been a generic portrait of a cantankerous idealist in the Wright mould.
Instead, Cohen's examination of Lautner's career balances interviews and archival Wright footage with a close, deliberate scrutiny of space, materials and a stunning landscape on the outskirts of Los Angeles, where Lautner built some of his most ambitious projects.
Cohen sets a standard toward which any film about architecture should aspire.
The Lautner portrait is the first in a series.
Another series has just been released on videocassette the Films of Charles and Ray Eames.
The design team made more than eighty-five films, each in some way conceived as an extension of the design process.
Subjects range from toy trains, to the construction of a chair, to the abstract beauty of water washing down an asphalt schoolyard.
The Films of Charles and Ray Eames now available from Pyramid Film and Video in Santa Monica, California are sure to move beyond the small audience which already recognised them as masterpieces.
Paris
The President wishes it
Mitterrand approves his Bibliothèque and plans for a national art library
PARIS.
Despite the damning report submitted in January by specialists from the Conseil Supérieur des Bibliothèques concerning the future Bibliothèque de France the project now seems set to go ahead.
After studying the report, which reiterated the multitude of reservations expressed over the last few months and went on to accuse architect Dominique Perrault of having sacrificed functionalism for the sake of aesthetics, President Mitterrand accepted Perrault's design, making only the most cosmetic of changes to appease the powerful lobby against the building.
Mitterrand ordered that the height of the four notorious L-shaped towers be reduced by 23 feet to 259 feet (losing two floors) and that more of the most valuable books be stored underground.
The last recommendation was seized upon by critics who calculate that storing the most frequently-used books high up in the four towers will create a considerable time delay in transporting them down to the reading areas.
While the saga of Très Grande Bibliothèque runs on, plans for a national art library linked to the transfer of the Bibliothèque National's volumes to the controversial new Tolbiac site are beginning to take shape.
Emmanuel Leroy Ladurie, administrator of the Bibliothèque Nationale, has been appointed chairman of an association set up to consider the administrative problems and to determine the aims and contents of the long awaited library, and who the users will be.
The other members are Professor Michel Meslin, president of the Université de Paris IV, who manages the Doucet fund, an essential part of the new institution; the Rector of Paris's universities; and representatives of the Musées Nationaux, the Délégation des Arts Plastiques and the Direction des Bibliothèques Universitaires.
The Doucet collection has been the nucleus of the library of the Institut d'art et d'archaeologie.
Doucet, a tailor, patron and collector, who bought Picasso's ‘Demoiselles d'Avignon’ in 1921, presented his library to the State in 1917.
Built up between 1908 and 1914 it contains monographs, exhibition and sales catalogues and original Japanese woodcuts.
The move to the new site will make the Doucet collection more accessible.
Alongside this initiative, an international committee will preside over the fate of the whole Bibliothèque Nationale des Arts (of which the Doucet collection will form one part).
This will bring together collections from a variety of sources although specialist departments of the Bibliothèque Nationale such as prints and photographs, manuscripts, coins and medals, maps and music, will remain in rue de Richelieu.
They will be joined by the former collection of books on architecture from the libraries of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and the Musées de France at present in the Louvre.
The Bibliothèque's spokesman is the linguist Pierre Encrevé, supported by Françoise Cachin, director of the Musée d'Orsay, Pierre Rosenberg, General Curator of the Département des Peintures at the Louvre, and many other leading figures from the academic world including Yves Alain Bois of the University of Harvard, Professor Pressouyre of the Université de Paris I, Professor Francis Haskell from Oxford, Professor Castelnuovo of Pisa, Hubert Damish, William Rubin and Jean Starobinskia.
Cultural property
Italy's Domesday book of her art and heritage
The numbers speak for themselves: 1.5 million entries, 2.65 million photos so far
ROME.
The prospect of1993 and the abolition of customs controls between EC countries has spurred the Italian State to set itself the awe-inspiring task of cataloguing a further two million items of its national heritage within two years in execution of its duty to ‘care for Italy's landscape, history and cultural heritage’(to quote the Constitution).
This involves identifying and describing all buildings of architectural merit and all objects of artistic, historic, literary and documentary value.
The project comes under the Ministero per i Beni Culturali e Ambientali (Ministry of Culture), founded in 1975.
Prior to this it was carried out by the Directorship-general of Fine Arts, Academies and Libraries, part of the Ministry of Education.
The work of cataloguing goes back to the early years of Italian unification in the late nineteenth century when the first photographs were taken of archaeological sites and of celebrated pictures and monuments.
The real beginnings, however, were made in 1969 when a central cataloguing institute was set up in Rome, which became the present Istituto centrale per il catalogo e la documentazione (ICCD) when the Minstero per i Beni Culturali was founded.
The ICCD, led by Professor Oreste Ferrari, greatly enhanced the depth and seriousness of cataloguing, which now functions both as a scholarly enterprise and as a means of protecting the country's heritage in case of damage (by war, vandalism, earthquake and other natural disasters); decay (by neglect or pollution); and loss (by theft or illegal export).
It is obvious how much better equipped the relevant authorities will be to prevent illegal exports or to retrieve a work of art thought to have been illegally exported when armed with a full description and photographs which enable title to be firmly established.
All sectors of ownership are being taken into account: the State; local authorities; the church (excluding the Vatican but including objects held in the churches and convents of the different religious orders); and private individuals (obviously only if the owners have let the State know what they possess).
So far much hampered by lack of money and staff about 1.5 million catalogue entries have been completed and 2,665,000 photographs produced.
Added to this are a couple of million pre-cataloguing or inventorial forms.
The work of cataloguing has been undertaken in the main by the various Soprintendenze (regional administrations of the patrimony), of which there are seventy-one, but also by other institutions using young qualified staff.
In 1985 there were 791 cataloguers, two administrators and 169 photographers; in order to carry out the current drive the number of employees has been set at 4,463.
This new effort (largely pre-cataloguing), which aims to produce about two million entries in two years, will be carried out by Soprintendenze staff and members of universities and specialist institutions which have entered into agreements with the Ministry and which will directly recruit their own staff.
We asked Maria Luisa Polichetti, Director of the Institute responsible for cataloguing Italy's cultural patrimony, to explain the background to the vast project
In your opinion, is there any point in carrying out a census to find out how many paintings, sculptures, and historic buildings there are in Italy?
Maria Luisa Polichetti.
Having such information is useful, but it is not the whole story.
Artefacts, works of art and historic buildings need to be considered in their historical and geographical context.
Only then can we speak of them as part of our cultural heritage.
Caravaggio's ‘Conversion of St Paul’ is one thing in the church of San Luigi dei Francesi, Rome; hung in a museum, it would be quite another.
Do you think that a ‘full census’ would be a valuable exercise?
A cost-benefit analysis would show it to be uneconomical.
The person gathering the data would first have to register the churches; then they would have to go back and record the sculptures kept in each; it would take another visit to catalogue the paintings; another for the liturgical vestments, and so on.
A terrible waste of time and money.
Have all the works kept in public museums been catalogued?
Yes, simply because inventories are kept of all the works on show.
How about the works kept in store?
We do not have a complete inventory, partly because it is hard to keep up with the many new arrivals, partly because we are always short-staffed.
However, progress is being made in this area.
What purpose will these records serve, especially with 1993 in view?
As we obtain the funds, we will gradually be able to build up further records: two million, five million, ten million.
It is vital that we have a policy for cataloguing works of art.
Just let us have the money and the staff we need.
Instead of giving priority to private enterprise, as it has done until now, the government should be channelling funds to the Soprintendenze, so that they can act effectively, working together with the universities, the regions, the church authorities, and research institutes active in this field.
The main thing is that we have a comprehensive plan, now and for the future.
Irish engineer awarded Gold Medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects
LONDON.
Although normally only architects qualify for the RIBA's Gold Medal (considered the world's most prestigious award for architecture), this year it has gone to an Irish structural engineer, the fifty-six year old Peter Rice.
Other non-architect winners have included Sir Nikolaus Pevsner.
Rice is known for his collaboration on the structure of some of the most important buildings world-wide, including the Centre Pompidou, Paris, the Sydney Opera House, the new Lloyd's building, London, and the Menil Museum, Houston.
Other works by him include the canopy under the Grande Arche de la Défense and the glass walls of the Science Museum at La Villette, both in Paris and the Pavilion of the Future, at Expo '92, Seville.
As the award-winner, he is described as ‘one of the foremost structural engineers of his time…
He has made a great contribution to anchoring the art of architecture to real life, real science and real modernity…
His passionate belief that technology is a tool to be used with imagination for the benefit of mankind has inspired a generation of designers of buildings of all disciplines’.
He is the co-author of Le Verre Structurel and has written extensively on international architecture.
The RIBA President, Richard MacCormac says, ‘Rice's work lies firmly in the tradition of the great Victorian engineers [combining]practicality with great beauty’.
Notable recent winners include Renzo Piano, Sir Richard Rogers and James Stirling.
Burton Constable secured
NORTH HUMBERSIDE.
The National Heritage Memorial Fund has secured the future of the outstanding Jacobean house Burton Constable and its contents.
In the mid eighteenth century the house was transformed by its owner William Constable who commissioned Chippendale furniture and neo-classical interiors by Thomas Lightoler.
In an arrangement with the house's present owner, John Chichester Constable, the house and its remarkable contents will pass to a newly-founded charity, the Burton Constable Foundation.
The Trustees of the charity will include Christopher Gilbert, Director of Leeds City Art Gallery, Anthony Wells Cole, Principal Keeper of the Gallery and Lord Downe, Trustee of the National Museum of Science and Industry, reflecting the importance of the house's contents, in particular its collection of scientific instruments, books, nineteenth-century French furniture and the family archive.
The archive is held by the County Archive Office at Beverly and contains a wealth of information on the house's contents including designs, drawings and receipts.
Georgina Naylor of the National Heritage Memorial Fund explained that securing the house under the charity was a cheaper solution than placing it with the National Trust and also allowed a greater individuality.
Under the present scheme the Foundation will receive an endowment of £3.5 million from the National Heritage Memorial Fund.
This will include both initial restoration work and the annual deficit on running the house and opening it to the public.
Other houses under the Fund's care to use such a system include Thirlestane Castle, Scotland, and Paxton House, Berwick.
The 70% restoration grant from English Heritage in the 1970s means that the house is currently in good structural condition.
The contents will be owned and cared for by Leeds City Art Gallery who will undertake a programme of cataloguing and aim to make the collection more widely known.
Britain's cathedrals get £5.4 million over three years
LONDON.
As part of the £11.5 million in state aid pledged last year to Britain's cathedrals, £5.4 million in grants for 1992–94 were announced by Lord Montagu of Beaulieu on 22 March (see The Art Newspaper No. 13, December 1991, p.2).
The Chairman of English Heritage noted that, together with the £2 million awarded last year, the present sum will help maintain the buildings for posterity,(although it is estimated that in all £185 million is needed for essential repairs over the next decade).
The two largest beneficiaries are Salisbury which will receive £870,000 over the next three years and Ely, which gets £690,000.
Salisbury will use the money to repair stonework, lead roofs and window glazing while Ely will put it towards work on the south-west transept, the archive of drawings, stonework cleaning and structural strengthening.
The largest grant for this year goes to Liverpool Roman Catholic Cathedral which receives £500,000, needed for structural repairs and water-proofing of the 1930 Lutyens crypt.
Cultural property
Polish Count recovers Leonardo's ‘Lady with the Ermine’ from the Communists and donates it to a foundation
Czartoryski Museum and Library converted into foundation with advice from London art dealer, Andrew Ciechanowiecki
LONDON.
A great deal has been said and written over the past two years about East European grandees being given back their property, but reality lags behind the talk.
In Poland, not a single country house has been returned to its rightful owner.
Hungary and Czechoslovakia suffered relatively little war-damage, and Communism was imposed after hostilities had ceased and normal life had resumed.
In Poland, Communism trundled in on the back of a tank, with a provisional government shooting from the hip with edicts and expropriations.
Country houses and town palaces were in varying stages of destruction.
Their contents had mostly been removed to Germany.
Their masters were either dead or absent in a concentration camp, in the Polish army in the West or else in the underground army.
They were forbidden by law to return to within thirty kilometres of their estates, and their houses were turned into the offices of state farms, rest homes for party bosses or factory workers, schools, mad-houses, orphanages or just left to crumble.
Those contents that remained were either plundered by the aparatchiks of the new regime or dumped in some local museum.
To reverse this process at a stroke would be impossible, and every compromise suggested so far has foundered in a fearful bog of legal and financial complications.
The issue of ‘reprivatisation’, as it is quaintly termed, is also politically sensitive, and the Polish Sejm has been throwing it back and forth across the Chamber like a hot potato.
Meanwhile the owners or their descendants champ impatiently to recover and lovingly restore what is left of the family heritage.
The picture is only a little brighter when it comes to objects, thanks to the intelligence of those in the museum world who support the ambitious and often altruistic plans of the owners.
Count Tarnowski has managed to recover ownership of pictures (the tail-end of the collection that once contained both the Frick's ‘Polish Rider’ and the Met's ‘Perseus’by Canova) appropriated by the National Museum in Warsaw in 1945, and intends to display them at his old country house of Dzikow.
Anna Wolska, heiress to the palace of Wilanow outside Warsaw, and the Potocki and Branicki collections in it, has offered to set it up as a public institution.
Count Edward Raczynski, the distinguished centenarian ex-President of Poland in exile living in London, has created a foundation whose aim is to recover as much of his property as possible and return it to his country house of Rogalin outside Poznan.
The director of the National Museum in Poznan, Professor Konstanty Kalinowski, has agreed to return all his pictures and furniture held by the museum.
Kalinowski is equally accommodating with Prince Adam Czartoryski, who has set up a foundation to  restore to glory the castle of Goluchow.
But all these agreements remain little more than pious hopes, even when, as in the case of Anna Wolska, President Walesa himself attempted to translate them into action.
The Zamoyski family's attempts to reactivate a foundation they set up in the 1920s at Kornik, a Scottish-baronial monstrosity housing a priceless library of early illuminated manuscripts and incunabula, are being thwarted by the Polish Academy of Learning, which swallowed it up in 1945.
Prince Jan Lubomirski, who managed to buy his castle of Kruszyna back from the local council for a symbolic zloty (they refused Barbara Johnson's offer of millions in a fine gesture of patriarchal loyalty), cannot get the Lodz Museum to return the set of family portraits removed from it, even though none of them has ever been exhibited since being confiscated.
Czartoryski's Goluchow is a good example of the problems facing the  altruistic grandee.
The castle and grounds, which include the greatest arboretum in Poland, at present belong to the colossal state forestry authority, while the collections have been dispersed not only to Poznan, but also to Warsaw, whose National Museum is sitting on the remains of the unique collection of Etruscan and Greek vases (some are in Moscow, while others were looted by the Germans, along with all the Limoges enamels, some of which regularly turn up in Western collections).
But Prince Adam has a certain amount of clout, as he has recently brought off a resounding coup and made a grand gesture.
In September 1991 he managed to recover possession of the Czartoryski Museum and Library in Krakow, lock, stock and barrel.
The museum, set up in the 1780s by his great-great-great-grandmother Izabela, was the first didactically historical museum in Europe (both the famous ‘Lady with an Ermine’ by Leonardo that starred in the National Gallery of Washington's recent ‘Circa 1492’exhibition and the remarkable Rembrandt landscape were collected for their historical associations rather than their artistic merit).
Prince Adam promptly donated the entire museum to a foundation which he set up for the purpose, to which he also ceded all his rights to his pre-war estates and property.
How much of these the foundation will manage to recover is an open question, but at least the collection is now safe (there have been several attempts in the past to remove its best paintings to other museums).
It is also now an independent body, and can begin to look for new ways to finance itself and improve its amenities.
It is desperately looking for advice, help or just moral support from museums and institutions in the west.
A major part in setting up the Czartoryski Foundation, and in most of the other similar attempts, has been played by an eminence grise familiar to Western art circles, namely the London art dealer Andrew Ciechanowiecki.
He himself made history when, in 1984, he donated over 1,200 pictures and objects to a foundation he established in Warsaw the first such institution since the war.
Mr Brown's garden capably revived
WEST SUSSEX.
Gardeners from the National Trust at Petworth Park, Sussex, have used Capability Brown's original designs to plant a four-acre plot for which Brown had sketched out a plan in 1750 but never carried out.
The sketch for the Upper Pond, part of Brown's great natural parkland at Petworth, was discovered in the Petworth archives some years ago but the backlog of work on the estate and the disastrous storm of 1987 which destroyed thousands of trees delayed plans to carry out the design.
Now, however, more than 3,300 trees including birch, grey poplars, white and crack willow and horse chestnut all mentioned in Brown's notes have been planted at the upper end of the lake.
The operation has been partly funded by a grant of £7,000 ($12,000) from the Countryside Commission and the Trust plans to raise the rest by appeal.
Happy snappers at Unesco
PARIS.
Unesco, in association with the Fundación de La Caixa and the photographic agency Gamma, has  announced the setting up of ‘Patrimonio 2001’.
Under the scheme natural and historic sites considered by Unesco to be ‘the patrimony of humanity’ will be photographed and documented with the aim of building up a reference library of 40,000 photographs and relevant documentation which will be available to researchers.
The project is headed by the Director General of Unesco, Federico Mayor Zaragoza, Juan Antonio Samaranch, President of Caixabank and Luìs Monreal, Director of the Fundación de la Caixa and formerly a Unesco official.
Changes afoot at the Getty
LOS ANGELES.
Kurt Forster, for the last eight years Director of the Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities at Santa Monica, has resigned to accept the Chair in the History of Art and Architecture at Zurich's Federal Polytechnic.
It is no secret that Forster has not been popular, his vigorous preference for a radical brand of abstract cultural history being considered almost hostile to the Museum's more object-based aims.
There are no suggestions yet as to who may succeed Forster.
On the other hand, John Walsh, Director of the J. Paul Getty Museum, is the hot tip to follow Carter Brown as the head of the National Gallery of Washington, with ‘Rusty’ Powell, Director of the Los Angeles County Museum, a close second.
Both are well known to the veteran Franklin D. Murphy, who is not only Chairman of the Trustees of the National Gallery, but a Trustee of LACMA and, until recently, of the Getty Trust (see The Art Newspaper No. 4, January 1991, Vernissage section).
The full Board of the National Gallery was meeting around 27 April to ratify the appointment.
No laughing matter for Danish artists
COPENHAGEN.
In December 1991, the Danish art magazine Pist Protta published a list of the one hundred Danish artists who had earned most money in 1990.
The amounts ranged from DKr16.1 million (£1.46 million) to DKr 750,000 (£68,000).
The list was given wider circulation by the monthly art newspaper Kunstavisen in its January/February 1992 number.
The list was a practical joke, a complete fabrication yes a happening even.
Nevertheless, it created a great stir in the Danish art world.
The staff of both periodicals were approached by many artists, some of whom were on the list and many more who were not.
Reasonably enough, there were those on the list who were angry because they had been made liable to investigation by the tax authorities.
Kunstavisen reports in its March/April number that not only did many artists protest because they were not on the list but one contacted them to say that he had lost the possibility of a big exhibition because he had not been included.
Some who were on the list contested their placing and felt ‘it was unreasonable that they had lost out in the advertisement race’.
The list had included most of the significant contemporary Danish artists and this behaviour apparently demonstrates, as Kunstavisen remarks, ‘that artists today are more preoccupied by money than by the art they are making’.
Peter Shield
Judge forces purchaser of Chagall to pay up
AMSTERDAM.
A dealer who refused to pay Sotheby's after he had bought a work by the artist Marc Chagall at auction last year, has been ordered by a court in Amsterdam to pay the auction house DFl. 27,000 (£8,400; $14,700).
The dealer refused to pay on account of the fact that the work ‘Moses and the Angel’ was not accompanied by a certificate of authenticity from the Comité Marc Chagall.
Apparently the committee had refused to give such a certificate because the graphic work had been presented by Chagall as a gift to friends.
The artist's widow did not think it appropriate that the work should have ended up on the commercial circuit and has therefore refused to sign the document.
The lawyer acting on behalf of the dealer argued that Sotheby's should have stated explicitly that no such certificate accompanied the work.
Instead they had assured the purchaser that the papers were in order, which he took to imply that the necessary certificate would be present.
The presiding judge did not find this explanation acceptable and ordered the payment to be made within two days.
An independent Akademie der Künste where the artists will have to double as sponsors
LEIPZIG.
At the time of writing, the founding session of the Freie Akademie der Künste in Leipzig (the Free Academy of the Arts) is being planned for some time in May.
Its nine founding members writers, composers and musicians, an art dealer, an art historian and the painter, Hartwig Ebersbach are planning to get the Akademie started over the next two years.
The Freie Akademie der Künste Hamburg will act as official ‘godparent’.
The budding Academy sees itself as an alternative to established institutions such as Berlin's Akademie der Künste whose ongoing merger of the West and East branches, beset by political wrangling, has alienated many artists (see The Art Newspaper No.17, April 1992, p.3).
The crossing of borders artistic, national, and generational is one of the founders' main intentions, and the projects currently being planned are all multi-media.
The list of around forty possible members includes Mauricio Kagel, Andrzej Wajda, and Göyrgi Ligeti (the latter having recently resigned his membership of the Berlin Akademie).
Names of important painters like Werner Tübke and Walter Mattheuer are missing in order to avoid controversy about the inclusion of former DDR ‘state-artists’; they are likely to join later.
Good external relations will be vital because the Freie Akademie is poor.
It starts with private capital of around DM150,000 (£53,500; $93,200) and further funds will have to be raised to reach the goal of a DM0.5 million (£178,500; $310,700) annual budget.
The artists are expected to act as sponsors too, by creating works for the Akademie at half their normal rates.
Exhibitions
Rome
Caro on up the Forum, dear
The ruins of ancient architecture create a dramatic stage for British sculptor's works
ROME.
An exhibition of thirty-eight sculptures from all stages of Anthony Caro's career opens in the remarkable context of Trajan's Markets in Rome towards the end of this month (20 May-20 August).
The most important display of his art to be mounted since the Museum of Modern Art's large exhibition in New York in 1975, and the Serpentine Gallery's survey of 1984, it consolidates the sculptor's recent interest in the achievements of ancient civilisations sparked by a visit to Greece in 1985, and tests his abstract interpretations of classical and Renaissance art against the authenticity of Imperial Roman architecture.
Exactly twenty years after their collaboration for that extraordinary presentation of Henry Moore in Florence, Caro's exhibition reunites the powerful curatorial vision of Professor Giovanni Carandente with the British Council.
Discussions between the artist and Carandente (who pioneered the use of historic or archaeological monuments for the exhibition of contemporary art through his work at Spoleto with David Smith, Stephen Cox and other artists), were launched several years ago, and other sites, including the Baths of Caracalla, where Rome's summer opera programme takes place, were considered.
But Caro's enthusiasm was unleashed when he visited Rome in May of last year and was shown Trajan's Markets.
Comprising three tiers of small chambers rising up the steep slopes of the Quirinal Hill, the markets were completed by Emperor Trajan in 112 AD and formed the commercial centre of ancient Rome.
With the adjoining terraces, they have never previously been used for an art exhibition, although Californian conceptual artist, Peter Erskine, placed a helioscope at the centre of his recent installation, ‘Secrets of the Sun’(to 10 May).
Caro has taken personal responsibility for the selection of the sculptures which have been chosen to complement the markets' strong architectural identity.
For that reason, he has omitted his more fragile or delicate works in favour of robustness, playing with various permutations in a 1:20 model built for him by the Richard Rogers Partnership.
That model, with miniature versions of his sculptures, was shown at the Accademia Italiana in Rutland Gate in February.
His solution places ‘After Olympia’, the great rusted steel frieze inspired by Greek pediment sculpture, at the heart of the exhibition in the main hall of the markets, while other works, drawn from an international list of collections, spread through corridors, terraces and chambers on two levels.
Among the painted sculptures from the first decade of his activity as an abstract artist are ‘Midday’(1960, MOMA, New York),), ‘Prairie’(1967, NGA, Washington) and ‘Early One Morning’(1962) which the Tate Gallery was persuaded to loan only after Caro had agreed to supervise its restoration at the end of the exhibition.
The sculpture received a fresh coat of paint in 1975 and will be repainted if it is scratched or damaged.
Important examples of his work with the end cuts of hot rolled steel include ‘Durham Purse’(1973, MFA, Boston) and ‘Toronto Flats’(1974, Mirvish, Toronto).
From his recent production the exhibition will feature ‘Moroccans’(1984–87, Hakone Open Air Museum, Japan), several table pieces including ‘The Triumph of Caesar’(1987, Cabot, Boston), his abstract dialogue with Mantegna, and ‘Child's Tower Room’(1984, Annely Juda), built in Japanese oak for an exhibition at Liberty's department store and the prototype for his exercises in sculpitecture.
‘The Tower of Discovery’(1991), the culmination of that exercise, is at present on exhibition in Seville.
An international edition of the catalogue, with dual language texts in English and Italian, will be published by Fabri several weeks after the exhibition opens (see also p. 15).
It will contain essays by Michael Fried and Karen Wilkin and be illustrated by new photographs showing Caro's sculpture in the context of Trajan's Markets.
Exhibition results
What the scholars thought of the Mantegna show
Agreeing to disagree over attributions
LONDON.
With attendance figures at around 2,500 per day (higher than those for Frans Hals and the Bührle Collection), the Royal Academy's ‘Mantegna’(closed 5 April) was a notable success.
The exhibition moves to the Metropolitan, New York from 9 May to 12 July.
The show has aroused considerable scholarly debate over all the fields of the artist's activities and the closing symposium in London generated lively discussion on questions of attribution and dating.
Doubts were expressed about the authorship of the early ‘St Jerome in the Wilderness’ from São Paulo although the poor condition of the surface may account for some of the picture's awkwardness.
The beautiful ‘Descent into Limbo’ from the collection of Mrs Barbara Johnson has been dated by the Metropolitan's Keith Christiansen (curator of the paintings section) to around 1492, but in the opinion of a number of scholars including David Landau, the exhibition's organiser, there are strong stylistic arguments for placing it much earlier in the artist's oeuvre.
It might then be the ‘painting of Limbo’ which Mantegna is recorded as working on for Ludovico Gonzaga in a document of 1468.
Other proposals made by Konrad Oberhuber of the Albertina, Vienna, include attributing all the grisaille paintings in the exhibition to Mantegna's own hand rather than dividing them between the master and his workshop, and assigning the magnificent ‘The Man of Sorrows with two Angels’ from Copenhagen one of the show's great revelations to a much earlier dating than the 1500 given it by Christiansen and earlier scholars.
Oberhuber also defended the traditional attribution to Mantegna of the miniature-like ‘Judith with the Head of Holofernes’ from Washington, marked down in the catalogue as ‘After Mantegna’; an alternative suggestion is the young Giulio Campagnola, recently proposed by David Landau.
There was a notable disagreement between the two curators of the prints section of the exhibition David Landau and Suzanne Boorsch of the Metropolitan Museum, New York over which prints were by the artist's own hand and which were executed after his designs.
Landau and Boorsch agreed to differ in the catalogue to the extent that the former proposed adding four further prints to the canon of seven generally accepted autograph works while Ms Boorsch felt strongly that none of them was by his hand.
Further complications raised at the symposiumover whether Mantegna or Antonio Pollaiuolo takes precedence in these crucial early years of printmaking threatened to take over the proceedings until halted by the discussion's Chairwoman, Caroline Elam, Editor of the Burlington Magazine.
Print enthusiasts will have to wait for the publication of David Landau and Peter Parshall's forthcoming book on Renaissance printmaking to be published by Yale University Press next year for a full discussion of such matters.
Meanwhile the exhibition moves to New York with a slightly re-vamped catalogue (more colour illustrations) and a new hanging under the direction of Christiansen and Suzanne Boorsch.
Korean ceramics tour America
SAN FRANCISCO.
The radiance of jade and the crystal clarity of water are the qualities mentioned by Xu Jing, Chinese ambassador to Korea in the twelfth century, in describing to his emperor the stoneware produced in that country.
The world's biggest collection of Korean ceramics over 1,000 pieces spanning the tenth to nineteenth centuries was formed from 1951 by the Japanese industrialist Eiichi Ataka.
In 1975 it was acquired by the Sumitomo Group following Ataka's bankruptcy and donated to the city of Osaka, together with the money to build what was to become the Museum of Oriental Ceramics.
Major items from the collection have now been chosen to form a travelling exhibition, which moves to the Metropolitan Museum in New York from 20 May (until 12 July) after shows at San Francisco's Asian Art Museum and the Art Institute of Chicago.
This is the first time these outstanding glazed ceramics and porcelain celadons have been exhibited outside Japan.
What happened to the ‘degenerate’ sculptors in Germany before and during the Nazi regime?
MÜNSTER.
Several exhibitions have recently displayed the art branded as ‘degenerate’ by the Nazis in their notorious show of 1937.
While they all concentrated on paintings, the  exhibition ‘Entartete Bildhauer’ at the Westfälisches Landesmuseum is exclusively devoted to the sculptors who suffered from this verdict.
Their development from the turn of the century until around 1945 is traced in the show which has been put together by Christian Tümpel and a group of his art history students at the University of Nijmegen.
The show evolved out of a seminar on Bernhard Hoetger, an artist who is represented by several works.
Freundlich, Belling, Kolbe, Scheibe, and Marcks are among the other sculptors on show.
They nearly all started out in Paris or were influenced by Paris artists, taking Rodin, Bourdelle and Maillol as their role models.
Otto Freundlich, whose powerful Cubist ‘Neuer Mensch’ was used as the cover illustration for the catalogue of the Nazi show, was resident in Paris from the mid-Twenties.
Arrested in 1943, he died in the Lublin-Maidanek concentration camp.
Like most of his other work, his ‘new man’ is lost.
The survey is most interesting in contrasting works from before and during the Nazi period by sculptors whose development was less consistent than Freundlich's.
Thus Belling's ‘Dreiklang’, the first German abstract sculpture, derided by the Nazis, can be seen next to his portrait of the boxer Max Schmeling, made ten years later and included in the official ‘Große Deutsche Kunstausstellung’.
Perhaps the most telling figures are Georg Kolbe and Richard Scheibe.
Although much of their classicising work in bronze produced after 1933 was liked and acquired by the regime, even these far from rebellious artists came at times under suspicion of being ‘degenerate’.
Kolbe, like Belling, continued to be awarded public commissions after 1945 the former with the unobjectionable mild classicism of his female nudes, the latter by reverting to his abstract beginnings.
The exhibition is in Münster until 31 May and subsequently at the Wilhelm-Lehmbruck Museum in Duisburg (28 June to 9 August) and Mannheim.
The CAS at the CAC
LONDON.
For one week only in the middle of this month (8–13 May), the Contemporary Art Society is exhibiting its recent acquisitions at the Camden Arts Centre before distributing them around museums in this country.
The acquisitions cover a four-year period until 1991 and fall into three categories: paintings and works on paper, including graphics, sculpture and crafts.
The Henry Moore Foundation contributes an annual budget of £40,000 for the purchase of sculpture, and guest buyers choosing pictures and prints are provided with a similar sum raised from the profits of the Society's popular art market, from fees paid for advice given to corporate collectors, and from membership subscriptions.
Among more than 200 works of art, notable acquisitions include a set of black granite ‘Tanmatras’ by Stephen Cox, a wall sculpture by Antony Gormley, a slate obelisk by Ian Hamilton Finlay, a cabinet of sea shells by Damien Hirst, Lisa Milroy's ‘Lightbulbs’and abstract paintings by Ian Davenport, Nicholas May, Fiona Rae and Adam Lowe.
Minneapolis Institute pays tribute to long-serving trustee Bruce B. Dayton
MINNEAPOLIS, MN.
A half century after becoming a trustee of the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, retailer and philanthropist Bruce B. Dayton (b. 1918) is still active in the museum's affairs.
He is being honoured by an exhibition assembling the more than 300 paintings, sculptures and decorative artworks he has donated or promised over the years.
Mr Dayton has given the Institute many of its finest oils, by Manet (‘The Smoker’, 1866), Matisse (‘Pensées de Pascal’, 1924), Nicolas Mignard (‘Venus and Adonis’, circa 1650) and van Goyen (a riverscape at Utrecht, 1648), along with works by Kandinsky, Kirchner, Bonnard and Mondrian.
Sculptures include bronzes by Rodin and Maillol, and his most recent gifts, two terracotta figurines by Carpeaux.
The largest single category of objects contains ninety-one limited edition artists' books illustrated by Bonnard, Matisse, Picasso, Maillol, Miró and others.
The Minneapolis native joined the board at twenty-three, as he was about to embark on a career in the family's department store chain.
His art collection began with a Rembrandt etching received as a college graduation gift, and expanded generously to serve the needs of the MIA.
Though personal taste tends toward late nineteenth- and twentieth-century European art, his gifts many of which went directly into the galleries have ranged from Egyptian and Roman antiquities and Tiffany glass, to Ming armchairs, an eighteenth-century Italian chest, and a Native American painted elk hide.
Mr Dayton currently co-chairs a committee seeking to raise $50 million for endowment a far cry from the $30,000 annual drives he remembers leading in the 1940s!
‘Celebrating Fifty Years a Trustee: Bruce B. Dayton’ is on view 17 May-16 August.
A 300-page illustrated catalogue accompanies the show.
Australia-Japan exhibition: 200 years of Australian art
SYDNEY.
The first substantial and historically comprehensive exhibition of Australian art to travel to Japan will go on display at the Tokyo National Museum of Western Art until 28 June and travel to the National Museum of Modern Art in Kyoto from 14 July to 6 September.
The selection, comprising some eighty oil paintings and fifty watercolours, illustrates 200 years of Australian painting from the earliest Colonial art to contemporary Aboriginal work.
The exhibition is the initiative of the Australia-Japan Foundation in Australia and the National Museum of Western Art in Tokyo.
The Art Gallery of New South Wales is the organising gallery in Australia; the principal Japanese sponsor is the Nihon Keizai Shimbun newspaper, a regular organiser and supporter of major art exhibitions in Japan.
With general interest in Australia running at a reasonably high level in Japan, the exhibition is expected to attract some 250,000 visitors.
Earthly delights restored
VENICE.
An exhibition to mark the restoration of Hieronymous Bosch's paintings in the Doge's Palace, Venice, opens on 6 May (until 10 August).
The restoration has been undertaken by Professor Nonfarmale funded by the Comune di Venezia.
Works by Bosch from the Palace collection to be exhibited include ‘The Temptations of Saints Jerome, Anthony and Egidius’, ‘Paradise’, the Saint Liberata triptych and ‘The Assumption of the Blessed’ as well as works by Metsys.
Flemish paintings by Dieric Bouts and others have been lent by the Museo Correr and the exhibition is completed by a selection of around twenty prints after Bosch loaned from museums in Italy and elsewhere.
Lodz and Lyon swap contemporary art
LYON AND LODZ.
The Musée d'Art Contemporain, Lyon, and the Museum Sztuki, Lodz, Poland (founded 1931), are arranging a sizeable exchange of contemporary works videos and installations.
The Sztuki will be sending more than 700 pieces and more than twenty hours of video as well as eight performance artists who will show their installations at the Espace Lyonnaise d'Art Contemporain.
Lyon will be lending more than 200 pieces as well as videos.
Two separate bi-lingual catalogues have been produced and the project is curated by Jaromir Jedlinski, Director of the Museum Sztuki and M. Thierry Raspail, Director of the Musée d'Art Contemporain.
The Lyon show opens on 6 May, Lodz opens on 22 May and both close on 27 September.
Karsh in Canada
ONTARIO.
The largest-ever retrospective exhibition devoted to the photography of Yousuf Karsh runs until 14 June at the McMichael Canadian Art Collection, Kleinburg, Ontario.
The exhibition is organised and circulated by the National Gallery of Canada in collaboration with the National Archives of Canada and includes more than 190 photographs.
San Francisco
Salvaging 1950s Rauschenberg
Exhibition recovers missing works (maybe only 50% from this period survive) and provides clues for his development
SAN FRANCISCO.
The exhibition of Robert Rauschenberg's early work reaches the conclusion of its four-city, fifteen-month tour when it opens at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in the middle of this month (14 May-2 August).
Previously shown at Washington's Corcoran Gallery, where the tour was launched almost exactly forty years after his first one-person exhibition held at the Betty Parsons Gallery in 1951; at the Menil Foundation in Houston and at Chicago's Museum of Contemporary Art, ‘Robert Rauschenberg: The Early 1950s’ concentrates upon the artist's activity between 1949, when he enrolled at Black Mountain College after a short apprenticeship in Paris, and 1954, when he embarked upon the most important series of works of his career, the combine paintings and constructions.
In this respect, San Francisco's version of the exhibition gains from the proximity of ‘Collection’, that important triptych of paint and collaged material belonging to the museum, in which Rauschenberg rehearsed the full range of the combined techniques which he would employ for the next ten years.
The period covered by the exhibition is not entirely unknown to scholars and collectors.
Twenty-five works including one blueprint monotype, two white paintings, four black paintings, a red painting, the ‘Automobile Tyre Print’, a collaboration with John Cage, and the celebrated ‘Erased de Kooning Drawing’ prefaced the artist's major touring retrospective organised by the Smithsonian Institute in 1976.
Ten years later, in 1986, Larry Gagosian showed a selection of the White and the Black Paintings in his gallery in New York.
But the present exhibition is more comprehensive and, with its accompanying monograph, reveals an even more precocious and diverse artist.
Walter Hopps, the exhibition's curator, and previously responsible for the Smithsonian retrospective, has performed a salvage job worthy of the artist's legendary search for materials on the streets of his neighbourhood.
In the course of his research, he has discovered missing works and found documentary photographs recording paintings and objects which have been lost or destroyed.
From this evidence, he calculates that Rauschenberg may have produced as many as 300 works of art during this five-year period, of which one-half may have survived.
Sixty-one works are presented in the exhibition.
Among them are the four remaining pictures shown by Betty Parsons, whose checklist notes seventeen works, the complete set of five White Paintings conceived in 1951 and recreated, under Rauschenberg's instructions, by Brice Marden in 1968, twelve Black Paintings, three gold leaf paintings, fifteen collages created in Rome and North Africa in the last months of 1952, and thirteen box sculptures incorporating stones, thorns, an insect and other material.
Disappointingly, the exhibition omits Rauschenberg's portrait and still-life photography, which is richly illustrated in the catalogue.
It is not a tidy development.
Rauschenberg's fertile imagination oscillates among styles and techniques, and only the Black and Red Paintings, with their richly textured surfaces of paint and newspaper, look properly accomplished.
But the seeds of the artist's powerful progress in the great decade from 1954 can be traced in other and lesser works throughout the exhibition.
New York
Louis Kahn: pre Post-Modernism's popular appeal
Architect who lacked a genius for self-promotion tours the world
LONDON.
‘The most terribly overlooked architect of the twentieth century’, according to Sherri Geldin of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, Louis Kahn's work drew crowds of 1,200 a day in Paris and the exhibition received rave reviews when it opened.
‘Louis I. Kahn: In the Realm of Architecture’ is the first international retrospective dedicated to the work of the American modernist architect.
The exhibition transferred to the Centre George Pompidou following the considerable success of its première in Philadelphia, and opens at MOMA in New York on 14 June (until 18 August).
Organised by the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, the $2 million exhibition, together with the weighty catalogue that accompanies it, is considered by the curators to represent the definitive scholarly study into the work of ‘the most important American architect of the mid-twentieth century’.
Robert Geddes, former Dean of Architecture at Princeton, claims that ‘much of the evolution of modern architecture since the 1950s came about because Louis Kahn questioned the tradition of the international style’.
Turning his back on the lightness and open planning characteristic of international style architecture, Kahn was concerned with what he called ‘going back to zero’ emphasising monumentality, weight and primitive classical forms.
Yet ironically, Kahn has received little recognition outside narrow architectural circles while many of his pupils have had considerable popular success.
Robert Geddes, Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Romaldo Giurgola have all become well-known names.
Why is this?
The answer according to Ms Geldin, the exhibition's associate director, is that his work lies chiefly outside major metropolitan areas, much of it in his native Pennsylvania.
And yet his best known pieces the Yale University Art Gallery (1951–53); the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California (1959–65); the capital complex for Dhaka, Bangladesh (1962–83); and the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas (1966–72) are in distinctly urban settings.
More convincing is the argument that Kahn lacked the genius for self-promotion of other great architects like Frank Lloyd Wright and Philip Johnson.
Kahn believed that his work spoke for itself.
Despite the powerful scale of his buildings, he was modest about the role of the architect.
Architecture, he maintained, should be function-led.
Known for his quirky sayings, Kahn taught his pupils always to ask the building what it wanted to be.
In his introductory essay, Vincent Scully maintains that Kahn would be disappointed by contemporary architecture and the work of his followers.
Critics are seeing this new interest in Kahn as indicative of a public dislike for the superficialities of Post Modern architecture.
(The exhibition travels to the Museum of Modern Art in Gunma, Japan, from 26 September to 3 November).
Venice
Canova from start to finish in forty-seven marbles
Major loans from the Hermitage to outstanding show in restored Napoleonic rooms
LONDON.
After the exhibition of Canova's work and related sculpture organised by the Fondazione Memmo at Palazzo Ruspoli in Rome, the nucleus of the show, including ten statues from the Hermitage, has moved to Venice and been greatly added to by further loans.
This amplification, orchestrated by Giuseppe Pavanello and Giandomenico Romanelli, has produced an extraordinary opportunity to see Canova's work as a sculptor in the round.
The sixty-four drawings and nineteen bozzetti and models lead up to the sculptures themselves forty-seven in all in both first and second versions.
The largest gathering previously seen was at the 1972 Neo-classical exhibition held at the V&A in London, organised by Mario Praz and Hugh Honour, which had managed to assemble fourteen sculptures.
The visitor now has a unique chance to see these works together, as well as tracing the development of an idea from Canova's initial pencil sketch to the bozzetto or model and then through to the finished marble and second version of the marble.
The Hermitage's marble version of ‘Orpheus’ can be compared with the stone version in Venice and the ‘Venus’from Palazzo Pitti in Florence can be seen with the second version from Munich.
The Munich version was finished first and the second ‘Venus’, destined for Florence, was deliberately improved on by Canova, which makes this a key point of comparison for scholars who have debated whether later versions of the marble compositions were not in fact merely copies.
The loans from the Hermitage of the ‘Penitent Magdalene’, ‘Hebe’, and ‘Standing Cupid and Psyche’ can all be compared with other versions of the statues from, respectively, Genoa, Forlí and Paris, although this last work, from the Louvre, is of a different composition, showing the two lovers reclining in an embrace.
Rarely seen works such as the very beautiful ‘Venus and Adonis’ from Geneva and the bust of Cicognara from the cemetery in Ferrara (one of Canova's very last works) form part of the extraordinary range of loans assembled.
Other exceptional works are the head of ‘Helen’ from the private collection in Palazzo Albrizzi, Venice and the over life-size ‘Boxers’from the Vatican.
A group of grisaille paintings, on unprepared canvas and resembling sculpted reliefs, has been loaned from the Bassano Museum.
The exhibition has been installed in the early nineteenth-century rooms of the Museo Correr.
Damaged by fire ten years ago and closed ever since they have been restored especially for the exhibition the Neo-classical architecture and decorative elements making an ideal setting for Canova's works.
The Museo Correr's own permanent collection of Canova is displayed in the last of the series of rooms, the ballroom, where it is hoped that it can remain on  permanent show.
An additional dimension to the exhibition is provided by the collection remaining at Possagno where Canova's cast collection and Temple (newly restored) can be visited, as well as the display of bozzetti and other works by the sculptor.
In addition, the Farsetti Collection of terracottas from the Hermitage are on show concurrently at the Ca' d'Oro.
The baroque artists of these maquettes, among them Bernini, Algardi, and Stefano Maderno, all exerted a significant influence on Canova.
The Canova exhibition continues at the Museo Correr until 30 September; the English version of the catalogue is published by Marsilio.
Ghent
The age of silver
Precious metal 1880–1940
ROTTERDAM AND GHENT.
The spirit of innovation in silver design throughout Europe in the latter part of the nineteenth and early years of twentieth century is celebrated in a stylish exhibition entitled ‘Silver of a new Era: International Highlights of Precious Metalware from 1880–1940’ which opened at the Museum Boymans van Beuningen, Rotterdam and is now at the Museum voor Sierkunst, Ghent (until 27 July).
The idea for an exhibition of such size around 250 exhibits from seven European countries was devised some years ago by the Dutch silver specialist Mrs A. Krekel-Aalberse with R. J. Willink of the Netherlands Office for Fine Arts and Dr J. ter Molen of the Boymans.
Together they have put together the current show.
The British section of the exhibition has been curated by Eric Turner of the Victoria and Albert Museum.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper Mr Turner noted that no such exhibition on silver of this period had been held before, reflecting the growing  academic standing of the study of decorative arts in general, and silver in particular .
He noted a marked increase in exhibitions devoted to modern decorative arts: in 1995 the Art Institute of Chicago, for example, will be presenting a show on twentieth-century British silversmiths whilst the current series of design exhibitions at the Bauhaus Archive has included one on metalwork.
The current strength of decorative art at auction is another indicator of this trend (see p. 17).
For the British section of the exhibition Mr Turner has included works by Knox, Ashbee and Mackintosh as well as less familiar names.
The exhibits are drawn from private collections with some previously unseen items, and public holdings including the Goldsmiths' Company who have lent ten pieces.
Other highlights include part of a ninety-seven-piece dining service by the Dutch designer Jan Eisenloeffel presented by the City of Amsterdam to Queen Wilhelmina on her marriage in 1901.
The Queen disliked the service, which was hidden away and only re-emerged in the early 1980s when included in a Dutch television programme on royal gifts.
The exhibition is accompanied by a catalogue which includes introductory essays to the silver of each country and catalogue details with a photograph of every item.
War booty
Bremen drawings on show at the Hermitage in June
ST PETERSBURG.
The Hermitage has confirmed that June is the date for showing the drawings and watercolours removed from the Kunsthalle in Bremen in 1945.
This is only the second time in post-war history that war booty art treasures have been put on view.
About 150 items from the Bremen Collection will be displayed at the exhibition.
Employees at Moscow's Schchusev Architectural History Museum have scotched rumours that twenty pages from the collection have been sold to Germany.
They say that the sheets in questions were never stored at the museum.
Every one of the 364 items which found their way to the museum after the war is still there, intact.
A committee of experts has been set up by the Russian Ministry of Culture to look into the problem of such articles within its borders.
They may consider that the exhibition of works from war booty collections should become an established practice.
It has even been suggested that the fate of trophy items should be decided openly by a referendum.
In the meanwhile, restorer Saveli Yamshchikov thinks that some of this war booty is already seeping out of the country.
More and more museums, archives and libraries are becoming independent and taking charge of their own stocks, which includes any booty they may contain.
In Yamshchikov's view the Hamburg sheet music library, which has lain for forty-five years in one of St Petersburg's special storage areas, could be used for barter.
The June exhibition may be so successful that the Hermitage would consider showing some of its own trophy collection alongside the one from Bremen.
The City celebrated
LONDON.
A selection of the Corporation of London's finest paintings, together with some of its treasures, will form a major exhibition entitled ‘The Celebrated City: Treasures from the Collections of the City of London’(28 May to 19 July).
Much of the Guildhall Art Gallery collection has been in store since the destruction of the gallery in the last war.
The role of the Corporation as art patron is one of the exhibition's themes, and works on show include paintings acquired by Alderman John Boydell (a print publisher in his own right) in the late eighteenth century; a selection of nineteenth century paintings from the donation made by Charles Gassiot in 1902; Landseer's ‘The First Leap’(1829); Alma-Tadema's ‘The Wine Shop’(1873); and works by Holman Hunt, Dyce, Lord Leighton, Millais and Rossetti.
More recently the collection was enriched by the bequest of Lord Samuel of Wych Cross who donated eighty-three seventeenth-century Dutch paintings in 1987, all of which are displayed: ‘the greatest art bequest of this century’, according to art dealer Hugh Leggatt.
The historical sections of the exhibition include early charters, manuscripts, views of London before and after the Great Fire.
Themes such as the role of the Lord Mayor, the relationship of the City with the Sovereign and the life of the City are also covered in this wide-ranging show.
Two major Genoese Baroque shows
GENOA AND FRANKFURT.
1992 sees two major exhibitions devoted to Genoese art of the Baroque age, the first in Genoa itself, at Palazzo Reale and Palazzo Spinola di Pellicceria from 29 April, the other in Frankfurt, at the Schirn Kunsthalle (29 August-9 November).
Both cover not only painting but also the decorative arts.
The exhibits will come from Italian and foreign museums, and private collections in Genoa and Liguria; these include 175 paintings, twenty-five graphic works, thirty marble and wooden sculptures, twenty-five ceramic pieces and ten pieces of silver, as well as furniture, textiles, medals and books.
Palazzo Spinola will show material from the first half of the seventeenth century, while the latter half will appear in the Palazzo Reale.
Most of the exhibits were restored with the help of the Amici dei Musei at a total cost of L1,450 million,(£670,365; $1.17 million) of which L70,000,000 will come from the Comitato Nazionale Colombiano.
According to Dr Mary Newcomb Schleier, the organiser of the Frankfurt exhibition, the Genoa showing will not be prolonged, as about twenty of the exhibits travel to Frankfurt.
The Schirn Kunsthalle will have about 200 exhibits, of which 130 are paintings, and the remainder sculpture, ceramics, silver, and furniture, covering the period from the beginning of the Genoese Republic with Andrea Doria until 1815.
The over 160 lenders are international, ranging from museums in Madrid, Florence, Rio, Dresden, and the United States to Poland and Russia, and many private collections world-wide.
‘We are not aiming at a local audience, but are bearing the EEC in mind, and of course all those who come to the Frankfurt Book Fair at the same time.’
The Frankfurt exhibition follows in the series which included ‘Guido Reni and Europe’(1988–89), ‘Savoldo’(1990), and ‘Guercino’(1991–92).
Boston and Impressionism when you're onto a good thing…
BOSTON.
Lately the greatest successes at the Museum of Fine Arts have been ‘Renoir’, ‘Monet in the Nineties’ and ‘Masterpieces from the Cone Collection of the Baltimore Museum of Art’.
No wonder the MFA has mounted another Impressionist exhibition.
‘European and American Impressionism: Crosscurrents’ examines the various manifestations of the international movement, with special attention to America and France.
Approximately one hundred paintings from the museum's permanent collection include works by all of the principal practitioners from Boudin to Pissarro, Homer to Hassam, and Sickert to Sorolla, with many lesser known followers from Norway, Belgium, Holland, Italy, Germany, Poland and elsewhere.
The exhibition continues until 17 May.
Texas show puts visitors at sea
HOUSTON.
Walk into a dimly-lit gallery and approach the welded steel device fitted with a battery of fan-shaped movie screens.
Climb onto a platform and your weight sets the contraption in motion the deck rides up and down simulating ocean swells, the soundtrack plays the moans of whale songs, and a film projection shows an opening and closing hand that approaches and recedes in wavelike sequence on the now-rotating screens.
Is it Poseidon himself who beckons, or a man overboard?
This mechanically manic installation-cum-excursion is the work of Steve Barry, a New York trained artist who teaches at the University of New Mexico.
‘Poseidon’ remains at the Contemporary Arts Museum from 30 May to 26 July.
Exhibition strategies
Beyond Elvis and barbecue
Memphis, Tennessee's ‘WONDERS’ series outperforms major US museums but is snubbed by them
MEMPHIS.
Unknown or overlooked by most museum professionals, a series of major international art exhibitions has been enjoying unusual success in the Tennessee capital.
‘WONDERS: The Memphis International Cultural Series’ has already raised this Southern town a rung or two on the nation's cultural ladder.
Bankrolled by the city government and powered by a marketing blitz in the bible belt, these annual blockbusters in the downtown convention centre have attracted hundreds of thousands of visitors from throughout the region and beyond, outpacing concurrent exhibitions at the major US museums.
The prelude to ‘WONDERS’ was ‘Rameses the Great’, a selection of seventy-four objects from the Cairo Museum that the mayor of Montreal had brought to North America for Expo ‘86.
Memphis signed on for the subsequent tour and expanded the exhibition, featuring the Rameses Colossus in the 1987 showing in the Memphis Cook Convention Center.
Aside from‘King Tut’, which stopped in New Orleans during the late 1970s, ‘Rameses’ became the largest international show the South-east had ever seen, attracting nearly 700,000 visitors.
‘Rameses’ exceeded attendance at any exhibition in America during its five-month period and paid for itself, turned a $1.5 million profit and, all told, generated an estimated $88 million for Memphis.
On 12 October 1989, with a $500,000 planning grant from local businessman ‘Ned’ Cook a son of the convention centre's namesake the city founded ‘WONDERS: The Memphis International Cultural Series’.
The inaugural show, last year's ‘Catherine the Great: Treasures of Imperial Russia’, brought 287 decorative arts objects from the Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg (The Art Newspaper, No. 8, May 1991, p. 9).
This year there are two ‘WONDERS’ events: ‘Splendors of the Ottoman Sultans’, featuring around 280 items, many from the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul (until 16 August), and ‘The Etruscans: Legacy of a Lost Civilization’with 175 objects from the Vatican (1 May-31 August).
For 1993, there will be a Napoleonic era show, mostly from the Château de Malmaison.
The city is negotiating future shows with representatives from several foreign countries.
The idea for a ‘Catherine’ exhibition was first proposed to the Hermitage by the National Geographic Society in Washington, D.C. The project lay dormant until Memphis came up with more than $6 million, and arranged co-sponsorship with Federal Express, Delta Airlines, the State of Tennessee, and Kroger Co. (a local grocery store chain).
The show ran from 10 April to 30 September 1991, seven days a week, and drew a reported 600,000 less than ‘Rameses’, but the largest art show attendance in the US in 1991.
‘WONDERS’ appears to have become the principal event in the cultural hub of the Tennessee-Arkansas-Mississippi tri-state region.
Jack Kyle, Public Relations Coordinator for the ‘WONDERS’ Series, told The Art Newspaper, ‘The response to ‘Tut’told us there's a market here for these kinds of events’.
This having been confirmed, the city is spending about $5.3 million for the ‘Ottoman’ show, with projected attendance of 500,000, and $3.2 million for the smaller ‘Etruscans’exhibition, which should attract about 200,000.
The Turkish show is especially significant, in that for years Turkish law prohibited even the temporary removal of objects from museums.
The rule was only recently repealed in 1987, for the exhibition, ‘The Age of Sultan Suleyman, the Magnificent’.
Dr Nurhan Atacey, Dean of the Faculty of Letters of Istanbul University, and a leading expert on Turkish and Persian miniature painting, Iznik pottery and Turkish textiles, is curating the exhibition and writing the catalogue.
Of the 280 objects, 175 come from the Topkapi Palace Museum.
The balance are from Turkish naval and military museums, the Turkish and Islamic Museums of Istanbul and Bursa, the Sadberk Hanim Museum in Istanbul (the first private museum in Turkey), and the privately owned Kuyas Collection, a major lender of Iznik pottery.
There are miniatures, sultan tents, a harem carriage, a throne, jewelled items, agate drinking cups, Iznik pottery, caftans, swords and the emerald-encrusted Topkapi dagger, which has only once before left the palace.
The ‘Etruscans’ exhibition, curated by Dr Francesco Buranelli of the Gregorian Etruscan Museum (see p. 14) in the Vatican, brings to the US for the first time around 180 pieces from the Guglielmi Collection, including votive busts, cinerary urns, domestic items, gold jewellery, and bronzes such as the ‘Putto Graziani’.
As a gesture of gratitude to the American Patrons of the Vatican Museum led by Mrs Helen Boehm, who bought part of the collection for the museum and have refurbished a wing, the Vatican agreed to send several hundred of the Etruscan objects on a tour of five US cities.
Mrs Boehm told The Art Newspaper that Walter Persegatti, former Treasurer and Secretary General of the Vatican Museums, and now International Coordinator of the Patrons and Friends of the Vatican Museums, was instrumental in making the loan possible.
The link with Memphis came about, in part, owing to Mrs Boehm's business ties with the city, and the fact that her studio produced porcelain objects for the ‘Rameses’ and ‘Catherine’gift shops.
The ‘WONDERS’ shows provide ‘a significant enhancement to the quality of life in the region’, says Mr Kyle, who notes that many people in the region cannot get to New York, Chicago, Washington D.C. and other big cities that have important collections and major temporary shows on a regular basis.
An indication of the enthusiasm ‘WONDERS’ generates is the fact that more than 1,700 volunteers devoted fifty hours each to the 1991 show.
‘Our efforts are to develop exhibitions that have a high appeal to the general public, while helping to educate and inform as much as possible’, explains Mr Kyle.
Included in the price of a ticket ($9.50 adult, $5.00 youth, $2.00 student groups) is an audio guide (screen actress Lauren Bacall narrated the ‘Catherine’ tape).
The accompanying media blitz is truly a thing of wonder rivalling or surpassing that of any US museum.
Twyla Dixon, Marketing and Promotion Director for the series, told The Art Newspaper her marketing budget for each show is $500,000 ($200,000 for the smaller ‘Etruscans show’ this year).
Based on a study of the pioneering ‘King Tut’ campaign, the ‘WONDERS’team focuses primarily on a 300–500 mile region around Memphis, implementing a dense, multi-tier marketing strategy.
Before the shows open, they sponsor media trips enabling journalists and the five Memphis television stations to produce thirty-minute documentaries previewing the exhibitions' countries of origin.
Radio stations and television channels donate time for ‘public service announcements’ and the Memphis Business Journal creates a special supplement for each show.
‘WONDERS’ hires an advertising agency to design a logo and emblazons it on 10,000 posters, ten billboards and a million brochures.
They put the device on 200 pennants suspended from utility poles, and paint it directly on crosswalks in the downtown area.
Kroger Supermarkets print exhibition information, with a toll-free telephone number for reservations, on four million grocery bags.
The agency places advertisements in state magazines and in regional editions of national publications, and a ‘speakers bureau’ books 250 engagements within the 300 mile region.
As posters go up in hotel lobbies and banners are hung in the international airport terminals, crowds are a foregone conclusion.
Mr Kyle told The Art Newspaper that the shows are mounted ‘in compliance with the strictest code of museumship and presentation’.
The exhibitions are held in the 26,000 sq.ft. two-storey Grand Exhibition Hall of the multi-use Memphis Cook Convention Center.
(The Etruscan show will be held concurrently in Memphis Pink Palace Museum, whose name derives from the pink Georgia marble of the original building, former home of the founder of the Piggly Wiggly grocery chain).
Inside the climate-controlled space, ‘WONDERS’ builds a structure based on the exhibition theme.
‘Rameses’, for example, was given a hypostyle temple-like setting.
‘Catherine’ was set in an architectural representation of the Hermitage, complete with imitation window and door frames, cornices and mouldings, matching paint colours, and a twenty foot long photo-mural of the exterior of the Hermitage that greeted visitors at the entrance.
The ‘Ottoman’ installation takes as its theme a Topkapi palace courtyard.
And the Pink Palace has a theatrical setting for the ‘Etruscans’, with a temple façade, city gate, house entrance, banqueting tent and tomb entrance.
Since there is no curatorial staff, the ‘WONDERS’ series creates one ad hoc, engaging a world expert for the subject.
The ‘Rameses’ team was led by Dr Rita Freud, then Director of the Institute of Egyptian Art and Archaeology at Memphis State University, who has since become Curator of Egyptian Art at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
‘Catherine’ was assembled by a curatorial committee from the Hermitage, led by Galina Komelova, Head of the Department of Russian Art, with Dr Allison Hilton of Georgetown University, a Russian art scholar.
Furthermore, respected art handlers have ensured that none of the objects is damaged in transit.
The majority of museum people interviewed had never heard of the ‘WONDERS’ series.
Many recognised the ‘Rameses’ and ‘Catherine’titles, but had seen neither show, and knew little or nothing about the imminent Turkish and Vatican exhibitions.
Several factors have contributed to this museum-world ‘blackout’.
Foremost is the fact that although the exhibitions are non-profit making, they are perceived as commercial exercises, more entertainments than museums.
Certainly, the middle-brow approach to the consumer marketing campaign throws a certain light on the productions, but it is not necessarily reflected in the character of the shows themselves.
Second, there is little or no cooperation with other US museums.
The city organises the shows independently, and invites no other major institution to play a significant part.
Third, the national and international art press have shunned ‘WONDERS’, and the dearth of mainstream press coverage serves to keep a lid on the series.
Finally, Memphis is not frequented by most members of the American museum community.
James Wood, Director of the Art Institute of Chicago, conveyed a suspicion held by most high-level museum administrators: ‘I would assume that these exhibitions have been tailored more as events than as the kind of exhibitions that are being sought after by the major museums’.
The Deputy Director of the National Gallery, Roger Mandle, told The Art Newspaper, ‘It's sort of anomalous to have an exhibition in a convention centre’, but the ‘Catherine’ installation was ‘professionally done’, he says.
Mr Mandle was more concerned that the city government is usurping the role of its museums.
But the directors of the city's art museums feel they have benefited enormously from ‘WONDERS’.
Dr Douglas Noble, of the Memphis Pink Palace Museum, headquarters of the city system, told The Art Newspaper that the ‘Etruscans’ show is inaugurating a newly completed $7.5 million expansion renovation at his museum.
His staff designed the show themselves, in coordination with the Vatican.
Alexander Gaudieri, of the Memphis Brooks Museum, pointed out that ‘Rameses’ was presented in cooperation with his museum.
He further told The Art Newspaper that completion of a new wing in 1991 has now given the Brooks the physical space to handle the attendance ‘WONDERS’ has drawn.
Thomas Hoving, former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, told The Art Newspaper, ‘There's no reason Memphis should not put on these great shows.
The convention centre is just as good or better than any museum.
They get some of the best curators in their fields’.
Having seen ‘Catherine’, Mr Hoving had nothing but praise for the exhibition: ‘It was sensational.
One of the best shows I've ever seen.
Better than any of the other museums in the US, with the exception of the National Gallery.
Excellent catalogue.
Superior choice of objects.
Top flight’.
Asked why the shows were not coming to Washington D.C., New York, Chicago or Los Angeles, Mr Hoving said: ‘Oh, they'll grumble something about scheduling or funding.
The real reason is they were resentful of the non-museum people in Memphis.
It's ‘The Club’’, he concluded.
‘The art museums of the United States have given up on great shows with the exception of Carter Brown, and now he's out.
They're usually run by idiots’, he said, ‘stuffed shirt idiots’.
None of the museums consulted has been approached as a possible venue for any of the ‘WONDERS’ shows.
Mr Wood conjectured, ‘They could be raising money for the lending institutions, which is not the kind of thing we do’.
Indeed, the lending museums receive guarantees of several hundred thousand dollars.
For ‘Rameses’, Memphis sponsored the restoration of the exhibition's centrepiece the 47-ton 27 foot Colossus of Memphis carried out by the staff of the Egyptian Antiquities Organisation at a cost of $125,000.
The E.A.O. also got a minimum guarantee of $300,000 from Memphis and every city on the five-stop North American tour, and additional royalties after the exhibitions took in a certain amount.
Memphis contributed $250,000 to allow conservators at the Hermitage to restore Catherine's coronation carriage, an elaborately carved and gilded confection adorned with panels painted by Boucher.
In addition, ‘WONDERS’ paid the Hermitage more than $200,000 for the exhibition, and for the Russian curators to write the catalogue.
Similar fees will be paid directly to the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Turkey.
A spokesman for ‘WONDERS’ told The Art Newspaper, ‘The approximate total guarantee is about $300,000 in cash for loan of the Ottoman objects, some of which goes to restoration’.
Similarly, the ‘Etruscans’ show will cost Memphis and the other venues around $300,000 each.
For many possible venues, such fees are prohibitive or contrary to policy.
The lenders wish to profit from sending the shows on tour.
However, because the venues are not booked sufficiently in advance, only institutions with the most flexible schedules have been able to participate.
Two weeks before the show closed in Memphis, the Armand Hammer Museum in Los Angeles called and expressed interest in the ‘Catherine’ show.
The West Coast museum negotiated directly with the Hermitage, and agreed to pay a rental fee of around $300,000.
For a separate amount they purchased the exhibition package from Memphis including cases, mounts, architecture, logo, transparencies, etc.
After closing at the Hammer on 12 April, ‘Catherine’ will go to the Dallas Historical Society, and to one other venue, yet to be determined.
The Victoria & Albert Museum in London had expressed some interest.
For the ‘Ottoman’ show, Turkey has approved time for three four-month venues that are still being negotiated.
The Vatican's ‘Etruscans’ show has a five-city itinerary that includes the Dallas Science Museum, the Morris Museum in Morristown, New Jersey, the Museum of Five Art at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, and the Birmingham Art Museum in Alabama.
The 1993 ‘Napoleonic’ show, curated by Mr Bernard Chevalier, Chief Conservateur of the Château de Malmaison, will not travel.
Look who thought of it first
Glass pyramid competition design for a Palace of Culture in Moscow (1930) by Ivan Leonidov (1902–59)(Schchusev Architecture Museum, Moscow).
Leonidov was one of the many Soviet architects of the Avant-garde whose designs remained projects on paper, only a staircase, in the Kislodovsk sanatorium, ever being executed.
This drawing is among the 700 or so exhibits, many never seen before in the West, in the exhibition ‘Die grosse Utopie: die russische Avantgarde 1915–1932’, at the Schirn Kunsthalle until 10 May.
In The Art Newspaper No. 16 March 1992 p. 6 we published the fears of some art historians that this exhibition might have been infiltrated by fakes; in the event these fears have proved to be groundless and the show has been enjoying great success.
It reopens at the Guggenheim, New York, in the autumn
Zygmunt Vogel's vision of Warsaw
LONDON.
From 15 May to 26 June, the Polish Cultural Institute is showing thirty-six watercolour views of Warsaw by Zygmunt Vogel (1764–1826), near-contemporary of the better-known Bellotto.
These come from the Warsaw National Museum's collection.
Vogel trained as an architect and was a resident artist at the Polish Royal Court.
Painted in 1785–86, these watercolours were the property of the Raczynski family prior to World War II, and were crucially important, with Bellotto's views, in the rebuilding of Warsaw.
Vogel's watercolours were taken by the occupying forces to Germany but in 1946 were successfully claimed back and returned.
Guercino reaches Washington
WASHINGTON D.C. The National Gallery of Art is currently hosting two exhibitions as part of the Guercino four-hundred years celebrations.
‘Guercino: Master Painter of the Baroque’ is the first American exhibition devoted to the artist's paintings, while ‘Guercino: Drawings from Windsor Castle’includes sixty works from the celebrated royal collection.
Both run until 17 May.
‘Master Painter’ was organized by the Pinacoteca Nazionale di Bologna with the Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt and the Washington National Gallery.
The paintings on show in Washington have been chosen by Diane de Grazia, Curator of Southern Baroque Painting, in consultation with Sir Denis Mahon.
Many of the paintings were shown at the Museo Civico Archeologico, Bologna, the Pinacoteca Civica and Chiesa del Rosario, Cento, and the Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt, before the present showing.
‘Drawings from Windsor’ was organized by the Royal Library, Windsor, with the National Gallery, Washington, the Kimbell, Fort Worth, and the Drawing Center, New York, and curated by Andrew Robison.
A rare outing: Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum lends Sargent to the National Gallery
BOSTON.
The Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston, hardly ever allows loans.
The last time was in 1987 when they lent a Reynolds to the Pierpont Morgan Library.
This year one of its famous paintings, Sargent's ‘El Jaleo’ will leave to be on view at the National Gallery of Washington until 5 July 1992.
On the conditions of lending Hilliard Goldfarb, Chief Curator of the Isabella Stewart Gardner said, ‘we consider whether the work lent will make an enduring contribution to a work of critical scholarship’.
The National Gallery is paying for the conservation of the painting.
‘El Jaleo’, a lifesize painting of a Spanish dancer, will be the centrepiece of a small exhibition of seven paintings and forty-four drawings by Sargent related to the Boston painting, including ‘The Spanish Dancer’, an earlier version of ‘El Jaleo’ which was abandoned by the artist in Paris and rediscovered in 1988 in Grenoble.
It's a Documenta tiff
BELGIUM.
On 13 March, De Morgen, a respected Flemish-language daily, published a front-page article stating that Jan Vercruysse, the forty-four-year-old Belgian artist who owes much of his growing international reputation to the keen discernment of Documenta boss Jan Hoet, was intending to withdraw from the Documenta IX survey of contemporary art (see The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, p.12).
De Morgen's correspondent interpreted Vercruysse's decision as ‘a reaction against Hoet's preparations for Documenta, which Vercruysse has labelled showy and pandering to public taste’.
The more sceptical see Vercruysse's defection simply as a private tiff between the artist and Hoet.
Some have pointed out that the mercurial Vercruysse has provoked similar situations in the past, and always as a result of difficulties in their relationship: most recently over an exhibition to be held in May at the Dhondt Dhaenens Museum, Deurle, which examines Belgium's contribution to Documenta.
Speaking of the decision, Vercruysse's dealer has said the reasons for the withdrawal are not personal.
Asked for his reaction Hoet simply said: ‘I hope he will change his mind.
I very much want him to be present at Kassel: he is a major artist’.
Great English country house shows its treasures
STAMFORD.
An exhibition entitled ‘Ten Years of Discoveries at Burghley’ is at Burghley House, Lincolnshire, until 4 October.
The house, built in the 1560s by William Cecil, Lord High Treasurer to Elizabeth I, but much altered and remodelled in the late seventeenth century, continues to yield undiscovered or long-lost treasures.
Included in the exhibition will be a Kakiemon group of wrestlers, until recently used as a door-stop; a selection of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century jewels found hidden under sawdust in bakers' trays; a small seventeenth-century Italian ivory copy of Bernini's ‘Apollo and Daphne’ group and a silver penstand by Phillip Syng who designed the penstand used in the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
In the energetic and art-historically minded care of Lady Victoria Leatham, Burghley has undergone major improvements in the form of restoration, cleaning and the cataloguing of the house's contents.
Over the past ten years a series of exhibitions at Burghley and on tour have focused on the house's clocks, European and Oriental ceramics, books, objets de vertu and scientific instruments.
Apart from the outstanding quality and rarity of many of the items, much of their fascination for scholars has lain in being able to document them in the family's ancient inventories.
Frick presents microcosm of nineteenth-century domestic life
NEW YORK.
From 21 Mayto 23 August, the Frick Collection is showing ‘An Album of Nineteenth-Century Interiors: watercolours from two private collections’.
These illustrate domestic interiors of diverse social classes, from an emperor's bedroom in Portugal to the bedroom of a Russian dacha.
One of the albums was compiled for the Wittgenstein family, documenting almost a decade of nomadic princely travel from house to house.
Many furnishings thus appear in different interiors, from Paris to Naples and Poland.
In addition to gifted amateurs, the artists represented include Joseph Nash, Franz Nachtmann, and Eduard Gaertner.
The exhibition is the work of Charlotte Gere, who has written its exhaustive catalogue, investigating the rooms' contents down to their present whereabouts and the attribution of paintings.
Dr Edgar Munhill, the Frick's Curator, pointed out to The Art Newspaper, ‘We have been doing exhibitions here for almost twenty years around aspects of our own collection, often not well known to the general public.
The present exhibition grew out of our director's knowledge of the two collections involved.
In a sense it continues the focus on the interior shown in our Ingres, ‘La Comtesse d'Haussonville’ in the exhibition devoted to that picture in 1985’.
Max Klinger at the Städel
FRANKFURT AM MAIN.
Apart from Max Klinger's superb etchings, the rest of his work has been much neglected since it fell out of fashion.
Much of it is preserved in the former DDR and now, thanks to German re-unification and to a renewed appreciation of grandiose kitsch, this great self-styled ‘Universalkünstler’ of the German fin-de-siècle can now be rediscovered at the Städelsches Kunstinstitut.
The current exhibition of his sculptures, drawings, paintings, and designs has been put together by the Museum der Bildenden Künste of Leipzig and sent to Frankfurt in return for the Städel's Max Beckmann exhibition which was shown in Leipzig in 1990.
The Städel's Graphische Sammlung has contributed a special display grouped around the ‘The Glove’, the series of ten etchings (1881) which made Klinger famous and which influenced Max Ernst and other surrealists.
The focal point of the show is the monumental ‘Beethoven’ sculpture, seen as the crowning achievement of Klinger's career by admirers (including the artist himself) or, alternatively, an expression of his ‘lethally bad taste’(Georg Bussmann in the catalogue).
Two rows of smaller sculptures lead up to it, beginning with Klinger's femmes fatales, ‘Cassandra’(1893) and the ‘New Salome’(1895).
Both are half-figures made of coloured marbles, with painted hair, dyed skin, and inset amber eyes.
Less flamboyant portrait busts of famous contemporaries such as Franz Liszt and Richard Wagner follow.
Finally, on a high pedestal, an incarnation of artistic genius, Beethoven sits naked the body of white marble with alabaster drapery over lap and legs, on a bronze throne.
A black marble eagle crouches at his feet.
The throne is decorated with coloured marble, jewelled mosaics, ivory angels, and allegorical reliefs.
Completed for the exhibition of Vienna Sezession in 1902, where it became a sensation and drew both exalted praise and extensive mockery, the monument was bought by Klinger's native town of Leipzig for the then enormous sum of DM250,000.
Today it is exhibited in the Neues Gewandhaus (the concert hall).
The exhibition closes on 7 June.
For the record
London, New York, Houston, Chicago: the big Magritte show
The artist, his critic and the custodian of his ‘moral rights’
Magritte should be canonised by the advertising industry for the inspiration he has given it; here are some of his own rarely seen ads
Magritte the artist
The most comprehensive exhibition for more than ten years
LONDON.
The exhibition opening at the Hayward Gallery towards the end of this month (21 May-2 August) is the most significant presentation of the art of Magritte since the survey mounted for the Palais des Beaux-Arts in Brussels and the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris in 1978–79.
Comprising 111 paintings, fifteen works on paper, nine painted objects and three posthumous bronze sculptures based upon his compositions, it has been selected by David Sylvester and Sarah Whitfield and will be shown in three important American venues in the following twelve months: at the Metropolitan Museum, New York (9 September-22 November), at the Menil Foundation in Houston (15 December-21 February 1993) and at the Art Institute of Chicago (16 March-30 May 1993).
Magritte's career has not been examined in such detail in Britain since Sylvester curated a smaller and more exclusive exhibition for the Tate Gallery in 1969.
On that occasion, references to the artist's formative work and to his objects and sculpture were omitted.
In scope, too, it eclipses James Thrall Soby's edited portrait of the great Belgian Surrealist master which took place at New York's Museum of Modern Art in 1965 and ignored his Impressionist period.
It seems remarkable that nearly thirty years has elapsed since there was a major museum exhibition in the United States, although Magritte's work has been familiar to, and widely admired by, the generation of American Pop artists.
One of the lenders to the exhibition is Jasper Johns, who owns ‘La Clef des Songes’, an important word painting of 1935.
With architects Stanton Williams, with whom he collaborated for the installation of the recent Jasper Johns drawings exhibition, Sylvester has devised an unusual and imaginative solution to the exhibition's arrangement.
He has inverted the customary circuit and opens the exhibition on the gallery's upper floor where experimental works revealing Magritte's interest in Cubism and Futurism at the beginning of his career will be hung.
Beyond it, the large upper space becomes a labyrinth of small chambers containing pictures from 1925 to 1928, including paintings made at the beginning of his short residence in Paris.
This pattern, which echoes the scheme invented by Sylvester for the Tate Gallery more than twenty years ago and encourages a focus upon single works, is continued in the long gallery of the ground floor where paintings from 1929 to 1939 are placed on both sides of a partition wall.
The gallery above the ramp is divided into five distinct spaces for the Impressionist paintings inspired by Renoir and dating from after 1940, the ‘vache’ paintings which occupied the artist briefly in 1948 and were the subject of a recent reassessment by Bernard Blistene, Director of the Musées de Marseilles, the rock or stone paintings, an important selection of gouaches and works on paper, and Magritte's painted bottles and other objects.
The exhibition is concluded in the gallery beneath the ramp, where three large bronze sculptures dating from 1967, ‘Madame Récamier’, ‘La Joconde’ and ‘La Folie des Grandeurs’are surrounded by eight paintings from the final chapter of Magritte's career.
A fourth bronze sculpture, ‘Le Thérapeute’, is at present on loan to the Tate Gallery.
Sarah Whitfield has written the catalogue.
Although it will attract the lion's share of attention, the exhibition is, in fact, only the last link in a chain of new developments in Magritte studies, for a fresh monograph and the first of five projected volumes of a catalogue raisonné are being published this month.
David Sylvester, the author of the monograph, is also the editor of the catalogue raisonné, which has been financed by the Menil Foundation, the largest repository of Magritte's art and a major lender to the Hayward Gallery's exhibition.
In association with Mercator Fonds and Sotheby's Publications, the Foundation is the project's co-publisher (£95 per volume; £400 for a subscription set of the complete catalogue).
With Sarah Whitfield, Sylvester has written Volume I, which covers Magritte's career to 1930 and identifies 333 oil paintings, with an additional fifty-six works, recorded but lost, listed in an appendix, and Volume II (1931–48), which will be published in the autumn.
They are followed by the publication, probably in the spring of 1993, of Volumes III (1949–67) and IV (works on paper and temperas 1920–67), which have been written by Sarah Whitfield and Michael Raeburn, who is responsible for designing and typesetting the entire project.
The catalogue will be completed by Volume V, provisionally scheduled for publication in the autumn of 1993, which will carry an addendum for any works flushed out by the exhibition, a long bibliography and extensive cross-referenced indices.
Totalling more than 1,000 paintings, nearly forty painted objects, eight bronze sculptures and about 600 gouaches, watercolours and papiers collés, the catalogue is an ambitious task which has occupied Sylvester's scholarship for twenty years.
The fruit is the enlargement of Magritte's known oeuvre by as many as 200 works, never previously illustrated, which Sylvester and his team have recovered from private collections, and a serious attempt to unravel that most taxing issue of the existence of different versions of the same composition and of different images which carry the same title.
Extensive entries for each of the artist's works are preceded by a long chronology with numbered and itemised sections discussing in detail the major developments in Magritte's career.
Preferring a neutral approach for such material, Sylvester has not loaded the catalogue with critical judgements.
Here, then, is the value of his new monograph which provides a lengthy discussion of the artist's biography and themes.
Published by the Menil Foundation with Mercator Fonds and Thames & Hudson (£45), it is aimed at a wider readership, but it will be the essential essay for all students keen to learn how a great scholar's opinions have been honed over the long years spent in the consideration of Magritte's art.
The Magritte business
‘I am fortunate to live on one of the clouds in his paintings, with the art I love so much’
PARIS.
Belgium is making preparations to celebrate the centenary of René Magritte, who was born in 1898, amid considerable regret that a large part of the artist's private collection was lost to the nation following the death of his widow.
Charly Herscovici, who formerly assisted Georgette Magritte and for the last six years has managed the painter's copyright and droit morale, explained how this could have come about.
‘In her original will, Georgette Magritte left her whole estate to Belgium's Musée Royale des Beaux-Arts.
But the directors of the museum at that time were so insensitive that they actually discouraged her generous offer.
For years, for example, they refused to move two canvases by Pasque and Mambour, which were ambiguously placed at the entrance to the Magritte room.
Later, when E.L.T. Mesens offered them his fabulous collection, which included a hundred or so works by Magritte, thirty by Max Ernst and twenty Dalís, asking only that the exhibition areas should bear his name, the directors were equally negative.
When a more open attitude began to prevail, it was too late: Georgette Magritte was on her death-bed.
Fortunately, the present curator is a more enlightened man.’
As a result of the rigidity of the museum's directors, Magritte's widow drew up a second will, and the new provisions were recognised as valid.
Belgium's most prestigious museum did benefit to some extent, but far less than anticipated.
In the event, part of the collection was left to the museum at Charleroi, near Magritte's home town; another part went to the Pompidou Centre's Musée National d'Art Moderne, while the painter's remaining works, house and surrealist library were left ownerless: his widow had not had time to stipulate how they should be divided.
Sadly, the Belgian State was obliged to let these treasures be auctioned, and they were eventually sold by Sotheby's in London and at Brussels's Palais des Beaux-Arts.
The Belgian government did everything it could to keep the works in the country: a genealogist was employed to trace distant relatives of the artist, and a new law on donations of works of art was passed, with the express purpose of encouraging his heirs to pay the death duties in kind (in which case roughly 80% of the collection would have remained in Belgium).
The financial aspirations of the legal heirs, however, frustrated any hope of compromise.
Works by René Magritte are consequently to be seen in museums and private collections all round the world.
Some are still being bought and sold and, according to Charly Herscovici, prices have been rising slowly since 1967, the year Magritte died.
Even now, however, good-quality large-scale canvases rarely fetch more than $4 million; and there have been problems with forgeries.
Herscovici says: ‘At a Foundation in Madrid, I came across a fake Magritte which had been slipped into into an official exhibition so that it could be reproduced in the catalogue without my permission in order to achieve legitimacy.
Then, a few months later quite by chance, of course the same painting came onto the market.’
Looking after the copyright of an artist as prolific and popular as Magritte can be no easy task.
His works travel the world, reproduced on postcards, posters and any medium which does not actually detract from the artist's intention.
As heir to the droit morale and guardian of the Magritte estate, Charly Herscovici explained that ‘Inheriting this intellectual property makes me responsible for protecting the artist and his work, and ensuring that it is handed down for posterity.
I have always been fascinated by Magritte's work; I have met all his friends, and I worked on his archives for six years.
Nowadays, I am consulted on all matters pertaining to him, and I feel my role is to make him better known.
I am fortunate to live on one of the clouds in his paintings, with the art I love so much’.
Herscovici is also thinking of writing a book based on his long conversations with Georgette Magritte.
Magritte, the Menil and the catalogue raisonné
HOUSTON, TEXAS.
The mammoth catalogue raisonné of Magritte's work would almost certainly not have come into existence if it were not for John (d. 1973) and Dominique de Menil.
It goes back to the 1969 Magritte exhibition, also curated by Sylvester, to which the Menil lent a number of works.
John de Menil conceived the idea of a catalogue raisonné of the artist's work then and asked David Sylvester to be its editor; the Foundation has been supporting the project ever since.
The couple was first drawn to the work of Magritte by the high regard in which he was held by another great Surrealist, Marcel Duchamp, and by Julian Levy and Alexander Iolas.
Both French nationals, Mrs de Menil was born a Schlumberger, an Alsatian family whose fortune was made in oil drilling equipment, and which transferred is centre of operations to Texas in 1942.
A love of art was kindled in her by a Dominican priest in the 1930s, and indeed, a spiritual and moral consciousness beyond the usual lip-service to the ‘otherness’ of creative endeavour has always informed her involvement in art.
In the garden around the museum, designed by Renzo Piano, stands Barnett Newman's ‘Broken Obelisk’ of 1968, which the city fathers of Houston had turned down as a gift: it was dedicated to the memory of Martin Luther King, murdered that year.
In front of the sculpture is a kind of chapel of meditation, octagonal in form, in which hang fourteen Rothkos.
At the heart of the around 1000-strong collection are a hundred works by the Surrealist, Max Ernst Dominique was painted by Ernst in the 1930s with antiquities, Byzantine and medieval, Oceanic and Indian artefacts, and twentieth-century art, all assembled by the couple over forty years.
The museum opened to the public in 1987 and the Collection is now funded by donations from Dominique de Menil and from the Estate of John de Menil, as well as from other foundations and individuals.
Six to ten temporary exhibitions are presented every year, and other more wide-ranging projects undertaken by the Foundation include a critical history of Vatican II in collaboration with the University of Bologna's Institute for Religious Studies, and the publication of a number of books on the image of the black in Western art.
Magritte at auction
LONDON.
Magritte has performed extremely well at auction over the last few years, according to Melanie Clore of Sotheby's Impressionist Pictures Department.
Magritte buyers are serious collectors, rather than the speculative buyers who were largely responsible for the rise and fall in prices of other European twentieth-century artists over the past few years.
The demand for Magritte, and for other Surrealist painters, continues to be strong and prices have risen consistently, although Surrealist works have not yet commanded the top flights of prices seen for other Classic modern artists.
In November 1990 Sotheby's New York offered three paintings by the artist in the Schlumberger Jones sale: of these ‘L'Idole’ made a hammer price of $1.1 million (est $600,000–800,000); and ‘La Philosophie dans le boudoir’, bought by a European dealer, made the then world record of $1.75 million (est. $700,000–900,000).
In New York, the same week, however, $9.9 million was paid for Léger's ‘Les Maisons sous les Arbres’ and $5.9 for a good early Miró, ‘Danseuse Espagnole’.
In May 1991 the Sotheby's Magritte record was broken by ‘Les barricades mystérieuses’(1961) which made $2.2 million at Christie's New York (est $1.2–1.6 million).
In the opinion of Melanie Clore there is no reason to believe that such prices could not be repeated at the present time.
Whether they break through to the next level will make interesting watching: the forthcoming exhibition and David Sylvester's catalogue raisonné may prove influential.
Magritte with chess board and painted bottle, photographed by Charles Leirens, 1960.
Magritte produced a number of such painted bottles in the 1940s.
In March 1972 a drawing of one was used as the cover of Playboy Magazine.
Playboy's use of the image relies on a sub-text of the woman as closed bottle, about to be uncorked.
Paradoxically the woman is also inside the bottle offered but inaccessible; thus the spectator/consumer can only quench his desire by reading the magazine.
The bottled woman arouses desire but does not satisfy it a function similar to modern advertising.
Photothèque René Magritte-Giraudon 
Poster design for ‘The Merry Widow’, Irving Thalberg's 1925 silent film directed by and starring Eric von Stroheim.
The poster was produced in November 1955 to advertise a series of Stroheim films.
The conventional format and heroic pose of the sitter are perfectly offset by the incongruity of the costume and title.
Photothèque René Magritte-Giraudon
‘Belga’, about 1955, Musée royaux des Beaux-Arts de Belgique, Brussels.
Magritte's relationship with advertising was ambivalent.
As a young man he earned a living from conventional poster design.
He also produced work of startling modernity such as the second catalogue for the furrier Samuel of 1928 which uses a disjointed photo-montage style to produce startlingly Surrealist images accompanied by brief, enigmatic texts on the facing pages.
The influences of Cubism, Futurism and Dada are evident in such work.
Poverty compelled a return to advertising in the early 1940s but the work of this period is essentially derivative in that it borrows from the artist's own paintings.
When asked in 1946 what he disliked most, the artist replied ‘Advertising!’ and defined modernity as ‘The decorative arts, folklore, newsreaders, aerodynamism, the smell of naphtha…’.
Photothèque René Magritte-Giraudon
Top: David Sylvester, b. 1924.
Veteran British art critic, former Arts Council member, broadcaster, film-maker and exhibition organiser: Henry Moore (1951,1968 and 1978); Alberto Giacometti (1955, 1965 and 1981); Soutine (1963); Magritte (1969,1978–79 and1992); Robert Morris (1971); Henri Laurens (1971); Joan Miró bronzes (1972); ‘Islamic Carpets’(1972) and ‘The Eastern carpet in the Western world’(1983); De Kooning (1977); ‘Dada and Surrealism Reviewed’(1978).
Among his publications (which also include some on sport), probably the most famous are his interviews with Francis Bacon of 1975.
Photo Derry Moore
Charly Herscovici, custodian of Magritte's droit morale
‘La Main heureuse’, sketch and explanatory notes, reproduced in the magazine Rhetorique, October 1962.
The startling image of a piano encircled by a wedding ring exemplifies the notion of affinities developed by Magritte from the 1930s.
The juxtaposition of seemingly disparate objects; the distortion of scale; the vaguely poetic resonances (the wedding ring around the finger, the fingers on the piano keys etc.) all contribute to the enigma of the images at once puzzling and yet trite.
Such a combination made Magritte's work immensely appealing to the Pop Art movement and to the advertising industry, to the artist's continuing annoyance.
Photothèque René Magritte-Giraudon
Design for an advertisement for Parfums Mem, 1946.
The design is plagiarised from Magritte's own 1934 painting ‘L'Arbre savant’, the first such borrowing by the artist from one of his own paintings for use as publicity material.
In the painting the shelves in the tree hold a candle, pyramid and worms; in the advertisement they are substituted by bottles of perfume.
The concepts of self-referentialism, strangeness and improbability, all central to Magritte's paintings, were easily adapted and assimilated into his advertising, and again became important for the development of the genre.
Photothèque René Magritte-Giraudon
Museums
Germany
Planned before reunification, Bonn's new $ 79.5 million Kunsthalle to open on 19 June
Swedish Director Pontus Hulten emphasises links between arts and sciences
PARIS.
Bonn, still the seat of Germany's federal government, is a quiet, well-heeled city.
It has never generated the cosmopolitan energy typical of Berlin, nor the creative ferment associated with other German cities, such as Düsseldorf or Cologne.
Bonn's cultural life should nevertheless be enhanced by its new Kunst-und-Ausstellungshalle, an exhibition complex which has risen on the site adjacent to the Stadtmuseum.
With the sole exception of the Museum of German History, which recently moved to the Altes Museum in former East Berlin, it is unique in being funded entirely by the German federal government.
To the great satisfaction of Irmgard Schwaetzer, federal minister for public works, the final building costs will be almost DM1 million less than the DM128 million (£45.7 million; $79.5 million) originally budgeted for the project.
The gigantic construction (the ground floor hall alone is 1,300 metres square) will be opened by Chancellor Kohl on 19 June, four months ahead of schedule, to coincide with the Documenta exhibition in Kassel and the ‘Platzverführung’ in Stuttgart.
The Kunsthalle's approach will be multi-disciplinary, emphasising and investigating the links between the arts and the sciences.
The idea of creating an exhibition centre to demonstrate the federal government's commitment to culture (usually responsibility of the regions), as well as to political and economic development, dates back to the 1950s.
Not until 1985, however, did the long debate bear fruit, when an international competition was launched to design a suitable building.
The winner was the Viennese architect Gustav Peichl, who proposed a straightforward rectangular design giving over 4,300 square metres of exhibition space on several levels.
The 6,020 square-metre terrace is capped by three unequal cones, admitting light to the areas below and symbolising the classic triad of the visual arts: architecture, painting and sculpture.
Further symbolism can be found in the row of sixteen dark metal columns that stand along one side, one for each Land.
Peichl has designed a building as well suited to display as to debate: in addition to modular areas intended to house exhibitions of all kinds, there is a technologically sophisticated complex consisting of a library, a 500-seat auditorium, television studios, and rooms for lectures, concerts, film shows and live performances.
Given the nature of the project, Pontus Hulten was an obvious choice to direct the artistic activities of the new Kunsthalle.
Before managing the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art and Palazzo Grassi in Venice, the Swedish scholar presided over the fortunes of the Pompidou Centre, where he pioneered the multi-disciplinary approach and the concept of architectural flexibility.
‘The fact that I am a foreigner almost certainly worked in my favour,’ suggests Hulten.
‘It would have been very difficult to appoint a director from one of Germany's regions.
Here, every city has its own traditions and makes its own demands.
Bonn is difficult to define, even for people who work there.
We have tried to create a centre which first meets the needs of the city, but which can also assume a national role.
From the beginning, the aim was to set up a prestigious institution, able to house the big exhibitions which have often passed Germany by.
The sort of people who live and work in Bonn are well educated and open-minded.
The city is somewhat isolated as the administrative heart of Germany, but the surrounding region is culturally well endowed.
The Bonn/Berlin dilemma is changing the image of the federal capital, but I think things will remain substantially the same over the next ten years’.
Although it was originally intended to receive exhibitions rather than to devise and produce them, the new federal Kunsthalle is now setting its sights higher.
Its directors have expressed their enthusiasm for European integration and have established a network of contacts and agreements with other countries, setting up new types of collaboration and programmes for joint and travelling exhibitions.
‘But we are not seeking to be a showcase or represent specifically German interests’, explains Pontus Hulten, who is assisted in his work by an international consultative committee.
‘The Ministry of the Interior, which has overall responsibility for German museums, has never tried to tell us what to do; the only restrictions on our activities have been financial’.
Although it has no permanent collections, its flexibility and room for manoeuvre could lead to new kinds of collaboration with institutions and individuals willing to lend works of art.
As far as the building itself is concerned, Hulten has not been able to exert much influence on a project conceived some seven years ago, but he professes to be satisfied with the structure, describing it as ‘generous’.
He does intend to increase its flexibility by modifying internal partitions, thus improving on the ‘outdated concepts of the Sixties and Seventies’.
The Kunsthalle will open with a programme of five exhibitions.
‘Territorium Artis’ is Hulten's synthesis of the main developments in modern art, from the end of the last century to the present day.
It consists of 150 key works by 120 different artists, all of whom were rejected or misunderstood by their contemporaries.
‘Pantheon der Photographie im 20.
Jahrhundert’ is another historical exhibition, bringing together images by thirty photographers, including Diane Arbus, Bernd and Hilla Becher, Paul Strand and André Kertész.
Niki de Saint-Phalle gets a solo show, with a wide range of works displayed inside the building and a further thirty-five outside in a kind of roof garden.
This is the first time so many monumental works by the French artist have been shown in one place (though her Gallericcio works are even bigger).
Another retrospective is devoted to the work of Gustav Peichl, while a major exhibition entitled ‘Erdsicht.
Global Change’ confronts the world's environmental problems.
It gives a view of the Earth based on satellite data and photographs, interactive computers and audio-visual systems.
The first exhibition of contemporary art planned by the Kunsthalle will be devoted to Gerhardt Richter, and is due to visit Stockholm, New York and Paris before arriving in Bonn.
According to Pontus Hulten, ‘The choice of Richter is significant.
He symbolises the new situation in the arts in Germany.
This exhibition also demonstrates our determination to concentrate on quality, and to make this centre a more ‘classic’ institution than many of its counterparts.
Washington D.C.
What's that sculpture there and who owns it?
Smithsonian launches survey for U.S.
WASHINGTON, D.C. In honour of the 1976 bicentennial, the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American Art (NMAA) completed a five-year survey of pre-1914 paintings by American artists born before 1880.
The museum catalogued 260,000 works in collections around the world.
Sculpture is next on the agenda.
The NMAA is assembling a register of American sculptures indoors (40,000 entries so far) and has announced plans to create a comprehensive inventory of America's outdoor sculpture.
The three-year, $5-million campaign, Save Outdoor Sculpture!
(SOS!), is a joint project of the NMAA and the National Institute for the Conservation of Cultural Property (NIC), a non-profit clearing house for conservation efforts in America.
SOS! will locate, catalogue and assess the condition of the thousands of outdoor sculptures throughout the fifty States.
Any work publicly or privately owned that is visually accessible to the community will be included.
Since many of the outdoor works of art suffer from natural wear, pollution, vandalism and neglect, the new registry will contain condition assessments.
It is hoped the survey will lead more communities and private owners to develop effective maintenance and preservation programmes.
Elizabeth Broun, Director of the NMAA, warns, ‘It's quite likely that no one remembers how the sculptures got there or who's responsible for them’.
The survey will inevitably resolve such jurisdictional uncertainties.
The operation will be coordinated locally by municipal agencies, historical societies and art museums that will enlist as many as 25,000 volunteers, making it the largest volunteer cultural project in the country.
Participating organisations will receive modest sums to defray recruiting, training and reporting costs.
SOS! is supplying orientation and field training videotapes.
The data will be compiled at the Inventory of American Painting and Sculpture centre at the NMAA.
Since the computer database does not incorporate visual images, corresponding photographs are kept on file.
At present, only the painting index is open to the public, but the sculpture component will be available by appointment beginning later this year, and the entire index of American art will eventually be accessible on-line.
Susan Nichols, Director of SOS! for the NIC, told The Art Newspaper she has already had inquiries from abroad regarding the establishment of parallel inventories.
The Tate Gallery, London, for example, is considering the possibility of expanding the British National Inventory of War Memorials, administered by the Imperial War Museum.
SOS! is funded by the Getty Grant Program, the Henry Luce Foundation and the Pew Charitable Trusts, with additional support from the NEA, Ogilvy Adams & Rinehart, and others.
London
New international centre for Ruskin studies proposed
Lancaster University steps up its bid to become academic custodians of Ruskin's papers with a Ruskin exhibition this month
LONDON.
Lancaster University has begun a new phase in its campaign to become the repository of the world's most important collection of Ruskin drawings, manuscripts, books and memorabilia, with the opening of a special exhibition ‘Ruskin, Tradition and Architecture’ at the university's Peter Scott Gallery (4–29 May).
In 1990 Lancaster came to an initial agreement with the Bembridge Education Trust for the future transfer of the key Ruskin collection formed by the Trust's founder, J.H. Whitehouse, to a proposed new purpose-built Ruskin Library at the university.
Whitehouse (1873–1955) was a disciple of Ruskin: he formed the Birmingham Ruskin Society in 1896, and in 1919 founded Bembridge School on the Isle of Wight, which he intended to be run on Ruskinian lines.
When Ruskin's heirs started to dispose of his manuscripts and drawings, Whitehouse began to buy them up, and he built a Ruskin Gallery at Bembridge School.
In 1932 he also bought Brantwood, Ruskin's house in the Lake District overlooking Coniston water.
The collection formed by Whitehouse, which includes Ruskin's manuscript diaries and a superb range of his drawings from every period, is now estimated to be worth £5 million.
It is divided between the Isle of Wight and Brantwood, which attracts 30,000 visitors a year.
But the collection is in great need of conservation.
Bembridge School takes the view that the collection no longer has any educational value, and that it needs the space it occupies for other purposes.
In 1990 the Education Trust controversially sold off some of the non-Ruskin association items in the collection in order to create an endowment fund for the rest.
The offer by Lancaster University to become ‘academic custodians’ of the collection, while ownership would remain in the Education Trust's hands, was timely.
But acceptance has been conditional on the university being able to raise £1.5 million to build a suitable building, and to conserve and endow the collection.
The university proposes to create an international centre for Ruskin studies, with a new Ruskin Foundation to administer both Brantwood and the Ruskin Library at Lancaster.
An appeal has been launched to ensure that the scheme goes ahead.
The exhibition is intended to underline the long term commitment to the study of Ruskin by the university's Ruskin Programme, a research group made up of scholars from different disciplines in the humanities.
During the academic year 1990–91 the group focused on the theme of Ruskin, tradition and architecture, and invited the contribution of visiting speakers from other institutions.
The exhibition brings together some of Ruskin's finest architectural studies, not only from the collection of the Education Trust, but also from the Guild of St George collection at the Ruskin Gallery in Sheffield, the John Rylands Library in Manchester and the tiny Ruskin Museum in Coniston.
The organisers stress that this is not an exhibition about Ruskin's relationship to Victorian architecture, but about his approach to architecture as a whole.
In order to explore the possibility of a continuing Ruskinian influence on the idea of ‘tradition’ in architecture today, the upper section of the gallery features the work and ideas of four contemporary architects, Robert Adam, Michael Hopkins, Richard MacCormac and Richard Rogers.
Rather than produce a catalogue, the Ruskin Programme is publishing a collection of scholarly essays to mark the occasion.
In his contribution the exhibition's co-ordinator Nigel Whiteley, Head of Visual Arts at Lancaster, argues that the tradition of Ruskin's ethical approach to architecture survived into the Modern Movement, however different the aesthetic result.
In true Ruskinian fashion Whiteley castigates contemporary classical revivalists who wish to appropriate the authority of tradition exclusively to the classicism which Ruskin abhorred.
In view of the contemporary architects whose work is on display beside Ruskin's, it will be interesting to see in which style the projected Ruskin Library is built.
City and Ministry differ over decorative arts museum for Rome
ROME.
After an extended period of neglect the decorative arts in Rome are about to have new homes.
Following the closure of the Museum of Art and Industry after World War II, much of the national collection of glass, textiles, ceramics, maiolica, enamels and ivory has been stored in large boxes in the basement of Palazzo Barberini and other museums.
Recently both the Roman city authorities and the Ministero dei Beni Culturali have independently produced plans for exhibiting a part of these collections.
The Roman authorities intend to refurbish the Casina delle Civette at Villa Torlonia, which already has splendid Art Nouveau furnishings and stained glass, to house twentieth-century decorative arts, whilst the Ministry has decided to allocate the Villino Boncompagni, near Via Veneto, to the Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna for a similar museum.
This means that the main body of the national collection still has no permanent home and it may well be that the Casina delle Civette will become a more specialised museum of Art Nouveau glass, the Villino Boncompagni will house the twentieth-century items and another site will be found for the remaining collections.
Japanese give millions to Chicago for East Asian galleries
CHICAGO.
With extraordinary support from Japan, the Art Institute of Chicago has completed a $5-million reinstallation of its important East Asian collections, with expanded exhibition space, modernised storage and a new Asian Studies Center (opening 3 June).
The remodelled first-floor galleries occupy 16,500 sq ft of the Allerton Wing, with the Asian Studies Center directly above.
The government of Japan, Mitsubishi Bank Ltd, and the Hong Kong collector T.T.
Tsui who also funded the new Chinese Gallery at the Victoria & Albert Museum contributed $1 million each.
Masao Kato, chairman of Kato Real Estate Corporation which owns the Hyatt Regency Chicago, gave $300,000 toward the purchase of a Japanese seventeenth-century screen for the new galleries, and Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan's largest daily newspapers, endowed the Asian Studies Center with $150,000.
In comparison, U.S. foundations and corporations gave a total of around $1 million, with the biggest boost from the National Endowment for the Arts, which awarded three grants totalling $210,000.
Curator of Asian Art, Yutaka Mino was instrumental in precipitating the Far East windfall.
‘The Japanese usually sponsor either the East coast or West coast, and forget about the Midwest’, he said.
‘We are very fortunate to have made this bridge’.
It has been three years since the galleries were last open, but according to Dr Mino, most of the material has been in the basement for half a century.
‘This is the first time you really see everything’, he told The Art Newspaper.
Dr Mino provided further historical perspective, insisting that credit go to Charles Kelly, former AIC Curator of Asian Art (1923–56), who encouraged gifts that formed the core of the East Asian collection.
Dr Mino has organised an ‘easy to understand chronology’, incorporating more than 1,000 works from the museum's approximately 25,000 Chinese, Japanese and Korean objects.
This autumn, the Art Institute will publish a catalogue of East Asian masterpieces, complementing and revising catalogues of the Buckingham bronzes and Sonnenschein jades, published in the 1940s and 1950s.
The Art Institute's ten-year reinstallation programme will conclude in 1994 with phase two of the modern collections.
The East Asian galleries open to the public on 3 June.
Philadelphia
Works of art in their context spiced with theatre and dignified with didacticism
Anne d'Harnoncourt, Director of the Philadelphia Museum is reinstalling its European collection and integrating the Johnson Collection Old Masters
PHILADELPHIA, PA.
The Philadelphia Museum of Art will enter the twenty-first century with a logical new presentation of European art.
Over the next three years the museum will spend $10 million to shift 1,000 works into a coherent scheme embracing the whole of Western civilisation since the Middle Ages.
The John G. Johnson Collection of Netherlandish, Early Italian and nineteenth-century pictures will finally be installed in galleries juxtaposed with the museum's own paintings, medieval sculpture, decorative arts, architectural elements and period rooms.
A continuous chronology will proceed from Romanesque to Romantic on the second floor, and from mid-nineteenth-century to contemporary art on the first.
More than eighty galleries will be renovated, repainted and relit, taking advantage of natural light where possible; and seven new internal galleries will be built.
No more than twenty per cent will be closed at one time, and the galleries will reopen in phases beginning next May, and concluding in Spring 1995.
The Art Newspaper recently spoke with Anne d'Harnoncourt, the George D. Widener Director of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, about this monumental project.
What led you to undertake the reinstallation, and what do you hope to accomplish?
Anne d'Harnoncourt.
We've been working on the project for quite some time.
In the museum right now, both physical and intellectual distances separate objects of the same period, style and culture.
For instance the Johnson Collection has always been a separate time line on the first floor.
We felt that both the Johnson Collection and the museum would benefit enormously from joining one another.
A planning grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities in 1984 allowed us to assemble a group of consultants and an architect to consider integrating these elements.
We submitted a proposal to the Court of Common Pleas that oversees the Johnson Collection, and in 1989 were granted permission to proceed.
We now hope to bring together a much more coherent ‘walk through time’.
Under what terms is the Johnson Collection housed in the museum?
Is there any chance of that changing?
The Johnson Collection was bequeathed to the city in 1917.
It is on permanent deposit at the museum under an agreement with the Court of Common Pleas, which essentially oversees its well-being.
The current arrangement extends until 2083.
Besides yourself and Joe Rishel, Senior Curator of the Johnson Collection, did other professionals participate in the planning?
Working with the museum's curatorial and education staffs, and our consulting architect, we consulted a broad group of experts.
Michel Laclotte came at the time he was working on the Musée D'Orsay.
Neil Harris, an historian of American museums at the University of Chicago, offered a very useful perspective.
Merribell Parsons, at that time assistant director for education at the Metropolitan (she now directs the Columbus Museum of Art in Ohio), Everett Fahy, Christian Prevost-Marcilhacy from the Monuments Historiques de France, and many others.
Each came separately to look at particular aspects of the collections and the project, then there were several group sessions.
Is there a philosophy guiding the project?
It is the belief in the need for museums to make their collections as meaningful as possible to their audiences.
We are convinced that the best way for works of art to communicate to the public is for those works to have the most beautiful and natural context in which to be shown.
It's a combination of theatre and thoughtful didacticism.
Which museums have been an inspiration?
One museum that does this in a different way is the Cleveland Museum.
They haven't attempted to create period rooms, and they don't have the big architectural framework of our museum.
But works of art in all media are presented together in historical periods.
The Cloisters [in New York City]is one of the great examples of giving the public a feeling of what the cultural context of a whole era was like through architecture, objects, tapestries, and other great works of art.
Of course, certain European museums, in their particular region and era, cannot be matched.
I mean, we can't be Fontainebleau or Versailles!
What will be coming out of storage?
The nineteenth century in general, and the decorative arts in particular across the board.
In the field of eighteenth-century art, we've had paintings, decorative arts and period rooms divorced from each other.
Now, the suite of period rooms will adjoin galleries with mid- to late-eighteenth-century paintings, as well as a number of tapestries and decorative arts which are currently not on display.
Are there gaps in the chronology?
We have unexpected gaps and unexpected strengths.
We had works by Bronzino and Pontormo, but there was a Northern Mannerist painting gap that we have just filled with the astonishing ‘Ceres, Bacchus and Venus’ by Goltzius executed in pen and brown ink with brush and oils on a prepared canvas.
Some of the biggest gaps are in decorative arts.
We have wonderful eighteenth-century objects, but would like to strengthen our holdings in the nineteenth century.
A particularly great suite of Art Nouveau furniture or a large-scale Second Empire piece, for example, would give weight to the end of the century.
What are some of the unexpected strengths?
An array of medieval and Renaissance furniture, English paintings and portraits, English silver, French wallpaper, the  extraordinarily rich assemblage of sixteenth-century paintings, both ‘official’ art of the Salons and the Impressionists.
It is amazing to have three great pictures on the theme of the bather by Degas, Renoir and Cézanne.
Will the reorganisation affect the museum's capacity to present temporary exhibitions?
It isn't really a disruption for the whole museum.
We may not present quite as many, but we plan to continue to be lively.
Some of the shows we have planned include ‘The Impressionist in the city: late series paintings by Pissarro’ in 1993, a contemporary Japanese designs show in 1994 and a major late Cézanne paintings show in 1995.
Has the board raised the money to pay for the reinstallation?
The total cost is about $9.9 million.
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, Inc. made a $2 million grant for the medieval and Renaissance galleries, and the National Endowment for the Humanities followed up a $525,000 ‘Museum Program’ grant with a challenge grant of $750,000 that we have to match 3 to 1.
We have also been receiving wonderful gifts ongoing I hope from individual contributors.
In total, we have received about $4.3 million.
The John G. Johnson Collection in the Philadelphia Museum
Philadelphian John Graver Johnson (1841–1917) was a hugely successful corporate trial lawyer who numbered among his clients J.P.
Morgan, Standard Oil, the Pennsylvania Railroad, U.S. Steel and the American Tobacco Company.
After he took up art collecting as a hobby in the late 1870s, Mr Johnson devoted much of his time and fortune amassing one of the country's finest collections of European Old Master and late nineteenth-century paintings.
At his death in 1917, he bequeathed his entire collection of 1,279 artworks to the City of Philadelphia, stipulating that they be exhibited in his home.
In 1923, the collection opened to the public, but ten years later the mansion was declared a fire hazard and the paintings were moved to the recently built Philadelphia Museum of Art.
For more than half a century, in accordance with the collector's will, the paintings occupied their own suite of first-floor galleries.
In 1989, however, the Court of Common Pleas that oversees the trust wisely approved the Philadelphia Museum's petition to distribute galleries of Johnson pictures throughout the museum, adjoining rooms with related works from the museum's own collection.
Since Mr Johnson died before the museum was built, he could have had no way of knowing the context in which his collection would eventually be shown.
It can scarcely be imagined that he would have opposed the Philadelphia Museum's immensely well-conceived plan.
The Johnson Collection includes 1,279 works, with masterpieces of Netherlandish, Early Italian and nineteenth-century painting:
Jan van Eyck ‘St Francis receiving the stigmata’
van der Weyden ‘The Crucifixion with the Virgin and St John’
Saenredam ‘Interior of Saint Bavo, Haarlem’
Steen ‘Moses striking the rock’
Pietro Lorenzetti ‘Enthroned Virgin and Child with a monk donor’
Giovanni di Paolo ‘Miracle of St Nicholas of Tolentino’
Fra Angelico ‘St Francis’(fragment of a Crucifixion group)
Four predella panels by Botticelli
Antonello da Messina ‘Portrait of a young man’
Manet ‘Battle of the Kearsarge and the Alabama’
Whistler ‘Purple and Rose: the Lange Leizen of the six marks’
Museum Boymans van Beuningen opens new branch
ROTTERDAM.
The Museum Boymans van Beuningen has opened a separate branch in Holland's tallest building.
The Insurance Company Nationale Nederlanden, which owns the newly completed office block, is sponsoring the undertaking for a period of five years.
During this time the exhibition space will house part of the museum's permanent collection of modern art while playing host to a number of temporary exhibitions.
The first of these is a retrospective of the glass artist A.D. Copier which will start on 20 May, the day on which the building will be officially opened.
Foundation stone of Berlin's Jewish museum to be laid on anniversary of pogrom
BERLIN.
The town Senat (council) has announced that the foundation stone of the Jewish Museum will be laid on 9 November, the fifty-fourth anniversary of Kristallnacht, the anti-Jewish pogrom by the Nazis.
Construction of Daniel Libeskind's bold project to enlarge the Berlin Museum should start early in 1993 and will cost around DM120 million.
The project is not only symbolically important, but is also the first attempt to show the history of a town integrated with that of its Jewish community.
The project was postponed to allow budgetary savings made necessary by the consequences of German reunification.
Salvador Allende Foundation has requested help from Barcelona to create a new art museum in Chile
BARCELONA.
The municipal authorities of Barcelona, who over the past few years have acquired a great deal of experience and expertise in founding and running cultural centres, have recently signed an agreement with the Fundación Salvador Allende to collaborate in setting up a museum in Santiago, Chile, to be called the Museo de la Solidaridad Salvador Allende.
A team of professionals from Barcelona, headed by Ferran Mascarell, the city's cultural delegate, will devise a preliminary scheme for the museum whose construction is due to begin in 1993.
About 1500 works donated by artists from all over the world will be housed in the museum which will honour the memory of President Allende who was assassinated in 1973.
These include some 300 Spanish works, many of notable quality.
Some of the works were presented in 1971 as a sign of solidarity with Allende's government, the rest were donated after the coup d'état.
Goodbye to Prints and Drawings curators at the National Gallery of Scotland?
EDINBURGH.
The National Galleries of Scotland own one of the finest collections of Old Master drawings in Britain.
In recognition of the distinguished service there of Keith Andrews, the Department has now been named after him, and its purchase grant increased by £10,000.
However, Timothy Clifford, Director of the Galleries,(and formerly in the Department of Prints and Drawings at the British Museum) plans to alter their organisation.
He intends to merge the curatorship of the Departments of Prints and Drawings and that of Painting under the Keeper of Paintings.
Thus, a Keeper of Italian Painting would have responsibility for the Italian drawings, thereby not only linking their administration and scholarly maintenance but also bringing drawing into the direct relationship with painting which Clifford says he has been advocating for many years.
He tells The Art Newspaper, ‘Philip Pouncey (the leading British drawings connoisseur until his death last year) used to bemoan the fact that during his eleven years at the National Gallery in London, almost no connection was ever made between the two by curators.
It is foolish to departmentalise in this way, and so I want to blur the distinctions.
All of our drawings catalogues here with the exception of the French are now in print; it would seem sensible to use the skills of one of our Keepers who specialises in French painting to fill this gap’.
Whitney welcomes photographs
NEW YORK.
The Whitney Museum is to take photography seriously: its director, David Ross, has announced the setting up of an acquisitions committee whose job will be to establish a coherent acquisitions policy, mainly by filling gaps in the present collections.
Ross says, ‘The Whitney already has photographs by twenty-five artists, from Steiglitz to Cindy Sherman.
We also have a nucleus of prints by William Klein, donated by Virginia Zabriskie.
But these were accidental acquisitions; they were not collected as part of a coherent plan’.
The committee will be chaired by Sandra Gilman Gonzales-Falla, who has advised the Whitney in the past on the purchase of paintings and sculptures.
The other members are Michael Ward Stout, President of the Mapplethorpe Foundation, and Audrey Irmas, a collector well-known on the West Coast.
The possibility of a new wing to house the future photographic collections is under discussion.
Fruitmarket reopens
EDINBURGH.
The Fruitmarket Gallery, which closed in February 1991 in financial disarray, has secured new support from the Scottish Arts Council and has appointed a new director.
He is Graeme Murray, whose gallery and publishing business is known to the international community from his attendance of European art fairs including Madrid's ARCO and Art Cologne.
The artists with whom his gallery was closely involved are Andy Goldsworthy, Hamish Fulton, Roger Ackling and Ian Hamilton Finlay, whose Wild Hawthorne Press material he presented at the Fruitmarket when it briefly reopened for last year's Edinburgh Festival.
That exhibition was subsequently seen at the Tate Gallery, Liverpool, and in Madrid and is now showing at galleries in Amsterdam and the Hague.
Murray, who will be closing his own commercial operations when he takes up his new appointment at the beginning of July, faces the daunting challenge of restoring the Fruitmarket's critical fortunes.
Under its previous director, Mark Francis, who holds the current position of curator of contemporary art at Pittsburgh's Carnegie Museum, it enjoyed international recognition for its adventurous exhibitions policy.
Murray arrives in time to devise a programme for the forthcoming Festival and to supervise an ambitious campaign of refurbishment which includes opening windows at the front and on top of the building and cleaning its stone façade.
Museums think about themselves
PARIS.
The International Council of Museum's (ICOM) fourteenth annual International Museums Day will be held on 18 May.
The event was established in 1977 to ‘increase interest and awareness of museums’ roles in society’.
This year's theme is Museums and the Environment and a database will be set up on projects completed for the 18 May.
ICOM is based at the Maison de l'Unesco, Paris.
Commentary
Art and government
France has her Julius II so where is her Michelangelo?
As Eurodisney opens in France, and the Minister of Culture Jack Lang is elevated yet higher by President Mitterrand, Michael Ignatieff looks at a stinging attack on French cultural politics
LONDON.
For several years the European and American press have been proclaiming François Mitterand's Paris to be the cultural capital of the world.
From the Arche de la Défense at one end of the city to the Parc de la Villette on the other, with the Pyramide of the Louvre, the Musée d'Orsay and Beaubourg in between, Paris can claim to have the most impressive monuments to the religion of culture to be seen anywhere in the Western world.
The Socialist project of the Mitterrand government may be dead, but its cultural entrepreneurship continues to enjoy wide popular support.
Fumaroli's book is among the first to break the consensus, to ask whether all this expenditure has revived French cultural vitality or merely made culture into a stylish prisoner of the French state.
In a biting attack on what he acidly calls ‘a micro climate of organised euphoria’, Fumaroli argues that Jacques Lang and François Mitterrand have transformed Paris from a living centre of artistic life into a cultural Disneyland.
To an Anglo-Saxon outsider this critique of Mitterrand's grand projets is long overdue.
Mr Pei's pyramid in the Louvre is fine architecture, but it is nothing other than a new front door.
What matters are the collections, and they remain as poorly exhibited as ever.
If you venture past the crowds to see the Poussins, you find yourself alone with a collection which is as lamentably hung as ever.
Paintings which beg to be viewed at a distance, one by one, are squeezed together in a room as narrow, bare and poorly lit as a urinal in an airport.
The Tate and the National Gallery cannot claim a magnificent entryway, but the London curators have displayed their collection with a respect which puts the Louvre to shame.
For Fumaroli, the Louvre is a perfect example of the triumph of the politics of bella figura, and the transformation of a great cultural treasure into a monument to the pharaonic ambitions of the President whom the Canard Enchaîné has dubbed Mitterramses the First.
Fumaroli is a professor at the Collège de France and a historian of ideas, specialising in the history of early modern and Renaissance rhetoric.
Politically, he is a learned philosophical conservative.
(Like the American conservatives, Leo Strauss and Alan Bloom, he attributes the conversion of culture into spectacle to the decay of higher education and the hegemony of relativist, anti-humanist social science in the universities.
This is the education system, he charges, which is producing the cultural bureaucrats who are turning the national patrimony of France into an amusement park for tourists).
Fumaroli is also a latter day Tocquevillian, using Alexis de Tocqueville's critique of nineteenth-century American democracy to call into question the whole project of trying to democratise culture for the masses.
The book, which is fierce, elegant and utterly unsparing is bound to enrage anyone who takes for granted the necessity of State funding for the arts.
But it makes the strongest case I have ever read for reassessing the role of the post-war welfare state in the cultural field, and will force even those who are not convinced by his arguments to sharpen up their own.
Fumaroli's book is a polemic and he takes a savage pleasure in destructive rather than constructive criticism of Jack Lang's Ministry of Culture.
One looks in vain for an alternative vision of the State's role in relation to the arts.
Yet he implies that the discredited Third Republic is the model to return to.
The Third Republic's reputation, he argues, does not deserve the opprobrium heaped upon it by Gaullists and Petainists alike.
In fact, the system of Republican education created by Jules Ferry after the defeat of 1870 put in place a common culture of liberal values.
Such an education was republican and democratic but it was not egalitarian: it aimed to encourage, in Fumaroli's words, ‘the only nobility compatible with political democracy’ nobility of spirit.
Post-war cultural relativism and egalitarianism has put in jeopardy France's very capacity to produce such an aristocracy of the spirit.
Under the Third Republic, Fumaroli observes, Braque, Picasso, Giacometti and Matisse received no State subsidy; nor did Proust or Gide; popular boulevard theatre was left on its own and produced the likes of Pitoeff, Guitry and Jouvet.
There were no cultural bureaucrats in State-subsidised theatres imposing the Brechtian avant-garde on uncomprehending audiences.
The Third Republic's record of creativity indicates, Fumaroli argues, that culture flourishes best when subsidised least.
The new cultural dispensation, Fumaroli argues, began not with André Malraux, but with Vichy.
Emmanuel Mounier and the young collaborationist intellectuals of Jeune France were the first to propose the idea of a State culture to counter the empty capitalist hedonism, which they held responsible for the moral catastrophe of 1940.
Malraux's Maisons de Culture, which he established up and down the country after becoming de Gaulle's Minister of Culture in 1959 were actually a Vichyite idea which came into its own when de Gaulle realised that culture could become the faithful servant of Gaullist grandeur.
What Malraux and de Gaulle began, Pompidou continued with le Centre Beaubourg, a Maison de Culture for Paris itself.
At Beaubourg the full prestige of the French State was allied to the architectural and artistic avant-garde.
This association between modernism and State power, consolidated by Giscard's commissioning of the Gare d'Orsay, was brought to perfection by Lang and Mitterrand's socialists.
Fumaroli presents the alliance between culture and the State as a Faustian pact with the devil in which, in return for a steady stream of subventions and commissions, the artistic community of France has surrendered its spiritual independence.
Whereas in the Twenties, there had been a uniquely creative cultural underground, in the Paris of the 1980s, the birds of the underground have all been imprisoned in Jack Lang's gilded cage.
The incorporation of the French intellectual tradition and the artistic underground made it all the easier to hide the ideological background of the Socialist regime.
It had incorporated everyone who could proclaim that the emperor was naked.
Fumaroli makes the standard conservative argument that an art that cannot be sustained by its audience does not deserve to survive.
State subsidy, he adds, does not free artists it imposes the tyranny of official taste.
For the State only promotes a trendy avant-garde; popular and bourgeois classics receive short shrift.
The sober vernacular architecture of the Third Republic is supplanted by the brutal international style; sub-Brechtian theatre of alienation drives out indigenous French boulevard theatre; the subsidy of rock and roll drives out the French popular chanson of Leclerc and Piaf.
For all its talk of fostering artistic freedom and widening participation in the arts, Jack Lang's Ministry of Culture frowns upon middle-brow bourgeois culture and exclusively cultivates either the avant-garde or pop.
By embracing popular culture, Fumaroli argues, Lang has contributed to the erosion of clear cultural standards.
If Poussin and pop, spraypainting and Seurat are equally valid cultural forms, culture loses all meaning.
Lang's rhetoric of inclusion and participation conceals a deep confusion about what constitutes worthwhile art.
This type of polemic about the decline of clear cultural standards is being heard everywhere these days.
There was Robert Hughes's stinging attack on the New York art market of the 1980s, and in France, Alain Finkelkraut's La Defaite de la Pensée on the banalisation of the idea of culture.
In England, there has been a recent debate about cultural standards, initiated by the playwright David Hare's polemic against the cultural relativism of the Sixties.
Hare wondered aloud on television why it was that English culture had lost the ability to state clearly that Keats was a better poet, for example, than Bob Dylan.
Fumaroli's contribution to this argument is to insist that it is not so much the market which has blurred cultural standards, as much as the queasy relativism and condescending egalitarianism of State funding of pop culture.
For this egalitarianism, Fumaroli insists, is a pose.
The State approves the artistic tastes of a fashionable avant-garde elite and then uses its powers of subvention and promotion to enforce these tastes on the majority.
The consequence is a metropolitan elite of ‘spoiled children’, whose licence to provoke frees them from any need to enter into a dialogue with their audiences.
This audience, Fumaroli asserts though he does not prove the assertion with figures has not significantly changed its social composition in fifty-five years.
The whole post-war attempt to democratise culture through State subsidy has failed.
High culture remains what it was before World War II, the preserve of an educated middle-class minority.
Whereas the Third Republic did set out to improve the aesthetic education of these citizens, the modern welfare State offers them the bread and circuses of culture as spectacle and entertainment.
Though Fumaroli does not mention Jean Pierre Goude's staging of the Bicentennial parade on 14 July 1989, it does seem to illustrate Fumaroli's thesis to perfection.
All of the republican themes of French history were reprocessed as a Hollywood spectacular for tourists.
Citizens were not even allowed to sing the Marseillaise for themselves.
Jessye Norman, clad in a tricolour, was there to do it for them on TV.
The most interesting aspect of Fumaroli's essay concerns his treatment of Lang's policies towards American culture.
Fumaroli argues, with some justice, that Lang has lurched between invectives against the American film industry and assiduous cultural subvention of American-style spraypainters, rappers and rockers.
The result, Fumaroli argues, is that the French State supports the import of the most trivial aspects of American culture, while barring, through its own domination of the cultural field, any of the best aspects of America: its openness, democratic spirit and genuine cultural egalitarianism.
Fumaroli's book is much more than a polemic against the artistic policies of one government.
Many of the trends in France, he believes, are equally observable in other European societies, and the price they will all pay will be political as well as cultural.
After a decade of assiduous cultural promotion, he charges, France is less sure of itself, of its values and heritage, than it was before Lang and Mitterrand began.
Instead of lyric participation in common cultural activity, the French have been numbed, divided and tranquillised by the cultural politics of bread and circuses.
In France, Fumaroli's polemic has been welcomed from the Right and dismissed by the Left.
In other words, it has been incorporated within the parochial confines of party-political polemic.
Yet it is much more than an attack on the policies of a given minister.
It is a real cri-de-coeur from a European intellectual about the incapacity of French society to honour, respect and defend the best of its traditions.
As such the book deserves thoughtful consideration.
Yet it also merits some careful criticism.
His analysis of French cultural decadence is excessively obsessed with the State.
If Fumaroli fears for the future of French traditions, if he worries that his students will one day no longer be reading Montaigne and Proust, he should address himself not just to Mr Lang, but also to Mr Berlusconi and Mr Murdoch and Mr Hersant.
If Mr Lang is trivialising the cultural heritage of France, what about the ad agencies, the movie companies, the publishing houses?
Fumaroli argues as if Le Roi Soleil still proposed and disposed in cultural matters.
In fact, the dilemma of any national state in cultural terms is that it is charged with defending cultural patrimony within a world market over which it exercises little control.
Once this is recognised, then, while it remains easy to criticise the relativist confusions of Mr Lang and his colleagues, it becomes less clear that France can do without someone like him.
Paris
Disillusionment
Pierre Rosenberg, Chief Curator of Paintings at the Louvre, also rebels at the use of ‘culture’
PARIS.
I have been asked to give my views on the most important events and changes in the ‘domain of art and artistic culture’ over the last ten years, which I have agreed to do, as much out of friendship for the Giornale dell'Arte (and its editor) as out of vanity (let's be honest).
Probably this was a mistake.
The phrase ‘artistic culture’ should already have put me on my guard.
Used for all purposes, in all situations and by everybody, it makes one feel rebellious.
Are we not all fed up with ‘artistic culture’?
The only merit of the expression is that it is vague enough to be used under all circumstances without the slightest risk; it is a favourite of official jargon today.
We ought to ask ourselves why this disquieting inflation should have taken place; we ought also to consider what causal relationship there is between ‘artistic culture’ and creativity.
For never have the ever more numerous museums been so crowded, exhibitions so well attended, art books so glossy, the so-called specialist periodicals so erudite, and historic buildings so well ‘protected’ against decay and destruction of all kinds (although in many cases one might well ask whether there is not some confusion and contradiction between protection and son ).Yet never has artistic creation itself whether painting, the cinema or literature (to my mind, architecture and perhaps photography are exceptions) been so impoverished, so derisory, so played out.
But has that not always been the cry, you may say everything already written, heard or said; art dead, creative spirits extinct?
This argument has weight, but is easily overturned.
I challenge you to tell me who are the Picassos, the Matisses, the Faulkners, the Nabokovs, the Stravinskys, the Richard Strausses, the Pasolinis, the Kahns and the Scarpas of our generation?
Could it not be that today's mania for ‘disseminating’ and ‘promoting’culture expressions which should be banned has actually caused the prevailing sterility?
And is not this sterility particularly evident in France, a country formerly renowned for its creativity and which, since Malraux's day, has given ‘culture’ a place of honour, to the envy often misplaced of its neighbours?
And yet, in the last ten years, what upheavals there have been.
A Nabokov symposium in St Petersburg in 1990; fragments of the Berlin Wall on sale at Hamley's, the famous London toy shop: what are these but symbols of the far-reaching changes we have witnessed without foreseeing them or being able to guess at their consequences?
But what of culture?
We are a long way removed from the 1929 Larousse dictionary's definition of the term: ‘act or way of cultivating the soil or certain plants’, with the added gloss: ‘this word is sometimes used, like the German word Kultur, to mean civilisation, though with particular reference to the Germanic peoples’!
The public spectacle of culture, the adoption of culture by the media, the standardisation of culture, the cultural discourse, cultural self-satisfaction, a slack cultural conformism, the recuperation of culture never has so much apparently been done for culture, never have the results (another word that deserves some elaboration) been so disappointing.
I say apparently because, whether in the areas of art education or of television, to name but two, nothing serious has been undertaken.
Nothing of any depth has been done to give the wider public, and especially young people, a cultural background or rather, an educational training, which transcends mere entertainment or spectacle.
And what use is it to provide more and more high-performance cultural facilities (an unpleasing phrase) if the artists who ought to be benefiting from them are lacking?
To return to the act of creation.
Creativity today is characterised by increasing intellectualisation.
In literature, music, the cinema (at least in Europe) and painting, works of art are more cerebral than ever, more difficult, more inaccessible, less penetrable, not just by the masses whose interests are so patronisingly espoused by politicians but also (even though they dare not always admit it) by those who really want to be involved.
Elitism, exclusivity flourishes.
There is a great gulf between ‘popular culture’(excuse me if I do not try to define the term) and contemporary art.
A meretricious populism and pretentious sectarianism have between them squeezed out everything else.
Art no longer appeals to the senses or the passions; it is mere mannerism.
The time of Caravaggio is upon us.
Soon Manet and Monet will have unseated our Bouguereau and Meissonier.
Leonardo in Venice
A great small drawings show in pursuit of the unknowable
Fiat's cultural showplace, the Palazzo Grassi, collaborates for the first time ever with a Venetian museum and produces an exhibition that is beautiful but misses the mark
LONDON.
The main purpose of the exhibition ‘Leonardo e Venezia’ now at the Palazzo Grassi in Venice (until 5 July) is to display the small but very important group of Leonardo's drawings preserved in the Accademia.
It is also important because, as the coordinator of the exhibition, the Soprintendente Giovanna Nepi Sciré said, ‘This is the first occasion when one of Palazzo Grassi's [owned and administered by Fiat]exhibitions has been so closely linked to Venetian public institutions.
This important breakthrough gives us hope for the future’.
The drawings include the ‘Vitruvian Man’, perhaps the most famous single drawing he ever made, as well as sheets related to major projects such as‘The Last Supper’ and the ‘Battle of Anghiari’.
Each of the Venetian drawings is accompanied by a group of related sheets, which are not only beautiful in themselves, but also provide a splendid demonstration of Leonardo's method of working in different media and at different periods of his career.
The selection of early Adoration studies, those associated with the Anghiari commission, and a chronologically varied series of grotesque heads are particularly noteworthy.
Indeed, this is the most extensive selection of Leonardo's drawings for the ‘Battle of Anghiari’ ever displayed together.
Another welcome exhibit was the small bronze of a horse and rider from Budapest, here given to Leonardo, whose attribution has been much discussed, which certainly deserves to be better known.
A special word of praise is in order too for the explanatory panels in Italian and English, which are unusually helpful and informative.
The Leonardo drawings alone would have made a fine exhibition, although not one to fill the entire first floor of Palazzo Grassi.
The organisers have accordingly taken the opportunity in the last few rooms to explore a second although only tenuously related theme, that of the possible influence of Leonardo and Milanese art on Venice at the beginning of the sixteenth century.
This is a topic which has been the focus of some scholarly discussion, partly because Leonardo himself is known to have visited the city in 1500, but mainly because Vasari, in the second edition of the Lives, stated that Giorgione had been greatly impressed by some unspecified works of Leonardo's which he had seen.
Moreover, Venetian sculpture at this period was dominated by craftsmen from Lombardy, and a number of Lombard painters are known to have produced works for Venetian clients, among them Andrea Solario, Marco d'Oggiono, Francesco Napoletano and Giovanni Agostino da Lodi, whose panel of ‘Christ washing the Apostles’ feet’from the Accademia, painted in 1500, has just been restored.
This may well have been produced in Venice, and it demonstrates how the idiom of Leonardo most probably became known to Venetian collectors and artists.
Unfortunately, the history of Venetian art in the first decade of the sixteenth century is still in many respects mysterious, not least in connection with Giorgione himself, whose oeuvre and development remains perhaps the most contentious single issue in the study of Italian Renaissance art.
At present, therefore, it is impossible to say with any confidence whether the influence of Milan was much more than a matter of banal repetition of a few characteristic physiognomic types.
To explore such a topic adequately in the context of an exhibition, given the imprecision of the phenomenon and the difficulty of obtaining the right loans to provide specific comparisons, is probably an impossible task.
These difficulties have been faced with commendable honesty in the large catalogue, which includes a number of useful specialist essays, and which will certainly be the point of departure for future research in this area.
But the exhibits themselves contribute relatively little to an understanding of the phenomenon.
This is partly because of the presence of a remarkably heterogenous group of pictures displayed under the name of Giorgione.
Thus, the wizened old woman of ‘Col Tempo’ from the Accademia is shown in the same room as Leonardo's drawings of grotesque heads, to which it bears little resemblance.
In another room is ‘Christ carrying the cross’ from the Scuola di San Rocco, which was given to Titian at the Palazzo Ducale a couple of years ago, but is here assigned to Giorgione.
In a third room is the so-called Broccardo portrait from Budapest, the ‘Three Singers’ from the Pitti and the recently restored canvas from the Mattioli collection, also showing three singers, which was formerly thought to show ‘Samson Mocked’.
It is certainly interesting for specialists to see this odd and disagreeable picture, whose attribution was upheld by Roberto Longhi, but it is difficult to detect any point of contact between it and the other exhibits assigned to Giorgione at Palazzo Grassi.
Equally, there is little evidence here of a significant debt to Milanese precedents.
After the clarity of the earlier rooms the later part of the exhibition therefore comes as something of a disappointment.
Visitors will at least be reminded that Venetian art in this period was not an entirely closed world, and that Giorgione's career is far from being fully understood, but it is difficult to escape the conclusion that now is not the moment, and an exhibition of this kind is not the ideal place to explore such art-historical problems.
Fortunately, even in the last rooms there are works of splendid quality, notably the pairs of heads by Tullio Lombardo from Vienna and the Ca d'Oro.
Most visitors, however, will come to Palazzo Grassi to see a marvellous display of drawings by Leonardo, and they will be right to do so.
Conservation
Padua
Bombed Mantegnas to live again?
Fragments from the Ovetari Chapel, some only two or three inches across, have survived in the Rome conservation institute since World War II
PADUA.
There is growing possibility that Andrea Mantegna's frescoes for the Ovetari Chapel, depicting episodes from the lives of Saints James and Christopher, will be recreated.
The major obstacle to the restoration of Mantegna's first documented work has always been a lack of funds, but now a sponsor has come forward in the shape of Francesco Piccolo Brunelli, an engineering contractor of Venetian origin, who lives in Africa.
The Ovetari frescoes, on which the young Mantegna worked from 1448 to 1455, were almost entirely destroyed in 1944, during a World War II air raid.
Immediately afterwards the artist Paolo De Poli, with the help of pupils from the Selvatico high school, began collecting the fragments some only two or three inches across which were then stored in a large number of boxes.
Exactly how many boxes there were originally is not certain, although it seems there may have been as many as sixty-five, all of which were sent to Rome's Istituto Centrale del Restauro in 1947.
In 1976, thirty-six boxes were returned and are now kept in a strongroom in the archbishop's palace at Padua.
Some of the remainder must still be at the Institute in Rome; a delegation from the Venice Soprintendenza and Padua's Eremitani Church, which owns the fragments, is due to travel to Rome shortly to resolve the problem.
Some restoration has already been done students at the Rome Istituto del Restauro worked on the contents of the boxes in the years 1954 to 1960.
Under the leadership of Paolo and Laura Mora, they reconstructed portions of fresco such as the ‘Seraph’, shown in the Mantegna exhibition which was at the Royal Academy in London and which opens in New York this month.
Since 1960 restoration techniques have progressed by leaps and bounds and light weight backing materials are now available, of which the honey-comb type would be particularly suited to the Ovetari Chapel frescoes.
A complete photographic record of the paintings exists in the Anderson-Alinari archives and this will be an essential tool to their reconstruction.
The sponsor says he is willing to see the project through even though it may be a lengthy one.
His only proviso is that the work be carried out in Padua, not at the Istituto Centrale del Restauro.
This condition should not pose too much of a problem, since the minister responsible, Luigi Covatta, stated publicly on a visit to Venice at the end of January that he was willing to return the materials still stored in Rome.
Amsterdam
‘This paint is suitable for church furniture and floors’
Barnett Newman saga rumbles on with further paint analyses
AMSTERDAM.
Long-running serials with an American flavour have always done well in Holland.
Now a similar fascination is being exerted by the ongoing Barnett Newman drama as the City Council of Amsterdam have asked for yet another laboratory analysis of his ‘Who's afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue III’(1967) which was the subject of an ill-fated restoration by Daniel Goldreyer (see The Art Newspaper, No. 15, February 1992, p. 2 and No. 16, March 1992, p. 2).
The chemist P. Keune who teaches Science of Materials at two Dutch art academies asked the American manufacturers of the paint used by Daniel Goldreyer in the recent restoration of the painting for details concerning its chemical composition.
From this it has emerged that, among other things, the paints were reinforced with polyurethane, making it tough and rubbery.
In a recent article in a Dutch newspaper (NRC Handelsblad 25.3.92), Keune was quoted as saying that the paint was ‘an industrial product with good properties for objects which have to endure a lot of wear and tear, but that it was not something to be used in restorations.
The label on the tin recommends it for church furniture and floors’.
Apparently the paint will turn yellow in the dark as well as in daylight; at the same time it is resistant to any form of solvent, making the restoration almost impossible to reverse without damage to the original.
Apparently Goldreyer used ‘Heirloom flat finish/-/0007’ from McCloskey Varnish Co. in Philadelphia, an alkyd based on linseed oil.
According to Keune, alkyds prepared on the basis of linseed oil turn yellow quicker and become harder than alkyds based on soya oils.
He is also afraid that the paint may have a tendency to absorb oxygen which means that it will eventually become brittle: ‘I suspect that the paint will start showing cracks within a few decades’.
The City Council of Amsterdam has recently ordered the forensic laboratories in Rijswijk to conduct a second test to answer specific questions with regard to the condition of the canvas and the reversibility of the restoration.
Whether this new investigation has been ordered partly as a response to the assertions made by the New York firm of O'Toole-Ewald Arts Associates, whose services Goldreyer engaged just after the first report was released by the Rijswijk laboratories, is not certain.
They claimed that the two laboratory investigations performed on the painting since it was slashed with a Stanley knife in 1986 showed discrepancies which seriously undermined their validity.
According to Professor Van de Wetering, the first publicly to criticise the restoration, these discrepancies can all be accounted for by the fact that each of the three investigations were conducted to answer completely different questions.
Van de Wetering's criticisms of Goldreyer's restoration landed him with a claim in damages for libel amounting to $25 million from Goldreyer's lawyer, to which Van de Wetering has since replied by asking the court in New York to declare the claim inadmissible on the grounds that he does not fall under the jurisdiction of the State of New York.
In a meeting at the beginning of April, the City Council of Amsterdam, after having ordered the forensic laboratory in Rijswijk to conduct its second investigation, severely criticised the councillor responsible for the Arts, Mrs M. Baak, for her inept handling of the problem and her lack of initiative at crucial moments during the affair.
Shortly before going to press The Art Newspaper learnt of the resignation of Mrs Baak.
Rome
Scandal of Rome's hidden public collections to end
Italian government votes $3.92 million for major restoration projects
ROME.
Claudio Strinati was named Soprintendente for Rome's artistic and historic heritage in September last year.
Born in 1948, his career in the Soprintendenze began in Genoa and then took him to Rome where he was Director of the Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Antica in Palazzo Barberini for three years.
As Soprintendente he is responsible for the administration of a grant recently made available by the Italian government specifically for restoration projects under the terms of a special law referred to as ‘Roma Capitale’, amounting to about L4.5 billion (£2.25 million; $3.92 million).
‘The grant’ says Strinati, ‘will enable us to complete within a year or two some important and very urgent restoration programmes’.
Foremost among these is the complete restoration of Palazzo Venezia.
‘Here we want to establish a museum to house works which at present are kept in the store at the Museo Nazionale di Palazzo Venezia: sculptures, tapestries and the extraordinary Odescalchi collection of arms and armour, one of the largest of its kind in Europe’.
He can now foresee the rapid completion of the work on Andrea Pozzo's frescoes in the apse of the church of S. Ignazio and the beginning of the project to conserve Baciccio's cupola decoration at the Gesú.
‘In the church of S. Andrea della Valle, the exterior of which has already been restored, we will set to work on Mattia Preti's grandiose but much-damaged frescoes and in Santa Maria della Pace we will restore Raphael's Chigi Chapel, also in a poor state of preservation’.
At Santa Maria del Popolo the Soprintendenza will begin work on the Mellini Chapel, which contains busts by Algardi, and the frescoes in Santa Maria della Vittoria will also be restored.
The projected campaigns will provide the opportunity to study the work of little-known and undervalued artists like Niccolò Martinelli, called il Trombetta, a late Mannerist follower of the Zuccari, who executed the absidal frescoes in Santa Maria in Aracoeli: ‘From a cultural point of view the restoration of these works will be of great importance’, says the Soprintendente.
The ordinary annual grant for restoration will be used up partly by the Laboratorio del Restauro in Palazzo Barberini, which recently restored Correggio's Borghese ‘Danae’, and partly by the needs of the five other museums which the Soprintendenza is responsible for: the Gallery in Palazzo Barberini, the Spada Gallery, the Corsini Gallery, the Museum of Musical Instruments and the Borghese Gallery.
If all goes well the Borghese Gallery should reopen within a year.
Work is also planned outside Rome in the towns of Tarquinia, Farnese, Ariccia and San Felice Circeo.
There Strinati will be collaborating with Francesco Zurli and Gianfranco Ruggeri, the Soprintendenti for Architectural Monuments of Rome and Lazio respectively.
‘The artistic heritage of Rome and Lazio is so vast and imposing that we distribute the work between us, even if according to the rules it is the Soprintendenza for Architectural Monuments which should deal with mural painting’.
The huge quantity of works which are the responsibility of the Soprintendenza means that it is not possible for all restoration campaigns to be carried out by in-house staff.
Often works are farmed out to professional restorers who are required to register with the Ufficio Istruzione Restauri.
Strinati believes in the closest possible collaboration between restorer and art historian.
‘At the Roman Soprintendenza we hold the role of the restorer in very high esteem, and we take full account of our restorers’ periodic reports on the state of conservation of works in our museums’.
Sausage skins save local archives
LEEDS.
A technique using ordinary sausage skins is being employed to restore the 700 parchment rolls of documents dating from 1275 which make up the Wakefield Manor Court archive, now owned by the Yorkshire Archaeological Society.
The documents are the longest surviving series of such records in Britain but a third of them have been unusable because of their delicate state.
Sausage skin is made from collagen and is an ideal material for the repair of tears as it is a natural substance and thus compatible with the parchment.
The technique was developed by Dr James C. Lewis of Imperial College, London and has been in use since the 1970s, replacing other more elaborate methods such as the use of fish bladders.
The 1400-feet of sausage casing needed for the project were donated to the owners of the documents the Yorkshire Archeological Society (YAS) by a Scottish sausage skin manufacturer.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper Sylvia Thomas, the YAS archivist, explained that almost half the one hundred parchment rolls (each roll comprising up to thirty parchments) had now been treated and that work would probably continue for another four to five years.
After this the documents on paper which date to 1925 would form the second stage of the conservation campaign.
Energetic fund-raising by the YAS produced £81,000 including a matching grant from the government's new National Manuscripts Conservation Trust which is  administered by the British Library.
Local sponsors include Yorkshire Electricity and North-East Gas and an ‘adopt-a-roll’ scheme has been devised.
Ribera's prophets cleaned for centenary exhibition
NAPLES.
Amongst the many works which were cleaned and restored for the large exhibition on Jusepe de Ribera now being held in the Castel Sant'Elmo and in the Certosa of San Martino in Naples (until 17 May), are the twelve paintings of Prophets painted between 1638 and 1643, in the spandrels above the chapel arches in the church of the Carthusian monastery.
They form an impressive series of patriarchal figures and although each one is richly characterised, only the figure of Noah can be unequivocally identified.
They are marked by a monumental presence which links them to Michelangelo's Sybils and Prophets on the Sistine ceiling, a presence made even more forceful by their compression into the limited spandrel areas.
The twelve paintings are remarkable for being executed on canvas when normally such representations were in fresco, but Ribera is known not to have been a fresco painter.
They were not in a very good state of conservation, having been drastically overcleaned in previous restoration campaigns sponsored by the Carthusian monks.
There were numerous abrasions and paint losses especially along the edges, and certain areas, for example the backgrounds, had been heavily overpainted.
The position of some of the pictures, which had left them exposed to direct sunlight for many decades, had also contributed to their deterioration.
The canvases had been properly relined in the nineteenth century and only the ‘Hosea’ and ‘Obadiah’required new linings.
The pictures were restored by Bruno Arciprete in the conservation department of the Neapolitan Soprintendenza, who cleaned them and repaired the damages.
The entire restoration project is fully described in a forthcoming publication by Ello De Rosa.
The restored Prophets have emerged as works of extraordinarily free handling, characterised by the resonant reds, greens and browns typical of Ribera's palette from the mid 1630s.
The Bonhams restoration guide
Bonhams auctioneers have produced a directory of English restorers, conservators and repairers of works of art.
Entries provide address, phone number and and service offered and (most usefully) the restorer's qualifications if any, and are arranged geographically under the relevant speciality such as furniture or works on paper.
Each section is prefaced by a short essay on the care of objects by an expert in the field and there are additional entries on security and insurance, lighting, display and transport and packing.
Sir Roy Strong provides the introduction: ‘If you have domestic help, it is not only unwise but unfair to expect them to cope with dusting and cleaning vulnerable objects’.
Bonhams' disclaimer for quality of service at the beginning should sound a note of warning: bad restoration is worse than no restoration.
Science meets art at Lausanne
LAUSANNE.
The Laboratoire de Conservation de la Pierre, now in its tenth year, has organised a series of lectures on how science can contribute to the restoration of works of art.
The programme, which runs until June, is being held at Lausanne's Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale.
The speakers are drawn from various countries and include Maria Teresa Escohotado, who teaches at Madrid's Complutense University, on the restoration of Spanish mural paintings (7 May); Christian Lahanier, of the Laboratoire de Recherche des Musées de France, on the analysis of high-definition images (21 May); Raul Enriquez, of the Institute of Chemistry at the University of Mexico, on the application of nuclear magnetic resonance to the study of organic fixatives in pre-Columbian wall painting (11 June); and finally Cristina Sànchez del Real, of Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology, whose subject is a project to save the archaeological site of Cacaxtia (25 June).
The Soane Monuments Trust
LONDON.
The Soane Mausoleum in St Pancras Gardens, London was designed by Sir John Soane in 1815–16 and is one of five monuments by that great eccentric of British neo-Classical and Romantic architecture, Sir John Soane, which the Soane Monuments Trust has restored or plans to restore as soon as possible.
These are all church memorials in the London districts of Chiswick, Southwark, Lambeth, Kensington and St Pancras, some of which are in perilous condition.
A separate list drawn up by the Trust includes ten other monuments by Soane, ranging from the column in the park at Lemmington Hall, Northumberland to an obelisk at Boconnoc in Cornwall.
Donations to support the Trust's activities should be sent to The Treasurer, The Hon Piers Gibson, 25 Sumner Place, London SW7 3NT.
Archaeology
London
High-tech raids Davy Jones's locker and sells at auction
National Maritime Museum laments ‘smash and grab’ approach of private salvage operations but who else has the funds?
LONDON.
Significant technological advances in underwater excavation and recovery are proving a mixed blessing in the field of marine archaeology.
In America satellite technology, video monitors and digital data links relay sound and images from the sea-bed to museum visitors thousands of miles away and Britain may soon benefit from this new type of underwater museum.
However, the unsupervised exploration of sunken treasure ships (yielding rich pickings for anyone able to fund the high costs of such expeditions) is widely condemned by marine  archaeologists .
Shipwreck treasure (in particular porcelain) has proved a strong seller at auction over the past few years, witness the Nanking cargo of 150,000 pieces sold in 1986 for £10.1 million.
On 7 and 8 April this year Christie's Amsterdam realised over £ 4 million for 28,000 pieces of Chinese export porcelain salvaged from a trading junk sunk off the coast of Vietnam in 1690.
Buyers are attracted to the glamorous provenance of works recovered from the sea bed and prices are generally higher than for similar objects without such watery origins.
On 28 May as part of their Spanish sale (see p. 17) Christie's will be offering further pieces from the Maravillas Treasure (some of which was sold in 1990) comprising some outstanding items of Spanish jewellery together with gold coins and bars recovered from the wreck of the seventeenth-century Spanish galleon the ‘Nuestra Señora de las Maravillas’, wrecked off the Bahamas in 1656.
The ship was laden with gold, silver and emeralds from Colombia and unsuccessful attempts were made by the Spanish government to salvage the ship immediately after it sank.
In 1972 the diver Robert Marx, who has specialised in the salvaging of treasure from wrecks around the world, located the ‘Maravillas’ from nautical charts discovered in Seville together with a copy of the ship's cargo manifest.
Marx's attempts to explore the wreck were unsuccessful; fourteen years later Captain Herbert Humphreys Jr negotiated a deal with the Bahamian government which gave him three-quarters of the profits of all items found.
Captain Humphreys' company Marine Archeological Recovery Ltd has retrieved items from June 1988 onwards and has been consigning items for sale at auction since that date.
Of the pieces on offer at Christie's the most important is a gold and Columbian emerald cross set with sixty-six stones with a highly distinctive engraved reverse which would once have been enamelled or possibly filled in with niello (est. £150–200,000).
No other cross of such design is known, according to Mary Fielden of Christie's Jewellery Department.
Also in the sale is a circular gold and emerald brooch with an open-work pattern of eighty-one Columbian stones.
The fact that the pieces have lain for 300 years under the sea bed means that they are remarkably fresh while the tight settings have ensured that the inlaid stones are still in place.
Sarah Draper, Assistant Curator of Archaeology at the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, expresses the strongest disapproval of private wreck salvage operations and ‘treasure hunters’ who make large sums of money from salvage operations.
In general the practice of searching wrecks for treasure is deplored by the Museum: in most cases no provision is made for properly recording where items were located; only items of commercial value are salvaged and there is no interest in the wreck as an entity or the long-term conservation issues involved in raising perishable items such as iron and wood from the sea bed.
Ms Draper describes the operation to recover the Nanking treasure as a ‘smash and grab’ raid.
The Museum's policy is that it is far better to leave such time-capsules undisturbed.
Furthermore it would never purchase items brought up in such a way, as this would give support to these operations.
But the National Maritime Museum's Archaeology department has been cut from twelve to two people (one part-time) since 1986 as the Museum has shifted its emphasis away from research towards exhibitions and leisure activities.
Ms Draper is funded by the Museum to undertake one month's underwater excavation per year, but only off the coast of the British Isles.
She has devoted her time to the survey of the wreck of an East Indiaman lying off Weymouth; once captained by William Wordsworth's brother, the ship went down in 1805.
The painstaking work on the wreck undertaken by the amateur Chelmsford Sub-Acqua Club over the last twelve years will be the subject of an exhibition at the Maritime Museum this year.
Elsewhere in Britain a new type of museum developed in America to view the wrecks of sunken ships in situ may be used for the 30,000 ton ‘Lusitania’ torpedoed off the Irish coast by a German U-boat in 1915 with the loss of 1,198 lives.
The project is the idea of the American oceanographer Dr Robert Ballard who found the wrecks of the Bismark and the Titanic.
If given the go-ahead, pictures from the wreck will be sent ashore by fibre optic cable to Liverpool by satellite.
Visitors to the Merseyside Maritime Museum, who are promoting the project with Dr Ballard, will be able to view the wreck and explore its interior with robot cameras remotely controlled from a viewing room in the museum.
Dr Ballard has already beamed live pictures from the wrecks of a Roman galley in the Mediterranean and two American warships sunk in 1812.
The project is still in its early stages but a spokesman for the Merseyside Museum noted that they are already using Dr Ballard's technology for the Jason Project IV which will take place in February next year in the Sea of Cortez off the Mexican Coast.
Underwater cameras will survey the wildlife and underwater features of the sea bed with particular reference to the species of Alaskan Gray Whale found in those waters.
Using Dr Ballard's technology, a child sitting in the Liverpool museum could drive a robot investigating underwater volcanoes 5,000 miles away.
A spokesman for the Merseyside Museum felt that both this project and the possible Lusitania scheme were a way of making information accessible.
In Greenwich Dr Ballard's work was described as serious, exciting and educational.
Iraq
Non-compliance with Security Council's resolutions holds up UNESCO mission
More than 4,000 museum items missing according to Director General of the Iraqi Antiquities Department
LONDON.
The London-based, Palestinian Arabic newspaper, Al-Quds Al Arabi, has given details of the cultural pillage of Iraq during and after the Gulf War.
Immediately after the war, the Department of Antiquities in Baghdad compiled a four-volume list of missing objects; many of these had been on long term loan from the Baghdad Museum to regional museums in Iraq.
This list was sent to UNESCO last September and copies have recently been distributed by UNESCO to the Metropolitan Museum in New York, Sotheby's in London, the International Foundation for Art Research, Interpol, and the International Council for Museums.
Unfortunately the report is so lacking in detail as to be virtually useless in identifying individual objects, and there are no accompanying photographs.
For the time being UNESCO is unable to send a cultural mission to Iraq to investigate the situation, although it has had a team of experts lined up since July of last year.
Nor will it will get the green light until the United Nations is satisfied that Iraq has fulfilled all the conditions laid down in the Security Council resolutions during the hostilities.
Although it is over a year since the end of the Gulf War, the Iraqi Ministry of Culture and Information is still trying to recover various ancient treasures dating back to the prehistoric and Islamic periods which disappeared from museums in the north and the south of the country.
Some of these items are believed to have been smuggled abroad.
Communiqués issued recently by the Department of Antiquities confirm that some of these historic items are still in Iraq in the hands of merchants who are trying to smuggle them out of the country for huge sums of money.
The Director General of the Department, Muayyad Said, stated that the stolen works comprised more than 500 items representing the civilization of Mesopotamia from prehistoric to late Islamic times; more than 700 items representing the civilisation of northern Iraq; 4,500 books from the Library of the Iraqi Museum; and twenty-six crates of manuscripts from the Saddam Document Centre.
According to official Iraqi sources, the stolen items include terracotta figurines, earthenware vessels and jars, statues, flat and cylinder seals as well as metal articles with Arabic writing, gold and silver Islamic coins, and a number of clay tablets with cuneiform inscriptions dating from various periods in history.
The term ‘antiquities’ covers all buildings and objects from historical sites, including manuscripts.
The stolen items include daggers, chairs, mirrors, various garments, domestic implements, and carpets.
The more than 4,000 items originally came from fourteen regional museums in Iraq and had been assembled in the seven main museums of Basra, Masan, Qadisiya and Kufa in the south of Iraq, and Kirkuk, Dahuk, and Suleymaniya in the north.
According to officials of the Department of Antiquities, the theft and destruction of these items took place during the upheavals of last March caused by the Gulf War.
This has led officials from the Department of Antiquities to offer rewards to anyone who helps them recover a lost item, as happened in Kirkuk where some people have already received between two and three thousand Dinars (less than £1) for turning items over to the Department.
Iraq has accused American soldiers of stealing important antiquities while they were on Iraqi territory during the war, and the Iraqi representative at the United Nations raised this issue after the ceasefire of last April.
Iraq also lodged a formal complaint with UNESCO during the twenty-sixth session, convened at the end of last year, where it was represented by the Minister of Culture, Hikmet El-Bazaz.
The Iraqi complaint included full details about almost all the items stolen from its museums in the hope that this would prevent them falling into private hands or being auctioned, but according to the Director of the Iraqi Museum, Sabah Jasim, this effort met with failure.
Sabah Jasim added that Iraq requested UNESCO to send a mission to investigate this matter, but agreement was not forthcoming ‘due to the obstructionism of America and Britain’.
Muayyad Said also accused American forces camped outside the city of Nasiriya in the south of Iraq of stealing antiquities from the locality of Tel El-lahm, saying that ‘while the American forces were digging in, the soldiers used their bayonets to dig up various artifacts from the site.’
He stated that the American forces caused extensive damage to the site of Ur, with its stepped ziggurat suffering more than 400 shell hits.
The ziggurat of Ur was originally built so that their god could step down from heaven into a room at the top of the structure, according to ancient mythology.
Experts say that the antiquities at Ur and Tel El-lahm date back to the Sumerian period.
Muayyad Said also drew attention to the fact that the items stolen from the museum in the district of Dhu Qar include a copy of the obelisk of Hammurabi, a statue of Venus and a chariot of Assurbanipal as well as‘jewellery, valuable objects, and clay tablets from various periods’.
He added that the temple of Nabushakkari at Babylon had been partially destroyed, along with the temple of Assurnasirpal II at Nimrod near Mosul, the fort of Akhissar in the desert at Karbala, the Kawaz mosque in Basra, the Mar Mata monastery and the Tahira church in Mosul.
He said that the official in charge of antiquities at the Nasiriya Museum had received from the Americans a ‘very small number’ of terracotta objects dating back to the dawn of mankind and the Babylonian period, some of which had only recently been broken.
The hand-over of those objects only took place after Iraq had lodged a complaint with the United Nations.
The official claimed that UNESCO's refusal to allow a mission was linked with schemes to transport those items out of Iraq.
Vatican
Meet the Etruscans!
Seven rooms of Rome's Gregorian Etruscan Museum refurbished courtesy of Americans
ROME.
The first seven rooms of the Gregorian Etruscan Museum have been reopened to the public.
The second stage of the work should be completed by the beginning of next year.
It involves the incorporation of two large rooms from the Archivio Segreto Vaticano, on the floor above, to house funerary and domestic objects of terracotta, and of other rooms which once housed Greek art.
The work, coordinated by Francesco Buranelli, head of the Etruscan and Early Italian Antiquities Department, will be partly financed by Helen Boehm (one of the Patrons of the Vatican Museums) and by the proceeds of an exhibition, ‘The Etruscans: Legacy of a Lost Civilisation’ which opened in Memphis, Tennessee, at the beginning of this month (see p.8).
The gallery is called after Mrs Boehm's late husband, the porcelain artist and studio founder, Edward Marshall Boehm.
The expansion was made necessary by the acquisition of the second part of the Guglielmi Collection.
This was excavated in the nineteenth century, mainly at Vulci near Florence, and belonged to the noble Guglielmi family until 1935, when Benedetto donated half of the more than 700 artefacts to the Pope; the other heir died without leaving his share to the Vatican.
In 1988, the American Patrons of the Vatican Museums decided to buy the rest of the valuable collection.
A campaign was led by Mrs Helen Boehm.
She and nine patrons (Mrs Boehm calls them ‘the Angels’) each agreed to give $100,000, raising a total of $1 million, a sum to which the owners generously agreed.
While the deal was being negotiated in 1989 one of the Guglielmi family's daughters was kidnapped and ransomed for $4 million.
Mrs Boehm feared the collection would have to be sold to save the girl.
But the ransom was paid, the girl returned, and the collection went to the Vatican.
The newly reopened galleries used to be the reception rooms of the Medici Pope Pius IV.
Decorated with magnificent sixteenth-century frescoes by Barocci, Santi di Tito, Zuccari and others, they were converted into a home for the Etruscan Museum by Gregory XVI in 1837.
The Gregorian system of arranging the exhibits will be maintained, with one room devoted to bronzes (including the famous ‘Mars of Todi’), one to precious stones, and three to vases (Attic black-figure ware and early examples of red-figure ceramics).
The first room will house works dating from the Iron Age (9th-8th centuries BC).
Then comes the famous Cerveteri tomb of Regolini Galassi, which belongs to the following period, when oriental influence was strong.
The tomb was added to the collection in the early years of the century.
US bans Salvadorean treasures
WASHINGTON DC.
The emergency import restriction on cultural artifacts from El Salvador has been extended for another three years.
The decision was announced by the Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency, Eugene P. Kopp.
It follows the recommendation of the Cultural Property Advisory Service, a Presidential committee of experts.
The original five-year ban, which expired in March this year, was made at the request of the Salvadorean government and is intended to protect the significant archaeological sites in the Cara Sucia region where stone and ceramic artifacts have been uncovered.
The US is an important market for such items.
Similar emergency import bans have been placed on certain Andean textiles from Bolivia, on Moche artifacts found in Peru and on Maya items from the Peten region of Guatemala.
The Bassae frieze re-displayed in the B.M.
LONDON.
New York art dealers and collectors of classical art Larry and Barbara Fleischman have, with a donation to the British Museum, allowed the sculptural frieze from the Temple of Apollo at Bassae to be redisplayed in a greatly improved setting.
Increased floor space, a new ventilation system and improved lighting now allow the 101-foot long relief to be seen in conditions appropriate to its importance as one of the best-preserved classical friezes in existence after the Elgin marbles.
According to the Roman writer Pausanias, the temple of Apollo Epicurius was designed in the fifth century BC by Ictinus, one of the architects of the Parthenon.
After the twenty-three slabs of the ornamental frieze had been dismantled to allow work on the installation to take place the Museum's curatorial staff and classical scholars from outside were able to reconsider the original order of sculptures.
Dowel holes in the stone, associated architectural slabs and the physical evidence of the slabs themselves were all considered in ensuring that the final display should be as close to the original narrative sequence of the battle between Greeks and Amazons and Lapiths and Centaurs as possible.
Casts of missing fragments have been incorporated into the frieze, as well as an original fragment excavated on the Bassae site by Professor Yalouris and subsequently displayed in the National Archaeological Museum in Athens.
This was acquired by the British Museum last year, 176 years after the frieze itself was bought and transported to London by the British government.
Caiphas's tomb discovered
JERUSALEM.
The tomb of Caiphas, the High Priest of the Temple of Jerusalem who interrogated Christ before turning Him over to Pontius Pilate, has been discovered by workmen, according to an Israeli radio report.
The tomb is around 2,000 years old and bears the inscribed name ‘Yusuf Bar Kaifas’.
Boy Scouts execute a Palaeolithic spring clean
ALBI.
Two bison, painted 15,000 years ago in a cave known as the Grotte de Mayrieres near Bruniquel, France, were virtually erased when Boy Scouts decided to give them a spring clean under the impression that they were graffiti.
The wall paintings, discovered in 1952, were the only ones of their kind in the Aveyron region.
The Ministry of Culture plans to sue the scouts and the Albi Speleo-Club who organised the clean-up.
Egypt plans for Giza with British firm
SUSSEX.
Unesco has appointed The Conservation Practice, a UK-based multi-disciplinary practice of architects, planners and archaeologists, to prepare a conservation management plan for the Giza Plateau, Cairo.
The Giza Plateau contains some of Egypt's most celebrated sites including the Great Pyramid and the Sphinx.
The work will include preparing designs for planning of the archaeological exploration of the site; conservation and restoration work on the monuments; control of access to tourists and local inhabitants; additional legal measures to protect the site; and visitor and tourist facilities.
Staff from The Conservation Practice will visit Egypt for a preliminary ten-day survey and will produce the follow-up report in about two months.
Barry Stow of the Practice explained that environmental impact was the primary concern in the present case.
The Plateau is currently at serious risk from man-made factors such as air pollution, the encroachment of nearby habitation and its unregulated sewage and rubbish, and the lack of control over how many tourist coaches visit the site and where they can drive.
Other projects currently being undertaken by the Practice include a Unesco-commissioned survey of Angkor Wat, Cambodia.
Smithsonian welcomes Mesopotamian loan
WASHINGTON, D.C. A selection of Mesopotamian artefacts normally displayed in the Louvre is at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution.
Ann Gunter, the Sackler's Curator of Ancient Near Eastern Art, knew the Louvre masterworks would be in storage during the reinstallation of the Mesopotamian Galleries.
In autumn 1989 she asked her colleague, Annie Caubet, head of the Louvre's Department of Oriental Antiquities, if it would be possible to mount a loan exhibition while the objects were off view.
The result was that Ms Gunter had her choice of more than 5,000 Near Eastern artefacts.
She selected thirty-two Sumerian and Akkadian works, dating from 3300 to 2000 BC.
Of top importance are five of the Louvre's diorite statues of Gudea, ruler of Southern Mesopotamia in the twenty-second century BC.
In lieu of a catalogue, the Sackler will devote the winter 1992 issue of its quarterly Asian Art (co-published with Oxford University Press) to the show.
‘When Kingship Descended from Heaven: Masterpieces of Mesopotamian Art from the Louvre’ is at the Sackler until 9 August.
Books
The magnum opus 
Sixty years of studying the swirls, the strokes and lines by the graphologists of art history
Degenhart and Schmitt talk about their Corpus of Italian drawings in twelve volumes and still growing
Now nearly eighty-five, Bernhard Degenhart has devoted more than sixty years to the study of Italian drawings.
His magnum opus, the Corpus der Italienischen Zeichnungen 1300–1450, an ongoing project which already consists of twelve weighty volumes, began publication in 1968 with a survey of drawing in southern and central Italy; there followed three volumes on Venice 1300–1400 (1980); a monographic study of Mariano Taccola (circa 1381–1453/58), the Sienese draughtsman, miniaturist and engineer (1982); and four volumes on Jacopo Bellini (1990).
His interest in drawings dates from his youth and from his own enthusiasm for drawing.
‘When I was young, drawings, although of enormous importance, were undervalued and little studied.
What seemed to me most significant about the period I chose to study was that this was the moment of transition between the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, a transition which could best be observed and studied in drawing, which lends itself to greater experimentation.
Drawing has always preceded painting; Pisanello is at his most innovative in his drawings, as is also Jacopo Bellini.
It would not have been possible anyway, in painting, to open up or to study so many different problems’.
Degenhart was born in Munich in 1907.
He completed his thesis on Lorenzo di Credi and worked in Italy at the Kunsthistorisches Institut in Florence and the Biblioteca Herziana, Rome, before being taken on by the Albertina, Vienna.
During the war he spent much of his time in Turin.
Dismissed from the Albertina because of his German nationality, he then worked for the Graphische Sammlung, Munich, until 1971 as a curator and then as director.
He met his collaborator of forty years' standing Dr Annegrit Schmitt (now his wife) when she presented her thesis to the Graphische Sammlung in 1952.
Together they tour the libraries of the world, while their photo archive contains 50,000 negatives, many of which they took themselves.
Degenhart achieved recognition in 1937 when he published his study entitled Zur Graphologie der Handzeichnungen, which forms the foundation of the methodology and structure of the Corpus.
‘That study was based not on preconceived notions but on the observations of structure in the drawings themselves.
What I mean by the ‘graphology’ of drawing is the study of the line, of the pure graphic quality, of the stroke, not that of the subject represented or the style.
Through the study of line we can identify the characteristics which differentiate one School from another perhaps not the hands, but the Schools certainly.
The Venetians for example, have a very fluent line, whereas the Florentines construct forms architectonically.
The Veronese prefer a longer, Gothic stroke.
What I am interested in is not the forms they construct, but how they construct them; I am concerned with identifying the graphological constants.
Through this it is possible to orient oneself amidst the various schools and to make sense of the anonymous drawings, which constitute the majority.’
Degenhart's thesis met with the approval of Berenson at the time, but certain Italian art historians expressed hostility.
It is a source of enormous satisfaction to him that they later came round to his view.
The publications of Degenhart and Annegrit Schmitt have succeeded in bringing into the mainstream of art history the study of artist's pattern books and travel notebooks, which were so important for the dissemination of ideas and motifs, as well as book illustration and marginalia drawings.
Their studies have also led to some surprising conclusions concerning chronology: Jacopo Bellini's Paris album they have argued, contrary to most of the literature, precedes the London album, which they date to 1460–70; they have been able to date Paolino Veneto's Map of Venice in the Marciana Library precisely to around 1328, when previously it was thought to have been made in the second half of the century.
In 1952 Degenhart collaborated on an exhibition of contemporary Italian drawings and he is proud to have known personally Carrà, Manzú, Marini, Balla and Severini.
The Corpus continues apace, with five volumes on Pisanello and his School almost ready for publication.
‘We shall then deal with Stefano da Verona, with Bologna, Ferrara and the Adriatic area of central Italy.
There is a vast amount of material’, says Degenhart, ‘perhaps too much.
It is a project which will exceed my lifetime’.
Degenhart and Schmitt's work has been honoured in Italy with prizes and memberships of several Italian Academies.
‘We are greatly honoured by these distinctions since we have truly dedicated all our lives, with passion, to the knowledge and diffusion of Italian art’.
Twentieth-century sculptors
The apotheosis of Caro
Two books on Anthony Caro as the exhibition of his work opens in Rome 20 May
Just as Henry Moore's career reached its apotheosis with his huge outdoor retrospective in the hills above Florence, so Caro gets the same treatment from the curator of the Moore extravaganza, Giovanni Carandente.
His show at Rome's Trajan's Markets opens on 20 May (see p. 5), with two editions of the catalogue from Fabbri Editoriale, Milan: an Italian edition, and an international one, to be published twenty days later with photographs of the forum installation.
The bibliography of Sir Anthony Caro can hardly keep pace with his protean output.
The catalogue raisonné which the German collector Dieter Blume has been compiling since the late 1970s has now reached its ninth volume, and has a general index listing well over 2000 unique sculptures, from Caro's schoolboy efforts under the tutelage of Charles Wheeler, through his heavily modelled ‘geometry of fear’ period when he was Moore's assistant, to the more distinctive Caro of the welded steel constructions which began in the 1960s.
His work is grouped thematically as well as chronologically in this catalogue: thus the first volume covers the ‘table’ sculptures, his strange, sprawling ‘still life’assemblages made to be viewed at waist height, from 1966–78; the second and later volumes continue with this idiom, while the substantial Volume III deals with larger scale, outdoor steel sculptures.
Volume IV catches up on student work and the expressive, figurative work of the 1950s, while Volume VIII deals with a hybrid group from the 1980s which harks back to this earlier preoccupation with the body.
The intervening volumes, and Volume IX, continues to chart works in different groups.
The volumes published so far now bear the collective imprint of Lund Humphries (the publishers of Moore's catalogue), who provide three handsome slipcases for purchasers of the complete set: but the enterprise is by no means finished, as work continues to pour out of Caro's Camden Town studio.
Besides various essays and prefaces by Blume, the catalogues include several important texts from Caro's career, including a vignette by Lawrence Alloway on the early bronzes, seminal and penetrating essays by Tim Hilton and Michael Fried, a lecture by Caro himself, and an extremely lively 1979 interview with Peter Fuller from the critic's Marxist years.
Blume's catalogue is an essential study tool for the committed student or collector of Caro, but its presentation is unavoidably prosaic: one misses the nuance and audacity of Caro if his works are reproduced postage-stamp size, sans colour and victim of dull light.
The monograph published by Prestel, by contrast, has to rank as one of the most beautifully designed and sensitively photographed volumes on a contemporary artist.
The editor Ian Barker (formerly of the British Council, now a director of Annely Juda, Caro's principal dealer) has selected a small cross-section of works, and grouped them around various themes, such as‘vessels’, ‘drawing in space’, ‘openings’, and so on , designations which enforce the formally innovative, but at the same time ‘formalist’ character of Caro's achievement.
The text by Karen Wilkin (expert on David Smith and ‘second generation’ Abstract Expressionists) is elegant and accessible, but contains few surprises.
The colour photography of John Riddy is nothing short of sensational, however, starting with plate number one, a deep purple painted steel construction from 1965 that lounges on a white New England wooden veranda.
Even a detractor of Caro would want to own this book just for the photography.
Portrait painting
The greedy hacksters of the art world
British portraiture from 1660 to 1960 charted brilliantly by a relay of scholars
‘Greedy hacksters’ a reviewer of 1859 called them, but this was nothing new: portrait painters in England had long been, and were long to be, vilified by the high minded.
Yet, ingratiating and inventive in equal measure, they thrived to form the longest and greatest tradition of British art.
The astonishing revival of fashionable naturalistic portraiture in our own time, after the Stalinist rigours of twentieth-century art theory, provides a fitting epilogue.
The long and complex story is brilliantly told by a relay team of scholars assembled by the Antique Collectors' Club for this handsomely produced and prodigally illustrated book.
Sir Roy Strong stumbles off the block with his opening sentence ‘The portrait was a child of the renaissance’, which seems to have forgotten about classical antiquity, but then sets off on a thought-provoking and terse survey of themes and ideas throughout the three centuries covered by the book.
There are remarkably few fumblings between the main historical chapters as the narrative is handed from one writer to the next.
The contributors seem to have been given a clear brief to provide just enough context to introduce the paintings themselves, with special emphasis on distinguishing the styles of lesser masters, and many plates showing refreshingly unfamiliar works from recent London auctions, all perhaps with antique collectors in mind.
Some contributions stand out.
Brian Allen enlivens portraiture's ‘Reign of Dullness, 1720–1760’, chiefly famous for the sneering of French commentators like Le Blanc and Rouquet, by discovering a earlier, more pervasive (and more constructive) Continental influence on the London portrait market than has hitherto been recognised.
Martin Postle splices detail and generalisation, so that he can move deftly from a meticulous account of Reynolds' studio practice to the perceptive observation that ‘it was not Reynolds’ style but his lack of style which characterised his work at this time as sitters danced, flirted, embroidered, sacrificed to pagan deities, or merely meditated, in the manner of Guido Reni, Titian, Van Dyck or even Michelangelo’.
The most interesting writer is Kenneth McConkey who deals with the Edwardian era.
Jargon and quirkiness assail him at times like passing attacks of cramp, but in the main he is always on the alert for a new ‘angle’, always individual in expression and always ready to usher the most illuminating quotations to their correct places with the discreet poise of a butler from his chosen period.
By contrast Frances Spalding's final chapter, ‘The Modern Face’, is surprisingly tentative for such an experienced writer: she obviously contemplates deserting the more endangered of Bloomsbury species the rank amateur as opposed to the merely amateurish but in the end mounts a token defence, and so damns them with faint art history.
Regency architecture
Conveying the general through the particular
Recent books on Nash and architectural drawings
As Giles Worsley explains in Architectural Drawings of the Regency Period, the term ‘Regency’ is technically understood to cover the period from 1811 to George III's death in 1820, but in matters concerning architecture, decoration and furniture, it is more appropriate to apply it to the years from 1790 to 1837 with the accession of Queen Victoria.
The term has also long been associated with powerful aesthetic connotations, with that which is colourfully beguiling, especially in interior decoration and furnishing, and not least in garden ornament.
Of course, it is relevant that the period under discussion also saw the triumph of the art of aquatint reproduction and of watercolour illustration, two modes that conveyed the idea of the Picturesque to the common reader.
We can witness all these in Worsley's book in which he demonstrates that architectural draughtsmanship reached a point of perfection by 1837, after which it degenerated into mere technical proficiency, when even bodies such as the Institute of British Architects condemned the use of colour and supplementary foreground activities that had previously made competition perspectives more attractive.
This is not to suggest that Worsley's book is just a compilation of pretty drawings.
Far from it, for he has matched his chosen designs to the theme of the growth of professionalism in architecture from the formation of the Architects' Club in 1791 to the founding of the Institute of British Architects in 1837; and more than this, for just as architects strove for recognition in a professional world being transformed by the Industrial Revolution and new sciences, so does Worsley show us how this new breed of architect acquired technical proficiencies: in the presentation of drawings, in methods of copying and reproduction, in colour coding, and in advanced modes of perspective.
All this comes out in Worsley's excellent introduction, a very valuable addition to the literature on the subject.
He follows by dividing his selected drawings into building types: public buildings, the country house, smaller houses, churches, urban architecture (town planning) and commercial buildings.
Alas that the RIBA's garden design book had taken away garden architecture, for that encapsulates so much characteristic of the Regency.
With the late Michael Mansbridge's book we are introduced to John Nash, to many the Regency architect par excellence(although this reviewer believes that John Buonarotti Papworth is more deserving of that accolade).
Here is a visual glut of generally superb photographs taken by Mr Mansbridge over many years.
More than 400 illustrations represent 286 numbered works.
Now having said that, afficionados of Nash will turn to Howard Colvin's Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 to discover only 130 listed works.
Mr Mansbridge was not a scholar.
He was an enthusiastic amateur of the best sort, perhaps a little hasty in his attributions.
For example, for Harpton Court, Radnor, built around 1805, Mr Colvin lists the outbuildings under Nash, whereas Mr Mansbridge gives the new south front to him despite its air of a Late Classical job of the 1840s.
But quibbles apart, it matters little, for to catalogue visually the complete works of an architect is, I believe, a unique achievement.
Let us hope that others may do the same.
It demonstrates that more can be achieved by bringing together a mass of illustration than many a pedantic thesis.
What Mansbridge did not tackle was the relationship between Nash and those who worked in his office.
G.S.
Repton is a case in point, and perhaps Mansbridge would have done better to omit works such as Repton's Sarsden in Oxfordshire that has nothing to do with Nash except for stylistic associations.
I seem to remember an American thesis writer who crashed to the ground over this contorted problem, and I am sure that both Worsley and Sir John Summerson (who contributes an elegant introduction to Mansbridge's book) would concur that mystery still surrounds the problem of Nash the draughtsman.
Apparently not a single conceptual drawing survives to demonstrate how Nash conveyed his intentions to those in his office who made his presentation watercolours.
But all these matters are the stuff for scholars to decide.
Perhaps Worsley will be one of those.
Certainly Mr Mansbridge from his vantage point of above or below can enjoy our acclaim at his pictorial success.
Irsa Verlag publishers go into art dealing
VIENNA.
The Irsa Verlag publishing group, specialists in art books and exhibition catalogues, and also publishers of the journal Artibus et Historiae, has announced plans to open a commercial gallery in the centre of Vienna.
The new gallery is to be managed by Josef Grabski and Barbara Wild, who was curator of the Österreichische Galerie before working at Sotheby's Vienna office.
The emphasis will be on painting and sculpture from the Renaissance and baroque periods, but the publishing group will continue to pursue its interest in related scholarly research.
Words, words, words
LONDON.
A new book prize called The National Art Book Prize is to be launched in Britain, sponsored by The National Art Collections Fund and Waterstone's booksellers.
Books submitted will be assessed both for their scholarship and for their accessibility to the general reader.
The judges for 1992 will be Tim Waterstone, founder of the chain of shops; Professor Michael Kauffmann, Director of the Courtauld Institute of Art; Michael Ratcliffe, Literary Editor of the Observer; Marina Vaizey, author, critic and editor of NACF Publications; and Paul Baggaley, a Waterstone's buyer and manager.
The author of the winning book will receive £2,000.
The shortlist will be announced this month.
Yale buys Pelican History of Art
LONDON.
Yale University Press has acquired the prestigious Pelican History of Art series from Penguin Books.
The series was the brainchild of publisher Allen Lane and architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner and the first volume appeared in 1953.
Almost fifty volumes have appeared to date.
Yale views the purchase as a long-term commitment and already has plans for new subjects to take the series into the twenty-first century.
Two new volumes commissioned while it was still under the Penguin name are Painting and Sculpture in France 1700–1789 by Sir Michael Levey which is an entirely rewritten version of the paintings section of the French eighteenth-century paintings and sculpture volume published in the 1970s and The Pictorial Arts of the West 800–1200 by Reginald Dodwell.
These will be published this autumn.
The series's new editor and head of Yale U.P.
in London, John Nicoll, stressed that many of Yale's plans are in their early stages but that some texts would undergo revision whilst others would probably be redone completely; some classics would remain untouched.
Mr Nicoll stressed the importance of speaking to art historians in order to canvass opinion on where revisions are necessary, which old volumes would benefit from splitting up and also what new topics should be commissioned.
Previous volumes, whose authors include Wittkower, Haskell, Baxandall and Girouard, will be updated with colour illustrations.
New books in the series will be brought out first in hard-back priced around £40.
Meanwhile existing stocks of the old paperbacks will be reduced in price to £16.95.
New access to old resources: whereto the art library?
VIENNA.
The Institut für Kunstgeschichte ( Insitute of Art History) of the University of Vienna is holding a conference this month (15 and 16 May) on the subject ‘The Tradition of the Art Library: New Access to Old Resources’.
Titled the Leopoldo Cicognara Conference, it is named after the eary nineteenth-century Venetian (d. 1834) who compiled the first bibliography of art-historical literature.
Cicognara's notable library was acquired by the Vatican in 1824 and forms the topic of one of the talks at the conference's first session, which is on ‘The History of Art Libraries: L. Cicognara and his models’.
Other sessions are on the recently completed project in the Vatican ‘The Cicognara Library on Microfiche’, which is divided into two parts: ‘Contents, catalogues and operation of the project’ and ‘Operation and opportunities for international co-operation’.
Finally a panel including Sir Ernst Gombrich, Elizabeth McGrath (Warburg Institute, London), and Professor Artur Rosenauer of the host institute will debate ‘The History of Art Libraries: Cicognara's influence and legacy (Quellenschriften, bibliographies, new art libraries)’.
Other speakers at the sessions will include Konrad Oberhuber of the Albertina, Vienna and Philippe Fehl from The Cicognara Project, the Vatican Library and the University of Illinois.
About twenty-five participants are expected, and the event is supported by the Samuel H. Kress foundation, whose president, Dr Marilyn Perry, will make the concluding remarks.
The Church in Russia gets back more buildings but books are now homeless
MOSCOW.
The Director of the State Historical Library, Mikhail Afanas'yev, has confessed in an interview with the newspaper Kuranty that, ‘Books from captured German holdings are perishing to a limited extent’.
His remarks were made when one of the locations used to store a unique collection of German literature taken from Germany in 1945 was recently handed back to the Orthodox Church, after four decades of being used as a store for the collection.
The building in question was also used to store priceless Russian editions belonging to the State Historical Library.
In what has become standard concern to make reparation to the Church in Russia, the authorities involved failed to think of the now homeless books.
According to Mikhail Afanas'yev, of the 600,000 German books received by the Library in the 1940s, no more than 30,000 were kept.
Some of those remaining were sent to other libraries, while many books were destroyed in a fire.
The remaining collection includes unique volumes of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries from the libraries of the Prussian kings, and from the Reichskanzlei.
Due to a lack of adequate accommodation no precise analysis has yet been made of the ex-German holdings.
The Director of the State Historical Library plans to invite German specialists to Moscow in the near future to help sort out the holdings and to decide the fate of the books.
In any case, many of them will need restoration.
At some time in the past, under orders from above, all Reichskanzlei marks and bookplates in German books were destroyed, together with the owners' annotations.
Pan magazine falls victim to the recession
From April, Pan magazine, published by Burda Verlag, has merged with the interior decoration Ambiente, another Burda publication.
Pan has been struggling financially: last year alone, advertising revenue fell by 20%.
Brainchild of Franz Burda, the company's founder, the periodical was the publisher Hubert Burda's flagship and, with a circulation of 115,000, Europe's most widely-read art magazine.
Pan will now be issued just four times a year, as a supplement to Ambiente.
Although Burda talks of maintaining its share of the upper end of the periodicals market this has been interpreted as a delaying tactic, to allow the magazine to bow out gracefully.
Books for Boston architects
WASHINGTON DC.
The annual American Institute of Architects (AIA) International Architecture Bookfair will be held this year from 19–22 June in conjunction with the AIA conference in Boston.
Last year over one hundred publishers of books on architecture, design and construction participated in the event.
Mitchell Prize revived
LONDON.
Applications are invited for the 1992 Mitchell Prize.
Founded in 1977 by art collector, philanthropist and businessman Jan Mitchell, the prize is awarded to authors of new books which have made a significant contribution to the study and understanding of the visual arts.
The last Mitchell prize was awarded to Thomas DaCosta Kauffmann in 1988 for his book The School of Prague: Painting at the Court of Rudolf II.
In 1989 no award was made, partly because the sponsor felt that publishers were submitting books by the distinguished but small group of authors who had already won prizes, and the prize was allowed to lapse until this year.
It has been revived under the auspices of the Burlington Magazine, and there will again be two categories of prize: the main award of $15,000 and a further award of $5,000 for a first book by a promising scholar.
Both books must be in English and have been published between 31 December 1989 and 31 December 1991.
Judges for this year's prize are: Dr George Goldner of the Getty; Professor Arthur C. Danto of Columbia University; Dr John Golding; Professor Linda Nochlin, Yale University; and Sir John Pope-Hennessy.
Past winners include: Francis Haskell (Rediscoveries in Art); Michael Baxendall (The Limewood Sculptors of Renaissance Germany); and John Rewald (Cézanne).
We've won a prize
LONDON.
The National Art Collections Fund announced the winners of its awards for outstanding contributions to the visual arts in Britain on 15 April.
Five awards of £5,000 each are made annually.
The Art Newspaper is delighted to be one of this year's winners and will use the award to build up the paper's archive.
The other four winning projects are: Community Education, Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, an educational programme under the direction of Lucy Dawe Lane involving over 200 artists living in the East End of London,(the award will be used to set up after-school activities for local Bengali children and their families); Art in Albany Prison, Isle of Wight, where Colin Riches has set up the first art centre in a maximum security jail, providing full-time employment and art education for eighteen long-term prisoners,(Colin Riches will use his award to carry out further researches into the benefits of art in prisons); Art Trust, Homerton Hospital, London, where the inspiration of surgeon William Shand has covered the bare walls and public spaces of the new building with  specially-commissioned pictures and sculpture,(the award will be used to commission a major sculpture for the principal courtyard; and The Fan Museum, Greenwich, London, the first museum of fans, set up by Dicky and Helen Alexander who have donated their collection of 2,000 fans to the museum,(the award will be used to provide proper storage facilities for the collection).
Summerson revised
Penguin Books has issued an eighth revised edition of Sir John Summerson's Architecture in Britain 1530–1830, first published in 1953 and intended as a companion to Ellis Waterhouse's Painting in Britain 1530–1830 and Margaret Whinney's Sculpture in Britain which covers the same period.
The new edition is not greatly different to the 1983 revision; the format is larger and there is a narrative bibliography covering publications from 1983 to early 1990.
The author's clear, elegant prose style combined with an attractive presentation and layout (useful maps as well as plans, elevations and related drawings) explain the continuing success of this book.
The refreshing powers of watercolours
According to Prince Charles the watercolour medium ‘quite literally refreshes parts of the soul which other activities cannot reach’.
In recent years exhibitions of English watercolours have also refreshed parts of the world never previously reached by this most British of mediums.
Birmingham and the Fitzwilliam's watercolours have been to Japan, the Victoria and Albert's to East Germany, and the British Museum's to Cleveland and North Carolina, a tour which resulted in the book under review.
Such catalogues, the academic carrot which rewards the curator's endeavours for organising the show, have two disparate functions.
They must introduce an unfamiliar subject to an audience which has never seen a watercolour before, and also provide new information of permanent value.
Both functions are well served in the present volume.
The useful introduction discusses changing attitudes to the depiction of nature.
It is particularly effective when describing the links between the technical virtuosity of the great Romantic watercolour painters and their empathy with the ‘inner life’ of nature.
The individual catalogue entries also provide new insights into works ranging from Joris Hoefnagel's view of ‘Nonsuch Palace’ of 1568 to William Simpson's surrealist view of ‘Summer in the Crimea’of 1857.
Fully illustrated in acceptable colour the book provides a useful permanent record of one hundred of the finest watercolours in the British Museum.
Kandinsky's watercolours at the Guggenheim
Kandinsky did not possess the most endearing of artistic personalities, as this album of seventy watercolours from the Guggenheim Museum attests.
Most of them might more accurately be described as tinted pen and ink drawings than watercolours in the traditional sense.
Dating from 1911 they not only show how he moved towards complete abstraction but also his unflagging inventiveness.
Although Kandinsky proclaimed the vital importance of the inner and personal inspiration it is extraordinary how he seized upon and exploited the styles of Matisse, Malévich, Klee, Arp and the Surrealists.
The introduction provides a summary of Kandinsky's career together with useful information on the watercolours themselves.
At home with the Renaissance
Peter Thornton's book is the first serious study of this vast and sometimes elusive subject and the fourth in a series of thematically non-sequential books from Weidenfeld and Nicolson initiated by Mr Thornton with his richly informative Authentic Décor: The Domestic Interior 1620–1920.
The aim of the series has been to record the domestic interior through contemporary visual records such as paintings, prints and drawings.
The present study is immensely rich in every way, and is an impressive foray into largely uncharted territory.
Bearing in mind the nature of the material, its division into four parts is a commendably rational way of dealing with material totally different from preceding books in the series.
The sections are ‘The Architectural Shell and its Embellishment’, ‘Furnishings’, ‘Architectural Planning’ and ‘Creating the Interior’.
‘What was novel in the fifteenth century was that these rich people (the upper middle classes) began to build splendid dwellings for themselves in such great numbers’ writes Mr Thornton, and the fact that interior decoration appears in something approaching its present-day form in this period is the key to this book.
The problem is the evidence; the architectural shells of rooms with their deliberately dominating chimneypiece often survive more or less intact, but unlike later rooms, fittings and furniture have been dispersed.
The author does a sterling job in painstakingly assembling a large corpus of evidence from a vast variety of sources, taking us through a welter of contemporary descriptions and extrapolating what are almost invariably convincing conclusions from the visual evidence.
That this evidence is found mainly (particularly in the Quattrocento) in religious art, where fantasy may have influenced the artist's vision to an unchartable extent, is a real problem.
Mr Thornton however produces a wealth of information from literary and archival sources which consolidate many of his assumptions from the pictures.
A list of relevant inventories outlines the richness of available material.
The additional information contained in the notes to each chapter is invaluable, and, like the rest of the text, intensely readable, human and lively.
This is a must for anyone who wishes to go beyond the conventional limits accepted for the understanding of Italian Renaissance art.
The Gilbert gold box collection in L.A.
The Gilbert Collection of Gold Boxes is more than just a catalogue.
With its extensive introductory articles and detailed references, emphasised by illustrations of comparative gold boxes or designs from major museums and private collections, the book represents a summary of present knowledge about the art of snuff boxes.
It is astounding to find that the Gilberts Californian real-estate and property magnates have managed to acquire a collection of this importance in just over thirty years.
Their interest originally lay in Italian mosaics, with the first acquisition made in 1960.
This interest brought them into contact with the world of gold boxes.
By 1983, the year of the publication of a first catalogue by Géza von Habsburg-Lothringen, their collection counted sixty-eight boxes.
It now includes 148 boxes, all pledged by the Gilberts as a gift to the Los Angeles County Museum of Arts.
Apart from their very high technical quality, as in the enamels by Le Sueur on the 1760 Prémin box, nearly all boxes are distinguished either by artists' signatures or by their provenance.
This may be historical, as with the four magnificent Frederick the Great boxes, or from more recent outstanding collections, such as the 1753 Apollo box by Breton, once the property of the late Lord Rothschild.
Also listed are the names of the dealers who provided the boxes.
Here we find that the Gilberts, like many of the great American collectors, were looking for guidance from experienced art dealers in the field, mostly located in London.
What distinguishes the Gilbert Collection is the wide spectrum not only of techniques and materials, such as goldsmiths' work, enamel, porcelain and especially hardstone, but also the countries of origin.
The art of the gold box is traditionally held to be epitomised in the Paris tabatières, but the strength of this collection also lies in those boxes which were produced in peripheral workshops, especially in Germany and Russia.
Mr Truman has made a number of discoveries and new attributions, not without correcting even the minutest mistake in the previous catalogue.
The photograph from a 1946 copy of the Illustrated London News showing snuff boxes belonging to the Hohenzollern family rediscovered by the Control Commission in Bremen after the war, proves that Mr Truman's research was not restricted to the specialised literature.
To the purist it would seem regrettable to have included a modern 14-carat gold box by Cartier (although decorated with a nineteenth-century mosaic) as the last entry in this book.
However, knowing that the box was a personal gift by one of the Gilberts to the other, it does emphasise the private character of this otherwise magnificent collection.
Medieval textiles unravelled
In the Middle Ages textile art was one of the great artes mechanicae; wool, linen, silk and gold were used to produce decorative and devotional objects of extraordinary beauty and complexity.
Wall hangings and tapestries are early examples of interior design, while churches and monasteries were filled with altar cloths, Lenten veils and ecclesiastical garments, often woven and embroidered with elaborate patterns.
Yet serious research into the history of textiles goes back little more than a century.
Leonie von Wilckens has been working in this area for over thirty years from her base at the German National Museum in Nuremberg, home of a major textile collection.
This is her most ambitious work, surveying the history of European textiles over some 1,000 years, from late Antiquity to the fifteenth century.
She tackles this huge theme in nine chronologically arranged chapters, and the text is complemented by over 400 illustrations and an extensive bibliography.
Von Wilckens is equally at ease discussing specific objects and broader historical themes, in comparing textiles with other arts such as painting and metalwork, and in following the patterns of influence between regions in and beyond Europe.
She also has an unfailing eye for the object drawn from an array of public and private collections to illustrate gradual changes in techniques and materials.
She follows current taste in emphasising weaving techniques and patterns rather than embroidery.
An opening chapter on silk fragments from China, Persia and the Middle East brings in the central theme of her narrative the passage of materials and techniques from one area to another.
Later she shows how between the eighth and eleventh centuries, Byzantine silk weavers gradually absorbed Islamic weaving methods, colour combinations and motifs.
The yellow, blue and green patterns on a red ground of the tenth-century Earth-Sea silk in Durham are drawn from Persian pictorial traditions.
The author traces the lively thirteenth-century silk trade, as contacts grew with China and traders from Genoa bought ever greater quantities of Persian silk, much of it used to embellish the homes of a prospering merchant class in Europe's expanding towns.
The trade in silk and other precious materials is documented in the inventories of St Peter's in Rome and St Paul's in London, both dating from 1295.
A chapter on embroidery includes the famous fifteenth-century Bohemian embroideries, with their often melancholy mystical scenes, and the fashion for ostentatious embroidery with pearls.
Von Wilckens also discusses the famous tapestries of Paris and Flanders—among them the commission of Ludwig I for 600 square metres illustrating the Apocalypse, which took seven years to complete.
Among the many virtues of this work is the equal enthusiasm and knowledge which the author brings to more modest materials such as linen and wool, or the topic with which she closes early and obscure weaving and pleating techniques.
Florence: a year in the life
Silvia Meloni Trkulja's book is a census of the city as it was four hundred years ago.
It tells us how many inhabitants there were and what they did, household by household and individually, recording the old family names, occupations, and streets one can still walk down today.
She uncovers the familiar haunts of shoemakers, wool-workers, dyers, armourers and lantern makers; of judges, notaries, doctors and chemists; of prostitutes, vast numbers of them, concentrated in the districts of Santa Maria Novella and San Giovanni; and of artists.
At the time Florence was suffering the effects of recession, but was still powerful after its victory over Siena, and manufacturing flourished.
The stonemasons almost all lived in the San Giovanni district and most belonged to the Opera del Duomo, as did the mirror makers and enamellers.
Artists a category which included interior decorators and lowly house-painters were not concentrated in any particular quarter.
San Giovanni seems to have been the well-to-do area, as one would expect, since it included the cathedral.
In this district lived ‘Michelagniolo Buonarruoti’ and Benvenuto di Giovanni Cellini, while Vasari ‘Giorgino d'Arezzo pictore’is recorded as living in the Santa Croce district.
Rebirth of a classic
Giovanni Morelli's classic and revolutionary Della Pittura italiana in Gustavo Frizzoni's Italian edition of 1897 has been reprinted to commemorate the centenary of the author's death.
The book originated in a series of articles by Morelli with radical reattributions of major Italian Renaissance paintings in the Borghese Gallery, published under a pseudonym in the Zeitschrift für bildende Kunst in the 1870s.
The book was reissued in 1890 with an exposition of his celebrated method and observations on the Doria collection.
The present edition reinstates Morelli's importance in the history of art.
Its editor is Jaynie Anderson, whose biography of Morelli, along with a wealth of her newly discovered material on him, is included.
Oriental complexity
Dürer's Knots, Walpole's sheep, John Martin's Babylon, Cuthbert Brodrick's baths at Leeds, Mrs Frances Trollope's Cincinnati Bazaar…which is the odd one out?
As it happens, the Turkish sheep at Strawberry Hill are left out of John Sweetman's compendium, but the more permanent aspects of Walpole's oriental tastes are described, as well as a host of other subjects permeated by orientalism.
Some areas of study are so hard of definition that they seem to evade all attempts to summarise them.
Many people believe they know what is meant by orientalism, yet it is notoriously difficult to comprehend and to write about the whole of this protean subject.
Perhaps the best beginning would be to collect important examples chronologically, and this is the strength of John Sweetman's book.
The author has bravely tried to describe succinctly all the key oriental influences on British and American art and architecture he could find.
It makes for an extraordinary mixture but an entertaining one, as eclectic as the individual pieces he describes.
Few things seem to have been left out, but this is because he based his work squarely on such useful volumes as Michael Darby's The Islamic Perspective and A. St Clair's The Image of the Turk in Europe, and a large number of other texts besides.
The bibliography is extensive and excellent and the notes are particularly easy to use.
Five thousand years of glass
The task of condensing five thousand years of glass-making appears to have little deterred the contributors of this latest offering from the British Museum.
Whilst following a traditional historical framework, tracing the evolution of glass manufacture and its regional distribution, this successful collaboration manages, nevertheless, not to lose sight of the inherent qualities of the medium itself.
Accompanied by superb colour plates of objects drawn largely from the museum's collection and newly re-photographed the multi-faceted, sometimes ethereal nature of glass is explored in all its astounding variety, from ancient civilisation onwards.
Indeed, on the evidence of surviving specimens (the numbers of which are surprising given the delicacy of the material) the glass worker is often seen to have embraced both a painterly and sculptural flair for colour, form and detail highlighting his creativity and sophistication.
From basic utilitarian objects such as the core-formed vessels of ancient Egypt, with their bold feathered decorations, to the elaborate ‘fantasy’ pieces of Venice, the amorphous nature of glass has lent itself admirably to individualistic expression.
Of particular interest is the series of photographs specially taken in a modern glass-maker's studio, which reconstruct step-by-step a variety of ancient techniques.
Not only do these pictures help to consolidate our general knowledge of glass-making processes, but they also reveal some new and important evidence on the ways in which specific types of glass wares were produced.
The Art Market
McCarty-Cooper sale at Christie's, New York
‘It should have become an I Tatti of modern French art’
John Richardson tells the story of Douglas Cooper, his collection and his adopted son Billy, whose estate comes up 11 May
NEW YORK.
Unlike most great collectors of the twentieth-century, Douglas Cooper, the prescient champion of Cubism, wanted no granite monument to his massive ego.
Upon his death in 1984, his magnificent Cubist collection did not rest in a private museum, let alone in a wing named in his honour.
‘Douglas was an egomaniac’, says his former companion, writer John Richardson.
‘He didn't think any museum was good enough to have his collection.
Of course, this didn't stop him from shamelessly flirting with and teasing the scores of solicitous museum officials that came to see him!’
Posterity's loss was the art world's gain, as the recipient of the tetchy man's largesse was his adopted son, the late William McCarty-Cooper, whose remains of the Cooper legacy, comprising important paintings and drawings by Gris, Picasso, Braque and Leger, are due to be sold by Christie's New York on 11 May.
Cooper got his start as a collector in 1932, after coming into a £100,000 trust fund inheritance when he was twenty-one years old.
His rebellious nature manifested itself in his collecting speciality, the Cubist masterpieces of Picasso, Léger, Braque and Gris.
Cooper was trained as an art historian and he applied the same methodology and rigorous scholarship to his chosen artists as earlier generations had to the Old Masters.
Thanks to the depressed economy and general slump in the art market, Cooper soon amassed the most comprehensive and complete representation of works by these four leading Cubists.
After distinguished service in World War II, first as an ambulance driver, then in R.A.F. Intelligence, Cooper embarked on a career as one of the art world's most persistent gadflies, finding his pulpit in the form of unsigned book reviews in the Times Literary Supplement.
Had he been less brilliant or sure of himself, he would have been easier to dismiss, but Cooper selected his victims with care, knowing precisely where their weaknesses were, and always aimed to draw blood, each review increasing his enemies within the international art establishment (see The Art Newspaper, No. 17, April 1992, p. 2 for his dealings with John Rothenstein).
In 1949, the thirty-eight-year old Cooper met John Richardson, a twenty-five-year old art historian.
Quitting England, the two moved into the abandoned eighteenth-century château Castille in Provence which they renovated The pictures were Douglas's and the furniture was mine’, says Richardson and in a few years, Cooper and Richardson made the place a private museum and shrine to Cubism and its creators, and where Picasso, Leger and Braque were frequent visitors.
‘The collection was so comprehensive, so beautifully put together’, says Richardson, ‘that if you subtracted one drawing, the totality would suffer.
Intact, the collection enabled you to study the entire element of the Cubist style’.
In his saner moments, Cooper felt strongly that the collection should remain intact, becoming, as Richardson says, an ‘I Tatti-like study centre of modern French art and literature, to be administered by a university.
I would have been its curator, and would have had the top floor to myself’.
Unfortunately, Cooper could be just as difficult in private as he was in public, and Richardson moved out in 1960.
‘I loved living in that Provençal château, in that very beautiful part of the world, with Picasso, Braque and Cocteau stopping by, but with Douglas you never knew when kindness would turn to vitriol…
After eleven years, I had to get out.
I had to make a life for myself…and thank God I did, even if Douglas appropriated all the things I left behind…pictures, papers and clothes…
The last he burnt’.
Cooper did not remain entirely alone.
At a Philadelphia dinner party given by collector Henry McIlhenny, Cooper met a willowy twenty-three-year old budding decorator named Billy McCarty, the son of an Air Force Colonel from Miami Springs.
‘Billy was the most charming person you could imagine’, says Clifford Henderson of Partridge Fine Arts.
‘He had this great ability to get to know people very quickly, and wherever he was, he was invited to all the best and most glittering parties.
The world was his oyster’.
As a handsome young man anxious to better himself in society, McCarty certainly got to know Cooper very quickly, and by the mid-Sixties was solidly ensconced in Cooper's life.
In 1972, Cooper legally adopted him as his son, as much to disinherit his own family as to ensure that under French law, most of his estate would go to his ‘son’.
Despite the adoption, McCarty spent less and less time with Cooper, who only got more arrogant and eccentric.
Cooper was further distracted by a still unsolved 1974 robbery at the château Castille where, among much else, twenty-five Picassos were stolen.
Cooper panicked, sold the château, and spent his remaining years in two small apartments in Monte Carlo, which were too small for the collection, part of which was sold.
Cooper died in 1984, aged seventy-three, leaving Billy McCarty-Cooper the overwhelming bulk of his estate, valued at approximately $40 million.
McCarty-Cooper soon gave up decorating, and began to sell his mentor's collection in order to support an extravagant lifestyle.
New York collector Leonard Lauder paid what is said to have been $25 million for some of the finest remaining works, including Braque's ‘Still life with mandoline and metronome’(1909–10) and Gris's ‘Portrait of the artist's mother’(1912).
Needing more funds to finance his move to a lavish Beverly Hills mansion (embellished with Ruhlmann furniture, Jensen silver, Chinese export porcelain, and African tribal art), Billy offered more works at Christie's London in 1988 (which realised $5.93 million).
Finding a small Picasso drawing inscribed ‘Pour Douglas et John’, Richardson begged Billy to take it out of the sale.
‘I did not want things that Picasso gave Douglas and me coming on the market, and Billy very decently gave me the drawing’.
Such generosity did not extend to a paper tie and crown that Picasso had made for Richardson (also for Cooper) on some gala occasion.
When Richardson asked for them back, Billy airily said, ‘Oh, I've given all that to the Musée Picasso’.
Richardson claims that a number of other things that are coming up at Christie's this month belong to him: notably a Picasso drawing of Dora Maar and some Braque Christmas cards that Cooper never forwarded.
‘I don't think I'm going to do anything about it…’ he says.
McCarty-Cooper lived and entertained lavishly, in ways completely the opposite of his great mentor.
‘At the opening of the Musée Picasso’, says Richardson, ‘Billy arrived with an entourage consisting of his curator, lawyer, financial adviser and personal secretary.
Douglas would have been horrified.
He would have appeared alone’.
Others are less critical.
‘Billy was extraordinarily generous to his friends’, says Henderson, who was a guest at McCarty-Cooper's $250,000 ball at Miami's Viscaya for his parents' Golden Wedding anniversary in 1985.
‘He flew me, and a friend out there, put us up for three nights, then gave us a holiday in the Florida Keys, all paid for’.
During this time, McCarty-Cooper became even more generous with people he knew less well.
When an acquaintance, the New York decorator Brent Arnold, contracted AIDS, Billy paid his grocery bills at Balducci's for more than a year.
Billy, too, found he had AIDS, finally succumbing to the disease in May 1990.
Despite his many sales of things from Douglas Cooper's collection, a substantial amount of art remained, much of it in Switzerland, where it was looked after and catalogued by Billy's curator, Dorothy Kozinski.
This was exhibited at the Tate Gallery and Kunstmuseum, Basel under the title ‘Douglas Cooper and the Masters of Cubism’ in 1987–88.
Billy had vested the ownership of most of this in a Swiss corporation, Churchglade Ltd.
This corporation, which is now run by Billy's lawyer, John Hutchinson, picked Christie's for the ultimate liquidations, each commemorated by a catalogue emblazoned with McCarty-Cooper's striking monogram.
The first dispersal, of furniture, silver, books and decorative arts on 25 January, primarily from the Beverly Hills estate, realised $2.97 million.
The 11 May sale features over one hundred paintings and drawings, highlighted by George Braque's late masterpiece ‘Atelier VIII’(1952–55)(est. around $8–10 million), bought by Cooper directly from the artist, who had sold it only on condition that it would never leave France.
Works by Picasso include ‘Paquet de tabac, vase, fleurs, journal, verre, bouteille’ of 1918, an important example of ‘synthetic’Cubism and a brutal 1938 charcoal drawing of a ‘Boy with a popsicle’.
The 19 May sale is devoted to over 200 lots of tribal art from Africa, the Pacific and North and South America, the only part of the collection which was Billy McCarty-Cooper's own creation.
Sotheby's
President Michael Ainslie discusses the 1991 figures
Decorative arts no longer the Cinderella
LONDON.
Sotheby's declared their full-year figures on 19 March which showed an overall profit of $21 million, of which $12.1 derived from their auctioneering activities and the rest from real estate and financial activities.
Overall sales were down 55% on last year when profits from autioneering were $139 million.
In an interview with The Art Newspaper, President and Chief Executive Officer Michael Ainslie expressed satisfaction with the figures in a year which saw the Gulf War and a world-wide recession.
He felt that the market reached its lowest point in the first half of last year and that a number of signs now pointed to returning confidence: a low unsold (bi) rate of 13% (by value) so far this year as compared to 21% for this time last year, together with stronger bidding in sales this year.
Sotheby's will be pinning their hopes on the decorative arts market which is performing well in Europe and the States and accounted for 56% of business last year compared to 38% in 1990.
Mr Ainslie dismissed Christie's strength in Old Master Paintings as a London phenomenon and, when asked to comment on Christie's Chairman Lord Carrington's statement that Christie's were now the largest auction house in Europe with a market share of 48%, said ‘let him wait till mid 1992.
Our profits market share is 63% worldwide’.
Asked where the company would be looking for its future clients Mr Ainslie stressed the importance of Europe, particularly Switzerland, Germany and Italy.
In addition the recent strong performance of the American stock market was contributing to the resurgence of American buying both in the States and in European sales.
He expressed modest optimism about the Impressionist market and felt that some new collectors were emerging.
On Sotheby's activities in Berlin he was candid about the difficulties experienced by this ‘very interesting experiment’ so far but felt that the company could build on the pool of new private (West) German buyers that had emerged from the sales.
There are no plans at present for sales in Russia the situation is simply too unpredictable.
Although he stressed that Sotheby's had ceased their practice of guaranteeing items in January 1989 Mr Ainslie conceded that the company still owned works of art as a result of this policy.
The current values of such items were audited annually but these figures were not made available.
On the subject of the Pierre Matisse purchase he noted that less than half the collection had been sold but that Sotheby's had recouped both the cost and associated taxes already.
In Mr Ainslie's opinion, the acquisition of the collection had protected the market from a ‘huge onslaught’ of works by twenty or so artists and the operation had been done in an ‘intelligent, systematic way’.
Christie's, London
Is this the beginning of a Peninsula campaign?
El Greco and Zurbarán in ‘Unique Spanish Sale’ on 28 and 29 May
LONDON.
The stars of Christie's sale of Spanish Works of Art on 28 and 29 May, dubbed ‘The Unique Spanish Sale’ is this the beginning of a Christie's campaign for the Spanish market? will be El Greco's ‘Disrobing of Christ’and Zurbarán's ‘Christ and the Virgin in the house at Nazareth’, both offered anonymously.
Both have figured in the last major exhibitions devoted to these painters.
The sale includes Old Master paintings and drawings, nineteenth-century pictures, contemporary pictures and prints, objets de vertu, sculpture, shipwreck treasure (see p. 14), picture frames, arms and armour and ceramics.
El Greco's ‘Disrobing’(estimate £1.5–2.5 million) is thought to be the first of the two small autograph versions of the famous altarpiece in the Toledo Cathedral baptistery, dating from 1577–80.
The Zurbarán (estimate £1.2–1.6 million) is a recent rediscovery, and probably dates from the period of the painter's greatest success in Seville around 1640.
Other major names include Alonso Coello, Ribera, and Murillo, who is represented by both paintings and drawings.
Paris
Tajan clocks up a record $3.8 million for the Haute Epoque Perrier sale
The reasons for the success?
‘Firstly, my talent secondly, my talent; and thirdly, excellent organisation’
PARIS.
Many art world professionals confidently predicted catastrophic results for the auction in Paris's Drouot salerooms on 6 April of the medieval and Renaissance furniture collection of leading French collector and dealer, Bruno Perrier.
The market was too bad, some said, to absorb such a quantity of high quality work at one gulp.
The sale turned out to be the most important and most successful Haute Epoque auction in history, establishing a number of world record prices.
Held by Jacques Tajan it made a total of FFr21.450 million (£2.2 million; $3.8 million) and most prices were well above high estimates.
Only one of the fifty-six lots, a seventeenth-century two-part walnut cabinet, was bought in at FFr750,000 (£77,950; $135,600), just under its high and somewhat optimistic estimate.
All leading dealers in the field attended the sale, only to be hopelessly outbid in every single case by private collectors who fought hard for what they wanted Swiss, French, Italians, Germans and five New York buyers were particularly in evidence.
One of the latter acquired an exceptionally rare late seventeenth-century Piedmontese set of eight chairs, four armchairs and settee with beautifully preserved embroidered covers for FFr2.450 million (£249,400; $434,000), way above its FFr1 million estimate.
It was the sort of set Haute Epoque specialist dealers said they never expected to see again in their lifetimes.
Another enthusiastic New York bidder, collector and dealer in Renaissance art and archaeology, Eduardo Almegià, bought a magnificently carved, late fifteenth-century Norman oak chest of State, extremely rare and in fine condition with a high estimate of FFr600,000 for FFr700,000 (£72,700; $126,600).
He also acquired an oak cupboard with linenfold panels of the same period made in Picardy for FFr380,000 (£39,500; $68,730), more than three times its low estimate and said after the sale only those unexpectedly high prices had prevented him from going for more.
‘They will also prevent me from selling these pieces for a long time to come’, he said.
Bidding for the second lot of the sale, a thirteenth-century oak cathedral chest with iron strapwork from Durham, tripled the high estimate to reach FFr1.1 million (£114,300; $198,900), establishing a world record for English oak furniture.
But the sale had its quirks too: enthusiasm among bidders for an inelegantly and oddly shaped sixteenth-century Lombard dignitary's chair in walnut pushed the price all the way up to a staggering FFr900,000 (£93,500; $162,700), a world record for a chair of the period and almost twenty times the estimate.
Bids for an oak standing court cabinet made in Flanders around 1520 rose to a startling FFr2.5 million (£259,800; $425,000), ten times its low estimate and another world record, while a more richly decorated and rich hued world cupboard with grotesque masks, Anjou work around 1600, went for a modest FFr400,000 (£41,200; $71,750)(estimate FFr200–250,000).
A thickly built oak and beechwood sixteenth-seventeenth century refectory table from the Pyrenees, admittedly characterful (Tajan's auction staff used it for stacking their telephones on) but more than difficult to place in a modern apartment, sold for FFr650,000 (£67,550; $117,500), over twice its high estimate.
A gem of an oak five-sided dressoir, on the other hand, François 1er period from Champagne and perfect museum material, sold for a modest FFr480,000 (£49,900; $86,800), just over its high estimate.
Asked about the reasons for the success of the sale, the ebullient Tajan said: ‘Firstly, my talent; secondly, my talent; and thirdly, excellent organisation’.
Compton sale of Japanese swords sets a world record for total value
NEW YORK.
On 31 March part I of the sale of Japanese swords and sword fittings from the collection of Dr Walter A. Compton (see The Art Newspaper No.16, March 1992, p.17) proved a major success with 92% lots sold or 96% value sold, realizing $7,998,375 (£4,623,338)(including premium) a world record total for any sale of Japanese art.
Important lots were contested by trade and private buyers, both Western and Japanese.
A record for a sword was set by lot 239, a Fukuoka Ichimonji Tachi from the Kamakura period (second half of the thirteenth century) signed Ichi; estimated at $200–300,000, it sold for $380,000 (£218,400) to a European private collector.
The previous record for a sword was $132,000.
A Soshu Ichimonji Tachi (lot 264) from the Kamakura period (circa 1250), signed Sukezane, sold for $340,000 (£195,400) against an estimate of $80–120,000 to the Japanese trade.
An Edo Noda Katana (circa 1630) signed Hankei (estimate at $200–300,000) sold for $200,000 (£115,000)(lot 325) to a European private collector.
An Ishiguro School Tsuba from the Edo period (circa 1850), signed Ishiguro Masaaki with Kao (lot 187) also set a record for a sword guard at $80,000 (£45,000)(estimate $40–60,000).
Given that so many swords and fittings were being offered in a session which might have stretched trade and private interest, a reasonable approach seems to have been taken towards the reserves.
For instance, lot 243, a Bizen Osafune Tachi from the Kamakura period (circa 1260) signed Kagehide sold for $100,000 ($57,500) against an estimate of $200–250,000.
Some of the lower valued lots also sold below estimate which should be an encouraging sign to collectors in the part II and III of the sales, scheduled for October and December of this year.
Edmund Peel & Asociados experiences worst results since its founding
MADRID.
A sale of Impressionist and Modern art in Madrid on 24 March was the least successful of any sale organised by Edmund Peel & Asociados since the Spanish auction house was founded four years ago.
Only three out of sixteen lots sold, for a total of Pta36,500,000 (£202,800; $352,800).
On nine lots bidding did not reach the reserves, and four lots were unsold with no bids at all.
Edmund Peel, the chairman of the firm, said the results were particularly disappointing as one of the star lots bought in was a major work, entitled ‘Mending the Sail’ by the Impressionist Joaquín Serolla y Bastida, and ‘exceptional’said Peel, in terms of its quality, luminosity and date.
The other star lot in the sale fared no better.
It was ‘Landscape with a figure and an artist painting out of doors’ by the Barcelona-born Impressionist Ramón Case y Garbo (1866–1932), which was also bought in.
Meanwhile, among the lots sold, the top price, but still only at mid-estimate, was reached by an early Salvador Dalí of 1921, called ‘Cadaqués’, and depicting the fishing village on the Costa Brava that Dalí so often visited.
It fetched Pta23.5 million (£130,500; $227,200).
The slump in the modern, contemporary, and Impressionist sections of the Spanish art market contrasts, according to Peel, with a buoyant market for quality Spanish Old Master works and for Old Master artists with Spanish connections.
Sotheby's new ‘arcade’ sales will offer works from £400–1200
LONDON.
In a move towards enticing buyers into the lower end of the market, Sotheby's announced on 28 February that it was introducing ‘Arcade sales’ in a new pillared gallery bridging their main galleries and the St George Street and Conduit Street galleries.
The sales will incorporate consignments in the £400 ($700) to £1200 ($2,100) price range and will be devoted to European Decorative Arts from 1600 to 1940 and Oriental Art from around 300 BC to 1916.
Each area will have three sales a year, the first being Oriental art on 27 May followed by a European Decorative Arts sale on 2 and 3 June.
Portrait of the embroiderer as a liberal artist
MADRID.
The embroiderer Juan López de Robredo’ by Goya (est.
Pta 200 million; £1.11 million; $1.93 million), to be sold at Edmund Peel & Asociados, Madrid, 19 May, is the most important painting by the artist to appear on the market in over twenty years.
De Robredo was the official court embroiderer to King Carlos IV of Spain.
He obtained recognition for his art as ‘a liberal art like those of painting, architecture and sculpture’, and this portrait shows him wearing his own specially embroidered uniform, and holding a cartoon for an embroidery design.
The sale also includes an Italian period El Greco, ‘The Entombment’(est.
Pta 70–90 million; £388,900; $676,000) and Zurbarán's ‘St John Chrysostom and Fray Luis de Granada’ of 1651, one of the few signed and dated works by this painter.
London
Late nineteenth- and twentieth-century sculpture index
With an above average climb in prices up to 1990, the fall has been equally steep, but prices look set to hold up as the international status of sculpture rises
LONDON.
Prices for the group of leading late nineteenth- and twentieth-century sculptors in the index rose by 1670% between 1975 and 1990 but fell sharply last year to give an overall rise of 715%.
The increase up to 1990 was greater than for the art market as a whole, and so too was the subsequent drop of 54%.
The Eighties were an important decade for sculpture when many contemporary artists turned to three-dimensional work.
With the emergence of a galaxy of new talents (in Britain in particular), prices of earlier generations of sculptors were reconsidered and found surprisingly low.
Between 1985 and 1990 alone the sculpture index climbed 270%.
Market experts foresee a recovery this year from the recent sharp falls; more realistic estimates are enticing buyers back to the salerooms and the Spring sales showed the market firming up for many European sculptors.
The volume of sculptures by the artists in the index sold in 1991 dropped from 630 to 360 reflecting high bought-in rates at auction and the unwillingness of sellers to risk adverse market conditions.
Sculptors already fully valued in 1985 notably Alexander Archipenko and Aristide Maillol (average prices £30,000 and £70,000) did not take part in the surge up to 1990 nor in the subsequent fall.
Others enjoyed an extraordinary jump in the 1985–90 period Fernandez Arman up 430% to average £17,500, Jean Arp up 460% to £89,000 and Alberto Giacometti up 660% to £402,000.
With the withdrawal of Japanese and American buyers, prices for Rodin and Henry Moore now stand slightly below their 1985 levels.
Of the mainstream figurative French sculptors, Bourdelle now shows an increase of 1090% and Dalou 460%.
Prices for British sculptors Lynn Chadwick, Barbara Hepworth, Jacob Epstein and Elizabeth Frink moved more steadily than the index as a whole, with an overall growth between 1985 and 1990 of 180% and dipping 30% last year.
None of the current generation of sculptors including Cragg, Deacon, Kapoor and Flanagan, is yet sold in large enough numbers at auction to be indexed, though the rise in the retail prices of their work through the latter part of the Eighties was at least as steep as for sculptors with a saleroom record.
The future performance of the sculpture index is linked with the international status of contemporary sculpture.
Whatever the short-term problems in this area, the outlook and for twentieth-century sculpture in general remains bright.
Sotheby's, New York
The long road from Cochabamba
The background to the Jaime Ortiz-Patiño sales starting 20 May
NEW YORK.
When prospective bidders gather at Sotheby's on three consecutive days starting 20 May for the collection of Old Master paintings, silver and French furniture formed by Swiss-based art collector Jaime Ortiz-Patiño, which is estimated by the auction house at more than $22 million, they will witness another chapter of an extravagant story unfold.
The story of the Patiño family is by no means unique, but it is arresting nonetheless for all the romance and tragedy that has surrounded this clan of immensely rich and socially ambitious art collectors.
Of humble origins and mixed Spanish and native South American blood, the Patiños of Cochabamba (in the Andes some 300 kilometres southeast of Bolivia's capital, La Paz), found themselves shortly after World War I in possession of one of the world's great fortunes.
Simon Patiño, the family's patriarch, who rose from being a clerk in a mining supplies store to owner of the largest known tin deposit, accrued revenues from the manufacture of nearly every tin can and piece of tin foil and was ultimately appointed a representative of the Bolivian government in Paris.
Exhibiting a Francophile collecting taste not uncommon among Latin America's rich Wildenstein's presence in Buenos Aires and the numerous interiors designed by the House of Jansen in Havana bear witness Simon Patiño commissioned an extensive silver dinner service from Chaumet to commemorate the twenty-first birthday of his son and heir, Antenor.
Simon Patiño also made the first purchases of French eighteenth-century furniture and Old Master paintings by the French School areas in which successive generations, including Jaime Ortiz-Patiño, his grandson, would collect as well.
Having left behind the bigoted Bolivian elite for whom he would always be only a rich cholo, the contemptuous South American term for anyone of mixed blood, Simon Patiño had his family enter a far grander arena through a series of aristocratic matches, and when he left his fortune estimated by some to have reached a billion dollars to Antenor following his death in 1947 (as well as his taste for all things French), he also left behind a legacy of bigotry borne of his wish to improve his family's social standing.
In 1953 Antenor's eighteen-year-old daughter, Maria Isabel, met and fell in love with James Goldsmith (then the son of a hotel manager with little more than a taste for gambling and various romantic exploits to recommend him), and informed her father that she wished to marry him.
Patiño is known to have told Goldsmith that it would be impossible because, ‘It is not our habit to marry Jews’.
Maria Isabel's elder sister, Cristina, had recently married a French prince and the twenty-year-old Goldsmith was still without the knighthood and the fortune he would later make from the leveraged buyouts of corporations.
Goldsmith could merely reply, ‘It is not our habit to marry Indians’.
The couple eventually eloped but their happiness away from Antenor's disapproval was brief: five months after their marriage, Maria Isabel was dead from a fatal brain disorder.
It is Jaime Ortiz Patiño's recent move from a house in Vandoeuveres, outside Geneva, to smaller quarters in London following in his father's and his maternal grandfather's footsteps he has recently accepted an appointment as an advisor to the Bolivian government that has prompted the present consignment of Old Masters, silver and French furniture.
George Wachter, head of Sotheby's Old Master paintings department in New York, explains that the core of the Ortiz-Patiño pictures is ‘essentially Venetian and French eighteenth-century paintings collected by Mr Ortiz-Patiño's parents, that reflect their taste as well as the fashionable taste of the period’.
Chief among these are Guardi's, ‘San Giorgio Maggiore and the tip of the Giudecca’(est. $1–1.4 million) which Ortiz-Patiño acquired from Agnew's in 1983, and ‘View of the Grand Canal, with Palladio's project for the Rialto Bridge’($600–800,000) only two of a total of eight works by the artist included in the sale.
Highlights of the French paintings are a pair of ‘Bathing scenes’(est. $600–900,000) by Watteau's follower Jean-Baptiste Pater that hung in Ortiz-Patiño's salon.
Also included are a pair of paintings by Hubert Robert, a small-scale work by Lancret and a Nattier pastel portrait.
The offering of Ortiz-Patiño silver features English Chinoiserie-decorated pieces dating from the late seventeenth-century and a number of French eighteenth-century examples ordered by Catherine the Great and the Russian court.
Kevin Tierney, head of Sotheby's silver department comments, ‘This is the most complete collection of English Chinioserie silver ever offered, and includes some of the finest examples made’, while pointing out that the Brownlow Tankards (est. $800,000–1.2 million), ‘are superb’.
Tierney also finds the pieces from the Orloff service (commissioned by Catherine the Great for her favourite, Gregory Orloff, from the Parisian silversmith Jacques-Nicolas Roettiers in 1770) equally important, partly for the historical romance attached to them.
The soup tureen, cover and stand from the Orloff service included in the Ortiz-Patiño sale has an estimate of $1.5–2 million, with a set of eighteen silver-gilt dinner plates, also from the Orloff service, estimated at $300–500,000.
Thierry Millerand, Sotheby's head of French furniture, remarks on the extreme rarity of the Louis XVI ormolu-mounted and painted satinwood and mahogany commode (est. $1.2–1.6 million) that is the top lot of the Ortiz-Patiño offering of French furniture: ‘The commode is one of the very few surviving examples of French eighteenth-century painted and veneered furniture’ and adds, ‘We are certain that it was executed by Joseph Baumhauer and that it belonged to a great collector, Nicolas Beaujon, in the eighteenth century’.
Comparing the present offering to Antenor's French furniture collection (sold at Sotheby's New York in 1986 for a total of over $8 million, a record for a single-owner sale of French furniture in the U.S. at the time), Millerand points out, ‘Antenor Patiño made a number of gifts of French furniture to the Louvre and to Versailles, as well as to the museum in Lisbon.
What was sold in 1986 included many pieces of a decorative nature while the approximate ninety-nine lots consigned by Mr Ortiz-Patiño are of a more consistent quality.
Those aware that in May 1989 Sotheby's New York sold for $67 million a small group of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings inherited and collected by Ortiz-Patiño and once displayed in his house in Switzerland (notable among the eight paintings offered at the time was Gauguin's ‘Mata Mua’, a Tahitian composition that sold for over $24 million to its former co-owner, Baron Thyssen, having been jointly purchased by Ortiz-Patiño and Thyssen only five years before at Sotheby's New York for $3.85 million), may ask themselves how will Jaime Ortiz-Patiño furnish and decorate his London flat?
With help from master decorator Renzo Mongiardino, who is known to have helped him in the past, Ortiz-Patiño should have little trouble showing off the rare editions, manuscripts and fine bindings first collected by his father; his own Dutch and Spanish Old Master paintings; English silver by Paul de Lamerie and the gold snuff boxes he has been collecting since 1956.
Toiles de Jouy en masse and brightly coloured
PARIS.
On 13 April, the Poulin-Le Fur group of auctioneers at the Hôtel Drouot sold the contents of an unnamed château near Jouy-en-Josas, among which was the most important group of toiles de Jouy (the celebrated French printed cotton fabric of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries) ever to appear on the market, including the remarkable number of twenty exceptionally fine garnitures de lit, largely intact and in their original form.
Examples here prove that the preferred colour was a striking red, not faded pink believed by some to be the original colour.
The fabrics had remained carefully packed since the end of the last century, and bear labels with the exact titles of the motifs, possibly made by Barbet de Jouy who donated the fabrics to the Union centrale des arts décoratifs in 1896.
Arts and Crafts at Liberty's
LONDON.
Liberty's is holding its nineteenth Arts and Crafts exhibition in its celebrated London shop from 15 May to 6 June.
This year's show concentrates on the height of the movement at the turn of the century and includes furniture by Heals and the Cotswold School as well as Liberty's own make.
An accompanying exhibition of Pre-Raphaelite paintings mounted by Peter Nahum will include a work by Burne-Jones priced at £85,000.
The jewellery manufacturers Cobra and Bellamy, who have an outlet inside the Liberty shop, will be showing Arts and Crafts pieces including a  silver , mother of pearl and pink tourmaline necklace by Arthur and Georgie Gaskin and items by Archibald Knox, Murle Bennett and Co. and Theodor Fahrner.
Prices start at £200.
The contents of dealer Steinitz's château to be auctioned by Tajan
PARIS.
The entire contents of Château Saint-Paul de Cornillon, the Loire valley home of Paris antique dealer Bernard Baruch Steinitz, are to be auctioned in the castle itself by Jacques Tajan of Ader Tajan in a four day sale from 28 to 31 May.
Around one third of the furniture has been brought to Cornillon by Steinitz since he bought both the property and its contents twenty years ago.
The sale will be divided into some 400 to 500 catalogued lots which Tajan, after a first visit to the château, said he thought would be estimated at FFr15–20 million (£1.5–2 million; $2.7–3.6 million).
The sale will also include a large number of uncatalogued items, including the contents of attics which Steinitz never had time to inspect.
Works on Paper at the Armory ‘Okay’
NEW YORK.
The gate may have been down at Sanford Smith's fourth annual Works on Paper exhibition in New York's Park Avenue Armory from 3 to 5 April, but most of the participants had little to complain about.
Though the overall level may not have been as spectacular as it has in years past, the show has built itself quite a substantial following, and most dealers reported ‘okay’ business.
As usual, foreign exhibitors reported the most sales, with Agnew's nineteenth-century coloured woodcuts proving consistently popular, and Australian dealer Josef Lebovic (specialising in Australian prints, drawings and photography) selling provocative photographs of Christine Keeler and Joe Orton.
Munich dealer Bruce Levie sold four Menzel drawings, and French drawings were well-featured by both Neil Fiertag and Nicholas Joly/Yves Mikaeloff, the latter offering perhaps the widest range, from an unusually fine Guiseppe Passeri pen-and-red chalk ‘Standing Soldier’ to two Art Deco designs for silver covered dishes by the French designers Sue et Mare, bought by the Cooper Union Museum, New York.
Indeed, American museums have proved themselves the most loyal clients of Works on Paper.
Eric G. Carlson of PNY Fine Prints and Drawings, New York, noted sales to the Philadelphia Museum, the Yale University Art Gallery (which bought Bonnard's lithograph ‘L'estampe et l'affiche’), the Baltimore Museum, and the Metropolitan and Brooklyn Museums,(the latter splitting a pair of pen drawings for dinnerware by the American ceramicist Charles Volkmar).
Most of what did sell was overwhelmingly inexpensive, if not cheap, ranging from $350 carte-de-visites of nineteenth-century artists and composers (at David and Constance Yates, New York) to Old Master prints and lithographs in the $5,000–10,000 range.
Milan Art and Antiques Biennale until 4 May
MILAN.
The eleventh International Biennale dell'Antiquario continues until 4 May.
Begun in 1960, in 1984 the fair moved to the ample space of the Fiera which is better equipped to deal with the growing number of visitors and exhibitors.
Visitor numbers for the last Biennale were around 40,000.
This year there are 130 stands including notable Italian names and a strong foreign presence: from Belgium, Bernard Blondeell; from France, Ariane Dandois, la Galerie de Jonckheere and la Galerie St-Honoré; from Germany, Galerie Lingenauber; from Great Britain, Ciancimino, S. Frances, G. Sarti, Bernard J. Shapiro Rare Books and Trinity Fine Arts; from the States, Newhouse; from Monaco, Athenaeum and Galerie d'Art Ancien et Moderne; from Spain, Concha Barrios and Luis Elvira Anticuario; from Switzerland, La Vieille Fontaine Antiquités and Bruno Scardeoni.
The works on show range in date from the first millenium BC to Oriental and contemporary objects.
As usual the event will be accompanied by a number of cultural activities including four seminars on collecting and an exhibition dedicated to the restoration of the area of Milan known as the Capitoline of S. Ambrogio.
For the occasion a series of frescoes of around 1267 have been restored, as has the tombstone of Abbot Cotta.
The Capitoline, formerly connecting the Basilica of S. Ambrogio with the Benedictine monastery, will now be integrated into the Museum of S. Ambrogio as an exhibition space.
The Biennale's catalogue, published by Allemandi, contains full details of all the exhibitors and a series of essays on aspects of the art market with partcular reference to the current economic situation.
There are contributions on silver from Timothy Schroder; on jewellery from Diana Scarisbrick; on Oriental art from Roger Keverne; ceramics from Angela, Gräfin von Wallwitz; sculpture from Pat Wengraf, and more.
Dealers & Galleries
Paris
Colnaghi reopens on the Faubourg St-Honoré after two hundred years
Aiming at the Continentals, Japanese and travelling Americans from the Hotel Bristol
PARIS.
On 6 May the British Ambassador to France, Sir Ewen Fergusson, is opening Colnaghi's new Paris premises at 112 rue du Faubourg St-Honoré (next door to the Hotel Bristol).
The gallery, a relatively small space, allowing for the hanging of twelve to fifteen paintings, will be run by Christophe Lázar, who originally came to Colnaghi's after eight years in private banking at Schroders in New York and investment banking at Credit Suisse First Boston in London.
For the past two years he has run Colnaghi's representative office in Paris and has been responsible for business development in Europe, Japan and South America.
With the new gallery Colnaghi's is, in a sense, returning to its historical roots: in 1783 Paul Colnaghi was running Anthony Torre's establishment, selling works of art at premises on the rue du Faubourg St-Honoré; in 1784 he came to London.
This year Colnaghi's also celebrates the tenth anniversary of the opening of its New York city gallery.
In December 1990 The Art Newspaper talked to dealers (including Richard Knight of Colnaghi's) and auctioneers about the Paris art market and their respective plans.
Now our London art market correspondent talks to Christophe Lázar about the changes in the intervening months and Colnaghi's plans for its Paris gallery.
Christophe Lázar: For the past two years I have been active expanding Colnaghi's presence in Europe, Asia and South America.
We are not opening in Paris solely to take advantage of the end of trading restrictions within the EC in 1993, but because the opportunity arose to obtain a suitable area of the Hotel Bristol with our own street window and entrance.
Why have you opted for a relatively modestly sized premises rather than a larger exhibition area?
In December 1990 Bob Haboldt gave his rationale behind choosing a large gallery as stemming from the different approach of Continental buyers, who like to stroll in and look, as opposed to clients who tend to make an appointment to visit his New York gallery in order to see a specific work.
We are not really operating a gallery in the true sense of the word, with additional stock behind the scenes.
We are showing a select number of works, much as we would at a major international fair such as the Biennale.
Our presence is not intended to be flashy and we want to minimize our risks while maximizing our opportunities.
Will having a gallery in Paris affect the kind of art which Colnaghi will be offering?
Our intent is to reflect the established image of Colnaghi worldwide, to show what Colnaghi is, rather than to cater to a specific national taste.
Our exhibition space will not be a French boutique.
We will show the same art as we would in New York or in London, only we will be more selective in terms of number.
What are your plans for the Biennale this autumn?
Will your presence be welcomed by your Parisian competitors?
We were offered several locations at the Biennale and decided on a small space in the best location thirty-six square metres (as opposed to fifty or ninety) opposite Galerie Cailleux.
In a sense, we do not feel we have any direct competitor in Paris.
Neither Richard Green nor Agnew's is in Paris and we regard Galerie Cailleux, which specializes in French eighteenth-century art, as a colleague rather than a competitor.
We see ourselves very much in sympathy with their sober, selective approach to what they show, and with their scholarly cataloguing.
In 1990 dealers and auctioneers were still stressing the importance of Paris to the Tokyo market.
Is this an important factor for your new gallery?
Yes, but in a larger sense: we consider the Japanese, Korean, Singaporean and Hong Kong markets to be potentially very important.
For instance, there are new collectors of Old Masters in Korea.
We were very successful in our June 1990 exhibition in Tokyo and came back having sold paintings.
Then the stock market in Tokyo declined forty-five per cent and the Gulf War broke out, which meant we did not return immediately.
We have to take the long-term view on a market which will be important by the end of the decade.
One of the reasons why Colnaghi's wanted a presence in Paris and welcomed the opportunity to be at the Hotel Bristol is the attraction which Paris holds to the Japanese; furthermore, a high occupancy rate at the Hotel Bristol is Japanese and I look forward to being able to meet this clientele.
During your two years in Paris as Colnaghi's representative, how much has your presence been of importance to selling as opposed to finding more sources of paintings than might have been possible from the London or New York base?
I am not an expert, so I leave the decisions regarding the buying of paintings to my specialist colleagues.
Now I do have input into what I think will sell in Europe and in Asia and my background in private and investment banking has contributed to our expansion in these directions; I come into contact with different people from those who might normally come into Colnaghi's, giving rise to possible purchasing opportunities.
Moreover, my colleague Christine d'Andlau-Hombourg is French and multilingual which will also help to introduce Colnaghi's to our Continental clients.
New York
Double sting of Japanese museum and leading U.S. dealer
Richard Feigen is sueing for the return of his painting, whereabouts now unknown
NEW YORK.
New York dealer Richard Feigen has resorted to the courts in his attempt to retrieve Henri Rousseau's ‘La Petite Carmagnole’ which he had loaned to the Harmo Museum in Nagona, Japan, with arrangements made through Vera Hildenbrand of San Francisco.
On 8 August 1991 Feigen was approached by Hildenbrand: ‘She asked for an appointment as an official of the museum and brought various Harmo Museum catalogues and credentials with her’.
This, Feigen states, was her first overture regarding the painting which had been unsold at a Butterfield auction a year earlier and then had been purchased by Eugene Thaw, with Feigen taking a half interest.
How she had learned that he had the painting, which was not a matter of public knowledge, is unknown.
Feigen was then asked by Hildenbrand on behalf of the museum to lend the painting for two months while the purchase (at a price of $725,000) was being negotiated and pending a meeting of the museum board, which apparently was to take place on 21 October last.
The arrangements concerning the loan were, according to Feigen, confirmed in a letter from the museum director and the painting was duly sent to the museum as a loan pending sale in mid August 1991.
Gallery correspondence was addressed to the museum care of its ‘purchasing agent’, Hildenbrand.
By December, when payment had been delayed using various excuses, Feigen began to get suspicious and sent letters directly to the museum.
Eventually, as no money was forthcoming and since, as far as he was concerned, title to the painting had not passed hands, Feigen reported the painting as stolen to his insurance company.
In March, sworn depositions and subpoenaed bank statements revealed the extent to which what had seemed a normal transaction with a Japanese museum had apparently been part of a deliberate swindle into which Feigen's gallery had been drawn.
Apparently on 5 July $600,000 had been paid into the account of Hildenbrand and her associate Lanzone and they had issued a receipt to the museum's director.
This payment was towards a purchase price of $800,000 or $850,000,(the entries in the bank and gallery records are contradictory).
An additional $200,000 was paid into Hildenbrand and Lanzone's account three months later.
The sale and the initial payments thus preceded the actual negotiations with the painting's owner, Richard L. Feigen & Co., by at least a month.
Initially, in her sworn depositions, Hildenbrand apparently said that the delay in payment to the gallery was due to an unnamed Japanese intermediary; Feigen states that she then ‘admitted in sworn testimony that she had perjured herself, which is a felony, and that the entity owned by Lanzone and herself had in fact received the money $600,000 of it seven months earlier, and then $200,000 and that the money had been spent on Lanzone's home mortgage and restaurant expenses’.
As for the letters of confirmation and negotiating the arrangements of the loan, Feigen states that in her sworn depositions Hildenbrand admitted that she had forged the museum director's agreement regarding the loan, the letterhead having been taken off a business card and the signature of the director having been forged.
As for the letters to the museum itself and the director, Feigen says that they were apparently intercepted and sent on to Hildenbrand: ‘When we contacted the museum to ask why payment had not been forthcoming, they had never heard of us’.
As of late March, Feigen succeeded in freezing the assets of Hildenbrand and Lanzone until 1 May, but he had not yet taken any legal action in Japan.
‘At best’, he says ruefully, ‘the museum has bought a stolen painting’, at worst , his painting has been stolen, present whereabouts unknown, and the museum has been swindled out of a large sum of money.
It was a painting that Hildenbrand neither knew was available for sale in June 1991 nor at what price.
The subsequent ‘sale’ was apparently transacted using a transparency, which was not provided by Feigen's gallery, and Hildenbrand's ability actually to get hold of the painting later was, according to Feigen, ‘something of a fluke.’
Apparently the Rousseau painting was not the only pawn; Feigen observes that the depositions also included references to the pending sale of a Renoir and a Chagall, neither of which Hildenbrand and Lanzone owned either.
Paris
Drawings fair enjoyed good if not euphoric, trading
Twice as many visitors to the Salon du Dessin de Collection as last year
PARIS.
Over 18,000 people, almost double last year's attendance, visited the second annual Salon du Dessin de Collection, organised by seventeen leading Paris drawings dealers in basement rooms at the Hôtel George V from 31 March to 6 April.
The first such fair in Europe and the only one in the world to show only drawings, this year's event drew serious collectors from across the world and a solid Parisian clientele.
Trading was reported to be good, if not euphoric, with every gallery selling and some moving as many as twenty works, mostly in a FFr 12,000 (£1,200; $2,000) -FFr 100,000 (£10,300; $18,000) price range.
Certain long-lost American collectors were spotted like swallows heralding spring, but economic gloom aggravated by political uncertainty in France and Britain made buyers nervous.
Little over FFr 250,000 sold, and some dealers said it had been difficult to get collectors to concentrate on highly priced items, let along sign cheques, in the crowded conditions of the George V basement.
A notable exception was Hopkins-Thomas, one of four modern art dealers present, who sold a masterpiece, a neo-Impressionist charcoal and watercolour of 1890 ‘La retraite aux flambeaux du 14 juillet au Puy’ by Albert Dubois-Pillet, a follower of Seurat, for something in the region of FFr 1.3 million (£134,000; $233,200) within an hour of the Salon opening.
The same gallery had a pastel study of a hand by Degas for the painting ‘Mademoiselle Fiocre’ while Galerie Heim next door had a foot for the same work.
Bob Haboldt, who showed a mixture of Italian, French, Dutch and Flemish works mostly priced at FFr 50–150,000, sold four, but found collectors surprised by the FFr 500,000 (£51,500; $89,700) he was asking for a very rare study of deer by Jan Brueghel the Elder and the FFr 400,000 (£41,200; $71,750) he expected for a study of standing men by Pietro da Cortona.
Decorative drawings dessins de charme however, fared well, with Paris clients beginning to venture out of their beloved eighteenth century.
Galerie de Stael, for example, sold seventeen works, mainly nineteenth-century watercolours and architectural drawings.
Bruno de Bayser attracted a lot of attention, albeit no buyer, for a magnificent FFr 1.2 million (£123,700; $215,250) red chalk drawing of a young woman by Fragonard a deliberately eye catching piece to show what the gallery is capable of but did sell ten works including three female portraits by Dunker, Jeaurat and Quesnel for under FFr 100,000 (£10,300; $18,000).
Nabi expert Huguette Berès had an outstanding display including eight Jongkind watercolours priced between FFr 80–250,000; studies by Delacroix; a very rare Millet pastel portrait of a gentleman; and Vuillard's gouache project for a Vollard print album cover.
Galerie de la Scala fared so well with a mixture of French, North European and Italian drawings, priced at FFr 20,000–350,000, not always by famous names but always in exquisite taste, that they had to go back to the gallery for more.
Eighteenth-century experts Galerie Cailleux did less well with a very courageous, wide-ranging forty-piece Hubert Robert one-man show comprising architectural studies and eminently affordable small format works priced between FFr 12,000–220,000.
Galerie Prouté had an outstanding range of works priced up to FFr 300,000 and the bargain of the fair, a delightful ink drawing of a dromedary and rider by Friesz, which was snapped up almost immediately for FFr 5,000 (£515; $900).
Emmanuel Moatti began to feel left out of things with his stunning display of mainly seventeenth- to eighteenth-century Italian drawings at prices ranging from FFr 10,000–400,000 for a Saint Sebastian study by Guercino.
They proved too exotic and religious for Parisians, in public at least, for Moatti had already sold a third of his catalogue in the privacy of his gallery.
Pontormo drawing discovery at Colnaghi
Pontormo, ‘Head of an old man’,(recto, ca. 1518–19).
Red chalk on pink washed paper, inscribed ‘Pontormo f.’ on verso.
Colnaghi is showing a wide-ranging group of fifty-three fine Master drawings.
An impressive group of Italian Mannerist drawings has as its focal point this previously unknown study of a man's head, one of only three studies for the ‘Joseph in Egypt’ in the National Gallery, London a rare discovery by any standards.
Also included are Parmigianino, Pellegrino Tibaldi, Francesco Salviati and Federico Zuccaro; among these are studies for such august settings as Florence's Palazzo Vecchio and the Ducal Palace in Venice.
Bolognese drawings include Ludovico Carracci, Pietro Faccini and Giacomo Cavedone.
The real measure of the show's international appeal is its inclusion not only of the more traditional Italian names, but also a remarkable array of French (Prud'hon, Fragonard, Natoire) and Northern drawings,(notably Goltzius and Spranger) and nineteenth-century artists including Adolph Menzel and, too little known outside their native Italy, Bartolomeo Pinelli, Vincenzo Gemito and Vincenzo Camuccini.
Leger Gallery records its history
The Leger Gallery was founded in 1892 by Joseph Leger, whose activities were ‘modest as a dealer in the period up to the end of the Great War and typical of an age in which there were few private clients and virtually no museum purchases’ astonishing in view of the purchasing possibilities at the time.
It was his son Harold (1897–1987) who put the firm on the map, and by the end of the 1920s there were branches in Brussels and New York, and by mid-1931 in Chicago and Paris, as well as a second Brussels gallery.
This survey is elegantly produced and more than just another picture book.
Carefully thought out, it lists all of Leger's exhibitions, but, more importantly, reproduces in colour a large selection of the finest paintings which have passed through their hands.
Bellini, Titian, Canaletto, Batoni, Greuze and Van Goyen are all represented by first-rate pictures, followed by a dazzling multitude of the English pictures for which Leger is celebrated.
Perhaps the most beautiful in this selection are the two Zoffany conversation pieces, ‘The Blair Family’ and the Willoughby de Broke picture, now possibly on its way to the Tate.
Orangerie goes home to Charlottenburg
BERLIN.
Founded in 1982, the Orangerie Antiques Fair went international in 1988, despite the opposition of the Federal Antique Dealers Association.
In 1991, the Fair moved to the ground floor of the Martin-Gropius-Bau in Kreuzberg, but in the autumn of 1993, when the event is next due to be held, it will return to its original venue the former orangery at Schloss Charlottenburg.
The Berlin Antique Dealers Association has also appointed a new chairman: Udo Arndt.
He replaces Berndt Schultz, the Fair's founder, who did not stand for re-election.
Arndt, who has a civil engineering background, was born in Berlin in 1945, and started his business, selling cast-iron and ceramic stoves, ten years ago.
The Annual General Meeting, attended by twenty-eight of the fifty-six members, appointed Berndt Seidel and Volker Westphal as vice-chairmen, and re-elected Barbara Willemeit and Ernst von Loesch to the committee.
In recognition of his outstanding service, Berndt Schultz was made honorary chairman.
Future plans for the Orangerie include the appointment of a professional director with financial acumen and specific experience of the art business.
Based on profits of DM250,000,(£89,285; $155,375) made by the 1991 Fair, there are plans to set up a permanent office to take over the duties which, in the past, Association members have undertaken voluntarily.
Clodion's rival at Galerie Patrice Bellanger
PARIS.
As part of a series of exhibitions which reassess the work of individual sculptors, Galerie Patrice Bellanger is presenting an exhibition of the work of Joseph-Charles Marin (1759–1834), pupil, rival and friend of Claude Michel Clodion, an exhibition of whose work is on at the Louvre.
Bellanger's show runs until 18 June.
Marin won the Grand Prix de Sculpture in 1801 and then moved to Rome where he stayed at the Villa Medici for ten years and taught at the Accademia di San Luca.
On his return to France he taught at Lyon and executed many official commissions, including the marble bust of Jerome Bonaparte, King of Westphalia.
This bust has been lent from Schloss Wilhelmshöhe, Kassel and is included in the exhibition with thirty or so other pieces, mainly in terracotta.
These include a sensual terracotta of ‘Zeus and Ganymede’ of 1803–1805, and a maquette for the marble portrait of the marquis de Tornay.
To crown this important exhibition of French sculpture, Bellanger has come up with something quite exceptional: Clodion's ‘Sacrifice à l'amour’, originally shown at the 1773 Salon, which only recently surfaced on the international market and has been brought back to France for this occasion.
Garrard's timely opening
LONDON.
Following his departure from Christie's London in December 1990, Richard Garnier was appointed by the Crown Jewellers Garrard to head a new clock department.
To launch this new department Garrard are holding ‘Master Clockmakers: the golden age of English horology 1680–1900’.
The exhibition will display pieces by Thomas Tompion and James Ferguson Cole including a carriage clock made by Cole in 1823, one of the first carriage clocks to be made in Britain.
Also on show are clocks for sale from £1,800 to £180,000, and a Garrard clockmaker will be on hand to demonstrate clockmaking and restoration techniques.
From 19 to 30 May.
New York
Why U.S. galleries are opening in Europe
‘To deal successfully today you need a foothold there you have to have your doors open to where the market will be’
NEW YORK.
The Europe of the 1990s is emerging as the new frontier for American dealers.
A number of New York galleries are establishing a presence there, including Brooke Alexander and John Weber Galleries who, with Spanish dealer Pepe Cobo have opened in Madrid (Galeria Weber, Alexander y Cobo); Salander O'Reilly Gallery, which has established a branch of its New York operation in Berlin; and Forum Gallery which will show at the Cologne Art Fair for the first time this November.
These dealers cite widely varying reasons for their moves, including the search for new markets for American art, local dealing rights to the work of desirable American artists, access to art in European and Eastern European collections, favourable exchange rates and participation in the new European economic community.
Robert Fishko, director of Forum Gallery, sees Cologne as an opportunity to enlarge the hitherto limited market for his non-abstract American artists.
‘The international reputation of artists I represent will be enhanced by exhibition in Germany.
It may also stimulate European dealers to exhibit one of my artists’, he says.
Forum Gallery represents the estates of Raphael Soyer and Max Weber, and the work of contemporary artist Gregory Gillespie, all of whom are currently collected almost exclusively by Americans.
‘There is a strong figurative tradition in Germany’, says Fishko.
‘They are already interested in some American artists who emigrated from Europe, like George Grosz and Lionel Feininger’.
Still, Fishko realises that his stable may not be an easy sell: ‘It will take some time years probably’, he acknowledges.
Meanwhile, the Cologne show is worth a try: ‘You'd have to be blind not to notice that the German Mark has been strong lately.
What I have to sell may seem very reasonable in price’.
Where the market already exists, the trick is to get the best art to sell: a year ago Brooke Alexander and John Weber teamed up with Pepe Cobo to open a 5,000 square foot gallery in Madrid partly because, as Alexander puts it, ‘Spain is a ‘clean plate’.
A lot of the artists we are interested in have no commitments there, as opposed to Paris, for example’.
This has translated into a chance for the partners to show work by artists like James Rosenquist, Robert Mapplethorpe and Richard Tuttle artists who are already firmly locked up in other dealers Stateside.
Madrid is also seen as the right venue for other reasons.
‘Spain has had limited exposure to international contemporary art’, says Joyce Nereaux-Weber, partner in the John Weber Gallery.
‘People there are open to learning.
It's very exciting.
They are literally ‘running’ into the twentieth century.
We have had a lot of response support from museums and Spanish collectors’.
Alexander and Weber believe they have found the best way to establish themselves where they need to be.
‘With free trade the European community is becoming a strong force and we want to be a part of it’, says Nereaux-Weber.
Alexander agrees: ‘To deal successfully today you need a foothold in Europe.
You need to have your doors open to where the market will be’.
Madrid is also a possibility for Larry Salander and Bill O'Reilly who are thinking seriously of opening a gallery there, and in London as well.
Meanwhile, last September they opened a branch of their New York gallery in Berlin.
Dismissing persistent rumours that Wall Street whizz Asher Edelman is the gallery's money source, Salander identified their partners in the German venture as ‘a group of Basque businessmen’ who, he says, ‘recommended’Berlin for a first European location.
Salander O'Reilly New York shows everything from works by Théodore Géricault to paintings by Kenneth Noland.
It is following the same eclectic exhibition programme in Berlin, where prints by Willem de Kooning and photographs by contemporary Spanish photographer, Alberto Sommer are currently on view.
What gets shown in either place is part of Larry Salander's well-known philosophical stand against nationalism in art.
‘We bring what we believe is the best art, and let people see it in the light of their own country and in the light of their own culture’, he says.
‘Great art is great art.
We're dropping it down in a different place, but the reaction will be the same’.
Things have not been the same on the operational side of the art business.
‘We're learning…’
Salander says.
‘We've found that in Berlin it's not polite to pick up the phone and offer a painting.
You need an introduction, or you must write a letter.
It's different hiring people here too: everybody has a contract that specifies exactly how many hours they have to work, length of vacations everything’.
‘It's hard work’, he admits.
But there are some very practical reasons for making the effort.
‘We deal in seventeenth-, eighteenth- and nineteenth-century art, and we are looking to find some in the East’, says Salander.
‘There are many collectors in Lithuania and Czechoslovakia and right now they need money more than they need art’.
Buyers, too are closer at hand: ‘There are a lot of people who want art but won't get on a plane to go and look at it.
Everybody used to come to New York City for three weeks a year and go to all the galleries.
Those days are over’.
Cologne
‘Those galleries which maintain a personal vision and rigorous programme will survive’
The Art Newspaper's correspondent in Cologne talks to the eight leading gallery owners about the art market in post re-unification Germany
COLOGNE.
As capital of the avant-garde art scene in Europe, Cologne can be compared to the mouse that roared.
With only one million inhabitants and, apart from the Cathedral, an inauspicious infrastructure composed of 1950s Le Corbusier knock-offs relieved by the occasional Jugendstil survivor and twelve Romanesque churches, its charisma is all on the inside.
It is the almost alarming concentration of commercial galleries over sixty-five and the presence of the annual Art Fair and the Museum Ludwig that constitute what gallerist Isabella Kacprzak calls ‘an individual world, with multiple cliques, neighbourhoods, confrontations and movements’.
The city's left bank is encircled by a Ringstrasse marked at intervals by different names and subtle differences in atmosphere.
The Belgian Quarter, between Brüsselerplatz and Friesenplatz, is a dense warren of galleries, but Ebertplatz to the north, and the South City are becoming increasingly important.
Moving away from the Ring, towards the river and the Dom is the Kreishaus Galerie complex, at the corner of Magnusstrasse and Albertusstrasse.
Built in 1989, it houses numerous galleries, the August Sander Archive and the offices of Sotheby's.
The Albertusstrasse site of the Kreishaus was determined partly in response to the proximity of two landmarks on the same street: Rudolf Zwirner's gallery and Walther Koenig's art bookstore, a de facto municipal library for every aspect of the visual arts.
A third star in this constellation is the Galerie Michael Werner, two blocks away on Gertrudenstrasse.
Cologne's unusually intense art scene began with what Kacprzak describes as a post-war vie de bohème, made possible by low rents in Cologne and Düsseldorf, and a rather un-German tolerance for something less than order.
In her opinion, ‘the Rheinland has always been the most anarchistic part of Germany; Hitler was never really supported here…’.
The first gallery to emerge after the war was Galerie Der Spiegel, founded in 1945 by Hein and Eva Stünke, who later became an intermittent director of Documenta, and in 1967 established the Cologne Art Fair.
Until 1966, the twelve or so commercial galleries in Cologne were devoted to mainstream, often foreign Modernism; the impetus for the Art Fair was to create a market in Cologne for avant-garde German and international art.
Stünke's efforts, later in collaboration with Rudolf Zwirner, had a stunning impact both locally and internationally.
By the time of the second art fair, in 1968, the number of galleries in Cologne had more than doubled, and Art Cologne became the direct inspiration for the establishment of art fairs in Basel, Paris and Chicago.
The second factor in Cologne's rise was the contribution by the Aachen chocolate magnate, Peter Ludwig, of his extensive collection of Pop Art and Russian Constructivist works.
In the mid Sixties, Ludwig began making large-scale, long-term loans to the former Wallraf-Richartz Museum (which, since 1989, has housed the Museum of Applied Arts).
By the late Sixties, Ludwig had designated the loans as permanent gifts to the city, culminating in the construction, in 1986, of a new Museum Ludwig by the architects Bussmann and Haberer.
The commercial scene also continued to expand, driven largely by the influence of Michael Werner, who began in the late Sixties to show the New Expressionists: Penck, Baselitz, Immendorf and Kiefer.
In 1980, the international marketability of Cologne's indigenous talent was galvanised by Paul Maenz, with his baptism of the Mülheimer Freiheit, a group of young painters which included Walter Dähn and Georg Dokoupil.
Dealer Karsten Greve notes that for foreigners interested in contemporary art the Rheinland now means more than just Cologne: ‘In Bonn, there are the new Bundeskunsthalle and Kunstmuseum Bonn; there is the Kaiser-Wilhelm Museum in Krefelt, the Hollein-designed Museum Abteiberg in Mönchen-Gladbach, the Wilhelm-Lehmbruck Museum in Duisburg, the Museum Folkwang in Essen, the Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen in Düsseldorf and the Von-der-Heydt Museum in Wuppertal’.
Cologne is also a key geographical link to the museums of the Netherlands and to private collectors in Belgium.
And, as Greve points out, in five years the rail journey between Paris, Brussels and Cologne will be reduced to a mere two hours and thirty-five minutes.
As a creative and economic force in the international art scene, Cologne clearly has staying power.
But will its preeminence be shadowed by the reunification of Germany and of Europe, and by the prospect of Berlin as a gargantuan cultural metropolis?
And how has Cologne fared in the contraction of the art market worldwide?
Reproduced below are the opinions of four of Cologne's eminences grises Rudolf Zwirner, Karsten Greve, Gerhard Reinz and Rolf Ricke and of four youngish upstarts: Tanja Grunert, Désiré Feurle, Ute Hammer of Miller Nordenhake and Isabella Kacprzak.
Rudolf Zwirner, Albertusstrasse 18
After twenty-five years as one of Cologne's premier dealers, Zwirner will close his gallery in December of this year in order to work as a private dealer and to devote himself to projects of personal interest.
His programme ranges from ‘classical’ Modernists such as Arp, Dubuffet, Ernst, Fontana, Gonzales, Jorn, Magritte, Laurens and Schwitters, to major contemporary artists such as Artschwager, Baselitz, Dahn, Droese, Astrid Klein, Kluge, Paeffgen, Penck and Polke.
Now cities as well as states must contribute to the rebuilding and remodelling of East German museums.
In Cologne, acquisitions by museums are nearly non-existent because the total budget for all [ten]museums is only DM500,000 (£178,500; $310,700).
Of course, if a museum wants to purchase a work it can ask for donations from banks, industries and other institutions.
But where we feel the greatest pressure is in Cologne's diminished capacity to launch major exhibitions.
There is no long-term programme beyond the Pop Art exhibition at the Museum Ludwig.
No vision, no future.
The exhibition in May, ‘Ars Pro Domo’(an exhibition of 1980s art from private collections in Cologne) will be paid for entirely by the Friends of the Ludwig.
Another example of the city government's indifference to cultural concerns is its decision to close the Kunsthalle for three months during Documenta in order to install an air-conditioning system.
Since Siegfried Gohr left the Kunsthalle to become Director of the Ludwig, the Kunsthalle has become a mere exhibition space without a director and without a programme.
Nonetheless, I am very optimistic about Cologne.
Even if the scene shrinks it will be very lively, especially for low-profile young gallerists who never really suffered because of the recession.
You don't sell million dollar paintings here.
Karsten Greve, Wallrafplatz 3
Since opening in Cologne in 1969, Greve has shown the work of Josef Albers and fostered long-term relationships with contemporary artists such as Twombly, Kounellis, Fontana, Manzoni, Bourgeois, Chamberlain and Nicola de Maria.
In September 1989 Greve opened a 900-square metre gallery in Paris, to which he will annex another space, to open in October, with an exhibition by Louise Bourgeois.
In early 1993 he will also open a second gallery in Cologne, at Zwirner's former space at Albertusstrasse 18.
At the beginning of reunification the government actually spent more money on cultural concerns.
The deeper problems in the art market have to do with the depredations of the auction houses.
Eight years ago the function of the auction houses changed from that of middlemen handling the occasional wonderful contemporary collection like that of the Sculls to that of primary dealers in contemporary art.
They created a fake cultural image, producing nice books, and incited a boom by pushing prices up.
Now they are trying to push prices down because, in either case, the auction house reaps its percentage from both seller and collector.
Most galleries need credit, and unfortunately banks (which have no cultural people) turn to auction houses for valuations of an artist's work.
And if the auction houses aren't doing well…it's a vicious circle.
In Germany the market is quite healthy.
But we need public opinion to put to pressure the government to spend enough on cultural things.
In France, where I have been working for two years, the government understands the need for cultural things.
Paris is a fascinating place, one of the best in the world, and it is frightening New York a lot.
Someone in the New York Times said I was opening in Berlin, where I lived for fifteen years.
Berlin might become important in the future but its great age was in the 1920s, when East Germany was rich and clients came from Scandinavia and Russia.
Now in Berlin there are about five major collectors; to create an art scene, there need to be fifty.
We are talking about a generation.
Gerhard Reinz, Orangerie Reinz, Helenenstrasse 3
In his thirty-two years as a gallerist in Cologne, Reinz has conducted a specialised programme consisting of work by Nay, Fautrier and Poliakoff, and by artists of the German Informel School of the 1950s and 60s: Hoehme, Gutz, Bruning, Schumacher, Dahmen and Sonderborg.
For the past twelve years (eight of them as President), Reinz has been active in the Bundesverband der Deutschen Galerien (founded in 1977) which orchestrates the annual Art Colonia.
The BVDG is currently lobbying in Bonn and Brussels over taxation issues affecting the art market: the uncertainty of preferential tax treatment of art works by the EC in 1993, and the German wealth tax (Vermögenssteuer) now levied on collections worth over DM 20,000.
For the past two years the BVDG has used the Cologne Art Fair as a platform to promote support for particular museums.
In 1990 we held a benefit which raised DM 200,000 for the Kupferstichkabinett in Dresden, whose director, Werner Schmidt, had over the years collected art that was forbidden in the former DDR.
During the 1990 Cologne Art Fair we initiated a programme to help the Museum of Gotha at Schloss Friedenstein in Thuringia, founded in 1647 as a private collection of the Count of Sachsen-Gotha, which contains antiquities and Northern European painting and sculpture from the fifteenth to the nineteenth centuries, but no twentieth-century works.
Dr Christoph Brockhaus, director of the Lehmbruck Museum of Duisburg, developed the concept of inviting fifty West and East German artists to create sculptures for the castle, park, countryside and city of Gotha.
An exhibition of models and drawings will be held this September in Gotha, and will be shown along with some newly realised works at the Cologne Art Fair in November.
Rolf Ricke, Volksgartenstrasse 10
Rolf Ricke opened his Cologne Gallery in March 1968.
His programme includes Donald Judd, Keith Sonnier, Claudio Parmiggiani, Günter Umberg, Steven Parrino, Philippe Cazal, Holger Bunk, Larry Bell, Laurie Parsons, Adrian Schiess and Thom Merrick, among others.
We can learn a lot from America.
I find it arrogant to compare New York and Cologne; it's true nothing became so inflated here, but also things were not so colourful, so deep.
Some American artists are responding to the recession by creating more modestly priced works.
Thom Merrick, for example, who is twenty-seven and exhibiting at Documenta this year, just made about twenty original pieces at $1200 each; Larry Bell has made a series of paintings one metre square, priced at $1500.
I still believe in the system.
But the investment aspect is so strange.
It has been pushed beyond the limit by many dealers and hopefully these are the dealers that will have to close.
Désiré Feurle, Hansaring 77
Désiré Feurle, who studied Decorative Arts at Sotheby's London and worked at Sotheby's New York has, since opening his gallery in November 1990, exhibited works by contemporary artists such as Gilbert and George, Julian Schnabel, Alexander von Schlieffen and Anish Kapoor in conjunction with historical works of decorative art.
Nobody knows what will happen.
There is a lot of speculation, but I would say the art market for real contemporary art young artists will stay in Cologne.
However, it has always been difficult in Cologne to sell a piece over DM 100,000.
Although many German collectors buy in a higher range, they do so in metropolises like New York and London, not Cologne.
So, in the long run Berlin will have its own version of Cork Street where one can buy an early Baselitz, Kounellis or Richter, and perhaps new works by such artists.
Before the war all the important dealers were Jewish, and they worked from Berlin because it was the place of international business.
Then they went to New York, and you feel it there the presence of many intellectual people.
One hopes that Berlin can draw interesting foreigners back to Germany, and that a kind of intellectual renaissance will happen there.
Tanja Grunert, Venloer Strasse 19
After four years as a gallerist in Stuttgart, in 1984 Grunert opened in Cologne where she shows young conceptual artists Raimund von Luckwald, Peter Fend, Peter Weibel, Meg Cranston, Thomas Grünfeld, Thomas Locher, Rolf Walz, Peter Zimmermann and Iskender Yediler, among others.
I don't believe reunification has had much effect at all.
The German government has never spent a lot of money on culture, and after reunification it cut the social, not the cultural, budget which is absurdly low anyhow.
Everything happening in East Germany is financed from private West German industries.
But this has not meant that those industries have withdrawn their support for museums here.
There may be no budget for acquisitions, but at least there is a budget for administration.
In East Germany, in contrast, the curators and other employees now depend upon private trustees from the West for their livelihood.
And the West Germans financing such cultural enterprises are doing so purely for their own image; it is vanity, not philanthropy.
It is all too easy to create a generous image in a country where nothing exists.
If you build a water plant in a desert using mediocre technology, you're a superstar.
Ute Hammer, Director, Miller Nordenhake, Bismarckstrasse 60
Hammer has been Director of Miller Nordenhake, the Cologne amalgam of Burnet Miller of Los Angeles and Galerie Nordenhake of Stockholm since April 1991.
The gallery's programme includes Leon Golub, Pedro Cabrita Reis, Ulf Rollof, Miroslaw Balka, Charles Ray, Kirsten Ortwed and Gunther Umberg.
The reunification has had tremendous consequences for the general economic situation in Germany, but as we now know, private companies have failed to invest in East Germany to the extent they were expected to.
Originally, projections for West German investment were in the range of DM120 billion; actual investment has been only DM13 million.
If gallerists now sense a hesitancy on the part of collectors, this is not the direct or exclusive result of those collectors' financial circumstances post reunification.
I think instead it is the result of art in the 1980s having become an industry, and therefore becoming dependent upon the rules of business.
I would assume that only those galleries which maintain a personal vision and a rigorous programme will retain collectors' confidence.
Isabella Kacprzak, Maria-Hilf-Strasse 17
Kacprzak came to Germany from Poland in 1978, and began her career as a gallerist in Stuttgart in 1986.
In Cologne since 1989 she shows Miroslow Balka, Barbara Bloom, Marlene Dumas, Asta Gröting and others.
When cultural and economic identity are lacking it is all too easy for a capitalist system to ‘sell’ culture issues and values quite aggressively.
In the East there are social problems on a much more basic level than in the West, and these of course are competing with cultural needs.
In times of crisis the budgets for cultural institutions are always the first to be suspended, and in some sense this is correct: I don't want to compete with kindergartens.
I'm currently making frequent trips to Poland, and there one sees a type of early capitalism developing that has a certain charm like Visconti's movies of the Fifties.
Poland resembles Italy and France during that period more than Germany, with which it has always had a deep cultural rift.
After the war, ‘la vie de bohème’ was possible in Cologne and Düsseldorf because rents were very low.
Now artists are leaving Berlin to come to Cologne.
The art scene depends on where artists are living.
Berlin may be enticing for tourists but this does not directly engender a new art world.
Cologne, on the other hand, is close to Holland, with its museums, and to Belgium, with its private collectors.
The city is an important nexus, especially because of the Art Fair, and the Ludwig, which was the first museum in Europe to buy contemporary art.
The International Art Expo is a bit less international
CHICAGO.
This month, despite the lagging market, 177 galleries from nineteen countries will take part in the Chicago International Art Exposition, an increase from last year's 166 exhibitors, though foreign participation has dropped off, and the return rate is down.
As always, the geographic distribution is concentrated in the U.S. (107 galleries) and Canada (eight galleries), followed by Europe (49 galleries) and a scattering from Scandinavia, Latin America, Korea, the former Soviet block, Australia and Israel.
But there are twelve fewer non-North American galleries this year, and forty-two dealers nearly twenty-five per cent of the fair are here for the first time.
Newcomers include Stawski Gallery of Krakow and the Today Gallery of Moscow, as well as two of the three Korean exhibitors.
The organisers estimate sales will approach $50 million (£28.7 million) on 25,000 pieces of art.
Hard times have caused many to drop out, including John Berggruen of San Francisco; Sperone Westwater, Vrej Baghoomian and Josh Baer of New York; Galerie Crousel-Robelin Bama, Paris; Bernard Jacobson and the recently-closed Fisher Fine Art, London.
Donald Young who has not missed a show until moving his Chicago gallery to Seattle last year is also absent.
Another sign of the times is that dealers are taking smaller spaces.
Each 110 sq ft. module costs $3,350–3,750, depending on how early payment is made.
A nine-member committee of past-participant gallery directors selected the exhibitors from more than 250 applicants.
As for the art available, a statistical look reveals a conservative and market-wary shift toward well established names.
A total of thirty-one artists are carried by six or more galleries, up from only twelve last year, when only Moore and Judd were available at ten different booths.
This year, seven artists are available at ten or more booths: Motherwell, Rauschenberg, Picasso, Lichtenstein, Matisse, Francis, and again, Moore.
This thirteenth annual CIAE takes place 15–18 May in the two-tier Donnelley International Hall in the McCormick Place Complex off Lakeshore Drive.
For additional information call (312) 787–6858.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this May
New York
Artists team up for the Roosevelt memorial
Janis previews ‘Fireside chat’
When the Fates and the mood are for it no entity on earth can move with greater elephantine pondorosity than official Washington.
And so, accordingly, it has been the lot of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial to be close to fifty years in the making.
There was never really any question that Mr Roosevelt should be memorialised and that the monument ought to have an impact comparable to those of the great Lincoln-Jefferson-Washington triumvirate.
An act of Congress authorised such a memorial in 1955.
For almost twenty years after that various proposals were run up the flagpole, mostly to unsaluting generals.
Finally in 1974 the San Francisco landscape architect Lawrence Halprin won the commission.
Since that time bureaucratic foot-dragging and dare it be said? politics have continued to delay the project.
Only now has ground-breaking been announced not for this summer but for next and ribbon-cutting projected for the autumn of 1995.
Halprin's design a series of high granite walls forming four outdoor ‘rooms’, each telling the story of one of Roosevelt's terms in office, will be set in sixty-seven landscaped acres of West Potomac Park.
The rooms will contain bronzes by four artists and wall texts will be carved by John Benson, scion of the legendary Rhode Island stone-carving family.
Leonard Baskin has been chosen to portray F.D.R.'s first inauguration and, in the final room, his funeral cortège.
Robert Graham, the Los Angeles sculptor, is doing bas-reliefs and pillars depicting the social programmes initiated during Roosevelt's presidency and Neil Estern will portray Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt sitting down, their famous pooch Falla in attendance.
Finally, George Segal has been busy at work making three groups: ‘Appalachian Couple’, ‘Bread Lines’ and
‘Fireside Chat’, the former two referring to the hard times of the Depression and the latter to Roosevelt's highly popular radio broadcasts.
New Yorkers this month will get to preview Mr Segal's efforts at the Janis gallery where the plasters for his three groups will be on view from the first of May until 6 June.
It is safe to say that Hans Haacke is the least likely of all artists ever to be commissioned to design a presidential memorial (though one day he may himself be memorialised as founder of the Academy of Anti-Establishment Art).
In his day he has taken on the big guns of industry, commercialised culture and of whole countries (who can easily forget his devastating portrait of Mrs Thatcher and the fawning Saatchi brothers?).
John Weber where an exhibition of his newest denunciation may be seen until the sixteenth of this month is not leaking any advance information about the show.
But might one infer from the tenor of its title ‘The Vision Thing’ that it is about Mr Bush and possibly the N.E.A.?
Another sculptor whose work is figurative, like Mr Segal's, but who will likely never do a presidential monument is Kiki Smith.
Her life-size wax nudes, male and female, hung up on hooks as though fresh from some abattoir, were horrific standouts in the last Whitney Biannual.
From 2 May until 3 June at Fawbush her latest wax and papier-mâché pieces are on view.
In the late Thirties the Baroness Hila Rebay was busy looking for a name for the new art museum her mentor Solomon R. Guggenheim was about to found and of which she was about to become the first director.
What she came up with was ‘The Museum of Non-Objective Art’ and the Guggenheim Museum existed under that rubric for some years.
When the name was officially changed the term ‘non-objective’ fell into general disfavour, possibly because of a public mis-perception that it referred to art without a purpose.
Lately in the field of painting, there has been a groundswell of revived interest in ‘pure abstraction’ but the same cannot be said for sculpture.
Young sculptors seem generally indifferent to its lures and so it is to veterans in the field that one must look for nourishment.
Among those, at Paula Cooper there is new work by Carl André, at Rubin Spangle ‘Important Works from 1963–1990’ by Dan Flavin (both shows until 30 May), and at Hirschl & Adler recent polychromed aluminium pieces by Barbara Schwartz (21 May until 19 June).
And the father of them all David Smith is represented by a selection of sculptures all this month (and next, too) at Knoedler.
As for painting, John Good this month shows Jacqueline Humphries, who has been exploring the notion of the ‘arrested gesture’ in relation to both the drip and the grid, from 2 May until 20 June.
At Reitzel, Emily Chang's newest abstractions are on until 30 May and at June Kelly there are recent works by Edwin Rudz (15 May–23 June).
New Yorkers will have their first chance to see the work of Ian Davenport at Kasmin (5–30 May).
He is the young London painter, in his twenties, whose first one person show two years ago at the prestigious Waddington Gallery caused somewhat of a stir.
Using mostly commercial housepaint, his work is process-generated and involves pouring and intervention.
It has a characteristic dark monochromaticism.
In 1967 Ron Gorchov dreamed up a uniquely curved and hinged frame to support the canvas on which he paints and in all the years since then he has never wavered from its use, though it has appeared in a wide variety of sizes and variations.
Critics, without notable success, have attempted to describe it.
‘Hyperbolic paraboloid’ has been tried, though that is inaccurate.
‘Shield-like’ is often mentioned, but that is too imprecise.
There is really nothing for it and you just, as they say, have to be there.
There, in the present instance, is the Tilton gallery where Gorchov shows his newest ‘pure’ abstractions from 5 to 30 May.
Densely-worked fields of circular shapes and spiralling lines have characterised the paintings of Pat Adams over many years.
Twenty new variations, both large and small, are on view until 16 May at Zabriskie.
And finally there is Shirly Jaffe, a senior member of a club whose number is dwindling steadily.
She's an American expatriate painter living in Paris.
She went there in the Fifties and never came back.
Her work, influenced by the Matisse of the late cut-outs and by Mondrian and Herbin, consists of brightly juxtaposed geometric shapes.
Until the thirtieth of this month her newest canvases can be seen at Holly Solomon.
In the realism department this month there is Avigdor Arikha, who also lives in Paris but who believes in finishing whatever painting he has started before the sun goes down because the light the next day is likely to be entirely different.
Nudes, still lifes and interiors are his accustomed subjects and Marlborough has gathered examples of these done in 1990 and 1991 to show from 7 May until 6 June.
David Bates's concisely bold figure studies Marsden Heartly often seems to haunt his work are on at Cowles and Susan Rothenberg's nervous-making fractured figurations are at Sperone Westwater (both shows from 2–30 May).
The Flynn gallery continues to focus on Al Leslie's figurative work, this time showing ‘The Red Paintings’ nudes, often more than one per painting, in non-frontal poses.
They were made between 1973 and 1975 and are on all this month (and until 27 June).
Landscapes from the truly realist to the virtually abstract array themselves across the May gallery horizon.
William Dixon, showing at Fischbach from 2–23 May, makes traditional realist landscapes based on northern California sites, and places in Pennsylvania provide inspiration for Mark Mahosky at Gimpel & Weitzenhofer from 5–30 May.
Abstract paintings based on the notion of landscape appear in two shows: Julia Fish's small works at Amy Lipton (20 May–23 June) and the British artist John Virtue's black and white canvases at Louver (until 23 May).
Huge cibachrome prints of landscapes enlarged to the point of  abstract dissolution by the team of Gwen Akin and Allan
Ludwig are at Pamela Auchencloss until the 20th.
Landscape, of course, was a constant theme throughout John Marin's long working life.
The Kennedy Galleries have organised, until the 23rd of this month, a survey of that early American Modernist's career in forty watercolours and oils, many of them landscapes either rural or urban.
And Grace Borgenicht has arranged a survey of the noted group of Canadian landscape painters centred in the Toronto area.
Some of them included are Lauren Harris, David Milne, William Stevenson and Clark McDougall (7–30 May).
A trip to Davis and Langdale is in order for anyone who loves the famous series of studies
Turner did while houseguesting at Petworth.
The gallery has secured a newly discovered and never before exhibited example from that group ‘Sunset at Petworth House’ and has placed it among examples by other artists from Richard Dadd to Lucian Freud in a show called ‘British Watercolors’, on from 5 May to 5 June.
Mark Tansey, he of the sly sense of humour, has often explored landscapes, sometimes building them up from what appear to be lines of typography.
To see what he has been up to lately visit Curt Marcus before the 31st of the month.
‘Anyone Can Make History’ is the title of Kate Ericson and Mel Ziegler's show at Michael Klein (until 23 May).
The idea reigns supreme in their work the idea ingeniously and elegantly embodied.
In a recent commission to make art for a new Manhattan high school they decided to embed hundreds of transparent glass bricks filled with artifacts from around the world in the walls of the public corridors.
In this show they have taken pieces of found nineteenth-century domestic furniture and combined them with paint and earth samples and various scents.
Meyer Raphael Rubinstein, an independent curator, has organised a show called ‘Hands and Eyes: Modeled Sculpture’ for Barbara Toll (9 May–6 June).
Included in the line-up are works by Louise Bourgeois, Saint Clair Cemin, Pier Consagra, Alain Kirili, Willem deKooning, Franz West, Daniel Wiener and Rona Pondick.
Ms Pondick represents the discipline of sculpture in a three-person show at fiction/non-fiction called ‘The Whole Part’.
Her work often refers to the truncated anatomy, as do the photographs of John Coplans and the paintings of John Wesley, the other two artists in the show.
It's on until 23 May.
New paintings by Julian Schnabel manage to fill both of Pace gallery's spaces this month (the 57th Stret show until 30 May and the Greene Street one until 5 June), and works by Georg Baselitz may also be seen at two places: works from the Seventies are at Michael Werner until 6 June and a selection of watercolours, pastels and drawings at Matthew Marks (2 May–26 June).
E.G. James was a farmer and self-taught fix-it person who lived all his life in Mungo County, Virginia.
He was one of those blessed people who have an itch in their hands to make things which will not be denied and for whom a lack of formal training in the arts is compensated by a hyper-developed sense of ingenious invention.
Just in time to celebrate the onrush of spring, the Vanderwoude-Tannenbaum gallery has mounted ‘A Bird's Eye View: One Man's Vision’ a tribute to Mr James in the form of a tree full of birdhouses he made (until 6 June).
London
Schubert holds ‘Closing down sale’ of Landy
Lisson's On Kawara with Houshiary
When Nicholas Logsdail opened his gallery's Bell Street extension at the beginning of the season, he created an opportunity for showing different artists in their own spaces.
Lisson's presentation of On Kawara with Shirazeh Houshiary (7 May–27 June) illustrates that opportunity rather effectively.
Promising young Persian sculptress, Houshiary, whose ‘The Earth and the Angel’, a recent acquisition by the Tate Gallery, looks particularly handsome in the museum's New Displays, has created three new sculptures and a suite of large drawings for this exhibition.
She fills the main space with ‘Isthmus’, a tall copper box seven and a half metres in length and rising to the gallery's ceiling.
A narrow gap permits access to the interior which, in contrast to its dark, oxidised skin, is brightly polished and causes a multiplicity of reflections.
Two smaller works share that concern for inner reflection, which the artist uses as a metaphor for the inner, or true, self.
‘Bright Night in a Dark Day’ is a lead and copper floor sculpture, and ‘The Cube of Man’is a column of hexagonal lead boxes lined in gold leaf.
More rigorously geometric than her previous and distinctively organic work, the new sculptures appear to mark a change of direction and approach the work of Bruce Nauman or Robert Morris, but their content is consistent and in them Houshiary continues to explore the journey from the body or self to its spirit, as she works towards a major exhibition at Grenoble's Magasin in 1993 or 1994.
On Bell Street's ground and upper floor, On Kawara, senior Japanese conceptual artist and recipient of the recent Carnegie Prize, is showing four date paintings, made in May and June of last year, with the ten volumes which comprise the book One Million Years Future, and a new set of ‘I'm Still Alive’ telegrams and ‘I Got Up’postcards.
Michael Landy's ‘Closing Down Sale’ at Karsten Schubert (to 30 May) is his most important exhibition since ‘Market’was installed at Building One in the autumn of 1990.
Comprising nearly fifty supermarket trolleys tightly packed with discarded household kit salvaged from skips and tips, the exhibition recreates, in the context of an art gallery, an Oxford Street clearance sale, with all its sleazy devices for purchases by pressure.
The gallery's windows will be covered in whitewash announcements, and a tape recorder plays, on continuous loop, the artist's own voice inciting his audience to buy while stocks last.
At a time when business is tottering, Landy's enterprise sails close to the wind and could only have been mounted by a dealer whose new lease in Charlotte Street has secured his own operation.
Sadly, however, genuine closing down sales are taking place in other galleries.
Kasmin's shop posted a For Lease sign some weeks ago, although he remains in Cork Street until he can identify a new tenant for his property.
But he looks to follow Mark Glazebrook who closed the Albemarle Gallery three weeks ago and reverts to being a private dealer and exhibition curator working from his home in Pont Street.
With former partner, Rodney Capstick Dale, he opened the gallery exactly five years ago with a Salon des Refusés of works rejected by the Royal Academy's summer exhibition.
Craigie Aitchison is his leading artist looking for a new representation.
Marlborough, a neighbour in Albemarle Street, opens a third exhibition of Therese Oulton (1 May–12 June), whose new paintings should dispel any lingering suggestion that she is a painter of the landscape.
‘Abstract with Memories’ is the exhibition's title, and the title of a set of four large yellow paintings at its core.
There are five canvases from the ‘Transparence’ series, predominantly blue in tonality, their honeycomb structures loosely derived from her study of crystalline formations in Egypt.
Three other pictures from this series were exhibited at LA Louver in January of last year.
‘Close Up’ and ‘Flare Up’are her latest works, large red compositions where the lattice is stitched more tightly.
On the evidence of this new group of works, the Tate Gallery's decision to acquire ‘Deposition’ from her last exhibition in 1990 was quite justified.
Marlborough Graphics is mounting a related exhibition of Oulton's mezzotints (21 May–13 June) and a group of monotypes printed by Garner Tullis in Los Angeles.
As other galleries close, it is nice to be able to report that Milch has reopened in a new location in Bloomsbury.
Directors Tamara Chodzko and Lawren Maben have taken a lease at 100 Great Russell Street where they launched their programme at the beginning of last month with ‘A Modest Proposal’(to 16 May).
It features a collaboration between Simon Patterson, who looked an intriguing new prospect at the Hayward Gallery's ‘Doubletake’, and Douglas Gordon, a sculpture of tins of housepaint relabelled with the names of members, historical and current, of Europe's Royal Families.
Karsten Schubert's colleague, Lady Helen Windsor, is included in the display.
Gordon himself has made a mail work, sending short, threatening letters to 300 recipients, and Anand Zenz has designed a pinstripe suit (ed.13), woven by a tailor in Savile Row, but changing the stripe to a provocative text which can be read at close quarters.
An exhibition of new sculptures by Nayland Blake opens in later May and will be discussed in next month's column.
In Cork Street, Waddington draws on his remarkable stock for an exhibition of modern and contemporary sculpture (to 30 May).
Besides groups of bronze statuettes by Degas and Henry Moore, notable works include Miró's ‘Tëte’(1974), ‘Oedipus II’(1962), a stone and bronze sculpture by William Turnbull, Kim Lim's ‘River-Stone’, a new standing block of Calacatta Siena marble, delicately decorated with incisions, a vast wall sculpture (1987) created by Mimmo Paladino from gold and encaustic and bronze, and Julian Schnabel's ‘Jacqueline’, a bronze bust of his former wife mounted on a steel platform and shown at his retrospective exhibition at the Whitney Museum in 1987.
RAAB's stock exhibition (to 4 July) is a changing selection of works by gallery artists including Rainer Fetting, Karl-Horst Hödicke, Luciano Castelli and Daniel Spoerri.
Benjamin Rhodes is exhibiting new sculptures of household objects by Zadok Ben-David (to 13 June), who represented Israel at the Venice Biennale in 1988.
For his third exhibition at Bernard Jacobson, Maurice Cockrill has made ‘The Four Seasons’, four oval canvases which he shows with a group of new pictures on door panels.
Since some critics have made a link between Cockrill and Peter Lanyon, it is appropriate that this exhibition tours to the Newlyn Art Gallery in June and will be seen at Exeter's Spacex Gallery and at the Plymouth Art Centre.
In Dering Street, Grob gives a first exhibition to Danny Moynihan (12 May–20 June), who was seen at the gallery in a mixed exhibition two years ago.
For this exhibition, the artist has painted six voluptuous nude portraits and four still-life compositions of fruit and tennis balls.
A catalogue includes an interview conducted by Damien Hirst.
Anthony d'Offay's survey of neon works by Bruce Nauman, extensively previewed in last month's issue, includes ‘Seven Figures’(1985), a chain of erotic entertainment (to 16 May).
Then the gallery closes for three weeks in preparation for its major summer exhibition of new pictures by Anselm Kiefer.
Other exhibitions discussed in previous issues include seven large woodcuts by leading Swiss master, Franz Gertsch, at Turske-Hue-Williams (to 29 May), Kenny Scharf at Edward Totah (to 23 May), Mayor's British Surrealism (to 22 May) and Brice Marden's ‘Cold Mountain’ series of prints at Marianne Holtermann's new gallery in Bond Street (to 29 May).
Roger Bevan
BRUSSELS
Artists ‘at home’ over three weekends
Van de Weghe shows Basquiat
It is twenty years since Claudio Parmiggiani's first one-man show in Belgium, organised by gallery owner Albert Baronian.
From 12 May, Sabine Wachters will be exhibiting ten or so of Parmiggiani's most typical sculptures.
At the same time, the gallery's other space at Knokke will be showing twenty of his small-scale drawings: pastels on map paper and india ink on musical scores.
Of the sculptures exhibited in Brussels, the most important and the biggest is ‘Bâteau zoologique’, which the artist has personally retouched and installed on site to obtain a particular emphasis.
Other earlier works include ‘Psyche’, an untitled sculpture dating from 1987, and his untitled gilded wings of 1988.
Still in Brussels, until 23 May the Eric van de Weghe gallery, which has close ties with Sonnabend and Miller of New York and Waddington's in London, is putting on a major retrospective devoted to the work of Jean-Michel Basquiat.
The sixteen canvases from the period 1981–1987 include ‘Old cars’(1981); ‘Collaboration’(1985), produced jointly with Andy Warhol; and ‘Eroica’(1987).
Basquiat is to be followed, from 26 May to 13 June, by an exhibition hot from the Robert Miller gallery in New York: ‘Photographs 1980–1990’ by David Salle.
Though, at first sight, he appears to portray a ‘crude and dogmatic sexuality’, Salle's images in fact display ‘genuine tenderness and extraordinary formal innovation’.
I am quoting from Henry Geldzahler's introduction to the catalogue.
Finally, for three weekends beginning on 8 May, the artists' quarter of Saint Gilles is hosting a third series of ‘Parcours d'Artistes’ an opportunity for experts and general public alike to visit artists ‘at home’in their studios and view some of their works.
This event is held every two years.
In 1988, it attracted over 15,000 visitors; in 1990, more than 200 artists took part.
This time, it will involve one hundred workshops, twenty-five galleries (including Pascal Polar, Lucien Bilinelli and Sabine Wachters), three cultural centres, the academies of music and fine art, and the Horte museum.
The chosen theme is the confluence of form and sound, music and the plastic arts.
Giovanna Massoni
PARIS
Logical possibilities
Albert Ayme at Franka Berndt
A practising engineer until the age of forty, Albert Ayme did not throw away his slide-rule and set-square when he decided to devote himself entirely to painting.
Even so, the linear perspectives and coloured surfaces of his serially-produced ‘programmes’ owe as much to chance as they do to logic and planning.
Throughout May, Franka Berndt is showing his ‘Chants des ténèbres’, subtle studies in colour which methodically apply his combinatorial principle to rectangular and oblique forms.
Albert Ayme is also the subject of a major retrospective organised by the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts.
Running until 10 May, this is Paris's first public exhibition of Ayme's work.
Zabriskie continues, until 30 May, to show sculptures and monotypes by Mary Frank, who draws inspiration from classical mythology, Bible stories and folklore.
At Samia Saouma, the fascinating cultured world captured in the photographs of Olivier Richon is followed by the water colours of Ross Bleckner.
This  exhibition runs until 27 June.
Bleckner is also featured, from 19 May to 20 June, by Ghislaine Hussenot, where he takes over from Matt Mullican.
‘Smorfia napoletana’(Neapolitan grimace) is the title of an exhibition of the work of thirty contemporary Italian painters, being held at the Musée-galerie de la Seita until 23 May.
Lelong continues to show recent works by Pierre Alechinsky: twenty feverish variations on the theme of the tree, whose tangle of branches conceals unexpected analogies and metamorphoses.
Consumer society is the irritant under the skin of David Mach; and the art world calls forth his most biting sculptures.
The Scottish artist builds temporary accumulations of printed paper and everyday objects, from the motor car to the washing machine confused heaps of matter upheld or accompanied by human and animal forms.
His work can be seen at the Nikki Diana Marquardt gallery from 13 May to 30 June.
‘Rendez-vous ‘Berlin’ continues until 19 May at the Vidal-Saint-Phalle, featuring three German artists previously unknown in France: the lyrical Jurgen Messensee; Adochi, who paints in black and white; and Tone-Sink, whose painting is akin to graphics.
Paul Graham is being featured by Claire Burrus, Jean-Pierre Bertrand by the Galerie de France, David Salle by Daniel Templon, and Markus Retz by Farideh Cadot.
In anticipation of his major 1993 exhibition at the Jeu de Paume, which concentrates on the work he produced during the Eighties, until the end of this month Martin Barré is presenting a new series of twelve paintings at the Laage-Salomon gallery.
Meanwhile, at the Yvon Lambert, On Kawara and Ashley Bickerton have been succeeded by Agnès Martin and Richard Tuttle.
During May, Maeght's rue Saint-Merri gallery is featuring young Czechoslovakian artists: Simona Bubanova, Tomas Cisarovsky, Milena Dopitova, Jiri Prihoda, Antonin Strizek, Laco Teren and Filip Turek, none of whom has exhibited in Paris before.
Froment & Putman is also showing a group of artists, with works by Pep Agut, Anne-Marie Jugnet, Marin Kasimir, Joseph Kosuth, John McCracken, Didier Marcel and James Turrel.
After the neo-conceptual art of General Idea, the Montenay is hosting a collective exhibition of small-scale works, to be followed by Philippe Hurteau.
The Di Meo brothers, having recently exhibited works by Joseph Sima (also on show at the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville), are now featuring paintings and drawings by Michel Haas.
He also uses a paper medium, but moulds and manipulates the paper into a thick backing, whose irregularities show through the paint surface with unexpected effect.
The British sculptor Barry Flanagan has progressed from bronze to stone and marble in the course of a career marked by the influence of Minimalism and Arte Povera.
He has not, however, lost the curious, indefinable quality which sets his sculptures apart from all else on the contemporary scene.
Following Luciano Fabro, his latest works are being shown by Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert, from 23 May to 20 June.
Pino Settani, who photographs personalities from the world of Italian cinema, music and art, is exhibiting until July with Hadrien Thomas.
Until 16 May, the gallery is also continuing its exhibition of recent polyptychs by Bruno Ceccobelli, which combine a variety of materials and techniques.
Patrick Faigenbaum, exhibiting at the Crousel-Robelin-Bama until 30 May, has changed his subject matter, but with no loss of intensity: his portraits of Italian aristocrats have given way to photographs of the Wailing Wall, taken during a recent visit to Jerusalem.
Stéphane Dumas looks for a soul in things that have been thrown away to continue their life as rubbish.
So she transforms a pair of rubber gloves or some rusty nails into eloquent allegories, or simply into new, surprising forms.
Isabelle Bongard is showing works by Dumas until the middle of the month.
Finally, in another collective exhibition: Anne de Villepoix is hanging works by Lothar Baumgarten, Fischli, Weiss, Rosemary Trockel, Thomas Grunefeld and Annette Messager.
COLOGNE
Documenta exerts its influence
Pistoletto and Heinrichsmeyer provide a foretaste
The run-up to Documenta (13 June-20 September) has inspired some unusually ambitious exhibitions in Cologne's galleries.
By coincidence, three of the most visually and intellectually provocative shows are dramatic meditations on the relationship of time, space and chance.
At Galerie Tanit until 30 May is a major new work by the Turin artist Michelangelo Pistoletto, who will also appear at Documenta.
(Christa Näher is Tanit's other emissary at Kassel.)
‘I Tavole del Giudizio: Composizione in sei tempi’ is an installation composed of eight mirror-topped tables, which for the duration of the exhibition will be rearranged at regular intervals in six different positions, each signifying a different concept: division/multiplication; dispersion; eliptical organisation; self-reflection; refectory/social life; absolute/relative.
In the gallery's second room will be four works from earlier stages of Pistoletto's career: a mirrored cube entitled ‘A square metre of infinity’(1966–70); ‘Hunger’, a 1989 sculpture of wood, foam rubber and canvas; and ‘The gift of Mercury to the mirror’(1971) in bronze, mirror-glass and quicksilver.
In addition a new sculpture, ‘The room of the mirrors’ of painted wood and mirror glass will be on display.
During May, Hiltrud Jordan, whose narrow gallery at Friesenstrasse 68 is devoted to borderline art, such as photographs and videos of performances, will present Reinhardt Heinrichsmeyer's ten-year project, ‘How to paint with dice’.
Since 1982, Heinrichsmeyer has sent various Documenta participants small cardboard questionnaires along with three dice; each roll of the dice yielded a particular choice of colour.
Working from the artists' chance selections, Heinrichsmeyer created geometric paintings resembling those of the De Stijl group, which he in turn transposed onto the planar surfaces of over one hundred cubic armchairs.
In the present exhibition Heinrichsmeyer's playful exercise in synchronicity is imbued with an elegaic aspect, for the six armchairs on display are derived from the questionnaires of deceased artists Paul Thek, Josef Beuys, Robert Mapplethorpe, Ralston Farina, Keith Haring and Robert Filliou.
From mid-May Esther Schipper will use the occasion of a group show by Pierre Joseph, Angela Bulloch, Wendy Jacobs and Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster to permanently transform the lower space of her two-storey gallery.
Wendy Jacobs, a member of the Chicago group Ha-Ha, will construct ‘breathing walls’, in an echo of her installation at Schipper last year.
Angela Bulloch, who will have a one-woman show upstairs at the gallery from 6 June to 4 July, is creating permanent light pieces, and Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster, whose earlier installations at Schipper have involved the atmospheric alteration of rooms with texts, will design a small library.
Preceding Schipper's adventure in Innenarchitektur is a group show of drawings by Los Angeles artist Paul McCarthy, small drawings and terracotta heads by New Yorker Sean Landers, and still photographs of video ‘surveillance’ by Julia Scher (also from New York) will be on display until 15 May.
Scher's installations will also appear at Rudolf Zwirner during June and July, along with works by Pettibon, Pruit-Early, J. Shaw and Titus.
A full promenade along Cologne's inner ring, from Schipper's far north oasis at Neusserstrasse to Thomas Rehbein's and Monika Sprüth's new settlements at Wormserstrasse can be accomplished in an hour without jogging.
But certain piquant byways, notably Kamekestrasse 21, are all too easily overlooked.
At that address a quiet Hinterhof or inner courtyard houses two galleries: Carla Stützer and Johnen & Schöttle.
Stützer, who has been at Kamekestrasse since 1980 and whose programme consists mainly of sculpture, is, until 6 June, showing neo-Constructivist works by the Yugoslav-born sculptor Wasa Marjanov.
Marjanov's early training as a machine-fitter was followed by a period of study with Megert at the Kunstakademie in Düsseldorf, where the artist now lives and works in the Ratherstrasse artists' collective.
In June Stützer will be showing ‘Travelling Art Works’ by French artist Patrick Raynaud, who is also featured at Documenta.
Johnen & Schöttle, whose emphasis is upon photography, with a smattering of sculpture and modern realist painting, is launching two group shows in May, entitled ‘Double Identity’.
The first, of Rodney Graham, Thomas Ruff,
On Kawara, Stephan Balkenhol and Martin Honert will take place at Kamekestrasse; the second, featuring Philip Akkerman, Elke Denda, Andreas Gursky, Candida Hofer, Michael van Ofen, Pia Stadtbäumer, Jeff Wall and James Welling, will be installed at the gallery's second space, at Grosse Brinkengasse 17/19.
Karsten Greve will follow his compelling exhibition of the hieratic images of little-known, self-taught Miami painter Purvis Young (with luck, the show might be extended to the second week of May) with new works by Californian artist Carole Seborovski (until 4 July).
Monika Sprüth reopens at the end of May with a group show of Dahn, Kasseböhmer, Schulze, Trockel and Fischi-Weiss.
Rolf Ricke, also in the Südstadt at Volksgartenstrasse 10 is presenting a ‘social piece’ by the young New York artist Ben Kinmont from 8 May until 10 June.
Kinmont's first European show is a combination of objects and performance, with inscribed plaster pieces in the gallery itself, and five students handing out leaflets throughout Cologne.
Maximilian Krips's exhibition of Beuys and Paik is likely to be extended until 15 May; and Tanja Grünert's show of American artist Peter Fend's ‘Ocean Earth’, video observations and models of an ecologically sound organisation of European territory, will continue until 9 May.
Finally, Désiré Feurle will complement Czech artist Jindrich Zeithamml's elliptical, Cycladic-inspired tableaux of silver and gold leaf on wood with a collection of Roman silver vessels and plates from about 200 BC Lisa Zeiger 
Art Market
Walking the dog
London, Christie's, 7 May.
What is probably a unique collection of photographs of man's best friend will be dispersed in a sale of nineteenth- and twentieth-century photographs.
Comprising over 500 photographs, they range from the earliest daguerrotypes to contemporary compositions by such photographers as Lartigue, Erwitt, Doisneau, Horst and Wegman.
Estimates vary between £100 ($175) and £2,000 ($3,450).
Check…
London, Christie's, 8 May.
Christie's South Kensington is offering the Dr Robert Blass collection of early chess books, comprising over 1,000 books and manuscripts.
The most important items are medieval French and Italian manuscripts and German and Italian incunable editions of ‘De ludo scachorum’ by the fifteenth-century friar Jacobus de Cessolis.
Of particular note are a 1483 illustrated edition from Strasbourg (20–30,000; $34–51,000) and another dated 1494 from Toulouse estimated at £10–15,000 ($17–34,000).
Carrying the Cross
New York, Christie's, 11–12 May.
This two-day sale of old master and modern prints includes a large selection of German engravings from the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries.
Martin Schongauer's ‘Christ carrying the Cross’, dated around 1498, should sell for $100–200,000 (£58–115,000) while Dürer's ‘Madonna with the monkey’ is estimated at $8–10,000 (£4,500–5,800).
Amongst the more modern works on offer may be seen a rare print by Pissarro, ‘Paysage sous bois à l'Hermitage’(est. $20–30,000; £11,500–17,500) and Picasso's ‘Jacqueline en mariée de face I’(est. $22–26,000; £12,750–15,000).
Sterling service, we presume
London, Christie's, 13 May.
This sale of silver, objets de vertu and Russian works of art features a group of presentation objects relating to the explorer Sir Henry Morton Stanley.
Highlight of the sale is the gold, ivory and enamel Stanley Freedom Casket presented to Stanley by the City of London in 1887 for his travels in Africa (est. £15–20,000; $26–34,000).
Also included is an inkstand presented to him on his wedding by the Prince and Princess of Wales est. £3–5,000 ($5–8,500).
Damp in parts
New York, Sotheby's, 13 May.
The economic climate now seems to affect art as well as the market: susceptible collectors will jump at Alfred Sisley's ‘Rue de village—temps gris’(est. $700–900,000; £405–525,000).
A solace of sorts is offered by George Braque's ‘Verre, bouteille et carte bas’ of 1912 (est. $800–1,000,000; £465–580,000) and Picasso's ‘Bouteille de bass, verre, paquet de table, pipe et as de trèfle’(est. $600–800,000; £350–465,000).
On a cheerier note is Renoir's ‘Paysage à la Roche-Guyon’ painted in 1887 and estimated at around $800,000 (£465,000).
Roman deities from Germany
Geneva, Sotheby's, 18 May.
Top lot of the sale is a silver-gilt and jewelled sculpture of Diana riding a stag accompanied by Cupid.
Made by Master AP of Regensburg in 1620, it is estimated at SF800–1,200,000 (£310–460,000; $530–800,000).
A silver-gilt sweet-meat dish made in Hamburg in 1610 and originally owned by Christian IV of Denmark before being given to the Tsar should realise SF300–450,000 (£115–175,000; $200–300,000).
Other items of note include a drinking cup in the form of Vulcan at his forge by the Swiss Schaffhausen guild of Smiths (est.
SF300–400,000; £135–155,000; $200–265,000) and a set of six candlesticks made for the King of Poland around 1750 (est.
SF350–450,000; £135–175,000; $230–300,000).
Friends in Milan
Milan, Sotheby's, 18 May.
This sale of 19th-century paintings will offer an oil on canvas by Giovanni Boldini entitled ‘Le due amiche’(est.
L 350–400 million; £160–185,000; $280–320,000) as well as a group of Tuscan paintings including ‘Veduta di Piazza Cavour’ by Ruggero Panerai estimated at L 24–28 million (est. £11–13,000; $19–22,000).
Latin America moves north
New York, Sotheby's, 19–20 May.
The bullish estimates of the top lots in this Latin American sale reflect the fact that this field is flourishing.
Matta's ‘Théorie de l'arbre’, painted in 1941, is expected to fetch $500–600,000 (£290–350,000) while two paintings by Fernando Botero, ‘The lovers’ and ‘Cat with green soup’, which date from his most popular period carry an estimate of $700–800,000 (£405–465,000) and $500–700,000 (£290–405,000) respectively.
A surrealist picture by Rufino Tamayo entitled ‘Naturaleza muerta’ should sell for $200–250,000 (£115–145,000).
Also included are a collection of Cuban paintings, a selection of prints featuring work by Botero, Tamayo and Posada and some drawings by Diego Rivera.
A lovesome thing, God wot
London, Christie's, 20 May.
The first pictorial record of flowers from a sixteenth-century garden marks the highlight of this sale of travel and natural history books.
The Camerarius Florilegium depicts 473 plants with their Latin names inscribed in Camerarius' hand.
Organised by season, this book marks an important step in the development of horticulture in the late 1500s and is probably the only surviving pictorial record of an important garden of that period (est. £300–500,000; $520–860,000).
The sale also includes a book containing some 145 watercolours and drawings of birds dating from the eighteenth century (est. £100–120,000; $170–205,000), a collection of natural history books, including John Gould's ‘Birds of paradise’(est. £12–16,000; $20–27,000) and a section devoted to globes.
St Prosdocimus to the fore
New York, Christie's, 21 May.
31 Italian Old Master paintings ranging from the fourteenth to the seventeenth centuries are to be sold by the J.Paul Getty Museum.
Among the works is a ‘Madonna and Child with St James the Elder and St Prosdociumus’ by Pietro Marescalchi (est. $80–120,000; £46–70,000).
Pietro Paolini's ‘Lute Players’, which appeared in an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum in 1990 on Caravaggio is estimated to sell for $100–150,000 (£58–87,000).
The sale also features Paris Bordone's portrait of a courtesan (est. $200–300,000; £115–175,000) and a ‘Madonna and Child enthroned’ by Michele Giambono.
Other artists represented include Domenico Beccafumi, Jacobello del Fiore and Benvenuto di Giovanni.
Faultless music
London, Sotheby's, 22 May.
This auction of music manuscripts sees the sale of an apparently unique sketch-leaf by Rossini for his opera ‘Maometto II’.
Only two sketches are known for his French operas and none for the Italian ones.
Their rarity lies in the fact that he supposedly worked so rapidly and neatly that they were unnecessary.
Indeed, it is said that he composed one aria while waiting for the rice to cook.
(est. £4–5,000; $6,900–8,600).
…
Mate
London, Phillip's, 26 May.
Phillip's riposte is with a sale of chess sets and related items including a mid-nineteenth-century carved ivory set with the pieces in the form of monkeys.
Probably of Japanese workmanship, the set is estimated to fetch £3–4000 ($5,100–6,900).
A late eighteenth-century carved bone chess set of ‘Spanish pulpit’ design is estimated at £2,500–3,500 ($4,300–6,000).
German art
Düsseldorf, Phillip's, 27 May.
On offer are paintings, drawings and works of art ranging from the seventeenth to the 20th centuries.
One of the star lots should be a small watercolour by Emil Nolde, ‘Cyclamen and chrysanthemum’, dated 1945 which is estimated at DM150–200,000 (£52–70,000; $90–120,000).
From the nineteenth century should be noted ‘Rauferei vor dem Wirtshaus’, an oil by Heinrich Burkel (est.
DM150–200,000; £52–70,000; $90–120,000) and a tiny farmhouse scene by Carl Jutz dated 1897 (est.
DM60–70,000; £21–24,000; $36–42,000).
On a nautical note, a view of the Norwegian coast by the landscape and marine artist Andreas Aschenbach should sell for DM50–60,000; £17,500–21,000; $30–36,000).
Four hundred tonnes of garden statuary
Billingshurst, Sotheby's, 27–28 May.
Stone and marble fixtures weighing 400 tonnes from a garden in Boston have been shipped over for this sale.
They include: a late nineteenth-century Italian Travertine marble fountain with sea horses, putti and masks estimated at £150,000–250,000 ($260–435,000); a stone jetty with landing stage; a terrace decorated with bronze dolphin masks, limestone urns and bronze landing rings estimated at £50,000–100,000 ($87–174,000); four Italian white marble seats circa 1870 estimated at £20–40,000 ($34–70,000); two pairs of Italian white marble herm figures of Pan and a Bacchante circa 1870, estimate £15–20,000 ($26–34,000).
The entire sale is expected to total around £500,000 ($860,000).
The lots are from the grounds of an institution whose garden was created around 1870.
Real butter
New York, Sotheby's, 28 May.
The highlight of Sotheby's 19th-century painting sale will undoubtedly be Millet's ‘Woman churning’, executed for the last Paris Salon in 1870.
A classic Barbizon picture, it marks the culmination of a series of works depicting butter churners which Millet began in the 1840s.
Formerly part of the renowned Secretan collection in Paris, it should sell within its ample estimate of $2–3 million (£1,150,000–1,750,000).
Two times Dix
Berlin, Sotheby's, 29 May.
Sotheby's third sale in Berlin concentrates on German Expressionist art and includes two works by Otto Dix, a portrait of Dr Roseberg from 1921 (DM350–450,000; £130–170,000; $210–270,000) and his ‘Early self-portrait with walking-hat’ exhibited recently in London and Berlin (same estimate).
Also on offer are three paintings by Alexej Jawlensky with estimates between DM200,000 (£75,000; $120,000) and DM380,000 (£140,000; $230,000), and works by Beckmann, Liebermann, Nolde and Feininger.
Fine Silver
London, Sotheby's, 2 June.
The finest piece in this sale is a magnificent silver soup tureen by Paul de Lamerie.
One of the earliest examples of silverwork in full rococo style by an English silversmith, it is also one of the few pieces by Paul de Lamerie remaining in private hands and carries a large estimate (around £750,000; $1,300,000).
Set on feet of dolphins, the tureen is elaborately decorated with grapevines, armorials, crayfish, birds of prey, cockerels, sheep and other animals.
Other fine lots include a pair of candelabra made by Benjamin Smith in 1845 and 1846 in the form of an oak-tree and a grapevine, each with applied allegorical figures (est. each £20–30,000; $34–52,000) and a second tureen by Paul Storr raised on sphinx and paw feet and with other decoration which reflects the influence of Egyptian designs at the time (est. £25–35,999; $43–60,000).