

L.A.:(Long anguish)
What use are artists in times of crisis?
Does all the art of reformers, activists and militants that we see exhibited in luxurious international galleries help prevent racial and ethnic conflicts?
Does aesthetic art and mystical art and contemplative art offer alternatives to the horror and humiliation in which three-quarters of mankind lives?
Ever since the time of Jean-Jacques Rousseau there has been art whose aim has been the renewal of society, but it has had no effect beyond that of producing testimonials (even if controversial ones) of what we call the ‘real’ world, in contrast perhaps with the unreal world of art.
And yet it would be unfair to deny the validity of art, that open forum in which we unceasingly sound out our emotional and intellectual understanding, merely because it has not had immediate effect on events in society.
Like all bodies, society needs a skin, and art is the pulsating outer surface of society.
As people of art, we can work from inside our skin to test out how competent or sincere our premises and actions are.
And here, alas, we find a tangle of polarising thought patterns competing rigidly with, instead of following, one another.
Each pattern proclaims that it has the solution instead of collaborating in the search.
This schematic way of thinking channels us into an obscurantist cul-de-sac instead of regenerating our culture.
Like spinning tops we dash from from one emergency to another, always citing them as an excuse for our unfailing refusal to face up to the global urgency staring at us
We have seen an example of this general short-sightedness in the the cultural community's reactions to the tragedy of Los Angeles, which like other conflicts today has been attributed to purely local factors.
Foreign papers crowingly announced the nemesis of US racism.
The same people who kill gypsies in Romania, burn Africans in Italy, beat up Turks in Germany, rape Indians in England, knife Algerians and bomb Jews in France (not to mention the abundant discrimination to which ethnic minorities, women and homosexuals are prey in most countries) those same people have pointed a virtuous finger at the USA, with marches and demonstrations to salve their consciences of any hint of collusion with those in power.
Artists and the artistic community must stop deluding themselves and from now onwards begin scrutinising the very structure of their thought, instead of contenting themselves with pointless posturing systematically contradicted by the way in which art is produced and distributed.
We must rethink thought.
And to succeed in this we must find out which of the puppet-master's strings make our intellects dance, and then cut them.
It is very simple: the artist cannot allow himself the luxury of letting himself be manipulated passively by our culture.
The state of emergency in which our planet finds itself consists not only in the contamination of nature but of the very roots of our thought, which are still shaped by thousands of years of prejudice and prescriptive categories.
The artist has little hope of influencing the world if he does not begin to reform himself by questing for a new vision of the experience of living, a vision which leads us to share, question, respect.
The structures of our artistic body, as they are today, do not encourage this kind of understanding.
Indeed, they seem even to separate and set in conflict.
We must not delude ourselves that when we paternalistically include certain Third World artists who hitherto have been excluded from our magazines, galleries and museums, we are correcting our culture.
That is certainly not the case, because we include them only after they have been made to fit in with our rules of the game.
We need a much more profound change.
Maybe it requires the elimination of galleries, museums and magazines, or at least of all their underlying premises.
Ours is a crisis not only of Western culture and technology, but of all other cultures.
It is a crisis of everything which served us in the past but which is no longer tenable today.
It is too easy to accuse Eurocentrism of all the ills of the world.
There are just as many prejudices and lies in Asia, Africa and South America as in Europe and North America.
We artists can contribute to the renewal by each of us attacking the root of the problem in himself and by making art which is incompatible with the dominating agenda of today's discourse.
Government policy
Who pays the piper…
Ex Arts Council chairman Luke Rittner calls for direct government arts funding.
New Heritage Minister
David Mellor is cautious: the Council says no
LONDON.
Luke Rittner, who resigned from the Arts Council for the sake of the ‘arm's length principle’ the convention dear to British minds that politicians should not interfere in arts funding decisions now says that principle is dead and that the arts community must embrace the continental approach of ‘hands on’government.
Rittner stood down as Arts Council Secretary General two years ago, believing government plans to devolve the council's funding responsibilities to the regions would drastically reduce its role.
Since 1946 the Arts Council had been a buffer between politicians and artists, protecting artists from interference, and politicians from being directly blamed for scandalous art.
While the first Arts Minister, Jenny Lee, boasted of handing cash to the council to spend as it wished, the ‘arm's length principle’ was progressively eroded by later ministers who earmarked grants for government approved schemes (The Art Newspaper, No.17, April 1992, p.1).
Now, according to Luke Rittner, a Secretary of State directly accountable to the Cabinet cannot be expected to have his hands tied on how his department's money is spent.
It is the price the arts must inevitably pay for a higher political profile.
While the Arts Council may survive as an advisory body, the crucial question is whether it retains a funding role: ‘The days of the arm's length principle are gone.
We have a powerful new ministry which would sensibly communicate directly with the Regional Arts Boards, and, I now believe, should fund the national companies direct.
That leaves the Arts Council without any funding responsibility, while the power and the influence lie with the person who holds the purse strings the Secretary of State’.
Luke Rittner believes the success of the new system will depend on a balancing act by Mr Mellor, the head of the new expanded arts ministry, the Ministry of National Heritage (The Art Newspaper, No.18, May 1992, p.1): he must make arts policy directly but keep his distance by taking a broadminded approach to the arts.
The French practice of artistic directors having to resign when a new government comes to power is not admired in Britain.
Success will also be judged by whether precious resources go to artists not bureaucrats; the projected 400-strong department could make the Arts Council's 150 staff look lean by comparison.
Mr Mellor is cautious.
He told arts correspondents on 6 May that while they had created an expectation of radical reform of the Arts Council, his team were not going to ‘rush their fences’.
Significantly, he gave continued currency to the phrase ‘arm's length’, when describing the independent manner in which future National Lottery proceeds would be disbursed.
In line with Arts Council thinking, he said a large proportion would go on capital expenditure: ‘We want to leave some heritage behind us, too’.
But, if there is really to be any streamlining, Mr Rittner's nettle must be grasped.
The Regional Arts Boards are straining at the leash, wanting to take over as many of the Arts Council's responsibilities as they can get.
Some of Mr Mellor's favourite orchestras will probably be among companies handed over, albeit kicking and screaming.
The last redoubt of the ‘arm's length’ policy would then be the national theatre companies and a chorus of voices is calling for their retention by the Arts Council.
Max Hutchinson, former President of the Royal Institute of British Architects, now East Midlands RAB chairman says: ‘The arm's length principle is absolute and sacrosanct.
Matters of artistic policy must be left to the intermediary institutions’.
The embattled Arts Council sketches its own position in its newly published Draft National Arts and Media Strategy: ‘We shall campaign for the arts funding system to remain as an intermediary between government and the arts’.
But if it means preserving a third tier of bureaucracy, the ‘arm's length principle’ could become very expensive indeed.
Moscow
Hermitage, Tretyakov, Bolshoi in joint stock company
International Art Exchange set up under ex-Minister of Culture to sell exhibitions, art even ideas to the West
MOSCOW.
The International Art Exchange has marked its birth with an active advertising campaign.
The founders of this open joint-stock company are the State Centre for Museums and Exhibitions and the International Cultural Centre of the Russian Ministry of Culture, the All-Russian Chamber of Exchanges and the All-Russian Trading House.
A former Russian Minister of Culture Yury Solomin has become President of the Exchange.
The first shareholders are the Hermitage and the Tretyakov Gallery, the Pushkin Museum, the Bolshoi Theatre and the Moscow State Conservatoire.
According to Solomin, the Exchange intends to create an effective market structure within the culture and art world.
Through their brokers' offices, the shareholders, as leading cultural establishments, will be able to offer tours, pictures, rights to hold exhibitions, scripts or even ideas.
It is anticipated that a more complete data bank on all forms of supply and demand will be set up in the exchange.
The head of the Exchange's advertising department Boris Goldman believes that the opening of the exchange will go a long way to breaking the mafia art market in which Western and Russian intermediaries often knock down prices on Russian works of art.
According to information from the Exchange's press centre, interest has already been expressed in this new commercial establishment by well known foreign companies such as IBM, Samsung, Pierre Cardin, Yves St Laurent, the British publishers Longmans, and also by agencies and trading representatives of various companies in Moscow.
The exchange has opened offices in the USA, Japan, Germany, the UK, Austria and other countries.
The Exchange's executive director Sergey Starodubov has said in an interview with the newspaper Kommersant that the majority of offers from foreign firms amount to the foreign partners being responsible for most of the hard currency expenditure involved in carrying out a project.
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) partners are required to make rouble investments, mostly into servicing expenses.
Hard currency earnings therefore consist of the intermediary percentage of the contractual total and derive from the compensation of the side issuing an invitation.
According to the International Art Exchange, the profits for CIS partners should amount to $1 for every ten roubles invested.
In addition, the exchange has a 1% service charge for deals.
For those who have never been involved in the arts the exchange offers a wide range of opportunities to invest money with the aim of obtaining hard currency under a transfer deal system.
A few of the offers to made during the first trading session have already been publicised.
These include, for example, rights to a selling exhibition of paintings by contemporary CIS artists in Germany (100 paintings at a price of DM600–3000 per painting, transportation costs and insurance to be paid by the German side); rights for foreign firms to make reproductions to order of paintings held in museums in the CIS (thirty copies at $1500 per copy), and exclusive foreign rights to the memoirs of cultural figures and former members of the government.
Venice Biennale
Political chess
Party games but still no head
VENICE.
There is still no decision on who is to head the Biennale.
Meeting on 3 May, the Executive Committee was again unable to agree on the appointment of a curator for the Visual Arts section.
The two candidates on this occasion were Achille Bonito Oliva, famous for having defined and supported the Transavanguardia movement, and Germano Celant, currently curator of Contemporary Art at the Guggenheim in New York, who was the chief proponent of Arte Povera in the 1960s.
It was almost as if the Biennale's President wanted to engineer a confrontation between the two most important trends to emerge in post-war Italy.
The candidature of Achille Bonito Oliva, who has the support of the Socialist Party, immediately aroused the opposition of the Christian Democrats.
There is a strong Catholic presence in the Veneto region and, despite Bonito Oliva's high standing as a critic (he was recently dubbed Chevalier de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French government), this element did not favour the appointment of a man recently involved in public displays of exhibitionist behaviour.
Recently the satirical magazine Frigidaire published a feature in which he appeared in the nude.
At first, the Christian Democrats are thought to have put forward Giorgio De Marchis, a noted specialist in twentieth-century Italian art, as their alternative nominee.
Rather than a serious proposal, this may have been a diversionary tactic, intended to block the appointment of Bonito Oliva and force the Socialists to nominate a second-choice candidate with fewer political connotations.
This is where Celant came in.
His appointment was likely to be approved by the Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis and, when it came to the ballot, he in fact received seven votes, as against five for Bonito Oliva.
In the event, the Biennale's President, Paolo Portoghesi, was not happy with so narrow a majority and adjourned the meeting until 22 May.
It is likely that the next session will be decisive and that a curator will then be elected on a temporary basis: the appointment to direct the Visual Arts sector for the 1992 and 1995 Biennales cannot be confirmed until the Executive Committee, whose mandate has now expired, has itself been completely renewed.
The Government has yet to appoint its three Committee members, and this is likely to be a long business, since confusion still reigns following the April elections.
According to informed sources, Bonito Oliva's chances are now somewhat slim.
It is also possible that, on 22 May, the Executive Committee may spring a surprise by agreeing to appoint an outsider.
The list of potential nominees includes Ida Gianelli, director of the Museo d'Arte Contemporanea at Castello di Rivoli; the critic Floriano De Sanctis; and, in third position, Renato Barilli.
Yugoslavia
Bosnia-Herzegovina alleges genocide policy
Eighty-six mosques, churches and other buildings damaged or destroyed
SARAJEVO.
A report issued on 8 May by Bosnia-Herzegovina's Office of Information lists recent damage to churches, mosques and other buildings inflicted, according to the report, by ‘the forces of the ex-Yugoslav National Army and the Serbian irregulars’.
While it is at present impossible to verify the claims, the list reflects the ethnic and religious complexities of the area.
It refers to the damage or destruction of forty Christian churches and monasteries (of which two are listed as Orthodox); two Jewish monuments (the Old Cemetery at Kovacic, Sarajevo, and the Synagogue, Sarajevo); and forty-six Muslim buildings, comprising forty-three mosques, two schools and the Islamic Faculty of Theology at Sarajevo.
The report cites a ‘strategy of genocide over [sic]the Bosnian Muslims’ as accounting for the widespread looting and destruction of Muslim buildings.
The buildings and monuments mentioned on the list include:
The stained glass windows of Sarajevo Cathedral.
Damaged by machine gun fire.
The Gazi Husrev-bey's mosque, Sarajevo.
Built 1592.
Hit by five mortars on 5 May.
All the seventeen mosques in the town of Foca either destroyed or severely damaged.
The Ferhad-Pasha's mosque, Banjaluka.
Built 1579.
Destroyed by a bomb 28 February.
The Franciscan Monastery in Mostar.
Damaged by missiles.
The Cathedral at Mostar.
Damaged by rocket attack.
The Bishop's Palace, Orlac.
Destroyed.
The church at Orlac.
Destroyed.
The church at Ravno.
Burnt down.
The Hassan Deftedar's mosque, Banjaluka.
Built 1594.
Destroyed by a bomb 9 March.
The mosque at Bosanski Samac.
Destroyed and looted 24 April.
For details of damage to Croatian art and architecture see The Art Newspaper No. 12, November 1991, pp.1–2 and No.13, December 1991, p.1.
The evolution of the species
From Roman 1st century AD to Boldrini after Titian to the New Yorker, 1962 the image of the Laocoon survives.
London's Warburg Institute has just made available on computer its database of the Census of Antique Works of Art and Architecture known to the Renaissance.
See page 2
Theft conference tackles crime
LONDON.
Trace magazine and The Georgian Group are organising the second annual Fine Art, Antiques and Architectural Theft Conference, to be held at the Copthorne Tara Hotel, London W8, 9–11 June.
A international team of speakers will discuss: fine art theft in France; theft from German public galleriers; theft of cultural property in the Netherlands and Europe; drugs, organised crime and art theft in the USA; the problems of art theft in Russia; and London as the centre for marketing the world's stolen art.
Three open discussions will be held on: international laws of ownership; rewards for the recovery of stolen art and antiques; and international liaison and art theft and there will be discussions on more specific topics such as Interpol, church theft and fine art insurance.
The conference will be held in conjunction with a Fine Art Security Fair where security products and services will be displayed.
Those interested in attending should contact: Trace Magazine, 38 New Street, The Barbican, Plymouth, Devon PL1 2NA, Tel: 0752 228727, Fax: 0752 226911.
Trace Magazine has offered readers of The Art Newspaper a free pass to the Fine Art Security Fair.
To claim the pass telephone the above number mentioning that the offer was seen in The Art Newspaper.
Hamburg
‘I believe that we are experiencing a ‘renationalisation’ of art history’
Martin Warnke, one of Germany's most famous art historians, reflects on the issues confronting the study of art history in reunited Germany
HAMBURG.
Professor Martin Warnke, of Hamburg University, and Andreas Beyer, of the University of Bonn, met and talked at the symposium held in Hamburg on 30 March to mark the centenary of the birth of Erwin Panofsky.
Panofsky, who was Professor of art history at Hamburg University from 1926 to 1931, was one of the many German intellectuals that were lost to Germany when he took up residence at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study in 1935, having been forced to leave in 1933.
Author of Early Netherlandish Painting as well as of Studies in Iconology and a monograph on Dürer, he was concerned with the question of ‘national styles’.
Now, following re-unification, German art history is meeting the challenge of a process which Warnke terms ‘renationalisation’.
German Renaissance painting, beloved of 1930s art historians, is a subject that Warnke believes has been avoided for too long.
Last year Warnke was awarded the prestigious Leibnitz Prize of DM3 million, given to scholars who ‘have already, despite being at a relatively early stage in their careers, shown outstanding achievement, and with the help of the prize will be enabled to increase substantially their scholarly output’.
One project that Warnke has had in mind since he came to Hamburg in 1982, has been finding more space for the art history department, and to this end he has had his eye on the former Warburg house with its famous oval reading room, conceived by Aby Warburg and opened to readers in 1926, one year after his death.
Warburg, whose scholarly tradition was transferred to London in 1933 when the entire library was moved there, has provided a link between London and Hamburg which shows every sign of strengthening over the coming years.
Two years ago the Art History Department of the University of Hamburg organised an international symposium on Aby Warburg.
This year, the centenary of the birth of Erwin Panofsky, researchers have once again gathered in Hamburg to discuss the life and work of the University's former Professor of Art History.
Is this a sign of a tradition-conscious reappraisal of iconology in the town where it began, or has it more to do with the current emphasis of your Department?
Martin Warnke: It is specifically to do with the emigration issue.
For a number of years, the department has been engaged in a research project entitled ‘The emigration of German-speaking art experts’, which lies behind this symposium.
But, of course, it also has to do with Hamburg's tradition in iconology.
This has actually died out: for example, when Panofsky visited Germany in 1967, the university's Philosophy Faculty asked the Department to invite him to visit Hamburg but nothing came of it.
The tradition was regarded as extinct.
Our revival of it could well be seen as defiant; that's why we have already commemorated the fiftieth anniversary of Aby Warburg's death.
And today is the hundredth anniversary of Erwin Panofsky's birth, which really could not be ignored.
Therefore, I don't think this has much to do with methodology.
The aim of the symposium is rather to situate Panofsky in history; that is to say, we are not asking whether his methods are still applicable and relevant.
Our question is instead: what was he?
As in the case of Wölfflin, we are no longer interested in whether he was right or wrong we are more concerned with him as a phenomenon in the history of culture.
Apart from projects of a more institutional nature, for example the one involving the emigration of German-speaking art experts, is Hamburg University's Art History Department engaged in any other of a more methodological kind?
Yes, with a variant: I call it ‘political iconography’.
Iconography as studied by Panofsky and Saxl was always directed towards the history of ideas; it had a specific philosophical slant, whether Neo-Platonic, Stoic or humanist.
I believe that, as Jews, Panofsky and the others deliberately steered clear of any politically orientated iconography in order not to be controversial.
This involved, for example, all questions of art geared towards particular interests, such as propagandistic iconography, the iconography of rulers and so on .
In his essay on the Reformation, Warburg did in fact indicate that there was a political aspect to iconography.
This approach was, however, consciously supressed thereafter, and to some degree neutralised, by an approach based on the history of ideas, the purpose being, of course, to avoid unwelcome attention on the part of the authorities towards the Warburg Library and the University's Art History Department with its predominantly Jewish staff.
What we are attempting now is a precise politicisation of iconography.
The establishment of a graduate school has an important role to play in this, as does also developing our library in this direction.
You once called iconological research the ‘international style’ of art history.
Is it really still international?
For example, I wonder why there are no English-speaking contributors to the Panofsky centenary conference, even though it is well known that this approach was most fully developed in the English-speaking world.
This was to do with the difficulty of financing conferences of this type.
For example, we could not afford to pay for anyone to travel from America to Hamburg.
But it was also, to some extent, deliberate.
After the decidedly international Warburg Conference of 1990, at which even this Department was not much in evidence, we regarded the Panofsky conference as a challenge to us to act independently not least because we could not be sure of financial support until the last minute.
Furthermore, we keep hearing about other conferences being planned in Paris and in Hannover, Panofsky's home town, and then we heard there has been a proposal that the International Congress of the History of Art in Berlin (15–20 July) should have a whole section devoted to Panofsky,(although there has been some disagreement about this recently).
All in all, therefore, we envisaged the Hamburg conference as a rather more modest and intimate affair.
The fact that in the end we were the only ones to organise our own conference was something of a surprise, as were the vast numbers of participants we attracted, far beyond all expectations.
Isn't anything planned for England?
No, although we were happy to see the Director of the Warburg Institute, Nicholas Mann, taking part here in Hamburg.
Speaking of the Warburg Institute: the relationship between your Department and the Warburg Library is known to be very close.
Yes, it was always close and we hope that it will become still closer.
Right, but there were times when it was not so close.
Every year a student goes to London from Hamburg with a guest scholarship, and, in keeping with the nature of the Warburg Library, it is not necessarily an art historian.
But for a long time, that was the only contact between us.
Let me take this opportunity to say what a wonderful thing it is that for almost fifty years now, the British government has spent huge sums of money to keep this unique library up to date.
It is, and always has been, one of the few first-class libraries in the world and remains a leader in its field.
It is ungracious for us to grumble about a creaking chair or a rattling shutter, as happened recently.
[A critical article by Volker Gebhardt appeared in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 4 March.]
There is quite enough for us to worry about in our own institutes; just think of the state of many buildings in the former East Germany.
On the other hand, the purchase of the former Warburg Library building here by Hamburg University is another matter.
It is also conceivable to house a part of the London Warburg Institute archive there on micro-film, so enabling us to share in these treasures.
Sharing on these lines and a desire to increase contacts between us should not, however, be confused with any desire to ‘take over’ the library.
How far has the idea of the University purchasing the former Warburg Library building in Heilwigstraße on the River Alster progressed?
It is very much a live issue and is progressing well.
The building has survived.
Only the dome needs to be replaced, but the son of the architect is still alive, is himself an architect and has all the plans, so restoration work could begin from one day to the next.
But how could the building be used today?
Definitely not as a library.
Space requirements have radically changed.
But it could be used, for example, to accommodate post-graduate courses which have no home of their own.
Symposia such as the Panofsky one could also be held there, the famous elliptical reading room would be an ideal venue.
At the same time we are exploring the possibility of establishing an Aby Warburg Chair, to be held by people in any of the subjects which play a role in that scholarly tradition.
Thus, the incumbent could be an art historian, a philosopher, philologist or sociologist.
The holder of this visiting professorship could then live here for a year and deliver one or two open lectures at which the entire university might once again have the experience of being assembled in congregation.
There could hardly be a better use of the building and its tradition as a ‘laboratory of the mind’.
Absolutely.
It would be completely in accord with the spirit of the old library.
We couldn't make a new book collection there: that would be absurd.
On the initiative of Kurt W. Forster, until recently Director of the Getty Center in Santa Monica, the first ever complete edition of the writings of Aby Warburg is about to be published in English.
Conversely, there is still no German translation of Panofsky's work in English, for example of Early Netherlandish Painting.
Do you feel that the language problem is a fundamental stumbling block for art historians?
It also affects the accessibility outside Germany of research published in German.
I do not think that this is a problem in the German-speaking world.
Nor does it pose any difficulty in Poland where research is a truly multilingual affair.
There they read the whole range of English, French and German writings.
Here in Germany also, Panofsky's English writings have not failed to have an effect.
On the other hand, it is certainly true that it is harder for specialist literature in German to be accepted.
But even so this is not perceived as a particular lack in other countries.
Germany is now reunified.
Does this also mean that a different kind of art history will be added to that already existing in the West?
Or to put it another way: is there an ‘East German history of art’ which is fundamentally different from our own?
Shortly after the Berlin Wall came down, a leading East German art historian, well known for her extensive work on Socialist Realist painting, was invited to lecture on the subject at a West German institute.
This was done without any cynicism or insincerity.
It was intended purely to acquaint us with a field of art historical research to which we had very limited access and to give us the opportunity of establishing a dialogue.
Unfortunately the invitation was turned down.
Yes, it is rather odd.
For instance, if one says to them, you at least have the advantage of speaking Russian and this entitles you to a certain authority in the area of Eastern European art, one seldom gets the reply: yes, that is our speciality, a contribution we could make.
I have only come across one women at the Humboldt University who has worked seriously on the Russian Avant-garde.
As far as I can judge, there is a great longing there for France, Italy and all those places where they were once unable to travel but now can.
It is precisely the interest in the old which does not interest them.
There is also almost no one there who feels enthusiastic about knowing Russian, which was imposed on them from above.
I fear that almost nothing of any substance will remain.
Even as far as methodology is concerned?
As far as methodology in East German art history is concerned, take for example their concept ‘Kunstverhältnisse’, which is what we refer to as ‘the sociology of art’: I do not feel that even this made much progress it never really became an established discipline.
We are not going to get much out of former East Germany.
One might well have imagined that an exhibition such as the one recently at the Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt (and now at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam), dealing with the Russian Avant-garde, could have been put on in Leipzig, Dresden or at least East Berlin with the necessary detachment of course.
Correct.
But if anyone looking at Germany from the outside and imagining that, as far as art history is concerned, something new and potentially fruitful is being formed will be disappointed.
I really do not see any level at which a dialogue is even possible.
At the International Conference in Berlin this summer there is very little mention of the host nation's art apart from Berlin's monuments and museums.
That would be practically unthinkable at any conference held in London, Paris or Rome.
How do you explain this?
The decision to hold the Conference in Berlin was reached in Washington four years ago.
At that time there was absolutely no inkling of reunification.
This decision met with considerable resistance from our East German colleagues, and in the end, the only way to overcome this was to steer clear so far as was possible of the art historical minefield that exists in Germany.
Many German works of art that were previously very difficult to see are once again easily accessible.
Do you believe that German-speaking art historians will increasingly turn their attention to home-grown art?
I believe in fact that we are experiencing a ‘renationalisation’ of art history.
The question of ‘national styles’ was one which greatly interested Panofsky whether a work of art was specifically Dutch, Italian and so forth.
The geographical standpoint in art was basic until well into the 1940s, and I believe that it will be so again.
Not for nothing has Nikolaus Pevsner's The Englishness of English Art just been translated into German.
Yes, and it is significant that the author of the book was German like Harald Keller, who with his Kunstlandschaften Italiens attempted to define regional characteristics in various Italian styles.
Yes.
Pevsner's book is pretty impossible: a German emigré creating a so-called national style.
Keller, too, was firmly rooted in his own culture…. so once again we shall have ‘German art’ and so forth.
We should develop it ourselves quite energetically before it gets monopolised from other quarters.
And we should not be bashful about its place in the current international art scene.
So we must get to work on Altdeutsche Malerei [German Renaissance paintings, before 1550], as I have often said and done in the past.
But this revival of national awareness is happening I believe not just in Germany.
Here in particular, however, I think the German art-historical slant will increasingly be towards the conservation of buildings and monuments.
Just look at all the restoration and vital repairs needed in former East Germany.
A practical need rules there.
Do you believe that the study of German art could begin to attract art historians abroad?
I served for a number of years on the selection committee of the Humboldt-Stiftung.
This is a foundation which invites foreign scholars to Germany, and I was really surprised at just how little response there was.
Foreign art historians were not exactly queuing up to come, although there were, of course, some notable exceptions.
At present, however, many people are absolutely riveted by what is happening, or could happen, in this country at a such a crucial moment in world history.
Possibly, this could lead to increased demand.
Your interest in Spanish art is also well known.
Apart from your own research, are there any other projects relating to Spain?
The ‘Carl Justi Vereinigung’ was founded for that.
The aim of the association is to increase and encourage research into the art of the Iberian Peninsula, also at an institutional level.
In addition to a whole range of new publications, dealing, for example, with Spanish painting, we also hope to establish an art-historical institute in Spain.
German-speakers used to do a lot of research there, but unfortunately, Hispanic studies have practically died out in this country.
We will do what we can to remedy this from our department.
While we are on the subject of money, in 1991 you were the first art historian to be awarded the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz Prize.
It is not only the most prestigious German research prize, but also the most valuable.
How are the millions being spent?
The prize is intended to support research projects over a period of several years.
My immediate thought was for the very basic question of acquiring premises, space to accommodate staff and the books we have purchased.
The Art History Department at Hamburg University suffers from a serious lack of space.
The money is being spent not only on books but also on a considerable number of photographs for the political iconography archive.
Then we have to employ staff to organise this material and take care of the archives.
In short, the millions are being spent very quickly.
London University
The struggle to survive of a tradition of survival
Hard-pressed Warburg may become part of a single federal research Institute to increase its bargaining power
LONDON.
The Warburg Institute is an indispensable library and centre of learning for scholars worldwide who are engaged in studies related to the survival of the classical tradition throughout the history of European civilisation.
Not given to making the headlines, it has recently attracted attention with the launch of the Census of Antique Works of Art and Architecture known to the Renaissance on a computerised database, with Getty support, and an old debate stirred up by an article in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung which criticised London University's custodianship of the library and called for its return to Hamburg.
As the conversation with Professor Martin Warnke of Hamburg University's art history institute makes clear however, this is no longer even contemplated in Aby Warburg's native city.
Instead, relations between the Hamburg and London institutes, both guardians of the Warburgian tradition of Kulturwissenschaft, have reached a new high.
Plans to restore the original library building in Hamburg include the possibility of exchanging and sharing resources with London.
The library created by Aby Warburg in Hamburg left for a safe haven in London in 1933, accompanied by its custodians and future directors Fritz Saxl and Gertrud Bing.
Thanks to the University of London, from 1936-57 it was housed in the Imperial Institute in South Kensington, being finally incorporated into the University from 1944.
During the years of World War II it became a place of refuge for German and Austrian academics of Jewish origin, among them Edgar Wind, Rudi Wittkower, and Ernst Gombrich.
It was the influx of these outstanding scholars that made the Warburg an internationally renowned research institute and set a pattern for the future.
Today, with funding for British Universities squeezed ever tighter by the recession and thirteen years of an unsympathetic Conservative government, the Warburg is being forced to fend for itself in large measure.
Visitors to the library are encouraged to give to the donations box at the entrance to allow the book purchasing policy to be kept up.
The library, in which the tradition of Warburg is enshrined, has always been seen as the Institute's essential purpose.
In the past few years two academic posts have had to be frozen to keep the photographic collection and library funded.
A new American–based organisation the American Friends of the Warburg Institute has been set up to raise funds that will allow research to continue through the enhancement of the collections (for instance by the purchase of scholarly databases) and the promotion of its function as a international research centre.
One possibility currently being explored by the director Nicholas Mann, together with the directors of the group of University of London Institutes for Advanced Study (ULIAS) to which the Warburg belongs, is the creation of a single federal research institute which would be in a stronger position to attract funds and to resist indiscriminate cuts from above.
For further information about the American Friends of the Warburg Insitute contact: Dr Carla Lord, Treasurer, Apt. 6A, 135 West 58th Street, New York, NY 10019.
(All donations and subscriptions are tax-deductible under U.S. law.)
For the Institute itself: The Warburg Institute, Woburn Square, London WC1H 0AB, tel: 071–580 9663.
Warburg Institute
Access
Apollo Belvedere and friends on computer now
LONDON.
With financial help from the J. Paul Getty Trust, the Warburg Institute has put the Census of Antique Art and Architecture known to the Renaissance onto a computerised video database.
The Census, which until ten years ago existed only on index cards and photographs in the Warburg's Photographic Collection, seems to have had its origins in a project allocated by Fritz Saxl to Alfred Scharf who had come to London as a refugee from Vienna around 1935.
Its purpose was to provide art historians with examples of antique sculpture that were definitely known to Renaissance artists such as Donatello and Ghiberti and influenced their work.
The raw material came from such sources as Renaissance sketchbooks, engravings and travel guides and was originally limited to Antique works of art known  between 1400 and the conquest of Rome by Charles V in 1527.
From 1981 the Biblioteca Hertziana in Rome has contributed material from its bibliographical and photographic archives, expanding the scope of the Census through to the mid-sixteenth century and to include architecture.
In 1982 the J. Paul Getty Trust came into the project to devise the necessary computer technology to create the database.
This was done through the Getty Art History Information Program.
It is now possible to access the database from all three of the participating institutions and call up information as well as visual images on screen simultaneously.
At a symposium held at the Warburg Insitute in March to demonstrate the capabilities of the computerised census to a distinguished array of international scholars there was much enthusiasm, but there were reservations.
Gaps were pinpointed which made this potentially excellent tool incomplete and hopes were fervently expressed that, as the funding from the Getty has come to an end, resources can be found to keep the system running and continued input assured.
Ten years ago it was supposed that when the database was up and running it would be relatively easy to find additional funds from outside to cover the running costs.
Now the financial climate is very different.
An independent Akademie der Künste where the artists will have to double as sponsors
LEIPZIG.
At the time of writing, the founding session of the Freie Akademie der Künste in Leipzig (the Free Academy of the Arts) is being planned for some time in May.
Its nine founding members writers, composers and musicians, an art dealer, an art historian and the painter, Hartwig Ebersbach are planning to get the Akademie started over the next two years.
The Freie Akademie der Künste Hamburg will act as official ‘godparent’.
The budding Academy sees itself as an alternative to established institutions such as Berlin's Akademie der Künste whose ongoing merger of the West and East branches, beset by political wrangling, has alienated many artists (see The Art Newspaper No.17, April 1992, p.3).
There will be no sections for the different media: the crossing of borders artistic, national, and generational is one of the founders' main intentions, and the projects currently being planned are all multi-media.
The list of around forty possible members includes Mauricio Kagel, Andrzej Wajda, and Göyrgi Ligeti (the latter having recently resigned his membership of the Berlin Akademie).
Names of important painters like Werner Tübke and Walter Mattheuer are missing in order to avoid controversy about the inclusion of former DDR ‘state-artists’; they are likely to join later.
Good external relations will be vital because the Freie Akademie is poor.
It starts with private capital of around DM150,000 (£53,500; $93,200) and further funds will have to be raised to reach the goal of a DM0.5 million (£178,500; $310,700) annual budget for projects.
The artists are expected to act as sponsors too, by creating works for the Akademie at half their normal rates.
Where is the real sculpture market?
I read with interest your analysis of sculpture prices in The Art Newspaper,(No.18, May 1992, p.18).
Your statistical method is, in the absence of any other published sales information, not unreasonable.
However there is bound to be a ‘margin for error’ capable of producing a misleading trend.
At Berkeley Square Gallery and through its dealing company BSG Fine Art we are heavily involved in buying and selling sculpture from many of the artists you list.
Our database is large and the two principle factors we employ are a) Cost Price to us from estate, foundry, artist or representative dealer and b) proposed and/or actual selling price to our client.
Take Chadwick as an example.
We represent the artist, work directly with him and are probably responsible for a large part of his ‘turnover’.
Only very rarely does something of significance appear at auction I can think of only one important major bronze in the last ten years.
Every year we buy his work for more than the year before and every year we sell for more than the year before 1991 being no exception.
We made two sales last year at around four times the highest price paid for Chadwick at auction.
Going back a couple of generations we find that our buying and selling prices of Rodin, Bourdelle, Maillol and their period depend precisely on subject and availability.
Maillol particularly will attract prices in excess of $1 million for the best subjects and this depends entirely on supply and demand.
In spite of everything, in our experience, demand has been reasonably constant!
Nor, in our experience, have Japanese and American buyers withdrawn.
The buyers are still there but perhaps they are now behaving rather more discreetly.
The Japanese, particularly, are bewildered by recent disappointing auction results and are now far more cautious in their acquisitions.
The buying power is still significant, it is the confidence that has been shaken.
Moore prices undoubtedly suffered from over-heating and have fallen back but looking through our records there is still a consistency again the best works getting the best prices.
I would suggest that a parallel with 1987 88 levels not 1985 would be more reasonable.
Finally, it is fair to point out that sculpture selling at auction is restricted by the problems of size and security.
Only Sotheby's New York attempt to get large works into the building and even they are sometimes reduced to ‘displaying’ major lots on the pavement outside.
I offer these comments in the best possible spirit and hope that you will continue to focus on the sculpture market, particularly the increasing prominence of British Sculptors of the post-war period.
The journalist replies
If an index were based on BSG Fine Art's retail sales, it might well show a steady rise.
The Sculpture Index, however, published in the May issue, measures something quite different, namely, price movements in the mainstream of the auction market.
It is sometimes possible to find a few rare or special examples of an artist's work that dealers have sold at rising prices, but this is no basis for saying prices for that artist's work in general have risen.
Dealers may not like to see the extent of the drop in auction prices quantified by the Sculpture Index, but it is important to remember that the figures are based on a large  number of actual transactions, not a selection of retail sales.
Readers will have to decide for themselves which is the more real market.
The Antonello da Messina: no offer to Getty or Mrs Johnson known
Paul Jeromack's article in your April number on the sale of Brenda Lady Cook's Antonello da Messina to the Louvre contained a number of inaccuracies, some of which Lady Cook has asked me to correct.
The picture was never offered with her knowledge to either the Getty Museum or Mrs Johnson, and she does not have an artistic advisor as such.
She was approached by an illustrious American institution, and when that negotiation (handled by Stephen Somerville) had to be abandoned because of the death of the donor she decided to offer the picture for sale at Christie's in 1989.
The picture was subsequently exhibited at the National Gallery on a two-year loan basis.
The sale (subject to British export control regulations) was made through Christie's after the completion of the loan period and after the National Gallery had been offered first refusal.
I told Sotheby's about the Saraceni
In the February issue of The Art Newspaper, you published an entertaining article about expertises.
In this article, Julien Stock (a Senior Director of Sotheby's London, Old Master Paintings), was quoted as follows:
‘Another particularly odious corruption is the scholar who sets himself up as a unique authority on a certain painter, with the specific knowledge that, in cornering the market, his opinion will be essential for anyone dealing with works by that artist.
A scholarly opinion can make or break a picture, as in the case of a Saraceni which we sold in 1989.
It was eventually returned by Agnew's because one Anna Cavina had pronounced it a copy’.
I feel that I cannot allow this statement to pass without due comment.
I am the author of the most recent monograph on Saraceni (Carlo Saraceni, Mario Spagnol Editore, Milan, 1968).
As the author of this publication, my opinion has been sought from time to time by dealers, other scholars and the auction rooms.
I invariably never charge for giving my opinion, which is freely available to those who seek it, and this includes the London auction rooms.
With specific regard to the painting to which Mr Stock refers, this small copper passed through the Paris auction rooms at the Hôtel Drouot some years ago, and my opinion was sought by Mr Patrick Matthiesen and Mr Giorgio Balboni, who held doubts about its authenticity.
I confirmed their own opinion that the picture was a very competent version of a missing Saraceni composition executed by a follower.
There are several examples of this composition by the artist's entourage.
A few years later, Mr Matthiesen saw a picture of the same subject matter when previewing forthcoming sale material at Sotheby's.
Having doubts about this picture's authenticity and surmising that it might be the same picture he had seen several years before, he again sought my opinion on the basis of a good photograph.
We met in Bologna and while discussing the painting I informed him that the original had turned up at Wildenstein's in New York, and had recently been sold to a New York private collector and that an article of mine was in proof, publishing the New York picture as the original.
Since Sotheby's catalogue categorically stated that their version was ‘unknown’ to me, it seemed reasonable that my views should be made known to them.
Sotheby's then would be able to affix a saleroom notice stating that the painting was in fact known to me, that it was not accepted, and that an original version was in the course of publication by me.
Mr Matthiesen informs me that he relayed this message to Sotheby's on three separate occasions prior to the sale, but no notice was displayed.
Understandably, when the eventual buyer learnt of my opinion, he returned the painting to Sotheby's.
Other scholars may of course reach a different opinion about this picture, but it is my understanding that the majority of Seicento scholars, having compared the two paintings, concord with my views.
To conclude, at no time do I write expertises for payment, and I find it strange that Mr Stock should dispute an independent scholar's freedom of expression.
Throwing open sculpture conservation to debate
Giorgio Bonsanti's article (‘A little knowledge of restoration is a dangerous thing’, April 1992) is timely.
The methods and purpose of sculpture conservation have become topical in recent years, not only in Italy but throughout Europe.
Uninformed criticism has contributed to the dissatisfaction with many recent conservation projects, but an even greater problem is the lack of discussion between conservationists and other interested parties, whether art historians, archaeologists, or industrial archaeologists.
All too often, conservators have been asked to make important decisions affecting the state of a work of art without informed comment from other specialists.
The results are highly variable in quality.
With the help of the Henry Moore Foundation and the Gabo Trust, we are now organising a European-wide conference in which the purpose and techniques of sculpture conservation can be addressed.
The venue will be the Merseyside Maritime Museum in Liverpool, and the date will be early in June of next year.
In order to allow for discussion and demonstration of techniques, we plan to limit participation to 200 sculpture conservators, art historians, and other interested parties.
Those interested in taking part should contact Victoria Todd, UKIC Office, 37 Upper Addison Gardens, London W14 8AJ.
The European Commission is deaf to the art trade
Although The Art Newspaper has written extensively during the last few months about the problems the international art trade will be facing in just over half a year from now, I nevertheless want to bring to your attention some other serious difficulties which the art market will have to confront, issues which are quite separate from the general economic malaise affecting business at the moment.
Even a £10 million Canaletto, sold to Andrew Lloyd Webber, or perhaps an even more astonishing $1.7 million Breenbergh sold to the Metropolitan Museum, New York, cannot veil the reserve of private collectors and buyers.
The problem is two-fold.
First, the European Commission in Brussels, probably because it is afraid of becoming completely superfluous once a truly free European market has been realised, is devising ways and means to regulate, or rather, deregulate, the import and export of works of art.
One of the pretexts is the smuggling of objects from countries such as Greece and Italy, not to speak of Turkey and the African countries whose cultural heritage could be seriously affected.
But these civil servants and other well-remunerated Brussels officials forget or (what is even worse) do not understand that the smuggling of excavated goods and tribal art has nothing whatsoever to do with the trade in Old Masters, modern paintings and other Western art from the developed world.
As it stands and we must not forget that UNESCO tried something similar some time ago it would appear that purely political motives are making trade impossible.
The second issue is the adjustment of Value Added Tax in EEC countries to around 15%, as well as the abolition of the considerably lower rate of 6% in a number of countries.
An important fact frequently overlooked is that the greater part of the works of art in the trade are technically speaking ‘second-hand goods’.
This means that dealers are denied the possibility of subtracting taxes paid earlier by the producer or manufacturer.
Jan van Goyen or Giambologna never charged VAT to their customers.
In other words the tax is not spread over previous transactions, but is charged on the full amount of the sale.
If one cannot deduct preceding taxation on the same object, the taxes due on a relatively low priced painting often exceed the profit margin, especially if it concerns goods offered on consignment.
The solution would be a rate on the realised margin of profit, and even then 15% can be a lot of money, being only part of the burden the State has imposed on the tax-payer.
CINOA, as international union of national associations of art dealers has been dealing with these issues for quite some time, albeit with modest success.
This is largely due to the lack of recognition from governing authorities who appear to ignore the fact that our organisation represents a competent and knowledgeable body of professionals aiming at high ethical standards in the world of art dealing.
At present the chair is held by Britain.
The next meeting of CINOA will take place at the end of June in Venice.
I have tried, although in a condensed form, to focus on the dominant technical problems of today's art market.
Except for a few specialised publications such as The Art Newspaper, only a handful of quality papers regularly deal with issues concerning the art trade: the International Herald Tribune; the German Handelsblatt and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung; and in the United States, the New York Times.
In the British press the good old days of Geraldine Norman are gone.
Euro-ArtScribble
Madame Ludmila Tcherina is a truly remarkable artist.
She causes forms, ideas, light and materials to dance.
With grace, with determination and with a surprising…robustness.
Music accompanies her steps, her features, her gestures.
She is maddening and charming.
But she reclaims harmony.
The sculpture she is offering to Europe celebrates with sensuality the union of mother with child, male with female, peoples and the Community, our continent with the universe.
Superbly, she evokes the fragile communion of the other and of herself in her ineluctable trajectory.
A magic circle in which she locks our destiny to this increase of tenderness which renders this work human, moving and unchallengeable.
Europe has its strategists, Art has its critics, Man his emotions.
Jean Dondelinger, European Commissioner for Information, Communications and Culture, writing in the May issue of Connaissance des Arts on the European Community's official commission of a sculpture called ‘Europe à Coeur’, by Ludmila Tcherina.
After being exhibited in front of the European Pavilion in Seville at Expo ‘92, it will eventually be located in the European Parliament in Strasbourg.
Any more of this, and The Art Newspaper will be forced to reconsider its pro-European stance.
Ed.
Michel Strauss of Sotheby's had no difficulty identifying last month's Page three as René Magritte's ‘La Philosophie dans le Boudoir’.
This month's competition is to suggest a sculpture that might plausibly symbolise a united Europe, and explain why in not more than twenty words.
A bottle of champagne to the winner.
A restoration confusion
In the translation of the article by Giorgio Bonsanti, ‘A little knowledge of restoration is a dangerous thing’(published on the Commentary page of the April issue of The Art Newspaper), we in one instance presented as fact what should have been rendered as hoped-for behaviour.
The author has asked us to point out that it is a desire of his to see opinions of restorations expressed by speakers at conferences thrown open to the floor for immediate debate this is not the prevailing state of affairs.
NEA vows to avoid funding ‘overwhelming sexual experiences’
WASHINGTON, D.C. The new acting chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, Republican Anne-Imelda Radice, has articulated a non-confrontational course for the embattled federal agency.
The former senior deputy director has no intention of falling victim to the conservative-waged ‘decency’ attack that claimed her former boss, John Frohnmayer, who was forced to resign by the Bush administration amid fears the NEA would damage the President's 1992 reelection bid (see The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, p. 1).
Appearing before the Congressional subcommittee that will eventually decide the NEA's fate, she declared, ‘If we find a proposal that does not have the widest audience…we just can't afford to fund that’.
Ms Radice got to the crux of the matter when she told The Washington Post, ‘To me, when the obvious sexual nature…is the only thing you see or the first thing you see or the overwhelming thing that you experience the American public has given us a lot of guidance on this, and Congress has given us a lot of guidance, saying they don't want us to spend money on that particular type of art’.
Ms Radice will implement her policy by vetoing aberrant grants among the 1,122 (totalling $66.1 million) that the National Council on the Arts has approved for funding on the recommendations of peer panels.
The announcement of her decisions in mid-June promises a new round of controversy.
Despite such policy reform, and procedural changes aimed at increasing the NEA's accountability for tax dollars, three newspapers want more.
The New York Times, The Washington Post, and The Philadelphia Inquirer have filed suits demanding public access to working meetings of the National Council on the Arts, the twenty-six member presidentially appointed group that advises the Endowment on grant applications.
An earlier suit, in summer 1990, opened the doors to the four annual full Council meetings.
But Council members began meeting in private the day before the full session.
A Federal judge refused the plaintiffs' request for a restraining order to open the late April pre-session meeting, saying they failed to demonstrate that real deliberations and decision making were taking place.
The court ruled that the Federal Advisory Committee Act does not apply to such subcommittee working groups.
The newspapers' attorney, Patrick J. Carome, told The Art Newspaper, ‘we think that's wrong, but we haven't resolved whether and how to proceed’.
The case is pending.
Mr Major's nice new festival
LONDON.
David Mellor, Britain's new Minister for Arts and Heritage, announced the forthcoming European Arts Festival at a reception at the National Gallery, London, on 29 April.
The Festival is the brainchild of the Prime Minister John Major and is intended to celebrate Britain's term of presidency of the European Council, which runs from July to December 1992.
The festival is under the direction of John Drummond, until last year Controller of Radio 3.
Its principal aim, according to Mellor is that there should be ‘something for everyone in all parts of the country, and that everyone should have an opportunity to try something new and widen their horizons’.
The bias of the whole thing is clearly toward the regions and more than 20% of events are listed as ‘Folk Festivals’.
Overall, 600 events will take place ranging from Flamenco dancing, Welsh harpers, a play on the medieval wool trade and Mozart's ‘Die Entführung aus dem Serail’.
Long-term projects connected with the event include the commissioning of new pieces for sculpture parks around the country.
The festival concludes with a concert at the Barbican Centre, London, conducted by Vladimir Ashkenazy on 31 December.
Heveningham Hall update
SUFFOLK.
In a further attempt to save Heveningham Hall for the nation (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, January 1992, p.4) the Suffolk Building Preservation Society has turned to the National Heritage Memorial Fund, now under the chairmanship of Lord Rothschild.
The Society hopes that any possible rescue package will ensure that the house soon to be placed on the market by the receivers will become the responsibility of a charitable trust such as The National Trust.
The Suffolk Society recently described the house as ‘the country's number one heritage problem’.
The Andrew Lloyd Webber Art Foundation
LONDON.
According to David Mason of the London art dealers MacConnal Mason, who acted for the musicals composer Andrew Lloyd Webber in the recent purchase of Canaletto's ‘Old Horse Guards, London’ at Christie's, the picture is the first work of art to be bought by the Andrew Lloyd Webber Art Foundation.
The Foundation would appear to be the first of its kind in Britain, where the art world has long bemoaned the paucity of private beneficence of this kind.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper of his client as ‘an important, refined, knowledgeable collector’, he says that it is Lloyd Webber's intention to ‘buy only world-class art already in Britain with the aim of keeping it here’.
It appears that Lloyd-Webber hopes eventually to house the nascent collection in one wing of a major gallery in the company of his private collection, which consists mainly of Victorian paintings.
According to Mason, ‘The foundation was set up six months ago before the Canaletto's sale was made public.
The painting is now in conservation for about three months, and will be shown to the public at the Tate Gallery for six months from September, before being included in Birmingham Museum's ‘Canaletto and England’ exhibition (to celebrate the opening of its new Gas Hall Exhibition Gallery, from 14 October 1992 to 9 January 1993).
This will be the first exhibition devoted to this aspect of Canaletto's work to be held for thirty years, and lenders will include H.M.The Queen, the National Gallery, the National Trust and many private and public collections.
Stolen Magritte recovered at Sotheby's
LONDON.
Working in collaboration with the London auction house, British police have recovered one of Magritte's most famous paintings, ‘Decalcomanie’, valued at £1.7 million ($3 million), stolen in Belgium thirteen years ago.
The painting, which depicts a man wearing a bowler hat standing next to a pair of curtains which have been cut out to form the shape of the man, was painted in 1966 for the present (American) owner's parents who were friends of the artist.
The painting was consigned for sale at one of Sotheby's European offices and was subsequently transferred to London with the knowledge of Scotland Yard's Art and Antiques Squad.
Scotland Yard confirmed that members of the Art and Antiques Squad would be conducting interviews in Europe in relation to the theft, but declined to comment further.
Italy's prime sites
ROME.
Recently-released figures for visitor numbers to Italy's monuments and galleries in 1991 show no change at the top on the previous year: the most visited free-entry attraction is still the Parco di Capodimonte, Naples (2.6 million visitors) and the most visited paying venue is Pompeii (1.4 million).
Both places saw slight falls in the numbers of visitors compared to 1991.
Below Capodimonte in the free list are: the Abbazia di Montecassino (1.4 million); the park of the Castello di Miramare at Trieste (1.9 million); the Pantheon, Rome (1.5 million); the Abbey of Pomposa di Codigoro (1.4 million); the Basilica of S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna (458,300); the Certosa di S. Lorenzo, Padula (163,066); the Torre di Cicerone, Arpino (116,775); the Medicean villa ‘Il Ventaglio’, Florence (102,200); and the crypt of the Basilica at Aquileia (100,944).
Following Pompeii with entrance charges the top ten are: the Uffizi, Florence (971,627); the Boboli Gardens, Florence (799,000); the Reggia di Caserta (614,937); the Galleria dell'Accademia, Florence (608,881); the Forum, Rome (586,018); the Villa d'Este, Tivoli (475,968); the Medici chapels, Florence (268,720); the Galleria Palatina, Florence (250,970); the temples at Paestum (242,193); and Hadrian's Villa, Tivoli (240,963).
A  notable inclusion at fourteenth place is the Blue Grotto, Capri (201,387).
Of the twenty-nine entries on the full list of sites and institutions receiving more than 100,000 visitors in 1991, only the Blue Grotto and the Egyptian Museum in Turin saw visitor numbers rise in comparison with 1990.
Museums
New York
Guggenheim: bigger and better
With the reopening of the Fifth Avenue building, as well as additional space in SoHo, will Director Krens and his powerful curatorial team take a lead in the current debate surrounding contemporary art?
NEW YORK.
When the Guggenheim Museum reopens on 28 June, Thomas Krens, its director, will have realised the first stage in his ambitious plan of expansion, seeking to establish new stations in North Adams, Massachusetts, Bilbao (see The Art Newspaper No.17, April 1992, p.5) and Salzburg, and to enlarge The Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice.
In New York, exhibition space at the museum's headquarters on Fifth Avenue has nearly doubled to 51,000 square feet, and a further 31,000 square feet has been provided through a downtown building which opens on the same day.
Uptown, additional space comes from the Monitor Building, which has been cleared of offices, and from the new ten-storey Tower, designed by Charles Gwathmey and Robert Siegel and raised on foundations laid by the museum's architect Frank Lloyd Wright for just such a purpose.
Within that tower, which houses plant and machinery and the offices of the director and his senior staff, are four new galleries, three of which carry through two storeys.
Other changes include a careful and necessary restoration of the main building, which was deteriorating rapidly when the museum closed in May 1990, the enlargement of the shop, and the creation of a new restaurant, to be managed by Dean and Deluca and with its own street entrance.
The restaurant will be in a ground-floor room where Wright had intended to place it, but which had been occupied by the conservation department,(now relocated, with the museum's storage facilities, to the city's West Side).
It is a sweeping and expensive programme of internal reorganisation and construction.
Deputy Director, Michael Govan, told The Art Newspaper that costs will total $65 million (£36 million), of which $55 million (£30.5 million) has been raised by the novelty of a tax-exempt bond, to be retired by fresh contributions and the sale of the names of the new galleries to particularly generous benefactors.
The museum reopens with an exhibition designed to show the range of its permanent collection.
‘The Guggenheim Museum and The Art of This Century’(to 27 August) spans a period of roughly one hundred years from Pissarro's large landscape of Pontoise of 1867, the earliest work owned by the museum.
The Thannhauser Collection, to which this picture belongs, has been returned to the wing where it was formerly installed with the addition of ten works, including five canvases by Picasso and a painting by Monet, not previously represented in the museum.
These have been bequeathed by Mrs Justin Thannhauser, who died exactly a year ago.
The Thannhauser Collection then spreads to a second level in the Monitor Building, where pastels and other works on paper by Degas and Toulouse-Lautrec will be shown.
The upper floor of the Monitor Building, with its distinctive windows looking towards Central Park, will be reserved for sculpture.
The four tower galleries, which are not uniformly successful in their proportions but which are distinguished by the soft ambient lighting concealed within the beautiful ribbed vaults (there is no natural light), will contain masterpieces of European and American art arranged floor by floor in a broadly chronological progression from Delaunay and Chagall through Mondrian and Surrealism to Abstract Expressionism and Pop Art.
David Smith's ‘Cubi XXVII’, the celebrated work which used to stand by the museum's entrance, and a second sculpture by the artist, have been placed on an awkward terrace above the Monitor Building.
In a decision certain to arouse controversy but brilliant in its audacity, Dan Flavin will build a column of neon light reaching from the Rotunda's floor to its skylight, and will occupy all the bays of the spiral ramp with an installation based upon a proposal which the artist realised, in fragment, in 1971.
The invitation underlines the museum's commitment to Minimalism, where its collection has been greatly strengthened by the acquisition of a substantial body of work from Count Panza di Biumo in 1990.
Forthcoming exhibitions feature ‘The Russian Avant-garde 1915–1932’(September-November), Lothar Baumgarten (December-January 1993), ‘Picasso and the Age of Iron’(February-March 1993; a survey of constructed sculpture curated by Carmen Gimenez), and surveys of Roy Lichtenstein and Rebecca Horn (May-August 1993).
An intriguing new development is The Guggenheim Museum SoHo, as its downtown branch will be known.
Located at 575 Broadway, on the corner of Prince Street, the museum has rented several floors in a handsome six-storey brick building originally constructed in 1884 as an office for John Jacob Astor's banking business.
Subsequently, it became a department store and a bridal veil factory before Peter Brant, owner of Interview and Art in America, embarked upon its renovation.
At a cost of $6 million (£3.3 million) Japanese architect Arata Isozaki is completing the conversion which retains original details such as the building's cast-iron columns but introduces exciting new features including a pair of grand steel staircases leading to the first floor, a sharply angled flight of stairs linking to a cafeteria in the basement (this feature will be completed only after the museum closes for a month at the end of August), and panels of etched glass which create a soft filter for natural light.
On the ground floor, Isozaki has designed a hall for ticket and information desks, a bookstore and four rectangular galleries.
On the first floor, he has devised one large empty space, its two side walls an uninterrupted 200 feet in length, broken only by the staircases and other services springing through its centre.
Six artists, drawn from the museum's collection, will be shown in depth, dividing into three pairs chosen for a visual, rather than art historical, dialogue.
Collections Curator Lisa Dennison has been playing with possibilities but told The Art Newspaper that she would be placing Brancusi with Robert Ryman and that the exhibition would include Kandinsky.
Other candidates currently under consideration are Carl Andre, Richard Long, Brice Marden and Bruce Nauman.
At the beginning of October, the museum will present exhibitions of Chagall's murals for the Russian Theatre and ‘The early works of Robert Rauschenberg’, a final leg to the tour organised by the Menil Foundation (see The Art Newspaper No.18, May 1992, p.7).
The Walker Art Centre's exhibition of contemporary German photography follows in February 1993.
The Guggenheim Museum intends to be a genuinely popular ingredient in New York's cultural affairs.
Its extended opening hours uptown to 8 p.m. six nights a week and downtown to 10 p.m. on Thursday, Friday and Saturday, will trawl a large local audience at a time when the Whitney Museum is closing on Monday and Tuesday, as will its heavyweight exhibition programme, concentrating upon the century's major historical developments and established personalities.
But, in some respects, it is a conservative policy adopted by a museum weak in the New Art created during the last ten years.
A more critical international audience will be watching to learn whether Krens and his powerful curatorial team are willing to take a lead in the current debate surrounding contemporary art.
Baltimore
Money, money…educate, educate…money, money
The worries of the annual conference of the American Association of Museums
BALTIMORE.
It may have taken the prospect of mortality to bring Dr Johnson's faculties to order, but penury seems to have done the job nicely among the nation's museum personnel.
The overriding concern of the organisers and participants at this year's American Association of Museums' convention in Baltimore (25–29 April) was the financial crisis that has, all too quickly, overtaken this country's cultural institutions.
The need to address this crisis in a realistic way led to a welcome seriousness of purpose and absence of rhetoric, a pleasant change from earlier AAM conventions.
But first came a surprise.
At the last minute the convention's keynote speaker for Sunday 26 April was taken ill, and her replacement turned out to be Mr John Frohnmayer, the dismissed chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts who, although not scheduled to leave his post officially until a few days later, had actually worked his last day the previous Friday.
He delivered a ringing First Amendment call to arms, enjoining the assembled audience of about 2,000 people to step forward from the sidelines and join him on the battlefield to protect the artist's right to express himself as he wishes, unhindered by the tastes or intrusions of the government.
This, evidently, was how he viewed the ongoing crisis involving the NEA, which has been accused of using American tax dollars to subsidise morally offensive, even pornographic art (see The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, pp. 1, 2 and 14).
Invoking Woodrow Wilson, Mr Frohnmayer told his audience that, ‘The world will not be free for museums until the world is free for ideas’.
His plea was well received by his listeners who, if they did not quite accept his characterisation of the present moment as a ‘cultural war’ between the advocates of free expression and individuals he referred to as ‘know-nothings’, nonetheless were happy, even relieved, to have something resembling moral high ground from which to defend themselves in the controversy and even take the battle back to the ‘enemy’.
But it was money that was on everybody's mind in Baltimore that week, as indicated by the fact that inviting Mr Frohnmayer was an afterthought.
Dilsworth H. Brown, the AAM's outgoing president stated at a news conference that money, or, as he put it, a ‘financial base’ for museums was the main issue facing them right now.
Beginning last spring, art museums have been reeling from drastic cuts in government support.
The Brooklyn Museum and Detroit Institute of Art have had to take draconian steps such as staff furloughs, and many smaller museums are in similar straits.
Only the day before the convention began the New York Times reported that the city of Philadelphia had cut its aid to the Philadelphia Museum by $560,000, making it a member of that same beleaguered club, or nearly.
There were two notable features of the museum community's response to this ongoing crisis, at least as manifested at the convention.
One was its desire to find some way not simply to get through the current hard times, but also to protect themselves from the financial ups and downs that make up every economic cycle.
Most of the panels devoted to money were on the order of how-to sessions.
Thus one could attend ‘When Growth Changes to Reduction: Challenges and Opportunities in Bringing Your Museum's Vision to Scale with Reality’.
The conference's usefully loose theme was ‘Vision and Reality’.
It was all about deciding where the ‘tough choices’ had to be made when cutting staff, programmes and so on.
A concern for ‘the community’ was the other dominant concern at the convention.
Asked if this was pure pragmatism, a desire to mine more lucrative markets, Dan Monroe, AAM's incoming president, demurred.
The strongest impetus, he said, comes from museums' reassessment of their role in society which the profession sees as far broader than even a decade ago.
Hence the abundance of panels on education forty-two, by far the largest category of the five day convention.
Hence, too, the large number of multicultural panels, typical of which was one titled ‘Museums as ‘Agents of Inclusion’’.
There were other topics on people's minds this year, anything from preventing the destruction of cultural property during wartime, a legacy of the Gulf War and Yugoslav civil war, to speculations on what democracy might mean for culture in Eastern Europe.
Ethics was on the conventioneer's minds, as well.
Last year's AAM convention adopted a new Code of Ethics, which among other things placed new restrictions on deaccessioning, or the practice of selling items in a permanent collection.
This is good news to anyone who has witnessed the way art museums have come to regard paintings and other objects placed in their perpetual trust as a kind of stock portfolio that can be traded at will.
But other types of museum found the provisions disposing only to enhance the institution's collections or mission unduly restrictive, and an open debate was scheduled to review the Code of Ethics.
Money remained the dominant concern this year, perhaps most keenly among those who could not attend.
A number of institutions had cut back on travel in order to balance their budgets.
Eric Gibson 
Washington, D.C.
The making of America's top director
In detail, how the National Gallery of Art came to settle on Rusty Powell as head
WASHINGTON, D.C. After the most highly publicised recruitment process in the history of American museums, the National Gallery of Art's Board of Trustees announced on 28 April that Earl A. Powell III will take over from departing director J. Carter Brown, who has led the fifty-one year old institution for the last twenty-three years.
Mr Powell will relinquish directorship of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) to assume the new post on 1 September.
The rumour mill had been in high gear since late January, when the fifty-seven year old Mr Brown announced he would retire by the end of the year to devote more time to ‘parenting’ and to the university founded by his family in Providence, Rhode Island (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p. 5).
High on the list of potential successors were candidates some claimed would steer the gallery away from Mr Brown's passion for mass appeal temporary exhibitions, towards a more collection-based academic programme.
In the end, the board embraced a seasoned veteran whose administrative and fund-raising abilities are more highly regarded than his scholarship, a choice that portends continuity rather than change.
The Director-designate is a known quantity at the National Gallery, having served as curator and administrator from 1976–80 before leaving to head LACMA.
Known to his friends as ‘Rusty’, the forty-eight year old South Carolina native is less patrician than Mr Brown.
He was a linebacker at Williams College yet another member of the so-called ‘Williams Mafia’ that now occupies so conspicuously large a percentage of the country's key museum posts and served on a Navy ammunition boat in Vietnam before pursuing graduate studies in nineteenth-century American and European art at Harvard.
For two years he taught at the University of Texas at Austin, and directed the Michener Collection there, before enlisting in the U.S. Naval Reserve for a four year stint.
Like Mr Brown, he guided his museum through a period of tremendous growth.
During his twelve years as director, he doubled LACMA's annual attendance to nearly one million visitors, and more than doubled resident membership to 90,000, the largest of any museum in the country.
The annual budget went from $8.5 to $31 million, and he raised more than $200 million for expansions and capital improvements, such as the Anderson Building, the Pavilion for Japanese Art, and the Gore Rifkind Center for German Expressionist Studies.
He added some 40,000 objects to the permanent collections, and oversaw the creation of important travelling shows, including ‘Guido Reni: 1575–1642’; ‘Timur and the princely vision’; ‘The Fauve landscape’; and ‘Degenerate Art: the fate of the Avant-garde in Nazi Germany’.
For the 1985 exhibition ‘A day in the country: Impressionism and the French landscape’, he was made Chevalier of Arts and Letters by the French Ministry of Culture.
Mr Powell emerged from a field of museum professionals assembled by a search committee consisting of four of the gallery's five general trustees: President John R. Stevenson, Robert H. Smith, Ruth Carter Stevenson, and Alexander M. Laughlin.
The fifth general trustee, Chairman Franklin Murphy, withdrew from the search to avoid a conflict of interest, since at least two likely candidates were from institutions of which he was, or is, a trustee.
Dr Murphy, Chairman Emeritus of the Times Mirror Corporation, and one of the most powerful figures in the American museum world (see The Art Newspaper No. 4, January 1991, Vernissage supplement), is both a Trustee of LACMA, and Trustee Emeritus of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, California, whose director was under consideration.
Also excluded from the search were Trustee Emeritus Paul Mellon, son of the National Gallery's founding benefactor, and the four ex-officio members of the board: the U.S. Chief Justice and the Secretaries of State, the Treasury and the Smithsonian Institution.
In consultation with the New York-based executive headhunter firm, Russel Reynolds & Associates, the search committee drew up a list of candidates, all directors or former directors of American museums.
In the first round of interviews the trustees spoke with Edmund P. Pillsbury, Director of the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas; John Walsh Jr, Director of the Getty; Anne d'Harnoncourt, Director of the Philadelphia Museum of Art; Roger Mandle, Deputy Director at the National Gallery; and Mr Powell.
According to Mr Stevenson, Metropolitan Museum of Art Director Philippe de Montebello was not interested, and other potential candidates withdrew from consideration.
James N. Wood, Director of the Art Institute of Chicago since 1980, and its President since 1991, felt he was needed to finish the Art Institute's nearly completed renovation and reinstallation.
John Wilmerding, former Deputy Director of the National Gallery (1983–88) was content with his present double duty as Sarofim Professor of American Art at Princeton University and Visiting Curator at the Met.
For several reasons, ‘Ted’ Pillsbury was touted by the press as the early frontrunner.
In 1987 he had declined an offer to direct the National Gallery in London, opting instead to lead the Kimbell where he has since conducted an exemplary acquisitions campaign; also, he has close ties with Mr Mellon, having served as CEO of the Paul Mellon Center for Studies in British Art, established by the philanthropist at Yale University.
But Mr Pillsbury was not asked back for a second interview.
Mrs Stevenson told The Art Newspaper, ‘Ted has a golden eye, but the board felt he was lacking in certain areas that were necessary here’.
Dr Murphy pinpointed one perceived shortcoming as fund-raising, noting, ‘At the Kimbell the money is there all he has to worry about is how to spend it wisely’.
Ms d'Harnoncourt, the only woman in the running, failed to make the short list because, according to Dr Murphy, ‘She didn't quite have the administrative skills needed for our museum’.
The urbane Ms d'Harnoncourt, a Duchamp specialist, has her hands full leading an ambitious reorganisation of the Philadelphia Museum's European collections, scheduled for completion in 1995 (The Art Newspaper No. 18, May 1992, p. 11).
Mr Walsh, Mr Powell and Mr Mandle were invited back, along with their wives, to, as Dr Murphy put it, ‘do some socialising’.
Mr Mandle enjoyed the endorsement of Mr Brown, whom he has served as Deputy since 1988.
An expert in eighteenth-century Dutch art, he is a former director of Ohio's Toledo Museum of Art, and former associate director of the Minneapolis Institute of Arts.
Acknowledging his administrative talents and scholarly assets, Mrs Stevenson said the board felt, ‘He simply did not have the specific skills which were needed for the job’.
Which left Messrs Walsh and Powell.
Mr Walsh has led the Getty Museum since 1983, before which time he held curatorial posts at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, and at the Metropolitan in New York.
A specialist in seventeenth-century Dutch art, he taught at Columbia University for nearly a decade.
It was widely believed the committee wanted him, but insiders pointed out he may have been the wrong man for the job.
Notwithstanding his estimable scholarship, the Getty has not mounted one major loan show during his tenure, and the Getty Trust's nearly $4 billion endowment has rendered fund-raising moot.
Moreover, had he accepted an offer from the National Gallery, Mr Walsh would have abandoned the biggest museum construction project in the world, the $1 billion headquarters now beginning to rise on the Getty's oceanside compound (The Art Newspaper No. 12, November 1991, p. 4).
It is not clear whether the Getty board offered Mr Walsh an incentive to stay, or whether he decided on his own to finish what he had begun.
In any event, in mid-April he withdrew from the contest.
On 28 April, the full board of the National Gallery voted unanimously for Rusty Powell.
‘The search committee felt Rusty Powell fitted better than anyone else’, said Dr Murphy.
‘He had experience in administering effectively a large public museum; he has demonstrated skills in fund-raising; and thirdly, we get the bulk of our annual budget from Congress, and Rusty got the bulk of his budget ($15 million a year) from the Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles and showed great skill in dealing with them.
So his political background and other skills made him the logical candidate’.
Asked if he had expected to be offered the position, Mr Powell told The Art Newspaper, ‘I felt, on the basis of our discussions, that I was a serious candidate’.
Mrs Stevenson stated, ‘He had the right qualities for the job’, calling him ‘a round peg in a round hole’.
The board has not set goals for Mr Powell's tenure, but Dr Murphy hinted at a theme.
‘Society itself is changing’, he told The Art Newspaper.
‘You have a multicultural society, and there's much discussion now about how to serve it’.
According to Robert F. Maguire III, President of LACMA's Board of Trustees, ‘One of Rusty's most significant accomplishments was spearheading the museum's efforts to reach out to the city's diverse population, mounting exhibitions of multicultural appeal’.
Mr Powell told The Art Newspaper that ‘extending an understanding to outreach audiences is clearly something one would like to address’.
He is considering ways ‘to develop exhibitions beyond the permanent collection that will relate to different sectors of the population.
The core of all this is interpretation and education’.
‘We're at an interesting point deciding what are the priorities for the next century’, he continued, ‘and the areas to expand are education, and the use of technology in education’.
He targeted for expansion the National Gallery's videodisc programmes for schools, and noted the vast potential of the gallery's mission to disburse artworks and related materials throughout the country.
‘We have an adult population for which education is increasingly important’, he said, ‘and museums can play a role in that’.
If Mr Powell's intention to become ‘the education director’ sets him slightly apart from the more flamboyant Mr Brown, in other respects he appears ready to follow his predecessor's load.
Despite the economic crunch, he plans to continue the gallery's string of major loan shows, and is confident ‘the money can be found’.
He praised ‘the sweep and grandeur’ of the ‘1492’exhibition, though he doubts there will be another blockbuster of that scale.
As far as staff changes are concerned, the immediate question is what will become of Deputy Director Roger Mandle, Mr Powell's opponent in the race for the directorship?
‘I don't think that will be awkward.
We'll discuss his role’, said Mr Powell, but conceding ‘that's an open question right now’.
Several curatorial spots need to be filled: former chief curator Sydney Freedberg has not been replaced, neither has Nan Rosenthal, former curator of twentieth-century art, and Charles C. Moffett, Senior Curator, is leaving in September to become the Director of the Phillips Collection.
Asked if he would bring in anyone from LACMA, Mr Powell said, ‘I don't think you're going to see a caravan from Los Angeles’.
Mr Powell created LACMA's departments of Photography and of Ancient & Islamic Art, but has no plans to enlarge the National Gallery's collections beyond Western painting, sculpture and works on paper since the Renaissance.
He does intend to increase the photography holdings significantly, and to develop a National Sculpture Garden on land along the Mall side of I.M. Pei's East Building.
There is no question that Mr Brown's will be an exceedingly hard act to follow.
His tenure saw the gallery grow from a provincial treasure house to a world-renowned showcase which challenged the Metropolitan as the country's most prestigious venue.
At a time when the price of an Old Master painting can consume an entire annual acquisition budget, Mr Brown's burnishing of the gallery's image may have done more for the permanent collection than is immediately apparent.
Because his exhibition programme was among the country's (and the world's) most impressive, the museum is now deemed a premier destination for philanthropic largesse.
The success of the fiftieth-anniversary appeal attests to the gallery's singular capacity to attract donations which is, and will be shown throughout the 1990s, the principal method by which museums will obtain masterpieces.
The challenge for Mr Powell will be to sustain the institution's hard-earned reputation, while continuing to harvest its rewards.
On a personal level, the new director will have no problem reaping rewards.
Last year, while Mr Brown was earning $195,000, Mr Powell was reportedly getting more than $275,000 from LACMA, and National Gallery Chairman Franklin Murphy told The Art Newspaper, ‘We certainly won't ask him to take a cut in salary’.
Who says museum work doesn't pay?
The National Gallery, Washington
Rusty Powell?
Well, strictly off the record…
NEW YORK.
Ask a dozen American curators about Earl A. Powell III, the new Director of the National Gallery, Washington, and you get more or less the same general response: ‘If you were having lunch with Rusty (his nickname that everyone uses) and didn't know what he did for a living, you would think he was either an Assistant Secretary of the Navy, a General Manager of General Motors, or a football coach.
The last thing you would ever imagine was that he was an art museum director’.
Powell's appointment following the demurral of the National Gallery's first choice, John Walsh of the Getty, surprised many observers, curators and dealers alike, all of them as free with their opinions as they are reluctant to be named.
Most agree that of all the candidates for the directorship of the National Gallery, Rusty Powell is perhaps the least art-historically rounded, despite having written several well received catalogue essays on American nineteenth-century paintings and a recently published monograph on Thomas Cole.
‘As a curator, Rusty's not very intellectually stimulating’, says one curator.
‘He's very corporate in his approach.
He likes spending time with real-estate types, fund-raisers and businessmen.
He's probably going to do well on Capitol Hill, because he can relate well to those kinds of people just like Carter Brown’.
Powell shares other traits with Brown as well.
Although he was quoted in The New York Times as saying, ‘I think the scope of the blockbuster is restricting…
I don't see the future for these massive international loan exhibitions.
I would prefer to use the gallery's permanent collection in new and innovative ways’, one curator believes, ‘He's just saying the politically correct thing there.
I'm not at all sure that would happen.
He had a strong lobby at the National Gallery led by Dodge Thompson, and Gil Ravenel and Mark Leithauser, the two principal exhibition designers, who doubtless want Rusty to continue the big shows.
At L.A. County, Rusty built the profile of the museum through big exhibitions…just as Carter did at the National Gallery’.
Another curator concurs: ‘Under Rusty, L.A. County had an unbelievably overactive exhibition programme for an institution of its size.
Rusty felt that it was important, as they would attract attention to the museum the way the permanent collection doesn't that isn't news’.
Perhaps more important to the National Gallery's trustees was the fact that, like Carter Brown, Powell has been a most effective fund-raiser.
This means much for an institution like the National Gallery which, despite federal funding, still lags far behind the Getty and Kimbell in purchasing power.
Powell also displayed remarkable agility in dealing with the numerous Los Angeles collectors who vied for a share of the museum's limelight.
‘There are a lot of collectors in Los Angeles and it is very hard to satisfy them all.
So many of them are very insecure because of the nature of the business of the city.
There are a lot of instant millionaires in Los Angeles, where a guy could come from nothing then have a hit record, or hit movie and have $12 million all of a sudden.
They look to the museum for some kind of validation.
Some collectors used to visit the museum weekly to check up on how the art they lent was being shown, or if it was shown at all’, says one long-time curator.
‘It would drive the curators crazy, but Rusty was very adept in smoothing ruffled feathers in situations like that’.
Unlike Brown, Powell enjoys a reputation of being approachable and affable with his curators.
‘Rusty's a delight to work for, and it's a stunning contrast with what I was used to at the Victoria and Albert Museum’, says LACMA's decorative arts curator Martin Chapman.
‘Here, there is an atmosphere of optimism that was totally lacking in London’.
Says another curator, ‘Rusty may not have the vision to say, ‘We need a Guido Reni at the National Gallery’ he's not the sort of person who could walk through the baroque galleries and realise they even need one, though if a curator went to him wanting to buy one, I think Rusty would certainly be supportive of the move, whereas Carter would basically have turned up his nose and said ‘no’’.
At the time of Brown's surprise resignation earlier this year (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p. 5), Pillsbury was considered by many, including this writer, to be a ‘shoo-in’ for the job.
Since becoming head of the Kimbell in 1980, he single-handedly built the sleepy Fort Worth museum into one of the most select collections in the country, purchasing a stellar array of old masters, including masterpieces by Caravaggio, Pietro da Cortona, Domenichino, Poussin and Georges de la Tour that would have significantly complemented or filled gaps at the National Gallery.
The Kimbell's hefty endowment freed Pillsbury from the chore of fundraising and enabled him to mount several important scholarly exhibitions that might not have found successful venues elsewhere (such as the Jacopo Bassano exhibition, scheduled for January-April 1993) and which still attracted numerous art lovers to Fort Worth.
Working against him, however, were several factors: his personality, for one.
Even his friends concede that Pillsbury can be difficult, being something of a diva, hot-tempered and imperious.
One curator recalls, ‘Ted is one of those brilliant mercurial people who don't suffer fools.
He is very hard on his staff, and makes enemies very easily’.
It is widely rumoured that Pillsbury and Ruth Carter Stevenson, an influential trustee of the National Gallery, did not get on, and also that several National Gallery staffers were, in the words of one curator, ‘absolutely terrified’ at the prospect of Pillsbury's appointment, the general feeling being that ‘heads would roll’in a grand sweep.
One curator noted that ‘Ted is fine at the Kimbell where he basically runs the show, but most American museums today aren't like that.
In the big American museums you no longer have brilliant ‘star’ directors the way you had them in the Sixties and Seventies people like Sherman Lee at Cleveland, Fred Cummings at Detroit, Tom Hoving at the Met who could manage 5,000 projects at once, either making brilliant acquisitions, or putting on unusual or daring exhibitions, or making outrageous statements that might get them censured today.
I remember that Lee once said that it was a good thing so many contemporary artists use shoddy materials because their works would happily disintegrate so future generations would be spared the sight of them.
Can you imagine any museum director today saying that!
Today, museum boards of trustees have become so difficult, and so powerful, they like their directors to be Yes-men.
Rusty's success is due to the fact that he serves the board.
Pillsbury would have come in with very strong ideas, and I don't think they would have appreciated that at the National Gallery’.
London
The spoils of Holkham: where are all the drawings going?
After the brinkmanship of the Holbein, an insider view of the ongoing dealings of British museums over the Holkham drawings
LONDON.
On 7 April the Office of Arts and Libraries announced that a nineteenth Old Master drawing from Holkham had had its export license deferred: Veronese's ‘Allegorical female figure holding a sceptre and globe’.
An offer to purchase, at a recommended price of £38,000, must come from within the country by the first of this month.
Amid considerable publicity, Christie's sold a group of sixty-six drawings from Holkham last July (see The Art Newspaper No.10, July-September 1991, p.1).
These drawings had been carefully assembled by Thomas Coke, First Earl of Leicester, in the first half of the eighteenth century, as part of the great collection for which Holkham was conceived and built.
The documentation for these drawings has always been the best of any British collection of its type, and after the paring away of the greatest country house collection of drawings Chatsworth's by the two Christie's sales of the 1980s, Holkham remained the most important extant.
Only eight weeks before the sale, Christie's announced that sixty-six drawings were to be auctioned without first being offered to any national institution by their owner, Viscount Coke.
Recognising an emergency, the four British public collections strongest in Old Master drawings met at the British Museum; these were the National Galleries of Scotland, the Ashmolean and Fitzwilliam Museums and the British Museum itself.
It was decided to try to raise enough money to buy all sixty-six drawings.
Christie's estimate was £1.6 million.
This sum was offered two weeks prior to the sale by the National Heritage Memorial Fund on behalf of the museum consortium, envisaging the drawings' division between the four museums.
On the evening before the sale, the offer was rejected.
This neutralised the efforts of the consortium since all funds committed so far had been for the purchase of the collection intact; they could not be used for individual sale bids or any subsequent related negotiations.
In the event, the sale total made £3.2 million, with thirty-three of the drawings fetching over £30,000 each (then the level at which export licences were required, now standing at £35,000).
It seemed inevitable that application for export licences would be made for most of these, given the unlikelihood of purchase within Britain.
On the strength of its hearings for the first eighteen applications the Reviewing Committee for the Export of Works of Art duly stopped all the drawings and starred the group, thus indicating its special status only the sixth time this has ever happened.
The drawings have now had to be purchased individually and other British institutions have been invited to join the consortium, with the British Museum acting as broker.
The Walker Art Gallery, the Barber Institute, Birmingham City Art Gallery and the Victoria and Albert Museum have all done so, Manchester City Art Gallery and Norwich Castle Museum both dropping out because of lack of funding.
The institutions themselves succeeded in raising fifty per cent of the price of eleven out of the eighteen drawings and the support of the National Art Collections Fund, the National Heritage Memorial Fund and the Foundation for Sport and the Arts has been crucial in raising most of the remaining moneys required.
Five further drawings were purchased after the sale from dealers, again with outside support.
On the whole individual museums went for drawings that best filled gaps in their collections and which could reasonably be afforded with their limited budgets.
There are still drawings for which export licences have not yet been applied but will no doubt be stopped when they come up before the reviewing committee.
National Galleries of Scotland, Edinburgh, appear to have done best for themselves so far (reflecting both their director's passion for Old Master drawings and their larger budget), and have acquired four of the drawings.
Girolamo Mazzola Bedoli's ‘Madonna and Child’, is now attributed by several scholars to Parmigianino after a photograph taken through the old mount revealed an architectural sketch and handwriting thought to be Parmigianino's (£52,000, est. £20–25,000).
Edinburgh also obtained Pietro da Cortona's finished and squared study for ‘St Ivo intervening on behalf of the poor’ for the altarpiece of the Roman church of S. Ivo della Sapienza (£72,637, est. £15–20,000; NACF, NHMF support); this drawing had been bought by the Metropolitan Museum, New York as a leaving memorial for the drawings expert Jacob Bean, but was export-stopped.
Scotland has also obtained Bernini's design for the simple tomb slab of Cardinal Carlo da Carpi,(£40,230, est. £40–60,000; NACF, Foundation for Sport and the Arts support) and Giovanni Battista Gaulli's ‘The Sacrifice of Isaac’(£111,750, est. £40–50,000; NACF, NHMF support).
Edinburgh has also agreed to buy Ciro Ferri's ‘The Meeting of St Francis and St Dominic’, which made £38,500 at auction,(est. £8–12,000).
At the time of going to press, funding information was not available on this.
Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, has bought its first Poussin drawing, the ‘View of the Tiber Valley’, attributed to Claude until Blunt gave it to Poussin,(£156,450, est. £70–100,000; NACF, NHMF, the Hulme Fund, and the Friends of the Ashmolean and the Purchase Grant Fund support).
Barber Institute of Fine Arts, Birmingham and Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery jointly purchased Pietro da Cortona's exceptional ‘Wooded River Landscape with Cascades’(£268,200, est. £30–50,000; NHMF, NACF support).
This appears to create a precedent of joint museum ownership for drawings, which the galleries are solving by means of shared responsibility for conservation and lending policy.
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, obtained four drawings, Ciro Ferri's ‘Allegory of the Labours of Hercules’(£35,760; NACF, NHMF support), now considered to be by Pietro da Cortona; Jacopo Cavedone's ‘Christ blessing the little Children’(£35,000, est. £5–7,000; NACF, NHMF and the Purchase Grant Fund support); and Ventura Salimbeni's ‘Death of St Clare with Pope Innocent IV blessing her’(£42,912, est. £12–16,000; NHMF, NACF support).
It has also purchased Salvator Rosa's ‘A Philosopher pointing to the ground’(£50,287; Foundation for Sport and the Arts support).
Victoria and Albert Museum, London, succeeded in buying Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione's monotype ‘Head of an Oriental’(£201,150, est. £40–60,000; NHMF, NACF support.)
Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, obtained Guercino's ‘Reclining nude woman lifting a curtain’(£106,162.50, est. £30–40,000, NACF, NHMF support) and Ribera's ‘Adoration of the Shepherds’(£83,812.00, est. £10–15,000; NACF and Foundation for Sport and the Arts support).
British Museum, London, the consortium's magnanimous host, has so far obtained only two drawings for its pains.
These are Ludovico Carracci's ‘Infant Christ, the Virgin, St Joseph and an Angel’(£17,500, est. £14–18,000) and Alessandro Algardi's ‘Two putti supporting the Arms of Camillo Pamphili’(£15,645, est. £10–15,000).
France
With Monet, ‘Money is ephemeral, art is eternal’
American industrialist Daniel J. Terra's Musée d'Art Américain opens 2 June
GIVERNY.
The Musée d'Art Américain, due to open on 2 June in the village of Giverny, where Monet's house and garden is already a highly popular tourist attraction, was conceived as a showcase for the demonstrable links between French and American art that of the Impressionist era in particular.
Monet had a magnetic attraction for many American painters, who came to France to learn the principles of Impressionism.
The Boston artist Lilla Cabot Perry lived in the house adjacent to Monet's at Giverny for twelve years, receiving tips on gardening as well as useful advice on painting, and proved an enthusiastic ambassador for the Impressionists back in the States.
This property became vacant in 1986 and Daniel Terra, and his wife Judith, immediately made an offer for the purchase.
When it became apparent that the land was too small to construct a museum on, the Terras bought a three and a half acre site opposite the Monet gardens.
Terra, who was responsible for Ronald Reagan's presidential campaign in 1979 and in return was named US Ambassador at Large for Cultural Affairs (from 1981–89), emphasises that the aim of the museum is to foster ever stronger cultural links between France and the United States.
A great enthusiast for Impressionism, he both conceived the idea of the Museum and gave the FFr120 million needed for its realisation through the Terra Foundation for the Arts.
Much of his extensive collection of American art is exhibited in the Terra Museum of American Art in Chicago, opened in 1987.
Designed by Philippe Robert, the Musée d'Art Américain en France is a two-storey building with 3,000 square metres of floor space.
It includes an exhibition hall, an auditorium, bookshop and restaurant.
Most of the 1,100 square metres of exhibition space is located below ground level and the exterior of the building itself is unobtrusive, being constructed of Norman limestone with a roof planted in heather.
The surrounding gardens have been designed by American Mark Rudkin to complement the Monet gardens nearby.
The inaugural exhibition is devoted to the ‘Americans in France’, in the years 1865 to 1915.
Much of the material has been lent by the Terra Foundation for the Arts and consists of ninety or so paintings by William Merrit Chase, William Leroy Metcalf, Frederick C. Frieseke, John Singer Sargent, Theodore Robinson, Childe Hassam, Mary Cassatt, Whistler and Winslow Homer.
The 500 citizens of Giverny, which already receives an average of 570,000 visitors a year attracted by the Maison Monet, are less than enthusiastic about the new museum.
A proposal to build a new 350-space car park right next to the Musée d'Art Américain created a storm of protest.
When the matter was discussed in council, the local mayor, Bernard Berche, was outvoted and planning permission refused.
The application is now the subject of an appeal.
The exhibition galleries will be open to the public from 2 June to 1 November from 10.00 am to 6.00 pm Tuesday through Sunday.
For further information: Musée américain de Giverny, 99 rue Claude-Monet, Giverny, 27620 Gasny.
Tel: 32–51–94–65.
The first museum of death opens in Germany
KASSEL.
A new museum has been opened in Kassel bearing the name Museum für Sepulkralkultur.
Its aim is to increase the public's awareness of funerary culture and all things death-related by illustrating human attitudes to death at different periods of history.
The building itself a glass, steel, concrete and wooden structure is anything but sepulchral.
On show are sculptures dating from antiquity to the early Christian era, and from the Middle Ages to the present day, with special emphasis on modern German examples.
An associated foundation has been set up to enable architects, art historians and archaeologists to investigate funerary rituals, art and culture.
Rare bird sighted: a local council that esteems its art gallery
LONDON.
Southampton Art Gallery, on the south coast of England, will re-open this September after an unprecedented £3 million refurbishment programme, largely financed by the Labour-controlled City Council, with contributions from Hampshire County Council.
The investment represents a personal victory for the city's Principal Arts Officer, Elizabeth Goodall, who has led a long campaign to educate local politicians of the cultural and economic rewards to be reaped from properly investing in the visual arts infrastructure.
The face-lift includes new picture stores and conservation studios and the introduction of air-conditioning throughout the building to include all the display galleries.
The gallery will benefit from a new entrance and reception area, café, lecture hall, meetings room, education room and shop.
Southampton Art Gallery has one of the principal collections of twentieth-century and contemporary British art outside London, together with a small Old Master collection and holdings in seventeenth-century Dutch painting and nineteenth-century French art.
It has forged an adventurous contemporary acquisitions policy which it intends to build on, purchasing works early in an artist's career before prices fall outside the scope of the gallery's low acquisitions budget which remains frozen despite the Council's largesse.
Since before World War II, the gallery has sought the advice of external advisors, such as the late Kenneth Clark, in its contemporary acquisitions.
Ex-Tate Gallery Curator, Dr David Brown, continues to act as the gallery's talent scout in the field of contemporary art.
Tartan trews for the National Galleries of Scotland
EDINBURGH.
The Director of the National Galleries of Scotland, design-conscious Timothy Clifford, plans to dress his warders in Argyle jackets and tartan trews.
Until about twelve years ago, they wore frock coats, and Clifford (an Englishman who has adopted tartan trews himself for evening wear) sees the new uniforms as not only an escape from the banality of the present outfits, but an opportunity to take part in the Scotland's resurgence of national pride.
He told The Art Newspaper, ‘Every two years we have a renewed clothes allowance, and we found that for a very little extra we could provide our warders with these outfits.
The Argyle is a relatively short jacket with large cuffs, and the specially designed large buttons (gilt for the Head Warder, silver for Supervisors, dark horn for the rest) will bear the Gallery's Neo-classical portico.
The official government tartan is the Black Watch, into which we are weaving a coloured line relating to each of the three Edinburgh galleries, taking the claret of the National Gallery's walls for ours’.
There is a precedent for this: the Marquess of Linlithgow (a Lowland family and therefore without its own tartan) introduced a ‘new’ tartan for the warders at Hopetoun House, outside Edinburgh.
‘This will also have spin-offs for our Gallery Shop’, adds Clifford.
‘We can then market wrapping papers and other products using the tartan’.
Commentary
An artist bears witness
War in Yugoslavia a house attacked by demons
The architect, Bogdan Bogdanovic, whose entire career has been devoted to the tragic commemoration of war victims, is one of the very few Serbians brave enough to speak out against the current Serbian aggression.
Here he describes the war fever that has gripped his country and lays the blame on the intellectuals
LONDON.
We are all used to the exploitation of art by tourism, but touristic exploitation of the miseries of war and the destruction of art is a grotesque perversion which brings us up short.
That is what the Belgrade Tourist Board was offering in April: a day trip to the pretty historic Croatian town of Vukovar on the banks of the Danube, which Serbian-led troops pounded to bits during an eighty-six day siege last autumn (The Art Newspaper No. 11, October 1991, p. 1 and No. 12, November 1991, p. 10).
The flyer for the day trip announces that, after leaving Belgrade by coach at 8 a.m., you arrive at Vukovar at 10, ‘the town whose monuments meant cultural and spiritual treasure of that part of the country.
Demolished baroque churches (orthodox and catholic), the count Elc castle, the old town nucleus’.
For safety reasons it is forbidden to leave the bus, and ‘considering special conditions’ the lunch menu includes one aperitif, soldier's beans and bread, a litre of Riesling and a doughnut.
Cost about £7 ($12.40).
The tour also takes the visitor to the Dudik memorial park, where there is an extraordinary mausoleum like a sunken city by the Yugoslavia's best known architect Bogdan Bogdanovic.
The flyer describes the park emotively as ‘the execution place of Serbian people in World War II’, but such sectarianism is completely alien to Bogdanovic's way of thinking.
He has been one of the very few Serbs to have the courage to speak out against the kind of fanatical Serbian nationalism which has led to the present war.
He was born in Belgrade in 1922 and he knows that war is not sweet because he fought with the partisans during World War II.
In fact, almost his entire oeuvre consists of war memorials in every part of former Yugoslavia.
He has been Professor of Architecture at the University of Belgrade, and was also for a brief period in the early 1980s the Mayor of the city.
He was a member of the Central Committee of the League of Communists of Serbia, but was expelled from the Party when President Milosevic came to power.
He is at present living in Belgrade, threatened and insulted for the public stand he is taking, his phone tapped.
Graffiti around his house sneer ‘Ustasha’, the name of the puppet government which during the last war collaborated with the Nazis.
He has allowed The Art Newspaper to republish what he said in the Dalmatian (therefore Croatian) periodical Nedjeljna Dalmacija last 5 September, because, he says, everything he said then remains true today.
‘Most of my monuments are to the victims of Fascism, to the Partisan movements.
They are monuments dedicated to suffering; they are never triumphalist and have no victorious character.
All are tied to the enigma of death, and to the complexity of our feelings when faced with historic events.
I have subsequently discovered in them something which is not easy to admit even to myself: it is as if they anticipated the present.
They commemorated that earlier tragedy with a premonition that it might happen again.
This is true especially of my last two monuments, the ones at Vukovar and Cacak.
Cacak caused me lots of problems with the people from the war veterans’ association, who couldn't understand it.
It was an allegory, a house attacked by demons.
It was completed in the 1980s and I was already daring to suggest that Fascism could return.
When you look at that mausoleum, with its granite monsters biting into the construction, then you feel you have been transported into the present day situation.
It is no secret that Slobodan Milosevic [the Serbian President]is psychologically a self-destructive, suicidal type, but the trouble is that he is transferring his suicidal madness onto the nation as a whole.
He does not want to fade away from the scene.
If he is to go, then the whole of the Serb nation must disappear as well, one way or another.
The occult power of dictators doesn't lie in the fact that they're clever they're frequently quite limited, and I think Milosevic is a very limited man but in the fact that they can draw a great number of people and even whole nations into the circle of their mad ideas.
Hitler also had the brains of a gnat, yet he managed to bring the great and wise German nation to the point of madness.
I think there is a sense in which the Serb nation is under the spell of Milosevic's madness.
In Belgrade cafés, streets and houses, you can hear constant war cries invitations to killing and to hatred.
All this is the result of an occult induction, as I think they call it in psychiatry.
The young, intelligent people feel a great sense of betrayal, even those who at first believed in all this.
Unfortunately, I think they are few in number; they are mainly young intellectuals who might have had a career but now cannot.
They have this potential within them, this power to do something, but are horribly suppressed, contained, frustrated…
I no longer count on the Serbian opposition.
Such as it is, it provides Milosevic with a seeming legitimacy.’
Despite the contempt with which Bogdanovic views Milosevic, he does not consider him as most responsible for the situation in which Serbia finds itself.
Already in 1981 Bogdanovic was criticising the Serbian Academy of Arts and Sciences.
He had just missed being elected a member of this Academy by a single vote.
Apparently many members are voted in only the second or third time round and he too could have waited quietly to be elected next time.
Lule Isakovic, a prominent Serbian writer and leading member of the Academy, said to him, ‘If only this or that person had come, you'd have gone through.
But next time it will be OK.’
Bogdanovic remembers he shouted at him, causing much consternation in the hall, ‘There will be no next time, you fuckers!
I have a different kind of Serbianness, which will never be the same as yours, and this building will never see me again!’
‘Yes, I already sensed the problem.
I could not bear their way of understanding the nation and its values, precisely for the sake of the dignity of the nation to which I belong.
How things went with them from then on we know from what has come out in public.
The result was that miserable document and philosophy known as the Memorandum.
[Drafted in 1986, this was the first systematic revision of the terms of the post-war international settlement in Yugoslavia and it opened the way to the Great Serbian expansion which began in 1987.]
That Memorandum is a mishmash of out-moded economic ideas and warmed-up Great Serb and Serbian Cultural Club ideas from before the war.
Milosevic carries with him a great charge of evil, but he has a limited mind; but precisely because he has a limited mind, he was very impressed by that Academy document.
He felt he was implementing something conceived by clever brains.
In the last instance, so far as the creation of this terrible situation in which we find ourselves is concerned, Milosevic is only an executive.
The ideological culprits are those others.
One day when the terrible moment comes and it is bound to come when we shall be talking of the Serb national catastrophe, when we shall be questioning ourselves about who was responsible for it and how it came about that we are the last nation in Europe to be surrounded by such enemies and such hatred, then many of the great brains of the Academy will find themselves in the dock if they live to see the day.
You see, Serbia has lost this war.
When I say ‘this war’, I am not thinking only of the current one, but of all our modern wars and our entire modern history from when we became free of the Turks in 1819.
One hundred and seventy years have passed since the proclamation of the Hatt-i-Sherif, and in the course of all that time a State like Serbia in Europe should have made a far greater civilisational, cultural and economic leap.
Today we should be at least where Hungary is, or where the Czechs are.
A feeling of failure lies at the very heart of Serb nationalism, and with that come all the various justifications for this failure: all the various Cominterns, masonries and their unbelievable plots.
There is indeed a sense of having missed out.
We see the map of destruction broaden.
The irresponsible, indeed disgusting, Belgrade press presents this as some kind of victory.
They write about advances, liberation, etc and the ordinary, already deeply indoctrinated, people acquire the feeling that we Serbs are winning the war.
This is a terrible misconception.
First, from a politico-military point of view they cannot possibly win, since nobody sensible would allow anything to be changed by force at the end of the twentieth century.
Sooner or later those who are there will be forced to withdraw shamefully.
Second, this war has been lost at another and even more terrible level: it is destroying our Serb feeling that our wars were just wars and that we behave honourably.
This is not an honourable war.
I say fuck this war, in which the defenders of villages make a skirmish and then Army tanks and personnel carriers come in to protect what they have done’.
His harshest words are in fact directed at the Serbian Army.
The Serbian irregulars, he says, ‘may be waging war for some mad reasons in the name of a sick, morbid and fanatical nationalism.
But the Army is making war not because of any fanatical nationalism, nor, as it is frequently accused of doing, out of ideological fanaticism.
The Army is simply fighting for its privileges!
The other day, after a long time, I walked through Dedinje, an exclusive suburb of Belgrade, and felt I had entered a completely unknown part of the city.
I saw flood-lit spaces, heard music and felt I was in another world, somewhere in Switzerland.
Tennis courts on which the children of high-ranking officers and generals play tennis during the night.
At that moment I understood that the Army out there, with its tanks aiding those madmen or, OK, even those pitiful people defending their immediate right to life is not defending anything that can be described as a social or national cause.
It is simply defending its own caste interests.
This Army caste is oppressing us greatly.
As in the Lebanon, there are wars which are fought as consumer wars.
There are great world-wide supermarkets of weapons, of designer arms.
There is arms marketing, love of arms, pushing of arms like drugs; an emotive tie to weapons, in just the same way that people become dependent on other consumer goods.
In some parts of the world, this consumer philosophy of arms-lovers can erupt suddenly.
This is what happened in the Lebanon.
There we saw countless small armies, with their commanders and paid chieftains, all of whom were also arms dealers.
This is how wars are made: to serve the arms supermarkets.
I am afraid that this war, which started for all the reasons I have mentioned, is turning gradually into a similar kind of war to the Lebanese.
The development of a consumer drive to possess a gun, to have a Kalashnikov or a Thompson, fell here on fertile ground.
The people of the Balkans have become addicted to guns, in the same way that we have drug addicts in other parts of the world.
There is an erotic attitude to weapons.
When I joined the Partisans, among other things that surprised me was this endless attention to the arms: their constant cleaning, oiling, polishing.
Of course, a gun must be kept clean, but this erotic relationship confused me.
They slept with their guns, embraced them even when asleep.
In Belgrade slang, an attractive woman is called a gun.
Well, a nation that equates women with guns is a nation that is addicted to them and should be cured, hospitalised.
This is true not only of Serbs, Croats, Albanians or Moslems, but of all the Balkan peoples.
If one day a more fortunate world would like to see a peaceful Balkans, then these little Balkan states should be subject to demilitarisation no armies, no weapons, nothing.
Today this is a utopia, I speak of dreams.
It is a notorious truth that this is an old men's war.
It is based on old men's ideas, old men's ideals and frustrations.
I am speaking now of its Belgrade side, of the old men in the Academy who wished to complete Serb history because it seemed to them that it had not been properly completed back in 1918.
When this old men's ideology starts to be transmitted into literature, and from literature into popular writings, and then into the press especially the gutter press and the mass media then it begins slowly to form the people.
The young people who have caught the madness of war are, in fact, prisoners of this old men's mentality which has charmed them.
Unfortunately, many wars in history have been old men's wars.
I doubt that these young men, had they been allowed to form their own world view and their own understanding of national history, would have voted for this bloodshed.
Those who bear the blame are the old men, men who know what war is like.
But the young people don't know, which is why they are often its victims.
I fear fragmentation into ridiculously small statelets.
There's that idiot who says, ‘I, president of Eastern Slavonia…’.
I might as well go into the street and say, ‘As president of the republic of Cubura [a Belgrade neighbourhood], I demand half of Cubura.’
It's crazy and that is what's so frightening.
This war has another side: I have said that it is a miserable, dirty and very bloody war, but it is also a meaningless war.
I come from a family, many of whose members fought in the last war, but at least that was a serious war.
Now we are confronted with a war that has no aim on the Serbian side.
The Croats and Bosnians are defending themselves, their aim is clear.
And this war, apart from its lack of purpose, is also militarily undefined.
There is a great deal of destruction; it has become a war of all against all, which is what makes it so horrific.’
For the record
Francis Bacon
Last thoughts and last work
‘Pathos means longing; yes, longing and feeling that wonderful things are possible but not really happening’
LONDON.
Francis Bacon died in Madrid on 28 April, aged eighty-two.
A descendant of the great English philosopher whose named he shared, Bacon was the son of a hard-drinking Dublin racehorse trainer.
His relations with his family were never happy and at the age of sixteen he left home and abandoned his education.
At eighteen he was familiar with Berlin nightlife and the art of Picasso whose work he saw exhibited in Paris.
Self-taught as an artist, Bacon designed furniture and rugs which he showed at Queensbury Mews Studio in 1929.
His acknowledged early influences in art include Eadward Muybridge's photographs of the human figure in motion and the still of the screaming nurse on the steps from Eisenstein's film ‘The Battleship Potemkin’, while he admired and absorbed the art of Rembrandt, Grünewald and Velasquez.
Of his early paintings little is known, as he destroyed most of them between 1941 and 1944, although as early as 1934 a crucifixion exhibited in a Curzon Street basement was singled out for praise by the critic Herbert Read.
His first major painting is generally acknowledged to be ‘Three studies for figures at the base of a Crucifixion’ shown at the Lefevre Gallery, London, in a mixed show with works by Moore and Sutherland.
International fame was achieved after he joined the Marlborough Gallery in 1958 who were instrumental in organising the first retrospective at the Tate in 1962, to be followed by major shows at the Grand Palais, Paris, in 1971 and the Tate in 1985.
A heavy drinker, obsessive gambler and renowned conversationalist, Bacon frequently felt that his work was misinterpreted: ‘You've only got to go into a butcher's shop, like Harrod's food hall.
It's got nothing to do with mortality but it's to do with the great beauty of the colour of raw meat’.
Gérard Regnier (who writes under the name of Jean Clair), Director of the Picasso Museum, Paris, interviewed Francis Bacon in London last August.
Regnier was preparing an exhibition on the theme of Picasso's crucifixions, for which Bacon had often expressed his profound admiration, and the ‘Three studies for figures at the base of a Crucifixion’ will be shown there.
This as yet unpublished interview will appear in the show's catalogue, to be published by the Réunion des Musées Nationaux.
The exhibition opens in Paris on 17 November this year.
Francis Bacon: I know that I was very much influenced by Picasso, especially when I was young, but now you're so flooded with illustrations of everything, that you hardly know in the end what you're principally influenced by.
Yes, but after the war, in the Forties, was it not also like that?
Oh, no, it was not like that.
Then it certainly was the influence of Picasso; you know, the greatest artist of our century for me.
Did you ever meet him?
No, I've never met anyone of that quality, except Giacometti he was certainly a most marvellous man.
I don't think you get anything from meeting someone except under very special circumstances.
Well, exactly.
If you know them very, very well and they criticise you and they say, do this and don't do that, they can really help you.
And concerning Picasso, were you more interested in his sculptures or the paintings?
I love the paintings a lot, but I love the sculptures as well .
I mean, he was such an all-round artist, so many of his things were marvellous.
And although a lot of the very late ones, in the way of paintings, I don't care for, many of his drawings in the last period of his life were wonderful, weren't they?
Especially his self-portraits.
They were extraordinary, yes.
And I remember I don't know how it came up once talking with Michel Leiris about Surrealism.
And then I don't know how, I said, well of course, Picasso was the best surrealist painter.
And he said, but he's nothing to do with Surrealism, which I expect is true that he didn't belong to the party but then perhaps Spaniards are, in any case, basically surrealist.
Because of Picasso's paroxystic way of treating the figure?
Its proximity to death?
It always goes hand in hand with any great artist.
But did you see Picasso's ‘Crucifixion’ of 1930?
Do you know, I've never see it.
I've only seen an illustration.
But the drawings, there are some beautiful drawings around the Crucifixion.
Yes, we've got about twenty drawings.
Some of them he did from the Grünewald in Colmar.
I love those ones where there's a piece of cloth just with a safety pin or something like that.
I think some of those are beautiful.
I mean, there it is: he was the greatest artist at least to me of our century.
There's a thing, because there are a terrible lot of things I don't like at all of Picasso's for instance, his versions of ‘Las Meniñas’.
Why?
Do you think it's too formal?
I feel that it's such a perfect thing, there was nothing to be done with ‘Las Meniñas’.
You can't add.
Exactly.
It's like the stupid things that I tried to do once myself with that great pope of Velasquez.
And it was just very stupid because you can add nothing to a thing which is perfect like that.
I always regret those paintings very much.
I hate them.
They are considered some of your masterpieces.
Well, I don't like…
I don't think they work for me!
I always regret doing them very much, I must say.
Why?
Well, you see, I think it's such a masterpiece in itself, that there's just nothing to be done.
It's just because it's so remarkable, I suppose, that one tries to do something about it, something even further, which is, of course, impossible.
Going back to the scene of the Crucifixion, do you think that you could add something to a scene which has been treated for almost 2000 years?
I think it was a stupid thing to do, but there's one of the images in the Crucifixion, the figure on the cross, that's in the Guggenheim exhibition; that I still quite like the one panel.
You're thinking of the very first one?
No, the third panel.
But we get away from the Crucifixion itself with this third panel.
It's something more than a Crucifixion; it's almost a piece of slaughter, butchery; meat and flesh.
Well, that's all the Crucifixion was, wasn't it?
I don't know.
Well then, wasn't it for you?
For a long time no, because it was such a gentle image; gentle I can't think of another word.
Do you think it's gentle?
In reality not, but until you go through very violent experiences in your own life, you can't understand this man on the cross in any other way than as an abstract figure.
It's very common: you wear it on your chest; you wear it as a bibelot on your body.
That's perfectly true.
Were you brought up a Catholic?
Well, of course, it is inevitable that one thinks of it from that angle from the way one has been brought up but actually one can't think of anything more barbaric than the Crucifixion and that way of killing somebody.
Was the fact of being Irish an influence on you?
You know, I'm not Irish.
I was born in Dublin, but my father and mother were both English.
He lived there because he was a trainer of race horses.
It was much cheaper to work there than it was in England; that's the only reason.
In fact I'm not Irish.
I don't mind whether I'm English or Irish, but the thing about this is that as I was there till I was about fifteen or sixteen, it rubbed off on me a lot the whole atmosphere of Ireland.
It's a country of literature, not of paint.
Not at all.
But it's because of the Church, of course, that people like Joyce and, for a great deal of his time, Yeats, had to live out of Ireland…
In order to survive?
Exactly.
There's a very interesting book which came out after T.S.
Eliot's death of the corrections to his original writings, and then the corrections that Ezra Pound made, and Ezra Pound has made them ten times better.
Of course, if we had that in painting, it would be absolutely marvellous; if one had somebody one could go and talk to who would say, ‘Don't do this; throw that away’ and all that kind of thing.
But there isn't anybody I've never had the luck to know anybody.
Why are you so reluctant to look back at your very early Crucifixions?
I was thinking of the first one which was reproduced in Herbert Read.
I think the ones that made me most were those which were very influenced by Picasso, which are in the Tate Gallery.
I think those were the ones which were most influenced by…the paintings he did between 1926 and about 1932, weren't they?
They're some of the work of Picasso's I still like most of all.
You're thinking of the screaming figures?
Not so much the screaming figures.
There's a marvellous one of an image unlocking a sort of door.
A woman on a beach?
Yes, on a beach.
I love those things.
With a huge key trying to open the door.
Yes, yes.
They were marvellous, those paintings.
Why?
I don't know why.
You see, one can't say.
You can't talk about painting because talking or writing and painting are two different…it's another language, isn't it?
But do you think you were struck by the image itself?
You are struck by the image, yes, exactly.
That's where those images of Picasso were very poignant.
Very dramatic, yes.
It was the worst years he had with his wife.
Were they?
Yes, he was trying to get a divorce but he couldn't.
I see.
She was pursuing him like the Fury pursuing the crime.
They were absolutely wonderful, those things.
To me they're some of the most exciting things of Picasso's, more exciting than things like Guernica.
I find them more human and more poignant, you know; going more to the core of how things, how feelings are.
Including the colours, or are you speaking of the drawing?
Even the coloured ones.
Even those beautiful ones just by the beach.
Blue and the colour of the sand.
Yes.
Well they are simply the most direct spontaneous images drawn from his personal drama, which had little to do with the war.
It was a real personal drama.
And was it a real drama at that time for him?
Oh yes.
Because Olga was pursuing him everywhere, day after day, screaming and crying.
But was Picasso fond of the different women he was with or was it that he just liked them physically, and he was able to use them in his work?
Was he very attached to them?
It's very difficult to answer.
It is very striking that he changed style immediately he changed wife.
Well, those beautiful ones, those beautiful heads and things he did after he met that girl called Marie-Thérèse Walter I always think those are so beautiful.
From her it was a very strange face.
A very quiet atmosphere.
A tranquillity and serenity.
He invented this type for her, really.
And yet they were not serene really, were they?
Because they went back to very ancient things they went back to ancient Greek or Egyptian things.
I think the art that I love most, really, is Egyptian art.
I don't know why.
I just can't believe in the kind of death that the Egyptian world has.
I think you're born and die and that's it.
But they did make, nevertheless, through their obsession with death, the most extraordinary images.
But you can't find an example of pathos in Egyptian art.
Pathos?
Yes, pathos.
You can't find an example of pain and suffering, compared to our Western art where pathos is everywhere.
That's absolutely true.
But if you have the attitude the Egyptians had towards death…
One doesn't know how much they feared death, but it didn't come out, at any rate in their painting or sculpture.
Yes.
That's why you like this art so much?
No, it's not that…
I like the result.
I can't have the Egyptian belief though.
But pathos exists even if you know you're finished at death in your lifetime, pathos still exists.
I'm sure that Picasso had no belief, but in those heads, for instance, of Marie-Thérèse Walter, there's tremendous pathos.
And yet she was very tender, and very sweet…
Ah, well then, perhaps I'm thinking of the word in a different way to you, because pathos to me means tender.
Tenderness?
Yes.
Not as you were using it.
Pathos means longing; yes, longing and feeling that wonderful things are possible but not really happening.
It's a very curious word, ‘pathos’, in English.
I suppose it means the same in French, doesn't it?
What is the word in French?
Pathos.
Pathos.
It's a very strong word in English.
It really means unfulfilled longing.
It is a longing for something that cannot happen.
I was thinking of your interest in William Blake.
You've painted a portrait of Blake a couple of times.
I'm not interested in William Blake at all.
It's just that somebody asked me to do some heads.
But you were interested in doing them?
Not really.
No?
I was quite interested in doing the heads; somebody gave me a plaster head of him, that was all.
But I don't really like Blake's work.
You mean his poems or his watercolours?
No, not his poems his drawings and those things.
I actively dislike them.
I dislike them in the way that I dislike Pre-Raphaelite things.
This I can imagine.
But going back to the 1944 triptych, you called it a base for the Crucifixion.
I never did the Crucifixion.
The idea was that I was going to have these images around the base, and then I never did the Crucifixion.
Because the base was enough?
No, it wasn't that.
I don't know what happened.
I just never went on; I just tried to do something else.
Except the two first Crucifixions.
Well, the first one.
That very first one?
But that I'd done before.
You see, those figures were so influenced by the Picasso drawings of 1926 to 1928 all those drawings and paintings of that period.
Picasso was an extraordinary man.
He is to me the greatest genius of our century.
I'm probably quite wrong about that, but you know, when I think of Matisse and Giacometti and people like that, I can't compare them; I think they fall very much below I may be quite wrong about this below the qualities of Picasso, because I think Picasso has such a very universal sense of things.
And a very tragic sense.
You too have a sense of tragedy.
It would be natural for me.
After all, I was born in 1909.
I remember when I was five, my father telling me of World War I starting, you see.
And then we were in Ireland during the time of what they used to call ‘the troubles’.
And then World War II.
The whole thing has been that, so it's not so much…it's just the whole circumstances of the time that one has lived in.
But do you not think the life of the Thirties, the daily life, was much more terrible?
There were more horrific details in the newspaper every day more than now.
We have become more civilised, in a way.
Well, we've only become civilised towards horror.
(Laughter) I mean, we accept it now as an everyday thing.
It's sort of ladled out to us like soup.
But when you look at the newspapers from those years, they are filled with crimes and every kind of horror.
Well they still are.
You don't see any difference?
Not much, no.
We don't of course see the kind of thing that went on in Germany under Hitler, but you feel a disaster is waiting, another disaster of some kind is waiting.
You can't help that, because I think life is like that.
I think that one just has the luck very occasionally to run through periods where one can be happy.
I've got a very optimistic nature, but I'm not optimistic about anything at all; there's nothing to be optimistic about.
After all, you're born to die.
There's nothing to be optimistic about ever.
But you would not agree to live for eternity.
What a nightmare!
Of course.
It would be a nightmare, but one doesn't think so.
One thinks how marvellous it would be to go on living.
Day after day.
Yes.
I mean, I'm still pleased, even at my old age, to wake up in the morning.
Even if it's raining and even if you have no stomach to work?
Of course, yes.
After all, what else have we got but life unless one's religious?
Do you think this comes automatically with humanism?
When I say humanism, I mean with no belief in anything except one's existence from, I suppose, oneself.
Would you think Greek mythology is closer to our needs than Christianity?
It's more truthful than Christianity.
The idea of the Fatum which weighs on humanity without any hope?
Exactly.
Without any redemption?
Yes, I think so.
Don't you?
I think it's nearer to the truth than Christianity.
It's absolutely extraordinary, you know, that every day here I'm sure you have the same thing in France if you listen to the radio, every day there's a sermon, something about hope of life hereafter.
I mean, there's something so ridiculous about it all.
But people still believe it.
If you think of Aeschylus, if you think of the Oresteia, what could be more barbaric and terrible than that, really?
Especially Agamemnon.
Well, Picasso resented death, didn't he?
I think so, yes.
If you look at the last self-portraits, then you can see…
Yes, you can see how much he was disgusted by death.
London
Just what is it that makes Richard Hamilton so different, so appealing?
As the major retrospective of Hamilton's work opens at the Tate Gallery this month, the artist gives a rare interview and airs his views on Pop Art and the Pop revival and the need for quality judgements in art and the consumer society
LONDON.
More than twenty years ago, the Tate Gallery mounted an important mid-career survey of the art of Richard Hamilton, founder, with Eduardo Paolozzi and others, of the Independent Group, definer of Pop Art, explorer of the coming trends in menswear, chronicler of the relationship between crumpet and her toaster, designer of the Beatles' ‘White Album’, critic of Swinging London, soft pink landscapist and lobbyist and manipulator of the Quantel Paintbox.
On the eve of a second major exhibition of his work at the Tate Gallery (17 June-6 September), curated, once again, by Richard Morphet and devoted, on this occasion, to his oil paintings, Hamilton spoke to Roger Bevan of his career, his relationship with dealers, the continuing attraction of television, his declining interest in America and his delight in discovering that he had been rediscovered by a younger generation of artists and students.
In the last three years, there have been important exhibitions of your work in Winterthur, Hannover and Valencia, you showed at the Sao Paulo Bienal in 1989 and in the recent Carnegie International in Pittsburgh.
Have you been surprised by the resurgence of interest in your work?
Richard Hamilton.
I have been a little surprised at the extent of recent interest.
I have always thought of myself as being rather unfavourably viewed by the art establishment and that includes journalists in Britain.
But on the other hand, the bibliography for the Tate catalogue required that I look back at a lot of old notices and I find that my perception was not at all valid.
There has been a lot of interest, even if it isn't public interest.
What I am most conscious of is that I have been regarded as a controversial figure: until the age of sixty I was seen either as a subversive or as an enfant terrible.
The likelihood is that at that point you will then turn into what the young term a boring old fart and that transition from enfant terrible to boring old fart is immediate at the age of sixty.
I have been encouraged to find that the young are not so predisposed to put me aside at the age of seventy and that a new generation of students and artists regard me as something of a cult figure.
The fact that Paul McCartney and Mick Jagger (Bryan Ferry couldn't come because he had a cold) were at my d'Offay Gallery opening last year raised it into a social event, so much so that Robin Vousden said, ‘We haven't had an opening like this since Andy Warhol’.
When I was in Bremen not long ago for what turned out to be a Fluxus family meeting, I felt great affection from and for old friends like Daniel Spoerri and Emmett Williams, but also the younger artists associated with the exhibition were warm and welcoming.
I was told by new-found friends, ‘I have known your work for years and the typographic version of Duchamp's Green Box book you made in 1960 was my first route into an understanding of modern art’.
In a way it's a surprise; but a very gratifying one.
Until your exhibition at Anthony d'Offay's gallery last summer, you had not showed a major group of works in London since the Serpentine Gallery's exhibition of 1975.
Was there any reason for this long absence?
I have always been a little suspicious of dealers.
There have been few relationships of that kind in my life.
My first real exhibition was at the Hanover Gallery in 1955 and it wasn't a great success commercially very little was sold so there was an interval of eight years before I had another.
I regularly asked Erica Brausen, the Hanover's director, if she would visit my studio to see what I was up to but she never had time to take a taxi from Hanover Street to Highgate.
It was the same with Robert Fraser.
I was friendly with him and admired his taste and style but he could never be induced to look seriously at my paintings.
I wasn't prepared to put things under my arm and hawk them around in Bond Street so there was a long gap.
Then, in 1963, I was asked if I would write a piece on my own work for Living Arts, an immaculately produced but short-lived ICA magazine.
I wrote, with some effort, a short text which I called ‘Urbane Image’.
There was a sudden flurry of interest.
Ted Power, a fine collector, whom I had known for years and who had seen odd paintings in mixed shows wanted to buy something.
Erica Brausen said, ‘Let's have that show; I don't need to come and see the pictures’.
Robert Fraser wanted to take up the invitation to visit my studio.
I was surprised that my failure to get an audience for my paintings was so quickly overcome by the act of writing about them.
I learned that the pen is mightier than the brush.
I had the second show at the Hanover in 1964 and then I was persuaded by Robert Fraser to make a move from the Hanover to his gallery.
He made some kind of deal with Erica Brausen a sort of transfer fee: it was like being a football player.
He really wanted me to show with him and I admired his stable so the move was irresistible in spite of the feeling of disloyalty to a gallery I had shown in twice, albeit with an eight year gap.
I stayed with Robert Fraser for some years and it all ended with Robert going to jail on the famous drug bust with the Rolling Stones.
The gallery closed, I got a dud cheque, the Receiver moved in and there was general disaster.
It was all quite dispiriting and I subsequently found it easier to work with museum officials.
They had their career interests; it wasn't a financial involvement.
Ambitious young curators have a different axe to grind and it worked out very well because I didn't produce that much.
There was an incompatibility between myself and the idea of dealing.
A dealer exists to sell and since I can only produce two or three pictures a year the flow of the commodity isn't adjusted to the pace of the market.
My income at that time was mainly from prints.
I made a lot well, three prints a year on average isn't much but it was enough to keep me economically viable.
When I painted it was for myself, I could afford the luxury of spending two years on a painting; I didn't have to worry about whether anyone was interested in it or not or whether I would exhibit it in a commercial gallery or whether it would be sold.
As things accumulated, I showed them in museums and in galleries abroad which were less demanding about selling, but seldom in England.
I did show in the Serpentine Gallery in 1975 but even that presented a problem of prudery which I didn't experience on the continent.
There was no understanding here of my intentions in a body of work that ventured into the unfashionable field of Romanticism, an exaggeratedly retinal approach, at a time when Concept Art was the rage.
It seemed that people thought it was about kinky sex; at best it was taken as the onset of senility.
This interest in young ladies, excrement, flowers and sunsets was viewed as a total absurdity.
I didn't feel it was worthwhile to make an effort in England any more if this was to be the result of my first exposure in England since Robert Fraser collapsed.
But there was one Italian reviewer, a distinguished critic named Guido Almansi, who wrote an article in a serious Italian journal of art history headed ‘Watteau escrementizio’.
It was the only part of the article I understood, but at least somebody seemed to see the point.
Your forthcoming exhibition at the Tate Gallery follows a retrospective which took place there in 1970.
How will the new exhibition differ in its treatment of your earlier work?
At the time of the Tate retrospective in 1970 my concerns were pedantic and didactic.
I was teaching until 1966 and my experience had been largely directed at explanation.
I was at pains to show how and why.
I thought of my interest as being in subjects rather than individual works; showing subjects rather than the summation of an idea made my objective clearer and that meant presenting the complete thought process.
There was a necessity to get the whole idea across it wasn't sufficient to show just the final product.
Even so, I was throwing in a certain amount of text in an attempt to build an entire justification for the picture, so that exhibition at the Tate was a display of areas of interest rather than paintings.
A painting like ‘I'm dreaming of a white Christmas’ was shown with several drawn studies and even its print variations.
When the Guggenheim made a retrospective in 1973, Tom Messer, the then Director, said the Tate show was fine but he didn't want the prints.
He wanted a different show and the only way to make it different was to leave out stuff because there wasn't anything to add.
I hung on to the drawings because they provided part of the explanation I felt was needed.
The 1970 Tate exhibition was conceived as a complete installation; it was beautifully done.
I had the advantage of working with a wonderful architect, Michael Braun, who contrived areas just to take individual groups, so that each subject was allocated its own space.
The Guggenheim installation worked well for me too because I was able to use a strict chronology: one thing after another all the way down the ramp.
How didactic can you get?
I thought it was marvellous opportunity to do it that way, each subject held in a bay and in strictly chronological order.
By the time the Winterthur show came around in 1990 I thought it would be interesting to exhibit just the paintings and when Nick Serota, the Director of the Tate, proposed that we might put on another retrospective at his gallery I felt more sure of myself.
Perhaps it isn't necessary to explain things in the way I used to.
The works, in whatever medium, must be self-sufficient and stand up for themselves.
I began to worry many years ago when I heard a young artist say at a Whitechapel Art Gallery discussion, ‘I'm in the painting business, not the explanation business’.
The remark struck home.
I think he was right because the painting must ultimately speak for itself.
Will the exhibition include your prints, objects and multiples, or works in other media?
There will be two installations: ‘Treatment room’ and ‘Lobby’.
The ‘Lobby’ painting will be presented as an installation.
There will be a few multiples but only because they are finished works which exist essentially in that form.
There are no prints.
Have you created any new works which will be previewed at the Tate?
Yes, and I have even added in a few pictures which have never been seen before.
The 1970 show at the Tate was somewhat restricted in that, although I showed some ‘Ulysses’ drawings as an introduction and some early Fifties paintings, it really began with 1956.
I was anxious that it shouldn't include too much of an earlier date because I didn't feel it would be helpful to the show.
It might dilute the real body of work which I felt to be making some kind of contribution.
If the show was extended too far back it would spread the interest a bit too thinly.
As time has progressed I have produced a bit more and I have been prepared to show things that went a bit further back; I have extended the oeuvre at both ends.
The show will open with three paintings that date back to 1939.
They have never been shown or even reproduced.
They were painted at the Royal Academy Schools when I was a student immediately before the closing of the Schools in 1940.
One is a nude done in the RA life-room rather Cubist in its approach.
Of the other two paintings, one is a picture of a friend, a girl who was also a student, posing in the same life-room, and the other, a portrait I made of a fellow student and good friend of mine from the Royal Academy, James Tower, who became a noted ceramicist.
And the new work?
Since well before Christmas I have done nothing but work on the Tate catalogue.
There hasn't been much opportunity to do anything new, but there is a painting which will be the final work in the catalogue and which I have yet to complete.
I have to drop the work on the catalogue and get into my studio for a few hours each day to carry further a painting which began as a request: it is called ‘War Games’.
When the Winterthur show went to the Kestner-Gesellschaft in Hannover as the second leg of its tour I was approached by the director of an art community set up in a distillery.
There was a project to get artists to work on panels for a long wall, concrete posts and lintels with a brick infill, that might be seen as a possible module for paintings or some other art form.
I agreed to undertake a panel.
One reason for finding the project intriguing was that it was a large open-air commission bigger than anything I had ever done about five and a half metres square.
The picture could be executed by a company called Scanachrome in which I already had some interest and it seemed like a good opportunity to get involved with the process.
It's a technique of scanning an image and enlarging it through a battery of airbrushes controlled by a computer.
I sought a subject, as I had done in the past, by looking at my TV screen to see what was going on the world.
It so happened that the Gulf War in Kuwait was filling our attention, and so I switched on a video tape whenever something attracted me and I found that I would be most likely to record the daily sessions on the BBC's Newsnight with Peter Snow discussing the disposition of troops over the battle zone using a visual aid which is now known as the sandpit.
He was conducting the whole affair with a model of the war zone with cardboard tanks and national flags to identify the blocks of combatants.
There were red tanks for the Iraqis, green for Saudi Arabia, blue for the French, yellow for the British and the Americans.
Having decided this was to be my subject, I made a still frame on my TV and photographed my television set with a Hasselblad.
I found it intriguing that the image on the screen was almost indecipherable, especially when blown up to five and a half metres square.
But the Scanachrome process introduces a linear scanning over the whole image, so I proposed to paint only the area of the TV screen and leave the scanning on everything that isn't TV.
Having made the Hannover picture I thought it would be nice to have a smaller version, so I now have a two-metre square version on canvas, also painted with Scanachrome, and I am working on the area of the television screen in a more painterly manner than I was able to use on the large one.
That is the closing point; the biggest picture in the exhibition will be the finale.
Nearly ten years lay between the arrival of a postcard of a hotel lobby in Berlin and your completion of ‘Lobby’.
Have you received any new material by post that might be useful for a painting in the years ahead?
No, I don't think so.
The television screen provides most of the ideas, but then, that has usually been the case.
But it can be any image that comes to me at second-hand, whether it be postcard, film still, TV or whatever.
You visited the United States for the first time in 1963.
That visit resulted in ‘Epiphany’ in which you openly declared your admiration for the boldness of American humour.
On other occasions, both before and shortly after that visit, you made work which revealed your enthusiasm for other American interests: its space programme, its fashion, Detroit, Kennedy and Hollywood.
What do you continue to admire in American culture?
I can't remember anything in the last fifteen years or so that has excited me in America.
I don't know quite why that should be except that in the Fifties all my peers were fascinated by the industrialised, consumer society of which the USA was the supreme example.
We were expecting the American model to arrive in Europe with pleasurable anticipation, accepting its inevitability.
But the subjects I have been concerned with recently have been more directly related to my own experience of life: the situation in Northern Ireland; the Gulf War; my thoughts have come closer to home.
I suppose it has something to do with the feeling that what came out of America tended to operate at either of two levels.
There was a banality colouring all visual material reaching us from New York, and the way we were experiencing that banality through the mass-media was regarded as an essential aspect of it.
The other experience of the USA was the philosophical and scientific thought emerging from the universities; all the major ideas we received in the early Fifties were from MIT, Caltech and the Princeton Institute for Advanced Studies.
We were gaining a total experience from the States, and the high-level ideas related to the low-level ones in that they allowed us to accept them.
The new philosophy said that we should not make value judgements: you can't think in an Aristotelian way; no value judgements, no good and bad.
It all made sense, the relationship between non-Aristotelian logic and the banality of the American way of life: you had to take a detached view of the culture; you weren't in love with it and you didn't hate it.
As time went on, and particularly by the early Seventies, I began to question whether one could take this point of view in a situation where things were going on which I clearly saw to be ‘bad’.
As a scientific or aesthetic concept, no value judgements may work; it may be possible to approach a painting from this standpoint.
But what if you get to thinking, are nuclear weapons good? or are they bad? are the political events we are experiencing good or bad?
I was forced to the conclusion that it is all relative.
Whether the image of an ice cream cone or a hamburger is good or bad is not too big an issue but when it comes to nuclear weapons and political events which affect not only the happiness of countless people but which are also a matter of life and death, does it help to avoid value judgements?
I began to question events in Northern Ireland, Thatcherism, the Gulf War; it all seems far from the jolly days when we said things are neither good nor bad.
By contrast, you have painted a gloomier picture of British themes, its politicians, its sense of justice, its failure to resolve the Irish issue.
Your ‘Treatment Room’ gave the bleak image of a patronising nanny state.
Have any events taken place in the last ten years which might call for a reassessment of that view or a more optimistic response in your work?
I have been depressed about life in the Eighties, the way the economy has gone in the last twelve years.
People living in cardboard boxes is one symptom, but our cultural deprivation is also tragic.
Art schools have been forced into the commercial ideology of Toryism.
Art schools have been closed down and those that survive are permitted only to the extent to which they have converted to a market economy.
Have you found any new sources to replace Playboy's Playmate of the Month as the contemporary odalisque?
Maybe it is a sign of age taking its toll, but sexual imagery doesn't command much of my attention these days.
In the Royal Academy's recent Pop Art exhibition, you were represented by eight earlier pictures and a set of your recent Self-Portraits manipulated by the Quantel paintbox.
Did that exhibition suggest to you that Pop Art was a thrusting and lively activity with a relevance in contemporary art, or that it had become a comfortable and nostalgic moment in art history?
I think the show was good because it covered a lot of ground and put a general feeling in context.
The fact that the organisers decided that it was time to show Spanish Pop and the French New Realists made sense; Martial Raysse has always seemed to me a very interesting artist, but he has been ignored outside France.
Perhaps the problem has been that the Americans have adopted Pop Art as a national institution and seen it as exclusively an American product, so I found the inclusion of the German painters, Sigmar Polke and Gerhard Richter, illuminating.
The Fluxus contribution also showed that Pop was not a narrow movement, but touches upon the culture of the period in many ways.
I rather deplore the recent manifestation of Pop; it doesn't seem to me to have the intellectual force of the art of the Sixties.
It is a mistake to think of that earlier period as a flippant approach to the problem of making art.
If you read the writings of Claus Oldenburg you find it has a precision and intellectual rigour.
Warhol too, through his extraordinary evasiveness and apparent lack of commitment is really very accurate in his expression of ideas.
Jim Dine knew very well what he was up to in demonstrating the interchangeability of object, word and image.
I am afraid the latter-day Pop artists think of themselves as being a culmination of the expression of cultural realism and they regard what happened in the Sixties as a primitive expression of their more developed ideas, which seems to me far from the truth.
But then, I don't like much of what is going on at all.
The generation gap makes it difficult, at my age, to find the generosity to devote the time and effort required to figure out what the bright young things are up to.
I did get into a car the other day to drive to London to the Imperial War Museum to see an exhibition of work by Tony Carter and was excited by it, but my appreciation may have something to do with the fact that he was a student of mine so I have been familiar with his ideas over many years.
Exhibitions
Paris
Whither the Pompidou Centre?
Germain Viatte, new Director of France's national museum of modern art gives his first interview
PARIS.
With Dominique Bozo in overall charge of the Centre Pompidou and Germain Viatte now heading the Musée National d'Art Moderne (MNAM) and the Centre de Création Industrielle (CCI), expressions of concern at the lack of space have given way to wide-ranging debate on the future role of the entire Beaubourg cultural complex.
Methodological rigour is making a comeback, together with an all-embracing vision of art and culture, evident in the reunification of research and administrative facilities within the MNAM and the CCI, and closer collaboration with the other departments of the Pompidou Centre: the public library and the Institut de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique (IRCAM).
For the first time in the history of the Beaubourg, the presidency has gone to a representative of the museum world, rather than to a high-ranking official from the Ministry of Culture.
Although Bozo's appointment is being presented as a natural consequence of the desire to reunite the Centre's four sections, it is clear that his presidency will give the museum a bigger say than in the past and ensure that, where funding is concerned, it is no longer the poor relation of the IRCAM.
To mark the new trend five floors of the Centre are being given over to a series of exhibitions, films, digital images, sound recordings, debates and theatrical events, tracing the history of artistic creativity over the last thirty years.
The CCI's recently constituted collection of industrial design will also be on show for the first time.
A new collection devoted to architecture features twelve contemporary giants: Rossi, Gehry, Portzamparc, Siza, Shinohara, Arcigram, Foster, Ito, Nouvel, Piano, Prouvé and Koolhaas.
Meanwhile, on the fourth floor, in addition to the newly re-arranged historical collection, works recently donated to the museum by Pierre Matisse will be on show.
The new director of the MNAM and CCI, Germain Viatte, is no stranger to the complex machinations of the Pompidou Centre.
He was a co-founder of the CNAC, involved in programming the Centre's activities and looking after its collections from the early days.
He subsequently became director of the Marseilles museums and head of the Inspection Générale des Musées de Province (provincial museums inspectorate).
We asked him to explain the significance of ‘Manifeste’.
Germain Viatte: This is an opportunity to stand back and take stock.
Until now, the museum has exhibited only 900 of the 32,000 works it actually owns, though 17,000 of these are drawings, videos and photographs which do not really qualify for permanent showing.
We felt we should make these resources better known and reinforce the contemporary vocation of the Pompidou Centre.
Visitors will be able to operate a network of interactive VDUs to obtain information on almost all the works we possess and their history as if they were taking a peep into the vaults.
I do not think a museum should continue to grow ad infinitum; on the other hand, I believe we should put on periodic exhibitions as a way of gradually familiarising the public with the full range of our artistic riches.
‘Manifeste’ concentrates on the art of the last thirty years, thereby overcoming a chronological and methodological rift, which results from the way the works are currently arranged.
The main trends in art in recent decades are already clear, and the works in our collections enable us to underline the key developments and inter-connections.
How would you describe the new industrial design and architecture collections?
Right from the beginning, the CCI has sought to trace the development of form in the work of designers, not forgetting the role played by a number of major manufacturers.
We have featured furniture because it is a barometer of changing tastes and ideals of beauty.
For instance, the magnificent suite by Eileen Gray has obvious affinities with constructivism.
Although we intend to integrate some architectural drawings and items of furniture with the historical art collections, architecture and industrial design will, nevertheless, have separate exhibition areas of their own.
What will distinguish the MNAM from the Musée d'Art Moderne (Paris's rival museum funded by the city), and, more generally, from the many French modern and contemporary art museums?
When the Beaubourg was set up, the only French institutions seriously exhibiting and purchasing contemporary art were at Saint-Etienne, Grenoble and Marseilles.
Since then, due to the stimulus and support given by the Centre to twentieth-century art, the setting up of regional funds for acquiring contemporary art, and the emergence of a new generation of museum curators, the landscape has completely changed.
This has led us to adopt a policy of collaborating with younger museums, letting them have works on temporary loan according to their strengths and weaknesses.
In Paris itself, the brilliant management of the city's Musée d'Art Moderne and the inauguration of the Jeu de Paume has brought about a profound change.
Here, too, though we are not looking to carve up the territory between us a degree of competition never does any harm we should at least be getting together to think out how best to collaborate in the future.
Getting back to the Pompidou Centre, what changes will visitors see in the building itself?
One purpose of the summer exhibition is to give Renzo Piano and his team scope to experiment with a number of changes, which might eventually become permanent.
Piano is planning to transform the surroundings of the Centre, and to improve the Forum area by getting rid of the grid-pattern ceiling and other obstacles which block out the light.
The central area, currently down in the basement, is to be raised to ground-floor level and will accommodate the new CCI collections.
The whole building will undergo a thorough restoration and refit.
‘Manifeste’ will show just what the Centre is capable of when it returns wholeheartedly to its original identity as a contemporary art centre starting from the entrance hall, which at present is too large and unstructured.
And how do you see the task of the director of the new MNAM-CCI?
To re-establish a sense of team-work, which has been lost recently, and to see the collections increase and grow.
Although in 1977 we were not entirely destitute, having received a major donation, we were able to open the Centre only thanks to loans from the Guggenheim and the MOMA in New York and the Ludwig Forum in Aachen.
We were something of a phantom museum.
Since then, we have acquired more than 14,000 works, 10,000 of them dated 1960 or later.
There are still many gaps, but we have come a long way.
Essen
When London was the richest city in the world
Villa Hügel shows the fourth in its great cities exhibitions
LONDON.
As the fourth in its biennial series of exhibitions devoted to cities at their zenith, the Kulturstiftung Ruhr is offering ‘London World City 1800–40’ from 6 June to 7 November at Essen's Villa Hügel.
Its predecessors were ‘Dresden in the baroque age’, ‘Prague around 1600’ and ‘St Petersburg around 1800’(1986, 1988, 1990 respectively).
The exhibition's co-ordinator in Britain is Dr Celina Fox of the Museum of London, in collaboration with a large group of scholars.
Describing the show's conception, Dr Fox told The Art Newspaper, ‘After much deliberation as to which was the period in which London was ‘most itself’, we dismissed the more obvious eighteenth century and High Victorian eras.
The years1800 to1840 saw the retention of many of the ideals of the Georgian period, including its exceptional craftsmanship, but many of the achievements which we regard as Victorian were also already in existence.
After the Napoleonic Wars, London was the richest city in the world, and the resulting dynamism was astonishingly productive in every field, from the arts to finance, engineering and philosophy.
It was an amazingly dense and sophisticated city at this time; in one square inch, there was more than in whole blocks of, say, New York.
Unlike the previous exhibitions in the series, this is the first devoted not to a royal court's culture but to a culture based on a city's commercial strength.
We cast our net wider and in a different direction.
It is easy to forget that alongside the architecture of Nash and Soane, the engineering work of Rennie (whose London Docks were the largest buildings of their date in Europe), Maudslay and Telford had few European rivals.
Schinkel came specially to see the Docks, and did not even like Nash's Regent Street.
Against that background, we have the lavish life of the Prince Regent, whose bills are scattered like confetti throughout the exhibition!’
Regarding the possibility of a London showing of such an important exhibition, she adds, ‘The two years we had to prepare this were simply insufficient to plan it in two separate locations; the only possible London location would have been the Royal Academy, and there simply wasn't enough money.
Above all, I have been impressed by the immense generosity of my academic and museum colleagues, who have given unstintingly of their time and expertise for this catalogue’.
The Queen heads a long list of lenders of the more than 700 objects in the exhibition.
These include art and artefacts relating to Nelson, Wellington, Lord Byron, Keats, George IV's spectacular coronation, the Baring bank; Bullock furniture for Napoleon's exile in St Helena, a Greek krater from the Hamilton Collection, a Wordsworth manuscript, Edmund Kean's costume for Richard III, paintings by Constable, Turner, Wilkie and Landseer, and the ‘Auto-Icon’, the stuffed seated figure of the reformer Jeremy Bentham.
The 600-page catalogue is to be published in German and English by Aurel Bongers and Yale University Press respectively.
World fairs
Artificialia in naturalia
‘Green’ art at the greatest flower show on earth for 3.5 million visitors
ZOETERMEER, NETHERLANDS.
When an international gardening show like ‘Floriade 1992’ sets out to draw 3.5 million visitors in 182 days (until 11 October), it cannot afford to give much leeway to the free play of nature.
Leaving nothing to chance, the organisers of the ‘Greatest Flower Show on Earth’ spent eight years transforming seventy hectares of polder into a totally controlled floral environment.
To put nature in its proper place, they have set up the exhibition as a living demonstration of the newest thinking on the interrelationship of the human and natural realms.
In 1989, the decision was made to add art to the mix.
The chief designer of the exhibition, Michiel den Ruijter, was commissioned, together with ‘art organiser’ Maria-Rosa Boezem and artist Jouke Kleerebezem, to enrich the Floriade with an international presentation of contemporary environmental art.
They invited twenty-three artists from nine countries to participate in an artistic sub-theme park entitled ‘Allocations: art for a natural and artificial environment’.
Embracing the temporary nature of the event and its superficiality, they challenged the artists to produce environmental art with a ‘mediagenic dynamic’ and to react in their work to three open questions: the theme park as architectonic and ideological environment for contemporary art; the ‘musealisation’of nature and environment; and the commercialisation of public space.
Some of the artists entered into the spirit of the Floriade by manipulating nature in their own way.
Vito Acconci (USA, b. 1940) created a ‘Personal island’ which can be rowed around the central pond, while Ashley Bickerton (USA, b. 1959), in ‘Tree of…tie me kangaroo down, sport’transforms a living Dutch elm into a bondage object.
‘Zucche’ by Piero Gilardo (Italy, b. 1942) is an artificial carpet of polyurethane cut in the form of a pumpkin patch.
Others dedicated their projects to the healing of man-damaged nature.
Mierle Laderman Ukeles (USA, b. 1941) ritualises a water purification system under the title ‘Pit/egg: a new low for Holland’.
Mel Chin (USA, b. 1951) laid down a field of plants which extract heavy metals from the ground by a process called hyperaccumulation, in his ‘Revival field Netherlands: simultaneous replicated field experiments’.
A more pessimistic note is struck by Chen Zhen (China/France, b. 1955) in ‘Green house, red laboratory, white tomb’, and Marius Boezem (Netherlands, b. 1934) in ‘Tree’.
They use synthetic materials in ways which suggest a genetics of the non-natural world, as if they have already written nature off.
The most explicit comment on the Floriade itself is provided by Ludger Gerdes (Germany, b. 1954) in ‘Dood (Death)’.
The second O reminds one strongly of the logo for the Florist Delivery Association: the friendly folks who deliver joy to your door in the form of cut, dead flowers.
The Floriade, like every world's fair, is an upbeat affair.
The 1992 version shows more vegetables and flowers than ever before and they are bigger, newer, more colourful and genetically purer.
In the midst of this celebration of the commercialisation of nature, ‘Allocations’ adds a needed note of irony.
A descriptive list of the works of art is available at the ticket counters.
Without it, one is apt to mistake technical installations for works of art (which they virtually are on occasions).
The plaques are summary and in Dutch only.
Accompanying ‘Allocations’, a book with the same title has been published, with statements by all the artists and essays by Thomas McEvilley, Rosalind Krauss, Robert Smithson and others.
Mitsukoshi department store opens art space in Paris for East-West exchanges
TOKYO.
Mitsukoshi, the largest and oldest department store in Japan, which also has the reputation of selling more art than any other Japanese department store, is launching a cultural space in the centre of Paris on 11 June.
It will be called ‘Espace des Arts’ Mitsukoshi Etoile.
They bought the building two years ago with the intention of turning it into an exhibition space for cultural exchanges between Europe (mainly France) and Japan.
Mitsukoshi Etoile intends to organise exhibitions, to foster good relations between the two cultures.
The person behind the project is the head of Mitsukoshi's art department, Mr Nishino, who in 1988 bid for Picasso's ‘Harlequin’ at Christie's London.
Japanese department stores differ from those in the West in that they not only sell goods but also organise cultural events of importance.
In 1904 Mitsukoshi was the first department store to open in Tokyo.
The exhibitions held then were mainly of known Japanese artists' works, but important shows of Impressionists and Post Impressionists soon followed.
About twenty years ago department stores in Tokyo started to make parts of their buildings into exhibition spaces and called them museums.
These have the same function as public museums which charge entrance fees.
In general, big cities in Japan do not have museums in their town centres which is why exhibitions in department stores are considered indispensable for presenting Japanese culture, as well as that of other countries.
The opening exhibition at Mitsukoshi Etoile is ‘Ceramics in Japan, a major art form: fifty-eight contemporary creators’, and it lasts until 18 July.
Contemporary Japanese ceramics are highly esteemed, but hardly known abroad.
One hundred pieces, including some older ones, have been chosen by the director of the Fukushima Prefectural Museum, Mr Mitsuhiko Hasebe and by the chief researcher of the Tokyo National Museum, Mr Kazunobu Nakanodo.
None of the works is for sale.
In September Mitsukoshi Etoile will be organising an exhibition of Tamako Kataoka, an eighty-seven year old woman artist who paints in the traditional Japanese style.
Then follows an exhibition of Kakiemon porcelain.
Next year Mitsukoshi Etoile are planning to exhibit works by French artists.
Michelangelo the sculptor in Canada
MONTREAL AND BOSTON.
The Museum of Fine Arts, Montreal, is mounting an exhibition entitled ‘The Genius of the Sculptor in Michelangelo's art’(12 June to 13 September) which draws on recent findings arising from major conservation campaigns including the Sistine ceiling and the Taddei Tondo.
‘It's an exhibition about Michelangelo the sculptor, not Michelangelo's sculptures’, in the words of Pietro C. Marani of the Soprintendenza per i Beni Artistici e Storici of Milan, curator at the Pinacoteca di Brera, and scientific co-ordinator of the exhibition.
Marani stressed that no major sculptures by the artist would be borrowed for the exhibition.
Instead, a selection of drawings (including about fifty by Michelangelo) together with small-scale models by the artist and by contemporary artists and followers, as well as sixteenth-and seventeenth-century engravings and paintings based on the artist's sculpture, will aim to place Michelangelo's sculptural  activities in the context of his entire output.
Marani has been assisted in his efforts by a highly distinguished panel of scholars including Giulio Carlo Argan, Antonio Paolucci, John Pope-Henessy, Craig Hugh Smyth and Giovanni Testori.
The exhibition is divided into four parts, the first on his early influences and teachers.
It includes drawings by Ghirlandaio, Verrocchio, Pollaiuolo and Leonardo, together with some juvenilia, sculpture by Bertoldo and Adriano Fiorentino and a small section on antique works which the artist may have known.
The second section concentrates on major sculptural projects, using autograph models and drawings as well as copies and derivations.
The third section is called ‘Sculpture into painting’ and examines the relationship between the two media in the artist's work in the light of the newly-revealed Sistine ceiling.
Finally there is a section devoted to Michelangelo's architecture, again interpreted in the light of sculptural preoccupations.
Sotheby's sponsor Bolognese drawings show at the Courtauld
LONDON.
Sotheby's is sponsoring an outstanding exhibition, ‘Drawing in Bologna 1500–1600’, at the Courtauld Galleries from 18 June to 31 August.
Conceived by Cristiana Romalli of Sotheby's, the show will include a predominance of drawings from private collections unlikely to be seen by the public under other circumstances.
There are are also loans from the Royal Library, Windsor, and the Devonshire Collection at Chatsworth.
Sotheby's have previously sponsored two Old Master drawings exhibitions at the Fitzwilliam Museum, and one at the Ashmolean, all of which received critical acclaim.
Although still little known to the general public, Bolognese draughtsmanship of the sixteenth century produced many of the Masters most sought after by collectors, in addition to the obvious Carracci family (already active by the 1580s) Bartolommeo Cesi, Pietro Faccini and Orazio Sammacchini and Lorenzo Sabbatini.
Francesco Primaticcio and Niccolo del'Abbate are better known for their work outside their native city, and an outsider, Dionys Calvaert, adopted Bologna to exert great influence on the next generation of painters.
New Zealand artists take the initiative at Expo
SEVILLE.
While its giant neighbours at Expo'92, Britain and America, have been criticised for the lack of artistic content in their pavilions (The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, p. 1), New Zealand with a comparatively tiny budget of NZ$39 million (£12.07 million, US$21.19 million) for its pavilion, is presenting a specially commissioned ceramics exhibition by fourteen artists, ‘Treasures of the Underworld’ and in the Pavilion of the Arts, an exhibition organised by the artists themselves, ‘Distance Looks Our Way 10 Artists from New Zealand’(25 June–16 July).
‘Distance Looks Our Way’ was first thought of in 1988, when Wellington artist Tony Lane was visiting Spain.
On his return, he and a group of artists set out with the idea of using Expo'92 as a showcase for their work.
Taking the initiative themselves, they approached other artists and asked Luit Bieringa, former Director of the National Art Gallery, to manage the exhibition.
An Arts Council grant was obtained for the bilingual catalogue, as well as support from private sponsors.
For this latter support the artists are handing over their works, up to NZ$5,000 (£1,500, US$2,700) value each, to the sponsors at a special function next month.
Each sponsor pays NZ$10,000 and for NZ$10,000 each artist gets a return airfare of around NZ$3,000 and the NZ$7,000 surplus goes towards running costs.
The exhibition travels to Leiden in August, back to Spain and Portugal before returning to New Zealand in 1993.
Washington, D.C.
National Gallery brings American Indians into the tribe of the new art history
Woodlands and Plains Indian material, organised by George P. Horse Capture of the Cros Ventre tribe, on display until 24 January 1993
WASHINGTON, DC.
The National Gallery's fifth North American Indian exhibition since 1943 is an exercise in ‘the new art history’.
The show reconstructs the collection of Woodlands and Plains Indian material assembled in the early part of this century by two midwestern amateurs, Milford Chandler (d. 1981) and Richard Pohrt.
Their collection was broken up in 1979, when Mr Pohrt, who bought out Mr Chandler, sold the material to the Detroit Institute of Art and the Buffalo Bill Historical Center in Cody, Wyoming.
‘Art of the American Indian Frontier: the collecting of Chandler and Pohrt’(until 24 January 1993) contains 153 nineteenth–century decorative, utilitarian and ceremonial objects head-dresses, moccasins, leather and textile apparel, beadwork, cradles, bowls, spoons, pipes, shields, weapons and pictographic drawings.
These are divided into two geographical sections: Eastern Woodlands and Great Northern Plains.
Each in turn has two chronological parts: 1790–1850, corresponding with the end of the fur trade era, and 1830–1900, the period of relocation and confinement to reservations.
Co-curators David W. Penney, Associate Curator, Department of African, Oceanic and New World Cultures, at the Detroit Institute, and George P. Horse Capture, a member of the Cros Ventre tribe and formerly Curator of the Plains Indian Museum at the Buffalo Bill Historical Center, tell us that ‘art as a category did not exist in American Indian languages’, but their concern ‘is not so much the issue of defining American Indian creations to fit a European definition of ‘art’, but of redefining ‘art’ and consequently art history to include the artistic practices of American Indians, Africans, folk artists, and even the modern film industry, advertising and popular illustrations’.
In this ‘new art history’, formal and iconological considerations still obtain, though the emphasis is on the relationship between form and content, and what that reveals about social, economic and cultural forces affecting production.
The result is unusual because the Indian crafts are usually dealt with by ethnographers or historians of style.
Our notion of Indians has been conditioned by the frontier mentality that saw them as savages inhabiting the geographic void that civilisation would tame.
Indian culture is still imagined as timeless, forever corresponding to a primitive stage of European history and art history; but the Indian tradition was both amplified and transformed by contact with the pioneers.
None of the Chandler and Pohrt Collection has been affected by the American Indian Grave Protection and Repatriation Act, which will return certain categories of museum objects to tribal ownership.
Procedures for implementing this recent legislation are being worked out by the U.S. Department of the Interior.
Judgments will be made on human remains, associated funerary objects, unassociated funerary materials (typically associated with funerary remains, but not clearly from graves), as well as‘cultural patrimony’(communally owned objects, that therefore could never have been legally sold), and religious objects (necessary for ongoing practice of religious ritual).
Deputy Director Roger Mandle told The Art Newspaper, ‘We were impressed with the quality of the objects of art in this concentrated collection and feel that they have considerable artistic and educational value for the broad public we serve’.
In fact, the Gallery has extended the show's run to eight months so that school children can see it this autumn and has moved the scheduled second venue, Detroit, to the end of the tour.
The exhibition will travel to the Seattle Art Museum (11 March-9 May 1993); the Buffalo Bill Historical Center (18 June-17 September 1993); and the Detroit Institute of Arts (17 October 1993–6 February 1994).
Paris
The Louvre pays homage to Philip Pouncey
The opening this month of the first of three exhibitions in memory of the great drawings connoisseur
PARIS.
Philip Pouncey's death at the age of eighty in 1990 (see The Art Newspaper No.3, December 1990, p. 2) robbed Old Master drawings studies of its greatest connoisseur and one of its most valued personalities.
Students in any of the major print rooms are familiar with his discreet pencilled initials ‘PP’ on drawings mounts, often indicating important reattributions which stand the test of time with amazing regularity.
The measure of the esteem in which he is held is shown by three forthcoming exhibitions devoted to his contribution: ‘L'Oeil du Connaisseur: hommage à Philip Pouncey’ at the Louvre, 19 June-7 September; another at the Uffizi later this year (dates unavailable), and the third at the British Museum in January 1994.
The current exhibition at the Cini Foundation in Venice, ‘From Pisanello to Tiepolo: Venetian drawings from the Fitzwilliam Museum’(until 15 June) is also dedicated to Pouncey's memory, while two major exhibitions have already been dedicated to him, one in 1978 at the Louvre and another at the Fitzwilliam in 1985.
Behind the forthcoming shows is a group of drawings connoisseurs including Françoise Viatte, Catherine Monbeig Goguel and Pouncey's widow, Myril.
Roseline Bacou's introduction to the Louvre catalogue points out that the collection there includes more than 500 of Pouncey's attributions, and goes on to analyse his ‘supreme art’ as a connoisseur.
Included in the exhibition are drawings by Correggio, Niccolò dell'Abbate, Bandinelli, Domenichino, Lanfranco, Parmigianino and Vasari, and, of particular interest to Pouncey, Lorenzo Lotto.
Mrs Pouncey's introduction merits special mention for its touching account of her immensely rewarding marriage and her involvement in her husband's career.
An understanding of that involvement is essential to grasping his methods.
Mrs Pouncey is at present editing his diaries, drawing attention to entries such as one for October 1949, when, between 7.17 am and 12.25 pm he visited no less than twelve Roman churches, certainly with the intense concentration he devoted to each of the many visits they made to Italy together.
Martigny
Braque thirty years on
The Fondation Gianadda holds Switzerland's third retrospective devoted to the Cubist master
MARTIGNY.
George Braque has not been the subject of a major exhibition in Switzerland for over thirty years but Jean-Louis Prat, director of the Fondation Pierre Gianadda, is remedying the situation.
From 13 June to 25 October, the Foundation will be showing seventy paintings, a similar number of drawings, a selection of sculptures and a series of livres d'artiste by the artist.
Many works are drawn from private collections and the exhibition includes some little-known works by the Argenteuil-born painter prior to his Cubist period.
‘Paysage d'Harfleur’, dated 1900, reveals his debt to the Impressionists, and there are works he painted on first arriving in Paris, after ten years spent at Le Havre with Dufy and Friesz.
These two friends were also his companions during his experiments with Fauvism, which is represented by five landscapes of L'Estaque and two nudes from the years 1907 and 1908.
In 1907, at the Salon d'Automne, the twenty-five year old artist was deeply impressed by the work of Cézanne whose influence is evident in Braque's early Cubist experiments, for instance his ‘Instruments de musique’(1908), lent by a Parisian private collector.
Braque's analytical phase is illustrated by ‘Les usines du Rio-Tinto à l'Estaque’(1910) from the Musée d'Art Moderne at Villeneuve d'Ascq, and ‘Femme Lisant’(1911), loaned by Basel's Beyeler Foundation.
In 1912 he first used stencilled figures and letters in ‘Guitare’, an oval painting owned by the Musée de Grenoble, and in 1913 adopted collage techniques, as in ‘Tivoli-Cinéma’, a work which once belonged to Pablo Picasso.
Braque adhered to his Cubist principles, even in the difficult post-war years, later producing large-format works such as‘Nature morte à la nappe rouge’(1934) and ‘Tabouret’(1939).
In the Thirties and Forties, the period of his greatest fame, he lightened and enriched his palette.
The exhibition also features four of his sculptures, including the bronzes ‘Les travaux et les jours d'Hésiode’ and ‘Hymen’, which was not actually cast until the 1950s.
After 1947 Aimé Maeght in particular undertook to support Braque and make his wartime work known to the public.
Of this, the famous ‘Billiards’ series is represented in the exhibition by a late example painted in 1947.
Interiors, such as‘L'atelier VI’(1950–51), and landscapes such as ‘Gros nuages’(1952) lead on to the final series of ‘Oiseaux’, symbolising freedom and renewal.
Braque died in 1963, three years after his second major Swiss retrospective, held at the Basel Kunsthalle.
The catalogue includes entries by the curator as well as previously unpublished articles by Dora Vallier and Pierre Gianadda.
It also includes an extensive bibliography, and a critical anthology of writings by Char, Diehl, Prévert, Duthuit, Leymarie, Malraux, Paulan, Ponge, Zervos and other scholars and writers who admired Braque's work.
London
Rude art
Mike Kelley's heroes are dirty toys
LONDON.
A new test for British taste takes place with the ICA's exhibition of works by avant garde American artist, Mike Kelley (9 June-19 July).
Comprising eight installations selected from a working career of fifteen years, the exhibition is the most comprehensive survey of his art yet to be mounted, and has been organised in conjunction with the Kunsthalle in Basel, where it was seen in April and May.
An abridged version of the exhibition will be presented at Glasgow's Centre for Contemporary Art in the autumn (3 October-15 November).
Kelley's art is not entirely unknown to a British audience.
His ‘Dirty toys’, as he describes his arrangements of battered dolls and stuffed animals which he rescues from thrift shops, were included in last autumn's ‘Objects for the Ideal Home’ at the Serpentine Gallery and in the Hayward Gallery's recent ‘Doubletake’, but neither occasion gave a complete or convincing account of the range of his interests.
The present exhibition will reveal him as an artist of greater variety and mood, in turn sinister, subversive, scatalogical and humorous, with interests in music and performance as well as the fine arts.
The conservative ranks of British art criticism stand ready to take offence at his avowed admiration of the Arts and Crafts Movement from which, he might claim, his toys and comforters have descended.
The core of the exhibition will be the recreation of two recent installations of ambitious scale and content.
‘Pay For Your Pleasure’(1988, MOCA, Los Angeles), one of the notable achievements in last year's ‘Metropolis’ in Berlin, is a gallery of forty-two painted portraits of leading figures of modern civilisation with attributed comments about the licence which society gives to the artist.
The installation's theme explores the relationship between creativity and evil, and concludes with a pair of collection boxes for victims of violence placed on either side of an amateur portrait made by a murderer.
It shares the main galleries of the ICA's ground floor with ‘Craft Morphology Flow Chart’(1991, Lannan Foundation) which created a strong impression at the recent Carnegie International in Pittsburgh and consists of rows of hand-made woollen dolls laid out in tables.
Measured photographs of these dolls, reminding of the documentation of immigrants arriving at Staten Island, hang on the surrounding walls.
One of the upper galleries is filled by ‘Lumpenprole’(1991), another arrangement of dirty toys now locked into unpardonable acts of indecent behaviour barely concealed beneath a large crochet blanket.
Two works calculated to cause great affront are the reconstructed histories, a series of reproductions of engravings of celebrated moments in American history, which Kelley has defaced with pictorial graffiti of faeces and erect penises, and felt banners (1987–88).
Large, brightly coloured and apparently celebratory, they have been developed from the découpages of Matisse, but are, on closer inspection, altogether less tasteful, with their short, smutty messages lifted from the scribble of a toilet door.
Kelley is an artist testing the boundaries of taste and tolerance.
His approach has won keen admirers and vociferous detractors in the United States.
Long before New York's Whitney Museum mounts its own assessment in 1994, the present exhibition introduces him to an European audience.
A catalogue (£17.95) contains essays by Thomas Kellein, director of Basel's Kunsthalle, and other commentators, with two interviews and statements by the artist.
Brazilian samba at the Jeu de Paume as Hélio Oiticica gets first European showing
PARIS.
The Jeu de Paume continues to explore unfamiliar territory with an exhibition of the work of Hélio Oiticica (10 June to 23 August).
This will be the first retrospective devoted to the Brazilian artist, who died in 1980 and is still virtually unknown outside Latin America.
His vision was indissolubly linked with the social and economic life of Brazil in the Sixties and the exhibition illustrates Oiticica's brief but complex career, showing his fidelity to the theme of the human body and its relationship to space and objects.
Oiticica's ‘Penetrabili’, booths which can be entered and explored with all five senses, were a major influence on ‘Tropicalismo’, an avant-garde movement which affected Brazilian cinema, theatre and music in the late Sixties.
At the end of his life, Oiticica was associated with Glauber Roche and Neville d'Almeida in important experiments in the medium of cinema.
After its display in Paris the show will travel on to Barcelona (Tàpies Foundation), Lisbon (Gulbenkian Foundation) and Minneapolis (Walker Art Center).
The catalogue constitutes the first ever monograph on the artist.
It will include articles by Guy Brett, Haraldo de Campos, Catherine David, Waly Salomâo and Oiticica himself.
Washington, D.C.
A tribute to Germany
Kirchner and Kollwitz, with more than one hundred drawings, prints and sculptures by the woman artist who depicted poverty, injustice, conflict and oppression
WASHINGTON, D.C. A Washington-area cultural festival, coordinated by the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts under the title of ‘Tribute to Germany’, has provided the impetus for two exhibitions of modern German artists, at the National Gallery of Art (until 16 August).
‘Ernst Ludwig Kirchner: Paintings, Drawings and Prints’ is a small survey selected from the museum's own collection and supplemented by several loans from private sources.
Although it comprises only a dozen paintings, sixteen works on paper and thirteen woodcuts and other graphic material, it is, in fact, the most significant presentation of his art since the Guggenheim Museum's ‘Expressionism: A German intuition 1905-20’ of 1980.
From Kirchner's early career, the most important works are ‘Two Nudes’(1907), an awkward and thickly brushed vertical composition, and the sharply coloured ‘Green House in Dresden’.
The Berlin period is distinguished by two major paintings of cabaret dancers (1911 and 1913) and his great pastel of ‘Two streetwalkers’(1914) as well as a fine impression of the celebrated woodcut ‘Five tarts’(1914) printed on a sheet of blotting paper.
‘The Visit’(1922), an interior double portrait with a visitor climbing a strangely foreshortened staircase, is the most interesting work from the artist's long exile in Davos.
But proper critical attention will be reserved for the museum's major treatment of Käthe Kollwitz, for whom this exhibition celebrates the 125th anniversary of her birth.
Long admired in the United States for the powerful social content of her imagery, the exhibition includes more than one hundred drawings and prints as well as five rare sculptures, among which is the large plaster of ‘Lovers’(1913, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston).
A remarkable series of nearly thirty self-portraits, one of which is a bronze sculpture (1926–36), is launched by a pen and ink study of the artist laughing (1888–89), not a mood which her work usually encourages.
With a group of nude studies, those portraits reveal the formidable skills in draughtsmanship which Kollwitz possessed from the beginning of her career.
Six of the seven woodcuts of ‘War’(1922–23), her major graphic cycle from the years of the Weimar Republic, are shown, but her later work, dating from the time of her dismissal from the Prussian Academy of Arts in Berlin in 1933, is thinly covered.
The list of sculptures is completed by three works created shortly before the outbreak of World War II, including ‘Lamentation’(1938), the tribute to her colleague, Ernst Barlach.
The catalogue (Yale, $45, £30) carries a long reconsideration of the artist's life and career by its curator, Dr Elizabeth Prelinger, assistant professor of fine arts at Georgetown University, with additional essays by Dr Alessandra Comini and Hildegard Bachert.
Columbus celebrations
Glasgow as home of the Brave
$3.5 million state-of-the-art show to tour France
GLASGOW.
Glasgow Museums have leapt with enthusiasm onto the Columbus celebrations bandwaggon and are presenting ‘Home of the Brave’ at the Art Gallery and Museum, Kelvingrove, until 20 September.
What Glasgow's director Julian Spalding proudly describes as ‘the museum world's answer to Disney’ takes the form of a major exhibition drawing on the history of Native American Indians since Columbus's landing.
It presents some of the museum's own collection of North and South American material as well as loans from British collections such as the Ashmolean and Pitt-Rivers in Oxford, the Horniman, London, and the Scottish national collections in Edinburgh.
The exhibition is the result of a collaboration between Glasgow's director and the Fondation Mécénat Science et Art, Paris, a charitable foundation under the directorship of Hubert Bari.
The visitor to ‘Home of the Brave’ is treated to a series of ‘complete installations’in the words of Glasgow's Keeper of Exhibitions Deborah Haase, involving a journey through ‘dramatic theatrical settings’including standing on a jetty with simulated water swirling underneath (actually blue light).
A bank of video monitors cunningly disguised as sacks of cargo show films of interviews with living Indians, maps of the regions covered and other backup material.
Glasgow are hoping for 2,000 visitors a day and are charging a comparatively modest £3.50 full entry tariff which includes a high-tech Walkman-type audio tour.
The £2 million costs are being found by the museum itself, together with Strathclyde Regional Council and the Fondation Mécénat which has looked to private sponsorship.
There is no catalogue.
Instead an accompanying book will be translated from French (the show moves on to La Défense, Paris, then to Strasbourg, Bordeaux and Lyons).
Troubled relations: blacks and Jews seek solutions
NEW YORK.
The Jewish Museum and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People have brought together more than 350 artefacts, photographs, documents and artworks exploring the relationships among African Americans and American Jews in the twentieth century.
The collaborative exhibition ‘seeks to understand the roots of the current tension between the two groups’.
After its premier (until19 July) at The New York Historical Society, the exhibition begins a two-year American tour with stops in San Francisco, Rochester, Baltimore, Wilberforce (Ohio), Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Chicago.
‘Bridges and Boundaries: African Americans and American Jews’ is sponsored by Philip Morris Companies, Inc. and the Lila Wallace-Readers Digest Fund.
Inca Peru in Berlin
BERLIN.
A sizeable exhibition of Pre-Columbian Peruvian artefacts which has already been seen in Rome, Madrid, Linz and Brussels, is now at the Haus der Kulturen der Welt (House of World Cultures), Berlin, until 23 August.
The exhibition was the brainchild of Sergio Purin, curator of the Latin-American department of the Royal Museum of Arts and Crafts in Brussels, who has curated it.
An assembly of around 400 artefacts from the Chavin, Nazca, Moche, Huari and Chimó cultures covering a period of 3,000 years aims to demonstrate the variety and richness of Pre-Columbian art.
The show is sponsored by a number of bodies including Lloyd's, KLM, the Office of Cultural Affairs, Berlin, and the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
A team of international scholars has contributed to the catalogue.
Maeght joins in Columbus jamboree
SAINT-PAUL.
The Maeght Foundation is contributing to the Columbus celebrations by showing a selection of 150 Mexican, Andean and pre-Columbian Amazonian items from the Musée Barbier-Mueller, Geneva (until 15 June).
The museum houses the collection built up by the industrialist Josef Mueller who started purchasing objects for their aesthetic qualities in Europe after the First World War.
Mueller's family continued the collection and his daughter Monique Mueller founded the museum with her son-in-law Jean-Paul Barbier.
The museum was opened to the public in 1977 and a number of publications on the collection have been written to date.
The present exhibition includes sculptures in wood, stone and terracotta and some textiles, and a catalogue illustrating all the exhibits has been produced.
Dubuffet goes South
NICE.
The Jean Dubuffet Donation, comprising the works given by the artist in 1967 to the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris, travels to the Musée d'Art Moderne et d'Art Contemporain, Nice (until 30 August).
The Donation was fully displayed in its home museum under the title ‘Les Dubuffets de Dubuffet’ earlier this year.
About a hundred works will travel from Paris, many of which are normally kept in storage for conservation reasons.
Prints, sculptures and drawings will be included as well as paintings.
After Nice the exhibition moves to Bordeaux, Saint-Etienne, Nantes and Villeneuve d'Asq.
Yorkshire Sculpture Park mounts survey of Phillip King
WAKEFIELD.
Phillip King has attracted surprisingly modest attention in the ten years since his retrospective exhibition at the Hayward Gallery in 1981 but, as Professor of Sculpture at the Royal College of Art until 1990, he has shaped the styles of his students and of artists such as Richard Deacon, who had left the college before his arrival.
A reassessment of his career was due and it comes as a new monograph by Tim Hilton (£30, Lund Humphries) and an exhibition which opened at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park at the end of last month (to 31 August) and will be shown at The Art Warehouse in London in the autumn.
A version of the exhibition will travel to museums in Germany and France in 1993.
The exhibition gathers more than twenty of the forty sculptures shown at the Hayward Gallery, including such significant works as ‘Rosebud’(1962), ‘Twilight’(1962), the Tate Gallery's ‘Ghengis Khan’(1963), ‘Through’(1965) and ‘Shiva's Rings’(1978) from the Arts Council's collection.
They are supplemented by several recent fibreglass and steel sculptures of large scale and a dozen smaller figurative or architectural works in bronze which will be recognisable only to an audience which has tracked King's later development at the Mayor Rowan gallery.
The excitement of the exhibition concerns the opportunity to place many works around the park's lake where they will create an impression quite different to the context of brutal architecture of the Hayward Gallery, or of the European Patent Office in Munich and of other cities for which King has made commissions in recent years.
The Yorkshire Sculpture Park is publishing a booklet with interviews with the artist.
The exhibition of large stone sculptures by Peter Randall-Page continues to 14 June, before transferring to Edinburgh's Royal Botanic Garden (27 June-9 August) and to the Arnolfini in Bristol (29 August-4 October).
Roger Bevan
The Royal Academies put on their summer shows
LONDON and Edinburgh.
The Royal Academy Summer show, derided by critics but beloved of the public, runs from 7 June to 16 August.
At the initiative of President Sir Roger de Grey several leading European artists will be showing their works, although these will not be for sale at the Academy.
Among these are Clemente, Baselitz, Tápies, Chillida and Ellsworth Kelly.
Nevertheless, the whole event (or at least our perception of it) remains resolutely British with even more paintings than usual from the public, as the walls are to be hung up to four deep.
Last year sales of paintings totalled £1.3 million, netting a £330,000 commission for the Academy (at 25% on works sold), out of which the administration and handling expenses had to be paid.
The highest price tag was £75,000 for an Elizabeth Frink horse, rumoured already to have been sold at the time of going to press.
Such is the event's profile that private companies are willing to put forward healthy sums of prize money, the largest being the £15,000 given by executive search group Korn/Ferry for best entry in a number of categories.
For the last two years the public have been asked to nominate winners for the Korn/Ferry prize but this year it will be decided by a judging panel alone.
Until 18 July, the Royal Scottish Academy is showing its 166th Annual Exhibition of painting, architecture and printmaking.
Almost 500 items are on show (out of 1200 submissions), from well-established contemporary artists to those recently graduated from a range of disciplines.
The past restored: photographs at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs
PARIS.
Long-standing museum collections are liable to find their status redefined as perspectives lengthen.
Fifteen years ago the Victoria and Albert Museum reclassified many of its nineteenth-century study photographs as art photographs and started treating them with much more respect.
The same has happened now at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs in Paris.
Digging into its collection of old photographs, mounted in the 5000 albums which constitute the Maciet archive, it has decided to elevate a selection of late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century topographical photographs to the level of art and exhibit them as ‘Le Passé recomposé’.
The exhibition will also present the first stage of a restoration programme which will cover the 150 photographs displayed.
These include views of Paris by Atget, Egypt by Felix Bonfils, Samarkand by Paul Nadar and Mexico by Desiré Charney.
The restoration campaign is receiving technical and financial support from the Commission Nationale de la Photographie du Ministère de la Culture et de la Communication.
The exhibition continues until 28 June.
Nelson-Atkins shows Ming paintings and calligraphy
KANSAS CITY, MO.
The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, known for its superb Chinese collections, has organised a major exhibition of late Ming painting and calligraphy with the cooperation of China's two greatest art museums, the Beijing Palace Museum and the Shanghai Museum.
Five years in the making, ‘The Century of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang’ marks the first time the two Chinese museums have participated jointly on an international exhibition.
The Chinese institutions have loaned one hundred works, including national treasures, most unpublished and virtually unknown outside China.
The exhibition's 171 handscrolls, hanging scrolls, and album leaves include ninety-seven by seventeenth-century masters, and seventy-four paintings and examples of calligraphy by Tung Ch'i-ch'ang (1555–1636), the most important figure in later Chinese art.
Poet, artist, calligrapher and connoisseur, Tung Ch'i-ch'ang devised the first systematic history and theory of Chinese art, dividing the old masters between the decorative Northern and the meditative Southern schools.
A 1592 manuscript of his highly influential Theories on Calligraphy and Painting is loaned by the Beijing Palace Museum.
Masterworks by later Ming and early Ch'ing painters of various schools illustrate the importance of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang's influence.
Accompanying the exhibition is a two-volume, 1,100 page catalogue with 750 illustrations, 300 in colour, and contributions by an international team of fifteen scholars, co-published by the Nelson-Atkins and the University of Washington Press.
‘The Century of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang’ is at the Nelson-Atkins until14 June, then travels to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (19 July-20 September) and to the Metropolitan Museum of Art (23 October-10 January 1993).
Archaeology and Conservation
Antwerp
Rubens's great and huge ‘Raising of the Cross’ restored
Its home, the Cathedral, to be ready by 1993
ANTWERP.
After more than a decade of restoration work, Peter Paul Rubens's renowned triptych ‘The Raising of the Cross’(1609–10) is back on view in Antwerp cathedral.
Painted immediately after the Flemish master's return from an eight-year sojourn in Italy, the Michelangelesque composition is a monument of the northern Baroque, and virtually synonymous with the golden age of this European port.
‘The Raising of the Cross’ was commissioned by the church of Saint Walburga in Antwerp where it occupied the raised main altar until 1794.
At that point, the occupying French carted off the painting to Paris for the new Musée Centrale des Arts.
In 1815 it was returned to Antwerp and placed in the huge Gothic Cathedral of Our Lady, where it has remained ever since.
It is an enormous altarpiece more than 15 x 21 ft when opened and was once even larger.
A 1661 painting by Anton Ghering shows the interior of St Walburga, with the original Rubens altarpiece rising more than thirty-five feet atop its balustraded platform.
Below the main Calvary scene were predella panels of the Crucifixion flanked by episodes from the lives of Saints Walburga and Catherine.
In a niche above was a depiction of God the Father toward which Christ below turns with angels on either side.
These were sold off by the French.
The three surviving main components are no longer in their original frame.
In 1977 conservation and aesthetic considerations led the Belgian Commission for Monuments and Landscapes (the agency responsible for the nation's patrimony) to initiate a campaign to strengthen the triptych's physical support and clean its painted surfaces.
An international committee of experts was formed this group was later reduced to three specialists to supervise the Brussels-based Royal Institute for Cultural Heritage, which conducted the actual work.
Restorers set up a temporary studio in the northwest end of the nave, with a glass wall allowing the public to follow the work in progress.
The first phase was a consolidation of the central panel's fourteen planks which were separating from one another.
An astonishing repair of sorts had been effected some time in the last century: a young fruit tree was nailed vertically to the back of the panel and held in place with iron bands.
The first step was to remove the sapling and replace it with a system of aluminium braces.
Work then proceeded to the paintings: the central panel showing the elevation of the cross; the flanking wings showing the mourning women, Roman soldiers and two thieves; and the reverse sides of the wings showing Sts Amandus and Walburga on the left, and Eligius and Catherine on the right.
Centuries-old varnish had yellowed and darkened, discolouring the original palette and weakening the composition's depth.
These nearly opaque layers were stripped away along with several areas of retouching.
In general the condition of the work was found to be extremely good.
The one major dilemma involved the outer edges of the side panels where lateral extensions probably made in the early nineteenth century had darkened more than the original painting.
It was decided to retain the added strips and to carefully balance their tonality with the original's.
One member of the advisory panel, Hubertus von Sonnenberg, Chief Conservator of paintings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, told The Art Newspaper that the restorers ‘did a very good cleaning.
They never carried it too far and stuck to the guidelines agreed on’.
The other committee members are R.-A.
D'Hulst, Professor Emeritus at the State University in Ghent, and Frans Baudouin, former curator of the Rubens House in Antwerp.
Eventually the triptych will return to its position against the east wall of the north transept.
Its pendant, ‘The descent from the Cross’, will occupy the corresponding wall in the south transept, and the ‘Assumption of the Virgin’ will be installed in the apse.
But for now the transepts and choir are undergoing restoration and are blocked off by a wooden screen.
Until the architectural work is finished in time for Antwerp's celebration as European Culture Capital in 1993 the three Rubens masterpieces will be placed against this temporary wall.
The return of ‘The Raising of the Cross’ altarpiece was officially celebrated this spring.
Padua
William Harvey observed dissections here
Restoration of the world's oldest anatomy theatre completed
PADUA.
The Teatro Anatomico of Padua, the oldest surviving in the world, is once more open after more than 3000 hours of highly specialised restoration work.
This has been entirely financed by Fidia, a pharmaceutical company in Abano Terme.
The theatre is one of the most influential in the history of medicine, and was built in 1594, a century after Alessandro Benedetti's De Anatomia was published in Venice, describing for the first time an anatomical theatre which could be dismantled.
The theatre occupies the two upper floors of the north-west part of the Palazzo dell'Università, known as ‘the Bò’, and takes the form of an inverted cone on an elliptical plan.
It has been suggested that this form derives from that of the structure of the human eye itself, and may have been conceived by the theologist Fra' Paolo Sarpi, who collaborated on eye research in 1581–84 with Girolamo Fabrizio d'Acquapendente.
Some of the greatest anatomists of the Renaissance and post-Renaissance periods witnessed dissections there, including William Harvey, who discovered the circulation of the blood.
It remained in use until the middle of the last century, when alterations were carried out.
The condition of its wooden structure is a tribute to the sixteenth-century carpenters, and despite disintegration through fungal and insect activity owing to the lack of proper ventilation, the quality and perfect seasoning of the woods used has permitted its survival.
James Beck launches ArtWatch
NEW YORK.
James Beck, Professor of Art History at Columbia University, recently achieved celebrity status when he was prosecuted for criticising the restoration of Jacopo della Quercia's tomb sculpture ‘Ilaria del Carretto’(see The Art Newspaper, No. 14, January 1992, p.1).
Professor Beck emerged with his reputation intact and has moved on to launch a new project called ArtWatch, based in New York.
ArtWatch's somewhat convoluted Mission Statement sets out its aims: ‘To serve as an international advocate for the circumspect conservation and stewardship of historically significant works of art….
To promote an open exchange of ideas and information on the full range of practices and policies in the field of conservation….
To contribute to the development and codification of national and international cultural policies and practices as they bear upon historic and contemporary works of art…and To develop manifestos such as a Bill of Rights for a Work of Art’.
The organisation will consist of executive and advisory boards and ad hoc committees and task forces will be set up for specific projects.
On the ground, international observers will draw attention to any restoration work thought to be unsuitable or harmful.
These observers will be drawn not just from the world of art history but will also include scholars, philosophers, writers and musicians.
When appropriate a statement or report will be issued: ‘We have no other power but the word’ said Beck at the project's launch, ‘But it has the value of slowing down the madness’.
Beck's ‘Bill of Rights for a Work of Art’, published in the 1991 issue of Notes in the History of Art asserts:
All works of art have the inalienable right to live an honorable life and should not be subject to inappropriate interference.
All works of art have the inalienable right to remain in their original abode rather than being shipped around the world for display.
Restorations should not be undertaken for aesthetic reasons alone, but only for carefully controlled maintenance, because of the  inherent possibilities of damage in any restoration.
Instead of art's being transferred to metropolitan centers for grand exhibitions, it is more desirable for interested individuals to travel to the works.
Remarkable medieval tiled floor uncovered
LICHFIELD.
A remarkably fine and well-preserved thirteenth-century patterned tiled floor has been rediscovered at Lichfield Cathedral.
Dr Warwick Rodwell, consultant archaeologist to the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral, came across the floor during his ongoing survey and investigation of the building.
It was hidden under matting in the octagonal library above the Chapter house and seems to have escaped the notice of all previous surveyors and writers including Nikolaus Pevsner, who mentions the library in his guidebook but not its flooring.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Dr Rodwell commented that the floor was comparable in condition to the finest surviving floors in Britain, such as those in Westminster Abbey and Ely Cathedral.
Although showing the influence of notable craftsmen such as the Westminster Tiler its design is unique.
There is little need for any work on the floor which retains its original thirteenth-century mortar.
The only disturbance to its surface happened in the nineteenth century when the architect Gilbert Scott took up the edges in order to install a heating system.
Dr Rodwell recently commissioned a conservator to consolidate a few loose pieces but no major work is anticipated.
Dr Rodwell will be publishing the floor in his forthcoming book on the archaeology and architecture of the cathedral in collaboration with his colleague Paul Drury.
Dr Rodwell has been commissioned by English Heritage to produce a similar book on Wells Cathedral.
The library at Lichfield contains fine books and manuscripts and is in regular use (although the Anglo-Saxon Lichfield Gospels are actually on display downstairs in the Chapter house), and access to the floor will necessarily remain limited, thus helping to ensure its continuing survival.
Writing on the wall
ABINGDON.
The United Kingdom Institute for Conservation will be holding a conference on the topic of wall paintings at the Unicorn Theatre, Abingdon, on 20 June.
Lectures will be on: Glastonbury Abbey the Lady Chapel doors and their dating in the light of the 1986 conservation; Exeter Cathedral exterior polychromy; the recovery of the sequence of panels and Jesse Tree in St Helen's, Abingdon; glass from Winchester College Chapel now in the V&A; and recent discoveries in Cormac's Chapel, Cashel, Co.
Tipperary, Eire.
Seating is limited to eighty places.
Applications to UKIC, 37 Upper Addison Gardens, London W14 8AJ.
Other conferences planned by UKIC for 1992 include ‘Management and Training for Conservators’, ‘Carpet and Rug Forum’ and ‘Architectural Ceramics and Terracottas’.
Sandstone and sculpture are on next year's agenda.
French archaeologists protest
PARIS.
Nineteen members of the Centre Scientifique des Recherches Archáeologiques, the thirty-nine member body which advises on archaeological research in France, have resigned in protest at what they see as the unsatisfactory behaviour of the Ministry of Culture.
The setting up, in 1991, of the Ecole Nationale du Patrimoine, staffed mainly by art historians, has further demoted archaeological research; the national plan for archaeology, which was to have been a blueprint for future research projects, has not yet received the promised funding of FFr17 million (£1.7 million; $2.9 million); and their proposal that special forms of taxation be introduced to pay for urgent excavations (with priority given to the most deserving cases) has not been taken up.
But what has most disturbed the professional archaeologists is the increasing decentralisation of decision-making in their field, reducing the CSRA to figurehead status.
The general feeling is that this trend would be more acceptable if archaeologists in the various French regions had adequate financial resources, the necessary training, and real independence to decide where to dig.
The Ministry is accused of caring only about the historical artefacts themselves, and neglecting their significance in context.
It is said to give priority to prestige projects, to the detriment of serious planning and proper funding of research, which, in the main, has to depend on the goodwill of private sponsors.
Diggers at loose on Carolingian site
CORBIE.
Experts in the field of Carolingian archaeology have expressed serious concern at the project to build a new school on the site of the abbey complex at Corbie near Amiens.
Now a small town of 6,000 inhabitants, the abbey's great scriptorium and library were once the heart of a community of 30,000 people.
Work began on the construction of the school in December and the first brick has already been laid.
Carol Heiz, professor at the Université de Nanterre and specialist in Carolingian architecture, has compared the situation with the unsupervised work carried out at Poitiers twelve years ago which destroyed the traces of much Gallo-Roman material.
Professor Heiz called for a six-month period of study to be devoted to the Corbie site before work proceeds on the school.
Countering this charge, engineer Didier Bayard, employed by the regional archaeology service of Picardie, stated that no Carolingian material had emerged from their surveys and that the new building was to be constructed on a seventeenth-century site.
One positive result of the present campaign is an agreement between the local authorities and the state to fund a programme of digs, backed up by archival research, in the town centre, with the aim of avoiding further confrontations.
Sponsorship found for Cimabue's ‘Maestà’
FLORENCE.
The Ministry of Culture and the Banca Toscana have recently signed a long awaited agreement whereby the bank is to sponsor the restoration of Cimabue's ‘Maestà’.
The altarpiece, originally painted for the church of Santa Trinità, depicts the enthroned Madonna and Child surrounded by eight angels and four prophets.
It has been dated between 1280 and the final decade of the thirteenth century.
The condition of the altarpiece is similar in many ways to its two famous neighbours at the Uffizi, both recently restored: Giotto's Ognissanti Madonna and Duccio's ‘Maestà’.
The picture has suffered from drastic cleaning operations in the past, and has been retouched at various times with oil-based paints.
The wooden panel was tampered with in the last century, probably while it was housed in the Museo dell'Accademia: at that time it was fitted with a hinged iron surround so that it could be swivelled.
Unlike Giotto's panel, the Cimabue has lost its original wooden support.
The iron band, together with the turn-of-the-century frame, was fitted directly to the panel itself, constricting it and causing it to split vertically.
Alfio Del Serra has been chosen to carry out the restoration.
Books
Art multiples
Originals, casts and aftercasts
There are 1500 or so bronze casts of Degas' sculpture, not one cast in his lifetime
What relation do they play to his waxes?
Degas' sculpture is on the move: literally, in the sense that a complete set of the artist's bronzes has been travelling the world for the past five years, turning up in Verona, Florence, Amsterdam and Japan; metaphorically, in a sudden resurgence of interest in the sculptures themselves, after more than four decades of academic neglect.
For all the familiarity of Degas' bronze ballet-dancers, racehorses and nudes, the big questions about them have remained unanswered, even unasked; when exactly were they made?
What relationship do they have to Degas' drawings, pastels and prints?
Are the casts legitimate works of art, or unsanctioned spin-offs made for a quick profit?
At last, a number of projects and publications are in hand that will tackle some of these issues, quickening the pace of research and heightening our response to these remarkable works.
The story behind Degas' sculpture is essentially simple.
Beginning in the 1860s, Degas made small wax statuettes of horses and female figures, keeping them in his studio and occasionally using them as models for his two-dimensional work.
His production was sporadic and almost secretive, and only one work (the exceptional ‘Little dancer aged fourteen’) was exhibited in the artist's lifetime.
Degas himself showed little interest in casting the waxes into bronze, though three sculptures were made into trial plasters and a similar fate was considered for the ‘Little dancer’.
After his death, Degas' executors were delighted to discover eighty or more wax studies in his studio (accounts vary; one claims there were 150) and an elaborate wrangle ensued, resulting in the casting of seventy-three of the pieces by the founders Hébrard et Cie.
Until recently, the method by which Hébrard made the casts, enabling him to preserve the original waxes (most of them owned today by Paul Mellon) has been shrouded in mystery and the precise number of the edition has remained uncertain.
Even before the sculptures were revealed to the world, artists of no less authority than Renoir and Mary Cassatt declared them to be among Degas' greatest achievements.
When the bronzes appeared on the market, museums and collectors moved in, buying either single items or acquiring complete sets through the generosity of patrons.
The academic community was slower in rising to the challenge.
It was not until Rewald's 1944 publication, Degas, Works in Sculpture, that a fully illustrated catalogue appeared and it was another thirty years before Charles Millard's The Sculpture of Edgar Degas attempted to set the work in a wider context.
Where does this leave us today?
Despite the recent re-issue of Rewald's classic monograph, we still lack a true catalogue raisonné, bringing together all the visual and documentary material and engaging with the fundamental issues; for example, after the sensational exhibition of the Mellon waxes at the National Gallery in Washington in 1991, there is an even greater need for a study of the relationship of the waxes to the 1,500 or so bronze casts scattered throughout the world; more understanding of Degas' techniques and the reproductive processes used by his founder is urgently required; a consideration of the images themselves, and their place in contemporary sculpture, is conspicuous by its absence; and, the biggest question of all, the role of these wax figures in the wider oeuvre cries out to be examined.
Help is at hand, from a number of quarters.
Sara Campbell, curator of the Norton Simon Museum, which owns the complete modèle set of sculptures, has for many years been tracking down all the known casts of Degas' bronzes and plans to publish the most up-to-date, though necessarily incomplete, account of the status quo.
Ronald Pickvance, already associated with the Sao Paolo bronzes from their Japanese tour of 1988, is to curate another show of the same collection at the Fondation Pierre Giannadda in Martigny, Switzerland, in 1993.
An exhibition of a refreshingly different kind is planned for 1994 at the Joslyn Art Museum, Omaha, USA, owner of one of the two known plaster versions of the ‘Little dancer aged fourteen’.
These plasters played a crucial, but still only partly understood, role in the casting of the bronze figure, and the Joslyn example will become the centrepiece of a highly focused show offering a definitive account of the sculpture, its genesis and its pictorial echoes in the work of Degas' middle years.
All these projects will benefit greatly from the advances made by the Degas retrospective of 1988–89, which bravely integrated sculptures with paintings and pastels in both exhibition and scholarly catalogues.
Partly as a result of archive material made available at that time, a book from the Réunion des musées nationaux provides us with the most up-to-date account of Degas' sculptural activity.
Degas Sculptures written by Anne Pingeot and with plates by the distinguished photographer Frank Horvat, is handsomely designed, exquisitely printed and numbingly expensive.
To be fair, for FFr 590 the lucky owner gets the equivalent of two, or even three, separate books within one set of covers.
Anne Pingeot's introduction offers a concise summary of Degas' attitudes and aphorisms, and a largely factual résumé of the history of the bronzes, incorporating much new documentation.
This is followed by a lavish one hundred pages of black and white photographs, all based on the set of bronzes owned by the Musée d'Orsay.
Finally, a dense catalogue section itemises each of the sculptures, complete with technical and bibliographical data, and includes the texts of crucial documents relating to the discovery and reproduction of the wax originals.
The first and last sections of the book together add more to our knowledge of Degas' sculpture than anything published in the last three or four decades.
Not only do the letters and inventories of Vollard, Durand-Ruel and Hébrard greatly illuminate the history of the casts, but the individual entries on the sculptures constitute the first true catalogue of these works.
Among the other crucial features are the complete set of photographs taken by Gauthier in January 1918 at the artist's studio, when the Durand-Ruel inventory was drawn up.
Never before published systematically, these photographs are a primary source of the utmost importance, recording the unrestored and sometimes pathetically damaged state of many of the pieces at the artist's death.
If a single criticism of Degas Sculptures is to be made, it is that the Gauthier prints are reproduced on a small, often miniature scale and are not presented, as they deserve to be, on a one-to-a-page basis, preferably beside their bronze counterparts.
Moscow
Russian publishing trade at a stand still
A convertible rouble will allow Western publishers to enter a huge market
MOSCOW.
The Moscow publishers Sovetskiy Khudozhnik [Soviet Artist]have published a book entitled Neizvestnyy avangard, which contains unique material on the work of early twentieth-century artists whose works were for years unknown to the public, stowed away in the store rooms of Russian provincial museums and in private collections.
In spite of the fact that many books and articles have been published on such well known masters as Malevich, Kandinsky, Tatlin, Larionov, Goncharova and others, the authors have been able to find genuinely new material about the Russian Avant-garde.
In the past, the publication of such a book would have been a major professional event.
Now, however, the book has attracted attention for another reason: it is just about the only book on art to have appeared in Russia in recent times.
The fact is that Russian publishers producing books on art are faced with the real threat of closure.
The old Moscow publishers Iskusstvo managed to release just one book last year, and having exhausted its resources, it was forced to suspend publication of the journal Iskusstvo, which has been coming out for a number of decades.
The situation facing other publishers is no better.
Having released a highly successful book of Russian posters the renowned publisher Aurora, which publishes books for export, does not know what to do with the rich reserve of editorial material it has accumulated over recent years, and it has been forced to sell transparencies and texts.
A unique situation has emerged.
Many extremely interesting publications on art currently only exist as a one-off draft.
At recent book fairs in London and Florence, publishers were not even able to make use of stands which were provided for free, since they simply had nothing to show.
Against a background of the printed ‘follies’ from Western publishers, the modest Russian draft copies glued together from photographs looked lost.
Every one of these could bring the publishers a decent profit on the Russian book market.
However, this does not matter much, since the book has to be printed and that is not so simple in Russia at the moment.
The paper which is more less suitable for publishing art books has always been made in Ukraine.
In the new Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Ukraine has become a foreign country, and it does not intend giving its paper to anyone.
Meanwhile, no one can buy the paper for hard currency, not even the mighty Ministry of Defence, because the only bank for foreign trade operations has declared itself almost bankrupt, and refuses to return hard currency to its owners.
The remaining option is the raw materials exchanges which sometimes offer consignments of paper.
However, the prices are beyond the reach of publishers.
The general cultural journals were the first to suffer.
Due to their failure to cope with a multi-million deficit, the journals Arkhitektura, Dekorativnoye iskusstvo and Tvorchestvo have stopped coming out.
The fate of the journal Nashe naslediye is in doubt following the death of its sponsor Robert Maxwell.
Then it was the turn of the book publishers.
Their desperate attempts to cut expenditure in any way they could led to a sharp decline in print quality.
Disillusioned authors have been drawn to Western publishers.
However, even this has not turned out to be so simple.
The interest in Russian subject matter is decreasing with every year.
Obviously, the abundance of offers and the haste to try and cover new ground have led to over-production.
The books of which Russian publishers used to be so proud academic research by specialists in culture-related fields are particularly vulnerable.
Multi-volume catalogues prepared by the Pushkin Museum and Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow are gathering dust with the publishers without any prospect of this situation changing.
The Sovetskiy khudozhnik press has stopped publishing the unique annual publication Sovetskoye iskusstvoznaniye, a collection of the year's best articles by art historians.
The fairly weak flow of publications devoted to the work of modern artists has dried up.
The most startling thing about this is the fact that the crisis in publishing is taking place against a background of an almost limitless book market.
The demand for popular books on art, unlike the demand for many others, is not only not falling, but also showing an enviable stability.
The rare books on this subject which make it to press do not remain in the shops.
They are snapped up like lightning by the black market with its ‘crazy’ economy.
The price of a large coffee-table book is in a number of cases twenty times higher than it was two years ago.
It seems that the current situation is of little concern to the Russian Ministry of Publishing.
The Ministry is more concerned with the shortage in school textbooks and political nonsense.
Many determined publishers and printers from the USA, Germany, Italy and France are taking a keen interest in this enigmatic country and in the limitless market, trying to decide how best to break into this Klondike.
In Russia they used to sell books, but it is now entirely possible that they could also sell the publishers.
Medieval studies
Giggling over rude words in the Latin psalter
The sexual and social politics of Marginalia
What is the rudest word in the Latin Psalter?
The answer, according to the smutty medieval joke quoted here, is conculcavit (‘he has trodden’) because it has a cul (a bum) in the middle flanked on either side by con and vit (the female and male genitalia).
Doubtless medieval choirboys fell off their misericords laughing as this grubby pun was passed along the row.
It is into this shadowy world of schoolboy humour that we are introduced by Michael Camille's Image on the Edge, the Margins of Medieval Art.
Many medieval manuscripts have decorated borders filled with comic animals and birds and people.
These images are not part of the text.
They are beyond and outside what was obligatory book illustration.
The artists were not following standard picture cycles but were indulging in their own fantasies and jokes, often amazingly smutty in the margins of pious liturgy.
Professor Camille has thoroughly enjoyed himself in looking at such images, and he skilfully shares with us his delight and enthusiasm for what he has found.
He lectures at the University of Chicago: he has a wonderful oratorical style, with a splendid command of English, and these essays would (and doubtless do) make magnificent lectures, with slides.
The whole book is worth buying if only for the fourteenth-century teddy bear and cuddly elephant in colour in plate 27.
Professor Camille quotes the ‘blinded generations of scholars’ who have failed to see the true significance of these unofficial marginal images.
He finds striking sexual and social politics everywhere he looks.
It is terrible to admit, but I for one, having read the book, am still blind.
Professor Camille generalises wildly, as if his examples covered the whole Middle Ages, when actually the fashion for whimsical marginal drawings was principally about 1280 to about 1340, and especially in Flanders.
He finds deep meaning in tiny pictures from daily life and satire which were often little more than space-fillers.
It is a grim indictment (and I do apologise to him if I am wrong) but he seems not to read Latin or to use any source except in translation.
From the very first page, where he both mistranscribes and then mistranslates further the opening of Terce in a Book of Hours, he matches marginal pictures with random words of text beside them, wildly associating words out of context with pictures near them in the margins, apparently grasping the flimsiest of puns and word associations.
What is so fascinating is that maybe the medieval artists were just as ignorant of Latin.
Long Latin words are full of syllables which resemble ‘bum’ and ‘tit’and ‘poo’much more, and an idly dreaming miniaturist may have had a thought process set off by half-reading the Latin: if in lege domini (Psalm 1:2) really suggested the funny men made of legs on the opening pages of the Bardolf-Vaux and Ormesby Psalters, then this tells us that the artists, like Professor Camille, spoke English.
Psychiatrists today may find scatological or sexual meanings in their patients' doodles, but this is a new approach for art historians and is quite unverifiable after 650 years.
But if it brings us to looking at medieval manuscripts more and more closely, peering with pleasure into the borders of bunnies and monkeys, whether we seek deliberate smut or idle whimsy, it makes Images on the Edge well worth reading.
It is an entirely diverting and unusual book, and is full of pictures of bosoms and bums.
Princeton books in Britain
LONDON.
From 1 July Princeton University Press will be distributing books in the UK and the EEC from John Wiley and Sons Ltd in Bognor Regis.
This means that books which do not have an English co-publisher will now be available for order and reorder more easily.
Princeton art titles for the autumn include two new additions to the Andrew W. Mellon Lectures in the fine Arts from John Shearman and Oleg Grabar.
In January 1993 they will be publishing the first English translation of Alois Riegel's nineteenth century book on the history of ornament.
From 1 July all orders from the UK, Europe, Africa and the Middle East should be placed c/o John Wiley and Sons, Distribution Centre, 1 Oldlands Way, Bognor Regis, W. Sussex PO22 9SA.
Tel: 0243 829121, fax: 0243 820250
Prometheus unbound
LONDON.
The British Museum Press launched its Prometheus award in 1991 with the aim of encouraging young scholars to produce work which crosses disciplinary boundaries or examines events over a wide time scale.
The prize of £2,000 is awarded to the most outstanding synopsis of a first book by a young author in the field of archaeology, ethnography or ancient history.
The winner of the first prize was Richard Rudgley for The Alchemy of Culture Intoxicants in Society, to be published in 1993.
Applicants for this year's prize should be aged under thirty-five on 31 July 1992 and be UK citizens.
The winner will be announced in November.
Bretschneider prize awarded to catalogues of Roman glass at the Toledo Museum of Art
TOLEDO, OH.
Dr Eva Marianne Stern, guest curator of Roman glass at the Toledo Museum of Art, has been awarded the sixth ‘L'Erma’ di Bretschneider publication prize for her manuscript of Roman mould-blown glass.
The manuscript, to be published by 1994, is the first of a three-volume catalogue of the museums's 1,100 piece collection of Roman and Byzantine glass.
Todedo's 168 pieces of Roman mould-blown glass, dating from the first to sixth centuries AD, constitute the world's largest and finest collection of examples of this technique.
Dr Stern has been conducting research at the museum to investigate ancient procedures of glass manufacture.
A grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation has allowed the Amsterdam-born Dr Stern to spend the last six years cataloguing the museum's ancient glass collection.
The second volume will include 410 examples of late-Roman and Byzantine glass (fourth to seventh centuries) and the third will cover 460 pieces of Roman free-blown glass (first to third centuries).
The international prize named after the Italian publisher Max Bretschneider is presented every five years to a work on pre-historic to Medieval art history.
The 1992 award consists of L4 million, to be split between Dr Stern and the museum, and funds to produce and distribute the lavishly  illustrated catalogue.
American book prize goes to Hiram Powers monograph
WASHINGTON, D.C. Richard P. Wunder, author of Hiram Powers, Vermont Sculptor, 1805-73, reviewed in The Art Newspaper last month, has won the fourth annual Charles C. Eldredge Prize for this book.
The $2,000 prize was set up by a patrons' organization of the National Museum of American Art in honour of Charles C. Eldredge, former director of the museum.
Jurors of this year's prize included Gabriel P. Weisberg, professor of art history at the University of Minnesota; Joan Marter, professor of art history at Rutgers University; and Jesssie Poech, professor of art history at Tulane University.
For next year's prize books on American art published between 1990 and 1992 will be considered: nominations to The Charles C. Eldredge Prize, Research and Scholars Center, National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC 20560.
American Art Review rides again
KANSAS CITY MO.
After a long dormancy, the American Art Review will resume publication this month.
The bi-monthly scholarly journal, founded in Los Angeles in 1973, suspended publication in 1978 owing to lack of funds.
Well regarded for its colour-illustrated articles by noted authors, many from the museum field, the journal had a devoted following of around 10,000 subscribers, but needed a cash infusion to get out of the red.
Founding publisher Thomas R. Kellaway recently inherited enough money for the restart.
The magazine will continue to cover American painting, drawings, prints, and sculpture from the Colonial period to 1960, with occasional attention to decorative arts and architecture, and a bit more to photography.
Regular features include previews and analysis of auctions and sales, a museum and gallery exhibition calendar, book reviews, and entries in the ‘Serialized Encyclopedia of American Art’.
Former editor Martha Hutson is back as Associate Publisher on the East coast, and Senior Editors are William H. Gerdts and William Innes Homer, advised by an editorial board of Americanist scholars.
For further information write P.O.
Box 480500, Kansas City, MO 64148 or call (913) 451–8801.
Castelli archive for sale: Getty in the running
NEW YORK.
The rich archive of photographs, letters, documents and memorabilia assembled by New York dealer-supreme Leo Castelli is up for sale.
The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities has declared itself a potential purchaser but is apparently negotiating on the asking price which is said to be $2 million.
According to a recent report in the New York Times, Castelli has said that he wishes the archives to be fully accessible to the public and that if this were in any doubt he would donate them without charge to the Smithsonian Institute's Archives of American Art.
At the time of going to press, no further details on the possible deal were available.
Spain looks to its archives
MADRID.
The General Directorate for Fine Arts and Archives of the Spanish Ministry of Culture has announced a Pta100 million funding programme for archives in Central and South America which relate to Spain's colonial past.
The money will be used to step up  technological know-how, to purchase restoration equipment and set up entire restoration studios in some countries including Colombia and Cuba.
In Costa Rica a microfilm centre will be started while a loan will enable Cuzco in Peru to build up an archive.
In addition a General Directory of Latin American Archives has been launched for which 30,000 archives will be put onto a database.
This will complement the already existing database of documents in Spanish archives relating to Latin America.
Renaissance sculpture
No controversy here over Jacopo della Quercia
A major monograph by James Beck, the subject of a recent notorious court case over the cleaning of della Quercia's tomb of Ilaria del Carretto
Jacopo della Quercia has never enjoyed the popularity of his fellow sculptors Ghiberti and Donatello, and his works have not been favoured by time.
The tomb of Ilaria del Carretto is only a fragment of its former state while the splendid complex of the Fonte Gaia is almost indecipherable.
To the general public, the sculptor is best known, as the artist who inspired Michelangelo's account of Genesis on the Sistine ceiling or, perhaps, as the creator of one of Ruskin's preferred icons.
James Beck's long awaited monograph looks at the man and his achievement; in his pages, Jacopo della Quercia is championed as the least provincial and most ‘Italian’ of fifteenth-century sculptors, an artist sensible to his environs, constantly adjusting his own stylistic language, and eventually producing an individual synthesis of classical, gothic, and contemporary influences in his major works.
Jacopo della Quercia is divided into two volumes, with the first given over to an account of the artist's life and works, followed by a concise catalogue.
The second volume is illustrated with a judicious selection of new and archival photographs so that past and present states of individual works can be compared, but the bulk of the volume contains over 500 documents with commentary so that the primary sources can now be easily consulted.
The core of the book is an extended essay on the sculptor's stylistic development, in which the author sees Jacopo first developing under his own father, the goldsmith Piero di Landi, then learning to carve marble under the capomaestro of Lucca Cathedral, Antonio Pardini, during the 1390s.
The young sculptor roamed around Italy, working in Ferrara and probably Bologna and responding to the International Gothic style of the Dalle Masegne workshop.
He wove these and other influences from Florentine contemporaries into a distinctive manner, at once responding to the plastic values of Donatello but never renouncing an almost calligraphic approach to outlines and drapery.
Early works, like the tomb of Ilaria or the Trenta altar, display an uncanny ability to keep Gothic and Renaissance elements in balance, but Jacopo della Quercia's gifts found a perfect statement in relief sculpture, from the Fonte Gaia of his middle years to the main portal of San Petronio, on which he worked intermittently from 1425 until his death in 1438.
The decoration of San Petronio's main portal became the sculptor's greatest statement in stone, and it was cast appropriately in the manner of Gothic narrative cycles of Old and New Testament scenes.
Beck devotes more space to this project than any other and rightly so because it was here that Jacopo della Quercia poured forth his genius in psychologically charged narratives and compelling statuary.
Beck's analysis of this complex project and of the various influences at play are among the finest pages in the book.
Jacopo della Quercia provides an authoritative guide to one of the great neglected sculptors of the fifteenth century.
It is not, however, a book for the uninitiated.
The author assumes considerable familiarity with the subject and is primarily concerned with the evolution of the sculptor's style.
This is reflected in an occasionally abrupt narrative and a lack of reference to the larger scene against which Jacopo della Quercia played out his life.
Symptomatic of this closely focused study is the absence of any comparative photographic material, which requires potential readers to be blessed with good visual memories or access to a well stocked library.
But James Beck has produced a solid contribution to Renaissance studies, and, unlike so many art-historical books, the author's engagement with his subject is felt on almost every page.
The Ian Woodner drawings symposium
Philip Wilson Publishers have published the papers presented at the Ian Woodner Master Drawings Symposium held at the Royal Academy, London, in November 1987.
The fourteen papers include: ‘The Renaissance draughtsman and his models’ by Francis Ames-Lewis, which takes issue with some of the opinions in the Woodner exhibition catalogue; ‘The creative copy in nineteenth-century French art’by Richard Thompson, which produces some striking juxtapositions such as a Redon charcoal after Leonardo's Louvre ‘Virgin and Child with Saint Anne’with the original painting; ‘Claude Lorraine as a figure draughtsman’by Michael Kitson; ‘The charcoal drawings of Odilon Redon’by Vojtech Jirat-Wasiutynski; ‘Pastel: its evolution to the twentieth century’by Genevieve Monnier’; and ‘An unknown collection of drawings in the eighteenth century’by Tilman Falk, which attempts to reconstruct the collection of the Rheinland merchant Johann Jakob Faesch (1732–96).
Of the eighteen drawings catalogued by Falk a number bear notable provenances including Jabach, Zoomer, Lanier and Lawrence.
The majority of the papers presented are highly readable and accessible to the general reader, indeed some are  surprisingly general, if not a little unfocused in approach.
Small  inaccuracies could have been ironed out: Redon's lithographs, discussed by Jirat-Wasiutynski, for example, are not printed on ‘tissue’ but on Chine collé which is quite different.
The volume suffers from less than immaculate editing and the quality of many of the illustrations is poor.
Ed.
Diana Dethloff Drawings: Masters and Methods.
Raphael to Redon.
Papers presented to the Woodner Symposium at the Royal Academy of Arts (Philip Wilson Publishers Ltd.
London, 1992) 228pp. 273 b/w ills.
£39.95
Netherlandish drawings in the Pierpont Morgan Library
Netherlandish Drawings is the culmination of years of research conducted by Felice Stampfle, Charles W. Engelhard Curator Emeritus of Drawings and Prints at the Morgan Library, who headed the department from 1945 to 1984, and began the present volume after her retirement.
Ms Stampfle, the first editor of Master Drawings from 1963 to 1984, was assisted by Dr Ruth S. Kraemer, and Jane Shoaf Turner, who wrote the twenty-five entries for the album of drawings by Maerten de Vos.
This is the first of two volumes devoted to the library's Netherlandish drawings; the second will deal with Dutch drawings of the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
No other area of the Morgan's collection of more than 9,000 Old Master drawings has been made available in a completely illustrated catalogue.
The catalogue treats 347 sheets, most from the sixteenth century, by Breughel, Goltzius, Pourbus, de Gheyn II, Jordaens, van Dyck, Rubens and about 120 other masters, arranged in alphabetical order of the artists' names.
Works formerly, but no longer, attributed to members of the school under consideration are also included.
Entries include physical descriptions, interpretations of subject matter and iconography, stylistic analyses when they relate to attribution, and surveys of earlier scholarly opinions.
The volume also contains bibliographies of books, articles and exhibition catalogues, line drawings of the most important watermarks, and an artist and a provenance index.
In the latter table one notes the prominence of the British artist and collector, Charles Fairfax Murray (1849–1919), from whom 244 of the 347 sheets descend.
Mr Morgan purchased the Murray Collection en bloc in 1910, bringing the first major group of Old Master drawings to America.
Mainie Jellett an unsexed biography
Sophisticated feminists can now study quite a range of art history, such as Mary Garrard's brilliant monograph on Artemesia Gentileschi, as well as the general rewriting of male-dominated art history produced by scholars like Germaine Greer or Griselda Pollock.
All too often though, the critical enthusiasm is immense, while the actual critical judgement disappoints, and we are left with the feeling that good but minor work is being overpraised for polemical reasons.
Such feminist strengths and weaknesses are entirely absent from Bruce Arnold's book on Mainie Jellett.
It moves smoothly and pleasantly through the course of her dedicated career without any recognition of her gender constituting a difficulty.
The Irish male being notoriously patriarchal, this is to undervalue Jellett as seriously as a feminist might overvalue her.
Arnold in no way undervalues her as an artist.
He calls her ‘an outstanding creative figure in twentieth-century art, and a dominating influence in Irish art in her time’; he praises ‘her radiant self-confidence’, ‘her austere intellectual vigour’ and makes no secret of his passionate commitment to the greatness of her artistic achievement.
But she achieved whatever she did against a massive public distaste for modern art, a fact well documented by Arnold and set clearly in the context of international and national attitudes.
Here Jellett deserves all the admiration he expresses.
He is probably right, too, in thinking that she would be far better known in art historical terms had she stayed in France, where her daring move into abstraction was more appreciated, than returning dutifully to the provincial inertia of Dublin.
One is surprised to discover which should be more widely known that her abstract work preceded that of Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth by ten years or so.
But Arnold seems unaware of the strain that Jellett must have borne specifically as a woman artist, and one cannot help but wonder if this contributed to her early death.
She had advantages, of course: a moneyed and cultured background, and a great canniness in finding the right teachers.
She went to England in her teens (1917) to work under the dark genius of Sickert, and from him went on to France, where first, and briefly, she learnt from Andere Lhote, and then commenced a lifetime study with and under Albert Gleizes.
The copious illustrations provided make it possible to assess the truth or falsity of the accusation that Gleizes had too strong and enduring an influence.
The progress of restorations in Venice since the 1966 flood
Venice Restored takes stock of the first twenty years of conservation in the Serenissima after the disastrous flood of 1966.
Prefaces by Margherita Asso, Alvise Zorzi, and others outline the problems still facing Venice, especially the lack of detailed studies of the urban fabric and the stalemate over the mobile dams to be constructed in the lagoon.
The litany of complaints, in particular the bureaucratic inertia of the various tiers of government, has not changed over the past quarter century; yet much has been done, both by foreign and Italian committees.
The bulk of the book deals with the various projects, sponsored by UNESCO and private committees, district by district.
The photographs alone give an idea of how wide-ranging the interventions have been.
Each entry consists of a brief history of the building, followed by accounts of its conservation and that of individual works of art, such as the cleaning of Donatello's ‘St John the Baptist’ in the Frari or the great stained glass window in SS.
Giovanni e Paolo.
If the prefaces strike a sombre note, the entries go to the other extreme by being blandly reassuring and avoiding excessive detail.
This may have been the result of cramming so much into a restricted space, but it diminishes the significance of the book as a whole.
Bibliographies are hit or miss, and continuing problems, such as the fragile state of the Miracoli after its lengthy restoration in 1968–77, are not mentioned.
Humbert de Superville: Trecento enthusiast
Humbert de Superville was a precocious admirer of Italian Primitives, to the point of signing himself ‘Giottino’.
During a stay in Italy de Superville produced 2,500 or so drawings of Tuscan, Umbrian and Roman works of art, intended to be used as illustrations for a history of art.
The drawings disappeared during the 1798 turmoil in Rome, later reappearing in the collection of the Milanese Giuseppe Bossi, whose collection eventually formed the nucleus of the Venice Accademia drawings collection.
The Accademia's curator Annalisa Perissa Torrina has compiled detailed notes on each of the 221 drawings now in the Accademia and has identified the original sources of the reproductive drawings, 124 of which are reproduced for the first time.
Torrina also discusses the original portrait and landscape drawings, which are executed in a freer, more intimate style.
Getty relaunches anthropology and aesthetics journal
The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities has assumed the role of publisher and co-owner of the journal RES Anthropology and Aesthetics, a joint venture with Harvard University's Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology.
The publication was founded in 1981 and appears twice-yearly.
It is lavishly illustrated and presented and has assumed a pre-eminent position in its field.
The editor will continue to be anthropologist, art historian and classicist Francesco Pellizzi.
The spring 1992 issue will appear this month and will contain eight articles including: ‘The Economics of Develop-Man in the Pacific’; ‘Plastic character, or how to twist morality with plastics’; ‘Flowery Heaven: the Aesthetics of Paradise in Nahuatl Devotional Literature’; and ‘The Maya Snake Dance: Ritual and Cosmology’.
The journal is distributed worldwide by Cambridge University Press and costs $27 annually for individuals and $50 for institutions.
The Art Market
New York
German art keenly contested at mediocre contemporary art sales
New auction records for Malcolm Morley and Julian Schnabel compensate for generally low prices
NEW YORK.
The results of the six sessions of contemporary art which took place on 5, 6 and 7 May and launched three weeks of intensive auction activity in New York, were difficult to predict and, even when they were known, provided little evidence about the current state of the market.
What conclusions could have been usefully drawn from sales which did not include major works by Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg, Francis Bacon and other masters by whom its temperature is usually gauged?
Instead, bloated catalogues bulged with inferior stock and works which properly belonged in the routine day sales and had been promoted in order to provide ballast for the smarter evening sessions.
Sotheby's paid dearly for this error of judgment with no less than six of the first nine lots in its evening sale failing to find buyers.
It is doubtful that auctioneer John Marion had ever presided over such a disastrous start to an auction.
Christie's reversed the usual pattern and loaded the front of its evening sale of 5 May with twenty-six new and recent works from the estate of Swedish collector and trader, Fredrik Roos.
The gamble paid off handsomely with only one picture, a difficult composition by Julian Schnabel (lot 19) failing to find a buyer.
Against presale estimates of $3–4.5 million, the collection raised $4.7 million towards the relief of the estate's debts of more than $20 million.
Noted successes included Anselm Kiefer's ‘Säulen’(lot 24), ‘Franz im Bett’, a major painting by Georg Baselitz (lot 23a, est. $300–400,000) which had been shown at Berlin's ‘Zeitgeist’ exhibition in 1982 and was bought by an unidentified collector from Omaha for $400,000 (£222,200); a precious little candle painting by Gerhard Richter (lot 3, est. $80–120,000) which attracted keen interest and a winning bid of $200,000 (£111,100); and ‘Stacked’, a carved polychrome wood sculpture of an assortment of domestic and farm animals by Jeff Koons (lot 8a, est. $100–150,000) from the Banality exhibition of 1988 and shown in ‘Metropolis’in Berlin last year, which was sold for $160,000 (£88,900) with Thomas Ammann and Anthony d'Offay among the underbidders.
Recent interest in the sculpture of Robert Gober was confirmed by an untitled ‘Sink’(lot 10, est. $90–120,000) and an untitled ‘Bed’(lot 18, est. $80–120,000), which fetched $120,000 (£66,700) and $180,000 (£100,000) respectively.
Among works by British artists in the Roos estate, Barry Flanagan's ‘Acrobats’(lot 1, est. $100–150,000), a pair of balancing bronze hares, sold for $85,000 (£47,200), and ‘Three cast bottles’ by Tony Cragg (lot 20, est. $80–120,000) fetched $95,000 (£52,800).
The remainder of Christie's evening sale was a more erratic affair.
Twenty-seven of forty-four lots found buyers, raising $5.5 million (£3.05 million) against presale estimates of $8.9–11.7 million.
Andy Warhol's ‘210 Coca-Cola bottles’(lot 46) accounted for a large slice of those figures.
Mark Tansey's ‘The myth of depth’(lot 65, est. $150–200,000) depicting Clement Greenberg and a group of Abstract Expressionist painters watching from a rowing boat as Jackson Pollock walks on the water, was bought by Ikkan Sanada, a private Japanese dealer, for $220,000 (£122,200).
A pair of granite chairs by Scott Burton (lot 55, est. $100–150,000) sold for $80,000 (£44,400), in spite of concerns about their condition Lichtenstein's ‘Laughing cat’(lot 44a, est. $350–450,000) failed to attract any interest and was bought in at $190,000.
A minor work by the artist, it had been purchased from the sale of Andy Warhol's property at Sotheby's in New York exactly four years ago for the exaggerated price of $290,000.
At Sotheby's the following evening, a dim sale was rescued by a package of twenty-one works of art consigned by advertising agent Charles Saatchi, who has been a regular trader through the auction houses in recent years.
Although minor works by Jasper Johns (lot 20, est. $300–400,000) and Robert Rauschenberg (lot 21, est. $500–700,000) failed to attract any bids, there was satisfactory interest in Minimalist and Neo-Expressionist pictures from his collection.
As a result, Sotheby's salvaged a poor session, selling forty of sixty-one lots for $11.2 million (£6.2 million) against presale estimates of $17.6–23.3 million.
Larry Gagosian paid the highest price of the evening when he purchased a magnificent untitled canvas from the Bolsena series, executed by Cy Twombly in 1969 (lot 33, est. $1.75–2.25 million), for $1.5 million (£833,000).
When this picture, which belonged to Saatchi, was exhibited with other works from the same series at Gagosian's gallery in 1990, it would have been valued at $3.5 million.
Keen interest surrounded three early works by Julian Schnabel (lots 37, 45 and 47) and two important oil paintings by Malcolm Morley (lots 43 and 46), artists who have enjoyed an erratic performance in the salerooms in the past.
Their reputations as major artists appear to have been confirmed by their strong showing (see captions).
Brice Marden's large diptych, ‘The Dylan Karina painting’(lot 29, est. $600–800,000) was purchased by Jeffrey Deitch for $575,000 (£319,400).
A slightly smaller but more beautiful painting from Marden's ‘Grove group’ had sold in these rooms in November for $750,000.
An important facture painting, ‘Graue Hunde, drei Streifen’ by Georg Baselitz (lot 31, est. $350–450,000), which London dealer Michael Hue-Williams had acquired from Saatchi several years ago and was widely known in the trade, sold to a telephone bidder for $370,000 (£205,600).
Two formica sculptures by Richard Artschwager, ‘Book II (Nike)’(lot 38, est. $150–200,000) and ‘Chair’(lot 40, est. $80–100,000), both of which had been exhibited at the Saatchi Collection last summer, sold inexpensively for $100,000 (£55,600) and $50,000 (£27,800) respectively.
Two important British pictures performed disappointingly.
R.B. Kitaj's ‘Rock garden’(lot 42, est. $200–300,000), his major statement on Jewish anguish, was bought by a bidder seated at the back of the room for $140,000 (£77,800).
Lucian Freud's compelling ‘Night Interior’(lot 44, est. $500–600,000), which was owned by Saatchi, attracted a couple of hesitant bids from Anthony d'Offay, who had exhibited the picture at his gallery in 1972, but was bought in at $260,000.
The strength of the market for German contemporary art was underlined when a group of twenty-six watercolours and drawings by Georg Baselitz was offered in the Sotheby's day sale of 7 May.
The property of a collection formed by Helmut and Margot Kraetz, whose German and Minimalist art had sold so well in New York in November, they attracted enthusiastic competition and fetched a total of $501,500 (£278,600), the most expensive lot being an untitled sheet (lot 104, est. $35–45,000), executed in gouache and crayons in 1964, which sold for $75,000 (£41,700).
In the same sale, Christian Boltanski's ‘Autel Chases’(lot 198, est. $50–70,000) sold for $75,000 (£41,700); ‘Fill’, an important lead figure sculpture by Antony Gormley (lot 148, est. $30–40,000) fetched $48,000 (£26,700); and Bill Woodrow's ‘Switch’(lot 220, est. $8–12,000), an exciting construction incorporating a car bonnet and a toy horse and consigned by Elaine Dannheisser, was sold for $15,000 (£8,300).
Anselm Kiefer's ‘Säulen’(Christie's lot 24, est. $300–400,000), a powerful architectural work of 1983, attracted the highest bid among the twenty-six lots consigned by the estate of Fredrik Roos to the evening sale of 5 May.
In spite of serious conservation problems, including losses of paint and straw, it was bought by an American dealer believed to be Celia Asher, who acts as agent for theatrical impresario Riklis, for $580,000 (£322,200)
‘Maria Callas No. 4’(Sotheby's lot 47, est. $200–250,000), an explosive abstract composition painted by Julian Schnabel on a large sheet of dark red velvet in 1982, shared an auction record for the artist's work when it sold to New York property developer, Harry Macklowe and his wife Linda, for $290,000 (£161,100).
That record had been set earlier in the same evening when ‘Bob's worlds’(Sotheby's lot 37, est. $250–350,000), an important crockery picture, had been purchased by a telephone bidder against art adviser Jeffrey Deitch.
Charles Saatchi was the vendor of both works
Malcolm Morley's spectacular copy of Vermeer's ‘Portrait of the artist in his studio’(Sotheby's lot 43, est. $350–450,000) established a new auction record for the artist when it was sold to Los Angeles collector, Eli Broad, for $570,000 (£316,700) at the evening sale of 6 May.
Seated in the second row, Broad purchased a second composition by Morley, ‘Age of Catastrophe’(Sotheby's lot 46, est. $300–400,000) for $280,000 (£155,600).
Both paintings had been consigned by Charles Saatchi
Andy Warhol's silkscreen canvas ‘210 Coca-Cola bottles’(Christie's lot 46, est. $2.2–2.8 million) was the most expensive lot of the week when it was sold for $1.9 million (£1.05 million) to Zurich dealer, Thomas Ammann, against stiff competition from Helge Achenbach, the dealer from Düsseldorf who advises Deutsche Bank and the Flick family.
Four years ago, the same picture was offered at Sotheby's in New York when it was bought by California collector Martin Blinder for $1.3 million
Second Rembrandt of the season to be sold at Sotheby's, 8 July
LONDON.
The Earl and Countess of Rosebery have consigned to Sotheby's Rembrandt's ‘Portrait of Johannes Uyttenbogaert’.
It is signed and dated 1633, and is inscribed ‘AET: 76’.
The reason given for selling is to raise funds for the restoration of the Rosebery seat, Dalmeny House, near Edinburgh, where the painting was on show to the public until a year ago.
The mother of the present Earl decided to include the Rembrandt among other works of art retained when the contents of the family's English country house, Mentmore Towers, went under Sotheby's hammer in 1977.
This is the second unimpeachable Rembrandt painting to come up for sale in London this season, the first having been his ‘Daniel and Cyrus before the idol of Bel’.
This was bought-in at £6 million at Christie's on 15 April, largely because the estimate was considered to be too high for what one expert commented was ‘an early, dark, Leyden-period picture, which is at variance with what people want and expect in Rembrandt.
Its small size may also have hurt it it doesn't have a lot of ‘wall-power’, and maybe people want more Rembrandt for their money’.
Johannes Uyttenbogaert was closely involved with the Remonstrants, a liberal and political movement opposed to the extremes of Calvinism.
The painting was first recorded in 1664, in the estate description of Abraham Anthonisz.
Recht, for whom the picture was painted.
It was bought by Baron Meyer de Rothschild for Mentmore before 1860, and is known to have been in Palazzo Manfrini, Venice, by the 1850s.
The Rembrandt Research Project comments: ‘All things taken together, there can be no doubt as to the Rembrandt attribution’.
The picture was shown at the Prince Hotel, Tokyo, and at Sotheby's, New York, in April.
An estimate of around £3 million has been given.
Getty Museum pulls out some prunes
NEW YORK.
On 21 May, Christie's New York sold thirty-one Italian pictures from the J. Paul Getty Museum.
The reasons given for these sales are that the Museum has limited storage space in its present building, and that the works in question have not been on exhibition for some considerable time, or duplicate existing holdings.
It is also hoped that the sale will also raise additional funds for future acquisitions.
While none of these pictures is of the first rank, some are of interest: Paris Bordone's ‘A Courtesan’; Pietro Marescalchi's ‘Madonna and Child enthroned, with Saints James the Greater and Prosdocimus’ of 1564 and Michele Giambono's ‘Madonna and Child enthroned’.
Dealers & Galleries
Christie's New York
Last of Douglas Cooper's classic Moderns dispersed
Sale of Braque ‘Atelier VIII’ for $7 million (£3.9 million) has boosted hopes that the art market recession may be over
NEW YORK.
Christie's sale of the modern paintings, drawings and works of art from the William A. McCarty-Cooper Collection,(primarily bequeathed to their late owner by his adoptive father and former lover, Douglas Cooper) on the evening of 11 May was a remarkably unexciting, business-like and fitful affair.
The buyers were there to succeed or not, and simply leave (‘Just like paying for sex’, quipped a journalist).
Perhaps the status of the collection, filled with classic modern masters (Picasso, Braque, Gris and Leger), all now ensconced in the art-historical pantheon, seemed more reassuring than the overinflated and uncertain status of last week's contemporary art (see p. 17).
The collection's great strength was its concentration on drawings and works on paper, both Cubist and otherwise, by Cooper's favoured masters.
Leading the group naturally, were the Picassos.
The black-chalk ‘Homme à la sucette’(1938), its sentimental subject at variance with the artists' powerful, shattered treatment, elicited lively bidding, selling to an American private collector for $880,000 (£488,900)(est. $600–800,000).
An early (1909) pencil study of a woman's head, a coffer and apple brought $80,000 (£44,400)(est. $60–80,000) and a brilliant brush drawing of a female nude from 1920 $85,000 (£47,200)(est. $60–80,000), both better buys, I thought, than a rather vapid pencil ‘Pierrot’(1918) that sold for $220,000 (£122,200)(est. $100–150,000).
Of Cooper's other favourites, Klee's 1927 pen ‘Blume und Früchte’(a gift to Cooper from the artist's widow) sold to Heinz Berggruen for $70,000 (£38,900)(est. $25–35,000), an entirely appropriate outcome as Berggruen had been as devoted to Picasso as Cooper was.
While a splendid Gris, the 1912 gouache-pastel-charcoal ‘Nature morte avec bouteille et cigares’(est. $300,000–400,000) inexplicably sold under-estimate for $280,000 (£155,600) the work's severity may not have endeared it to many people the biggest surprise was the prices paid for the Legers, which came from all points of the artist's career.
An early, disquieting Cubist pen study of two dead soldiers at Verdun (est. $25–35,000) sold to Stephen Mazoh for $40,000 (£22,200).
Of the Leger figure compositions, the pencil ‘Trois femmes’ of 1921 sold under estimate at $280,000 (£155,500)(est. $300–400,000) though the pencil ‘Deux hommes dans un escalier’of 1924 sold surprisingly well at $230,000 (£127,800)(est. $150–200,000).
Even the late Legers (not the most favoured period in the artists' output) sold well the 1951 pen and brush study of the lower torso of a barefoot construction-worker, seated on a chair, sold (to the same buyer as ‘Nature morte au buste’) for $180,000 (£100,000)(est. $60–80,000).
As successful as the works on paper were, the crowds came for the paintings, particularly the late Braque ‘Atelier VIII’,(1952–55) conceived by the artist as the summation of his career, and which he had fervently hoped would never leave France.
The centrepiece of the McCarty-Cooper sale, the estimates had fluctuated between $10 million and $5.5 million since Christie's announced the sale back in September.
As with any expensive lot, there was some initial trepidation, as there was noticeably little bidding on the floor when the picture came up.
Two phone bidders made the difference as they slowly and deliberately raised the bidding, the victor (an anonymous buyer) paying $7 million (£3.9 million) for it.
Proceedings were considerably more relaxed following its sale, and after Picasso's 1932 ‘Compotier et guitare’ sold via a phone bid for $3.5 million (£1.9 million)(to an American private buyer), dozens of observers, relieved and content that the art world wasn't going to collapse after all, got up and left, leaving the rest of the room rather sparsely attended indeed.
Many of the later lots, primarily small, personal objects given to Cooper by artists' were not easy to gauge, though by any standards, the miniscule estimates were ridiculous.
Typical was the hexagonal tile, painted by Picasso with a bull and inscribed to Cooper, estimated at $6–8,000 and sold to a phone bidder for $42,000 (£23,300), the lot of eight lithographed greeting cards by Braque, sold for $15,000 (£8,300)(est. $2,000–3,000), a nine-item lot of small drawings and autographed and inscribed photographs by Picasso, Miró, Braque and Leger, sold for $8,000 (£4,400)(est. $500–700) and a lot of three delicate watercolours by Picasso's mistress Dora Maar (est. $600–800) bought by Paloma Picasso, the artist's daughter by his subsequent mistress, Françoise Gilot, for $5,000 (£2,800).
The latter half of the sale featured several very different portraits of the great collector (Cooper, not his adopted son), featuring the famous, fascinatingly ugly Graham Sutherland portrait of 1967, the product of a political battle initiated by Cooper to unseat the director of the Tate Gallery, Sir John Rothenstein.
Cooper had enlisted Sutherland as an ally, and in return, Cooper was to elevate Sutherland's career and position as a first-rank European modernist.
Cooper gradually grew to hate Sutherland, and as John Richardson says, ‘He remarked on more than one occasion that he would ‘do a Lady Churchill’ on it’(referring to Lady Churchill's infamous burning of a much-despised Sutherland portrait of her husband, Sir Winston).
This never took place, and it sold to a phone bidder for $42,000 (£23,300)(est. $20–25,000).
An accompanying watercolour and pencil study for it sold to an order bidder for $6,000 (£3,300)(est. $4–6,000).
The sale concluded with a more tender, affectionate and rather moving coloured pencil portrait of the aging Cooper by David Hockney, drawn in 1974.
Estimated at $20–30,000 it sold for only $16,000 (£8,900) to a private collector.
London
The Surrealist Index shows 605% rise since 1975
A sequence of major exhibitions (Magritte continues at the Hayward Gallery until 2 August) has led to a revival of interest in this neglected school
LONDON.
With a rise of 605% since 1975 the Surrealists have  underperformed the art market as a whole.
Their prices rose by just 30% between 1975 and 1983, suggesting that despite their historical importance, their work was being eclipsed by the Impressionists and the School of Paris.
Prices were lagging behind in the mid to late Eighties, rising in sympathy rather than on a burst of serious investment buying.
The Surrealist School always appealed to a narrower, more intellectual band of collectors than those who bought the Impressionists.
Broadly speaking, demand was and remains concentrated in Europe, with a flurry of Japanese and American buying in the 1988–90 period.
A total of 360 paintings by the artists in the index were sold in 1991 compared with over 700 in 1990.
The variation in performance reflects special factors including the degree of cerebral ‘difficulty’ or challenge presented by each artist's work.
A sequence of major exhibitions of Max Ernst, de Chirico, Miró and now Magritte at the Hayward Gallery have helped to re-establish the importance of these artists.
The field is led by Miró with a rise of 1090% one of the few artists to have held on to the gains of the 1988–90 period.
Demand from prospering Spanish collectors helped sell forty Mirós in 1991 at an average price of £130,000.
The next strongest  performance has been by Giorgio de Chirico, up 690% at an average price of £55,000 even after a 25% fall last year.
One reason for the Surrealists' relatively slow climb since 1975 is that they were highly valued then.
René Magritte's work, which averaged £14,000 in 1975, is now up 360% at £65,000 but down 38% on 1990.
The largest individual fall in 1991 was for Victor Brauner whose mercurial rise of 720% between 1987 and 1990 could not be sustained.
The weakest performer after Brauner has been Salvador Dalí with a rise of 220%.
Proof that fake Dalís are circulating and fears of further problems could continue to undermine confidence in this market.
Brauner apart, prices showed defensive strength, the 22% dip in the index in 1991 seeming modest compared to falls of over 50% for several schools of French and American painting.
Christie's London
Unknown Italian Rococo masterpiece by royal cabinet-maker Piffetti surfaces
£700,000 estimate for exceptional cabinet from the estate of the late
Lord Ashburton K.G.
LONDON.
Christie's London are selling the Ashburton Cabinet by Pietro Piffetti in their Important French and Continental Furniture, Tapestries and Carpets sale on Thursday 11 June.
The sale also contains some of the most dazzling French furniture to appear on the market for some time.
Pietro Piffetti was royal cabinet-maker to the Kings of Sardinia about 1765, and this piece was previously unknown to scholars of Italian furniture.
Piffetti is noted for his technical perfection in the application of complex marquetry of ivory (sometimes carved in three-dimensional relief), mother-of-pearl and tortoiseshell to furniture with elaborate forms.
Christie's consider that it might even exceed £770,000, the highest auction price for a piece of Italian furniture (with the exception of the Badminton Cabinet, sold for £7.6 million).
The cabinet was in the celebrated Ashburton collection, probably having been acquired by Francis Baring, Third Lord Ashburton (d.1882) on his marriage in 1833 to Hortense Eugenie Claire, daughter of the Duke of Bassano, who may have acquired the cabinet while French Ambassador at Naples in 1793–94.
This autumn, the definitive study of Piffetti, by Gian Carlo Ferrari and edited by Alvar González-Palacios, relating a wealth of new documentation to his known and surviving oeuvre, will be published by Umberto Allemandi, Turin.
The sale also includes other notable pieces, many of them with very distinguished provenances, such as Jean-François Leleu's bureau plat of the 1770s, once in the collection of the comte de Flahaut, Talleyrand's illegitimate son, and owner of the famous Hôtel de Massa in Paris (est. in excess of £750,000).
It comes from the Barbara Piasecka Johnson Collection.
On 20 June, Christie's Monaco are also selling important French furniture with pieces by Weisweiler, Foliot and Dester.
Fall-out from the biggest insurance losses in Lloyd's history affects art and heritage world
LONDON.
The projected sale of the contents of Pitchford Hall, Shropshire by Christie's on 28–30 September is a direct result of the owner, Mrs Caroline Colthurst's family's major losses at Lloyd's.
‘Names’ at Lloyds, who have to demonstrate that they have considerable capital assets, stand surety for Lloyds' guarantees in insurance claims, in exchange for a share of the profits of the insurance syndicates, were recently badly hit by some of the biggest losses experienced at Lloyds.
Because liability for losses is unlimited, ‘Names’ have recently been called upon to produce sums on a large and recurring basis.
This has led to sales of houses, land and contents to meet the syndicate losses.
Pitchford is one of England's most important timber-framed houses, dating from the later sixteenth century and in the same family since 1473.
The house is now for sale at £1.25 million, and the contents are expected to raise about £2 million at auction.
Given the importance of the unity of house with contents, the National Trust is considering the feasibility of a £10 million bid to preserve both intact.
Discussions are taking place with the National Heritage Memorial Fund and English Heritage.
Mrs Colthurst's agent, Robert Holden, told The Art Newspaper, ‘My client is naturally anxious that the National Trust should have the house, but because of the urgency of the situation, we had to enter the open market’.
Among the objects to be sold are what is thought to be the only signed painting by Petrus Troueil, the portrait of Sir Francis Ottley and his family (est. £40–60,000), Sir Joshua Reynolds's ‘Admiral Cotes’(est. £15–20,000) and other paintings by John Hoppner, James Ward, Michael Dahl and Sir Godfrey Kneller.
There are more than 500 works of art and furniture of all periods, including much fine porcelain.
In what could be construed as an insensitive move, Lloyd's ‘Names’ recently received in a separate envelope enclosed with their copies of Lloyd's Log a letter from David Moore-Gwyn, Director of British Paintings at Sotheby's.
This offered Members of Lloyd's saleroom valuations of their works of art without charge or obligation, as well as advance payments on works of art consigned to auction ‘up to 35% of the estimated proceeds of sale when the items have been delivered to us and entered for sale’.
It is worth adding that these terms are anyway applicable under normal circumstances, with 35% advances on the lower estimate of sale proceeds, minimum £30,000, with a minimum advance of £85,000.
For Lloyd's sales however, the minimum is £150,000.
Sotheby's told The Art Newspaper that ‘there has been quite a large response to the Lloyd's letter, but talks are going on with a view to possible changes in this arrangement’.
Bachofen von Echt Indian miniatures triumph
LONDON.
Sotheby's were extremely well satisfied with the results of the sale of the Bachofen von Echt collection of Indian Miniatures held on 29 April.
With only one lot unsold, the thirty-seven works brought a total of £976,800 ($1.76 million), a record for a sale of this material.
The highest price was achieved for lot 6, a depiction of ‘Madhya Vipralabhda, the neglected adolescent nayika’, from the celebrated Rasmanjari of Bhanu Datta, from Basohli, datable around 1660–70.
This was sold on the telephone to a private collector for £130,000 ($234,000) against an estimate of £80–120,000, an auction record for a Pahari miniature.
Only lot 10 failed to sell, probably due to its similarity to the two previous lots which were from the same series, and its slightly poorer condition.
In general estimates were based on prices achieved for similar pieces offered at auction over the years although no comparable collection has appeared, undoubtedly adding a premium to the value of the works.
Marcus Fraser of the Oriental Manuscript and Miniature Department stressed the outstanding quality of the Bachofen collection, assembled between the mid 1960s and early 1980s when much fine quality material was available to collectors.
Many of the works in the collection have been published and exhibited in recent years.
Much less material of this quality is in circulation today and private bidding was strong, mostly from collectors already known to Sotheby's.
The London and New York trade were also bidding actively.
Robert Skelton, former Keeper of the Victoria and Albert's Indian Section, assessed the quality of the Bachofen collection as extremely high and worthy of the high profile given to it by Sotheby's.
He stressed that there are few serious collections of Indian miniatures in private hands in Britain; notable among these are the artist Howard Hodgkin's, and the collection built up by the late William Archer, also a former V&A Keeper, who carried out much of the early research in this field in the 1950s.
Art and antiques fairs
Theme and variation on Yankee Doodle Dandy
As the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair (10–20 June) opens to the fanfare of 500 years of American Patronage, The Art Newspaper's American in London asks leading dealers, do themes really help fairs to sell?
LONDON.
Themes for fairs are often chosen well in advance of opening dates, so they run the danger of not reflecting the subsequent realities of the marketplace.
For instance, last year's theme of the art and influence of Japan at Grosvenor House coincided with a resounding silence on the part of the Japanese at the art market's season finale.
This year's theme, in the year of the Columbus commemorations, presented some dealers with difficulties, but, as one observed, ‘Strictly speaking, not much was American in patronage before 1776, so we may be excused for stretching the definition’.
There is no doubt that the last eighteen months have been short of American patronage for European dealers (a combined effect of general economic conditions, the aftermath of the Gulf War and the continued high value of the pound against the dollar), so the hope is that this year's focus will bring the Yankee Doodle Dandies to town.
So how do the fair's organisers' choose a theme and what do the dealers think of it?
Alison Vaissiere (the Fair's organiser): Four years ago we drew up a five-year plan; the first theme in 1989 coincided with the tercentenary of William and Mary and was titled ‘A tribute to the age of William and Mary’; the following year was ‘Italy and the Grand Tour’; last year, ‘The Art and influence of Japan’ coincided with the Japan Festival; and of course this year celebrates American patronage.
We, the organisers, put up ideas to the executive committee which arrives at a consensus, then we discuss possible titles that are appropriate and short enough to capture the necessary publicity.
Next year 1993 we will use the theme of Europe.
Themes are a splendid way of giving exhibitors a bias; it challenges them to put on their thinking caps and at times they can find material with only a subtle connection.
They are also a way of injecting new blood into the Fair.
The choice of patrons to our Charity Gala (the American Ambassador, the Hon Raymond G.H. Seitz and Mrs Seitz and his counterpart Sir Robin Renwick, H.M.
Ambassador to the USA and Lady Renwick) is also intended to stimulate American patronage and raise funds for the Royal Academy and the Royal Marsden Cancer Appeal (tickets from the organizer on 0799 52699).
We are honoured also to have among our Charity Gala Committee prominent Americans, including Mrs Lise Besthoff, Mr Frank C. Grace, Mr Mark Fehrs Haukohl, Mrs Evelyn Lauder, Mr William McNaught, Mr Charles McVeigh III, Mrs Charles H. Price II, Dr Shirley Sherwood, Mr James Sherwood, Mrs Edward Streator and Mrs Arthur Sulzberger.
The exhibits will also be enriched by the loan display of American art from the collection of Richard H. Jenrette (whose holdings furnish the Robert William Roper House, Charleston, South Carolina and his own residence a Federal plantation-style house, Ayr Mount, near Hillsborough, North Carolina) and from the corporate collection of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, of which Jenrette is Chairman of the Board.
Lanto Synge, Mallett & Son, London (leading dealers in English furniture): Themes certainly do stretch us artistically and commercially but they present an interesting and challenging exercise.
I'm sure themes are not chosen casually and they do serve a purpose in attracting possible markets.
They are a gesture of respect to clients who have particular interests.
As for the Japanese theme last year at Grosvenor House, it was good to see it taken seriously by exhibitors.
Grosvenor House has traditionally been both an exhibition and a fair it is not just about the exchange of money with this American theme, I admit that we draw something of a blank.
However the paintings part of our business (we incorporated Christopher Wood's gallery in 1988), will be able to exploit links.
In most fields, however, you cannot speak of separate British and American histories as they share so much in materials and design and craftsmanship.
With English furniture, American provenances sometimes provide an interest.
One of our most important pieces, an Adam period Neo-classical semi-circular satinwood and marquetry secretaire cabinet (English, circa 1770), was formerly in the collection of J. Pierpont Morgan.
We bought this privately in America last year and will be exhibiting it in London this summer and in Australia in the autumn.
However we will not be showing it at Grosvenor House: it will remain in the greater grandeur of one of our new galleries in Bond Street.
Fairs are useful for meeting potential new clients and as a way to introduce ourselves.
However, all of our established clients will also be visiting us at our showrooms where they know we retain our most important pieces which are shown to their greatest advantage in a purpose built gallery rather than on temporary stands.
Steven Rich, Peter H. Tillou, London (a relatively recent presence in London): Peter Tillou has been a dealer and a collector for over thirty-five years from his home in Connecticut.
Three years ago we opened the gallery in Duke Street, London, to show our broad collections of Old Master and nineteenth-century paintings, arms and armour, furniture and works of art.
This year, our first year at Grosvenor House, the theme of American patronage allows us to exhibit several important pieces of Americana.
The portrait of Andrew Jackson Ten Broeck, aged one year and six months and dated 1834, is one of the great masterpieces of American Folk Art by Ammi Phillips, long considered to be the single most important naive painter of the nineteenth century.
The painting is from the personal collection of Peter Tillou.
Also on show will be an oil painting entitled ‘The landing of the Pilgrims at Plymouth’ by Michele Felice Corne and painted in 1802.
It was one of a series of works by Corne commissioned by the East India Marine Society, the parent organisation of the Peabody Museum of Salem, which later formed the basis of the museum's maritime interests.
However, we will not be exhibiting solely Americana but also European paintings, arms and armour, cameos and intaglios, and works of art.
Among the European paintings on show will be the earliest known signed and dated painting by Ludholf Bakhuizen.
Dated 1656 and painted by the artist at twenty-five years of age, it depicts the ship ‘De Esperanca’, which was rented by the Amsterdam Chamber of the East India Company to escort home the incredibly rich return fleet of Pieter de Bitter and other merchantmen which had sought refuge from the English in the port of Bergen, Norway.
In the field of arms and armour, several exceptional seventeenth-century sporting rifles and two exquisite sets of nineteenth-century duelling pistols will also be exhibited.
Other objects on show will include a late sixteenth-century marriage casket inlaid with numerous panels of staghorn depicting a marriage celebration and other classical motifs, including eight copper-gilt engravers' plates, each engraved with a Virtue.
Lawrence Greenough, Richard L. Feigen & Co., London and New York (first-time exhibitor and New York-based): We decided this year not to do the Maastricht fair because our Old Master stock is not primarily Dutch, and visitors there seem principally interested in seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish paintings.
We were delighted to have been invited to exhibit at the Grosvenor House Fair, which attracts a more diverse audience.
With this year's theme, we will focus on the close artistic links between America and England by showing such artists as Benjamin West, Copley and Stuart.
We shall also be exhibiting Sargent's ‘Mrs Albert Vickers’(1884).
This establish the American artist's reputation amongst British patrons.
Paul Champkins, Spink & Son, London: The American theme is both easy and difficult for us.
Last year's Japanese one was easy in the sense that we could simply field the best of our Japanese works of art.
This year's theme makes us shift focus, from the object per se, to the provenance.
Given our large and wide-ranging stock of Chinese and Japanese works of art, it has been relatively easy for us to find items with American provenances, but difficult to find ones with provenances of significance.
If the past owner was a famous collector or a museum (the latter the case for the late Ming lacquer altar table which we are displaying, from the Art Institute of Chicago) or the work of art was exhibited at a museum (as is the case for the T'ang torso, formerly in the collection of Lawrence Sickman and shown at the Nelson-Atkins Museum, Kansas City for years), this would add to its interest in the eyes of subsequent collectors.
Nicholas Harris, London (silver dealer): Although this is the first year we will be exhibiting at the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair in person, we were in fact represented last year as contributors to the British Antique Dealer's Association loan exhibition, entitled ‘The Art and Influence of Japan’.
The pieces we loaned made up the ‘influence of’ section, with each piece was a particularly rare and important example of Japonisme as applied to domestic silver, and we shall have some of those pieces displayed for sale at this year's fair.
The American theme has allowed me additional scope in exhibiting silver and decorative arts.
As a gallery, we specialise in a great many virtually ‘interlocking’ different art styles, of which it would be fair to say that the Japonisme Aesthetic Movement is our largest single field.
As this was an art movement which America embraced with unprecedented enthusiasm and unrivalled breadth of vision, and as we specialise so much in American art objects (we showed at the Modernism Fair in New York last year), the theme has provided a vehicle to address the famously discriminating audience of Grosvenor House with objects normally found only in a handful of the most forward looking museums.
A prime example of this is a silver rams-horn presentation piece which, despite being dated 1905 (outside the normal cut-off date of 1892 for the Fair), has been wholeheartedly accepted for exhibition.
It was specially commissioned from Tiffany and Co. of New York and is almost certainly the work of their pre-eminent designer of the period, Paulding Farnham, creator of the gold, crystal and gem-set vase, known as the Adams vase, which is still one of the Metropolitan Museum of New York's most popular permanent exhibits.
The rams-horn was commissioned to celebrate the founding of the Camp Fire Club of America, a body founded by Theodore Roosevelt in conjunction with William T. Hornaday, their first president, to whom it was presented.
As regards the public perception of the term ‘antique’, I think it would be fair to say that a great many of today's most eminent collectors, particularly in America, and public institutions, are definitely beginning to interpret the word far more loosely than its previously accepted definition of ‘a hundred years old’ and, it is clearly a great shame that two of the most original and internationally influential artistic styles ever to emerge in Britain are almost entirely excluded from the Fair: the Arts and Crafts Movement and Art Nouveau, on the basis of age.
This becomes even more ironic when one considers the veneration afforded to the works of Joseph Hoffman and the whole of the Wiener Werkstätte on the one hand, and Frank Lloyd Wright and the entire Prairie School of Design on the other, both of which are the direct issue of the combined influence of the British Arts and Crafts Movement and the Glasgow School of Design.
Stewart Whittington, Norman Adams (furniture dealer with strong historical connections with the U.S.): In 1923 Norman Adams was told by his Bristol art dealer father to seek his fortune elsewhere.
He then went to Boston and opened a gallery, followed the next year by one in New York and subsequently, in 1928, by the present London gallery on Hans Road, across from Harrods.
During the war he sold his interest in his galleries and went off to war; following this six-year closure he reopened the Hans Road gallery but decided not to reopen the American galleries; it was hard enough to get the good material for one shop.
As for recent patterns of American buying, it is less the pound/dollar ratio and Gulf War political uncertainties, than general economic factors.
There is a psychological unwillingness to commit money during uncertain economic times.
It is difficult to quantify buying patterns, but I can say that American buying has dipped in the same way that European and non-European buying has dipped.
But I believe that there is a pent-up demand which I hope will begin to show in June.
In terms of American provenance, we have sent so much material across the Atlantic over the years that we are often called up by someone who has discovered our label on their piece with a view to our buying it back.
Since publication of our book Eighteenth-century English Furniture: The Norman Adams Collection we have bought back eleven pieces as a direct result of Americans seeing their furniture illustrated therein.
Alan Hobart, Pyms Gallery, London (specialist in Irish art): Irish art has a small following in America, but this is not why I think we have been invited.
Rather than being selected for our speciality, which also extends to French naturalism and British art generally at the turn of the century, I believe it has more to do with our publishing scholarly catalogues over the years and with our track record as dealers.
I think that themes are a good idea in terms of promotion; they draw attention to the breadth of art represented by the top range of dealers at Grosvenor House.
It is after all a dealers' fair and gives us a chance to show what we have to potential and established clients without the auction houses breathing down our necks.
With regards to the American theme we will be taking Sir William Orpen's portrait of Mrs St George.
She was the daughter of the wealthy New York banker, George Fisher Baker, founder of the First National Bank of America.
Around 1906 Orpen was introduced to Mrs St George and she became his most important and influential patron.
The International Ceramics Fair
The winning formula
‘Because of the Fair and the seminars, I know practically every curator in the ceramics field’
LONDON.
On 12 through 15 June 1992 the eleventh International Ceramics Fair will be held at the Park Lane Hotel.
Continuing its successful format, the trade fair will be augmented by scholarly lectures by experts in the field including Pat Halfpenny (City Museum & Art Gallery, Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent) on Creamware, Edgar Munhall (Curator, The Frick Collection) on Sèvres in the Frick Collection, Clare Le Corbeiller (Curator, European Sculpture and Decorative Arts, The Metropolitan Museum of Art) on the artist potter and his factory, Dr Stephen V. Hartog (Curator of Collections, Jewish Historical Museum of Amsterdam) on the display of Chinese export porcelain in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and Tamara Preaud (Archiviste, Manufacture Nationale de Sèvres) on Neo-classicism and Sèvres Porcelain in the eighteenth century.
The loan exhibition of eighteenth-century European ceramics from the Bowes Museum will allow many who have not already made the trek to Barnard Castle a fascinating glimpse of this major collection of Continental ceramics assembled by Josephine Bowes, beginning in 1860, with the idea in mind of creating a public collection (opened 1892, unfortunately after her and her husband's death).
Long-time exhibitor at the Ceramics Fair, Clemens Van der Ven of s'Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands, who specialises in Oriental Art, explains his continued presence at the fair: ‘The Ceramics Fair has always been very successful for us.
I enjoy the faithful following of a specific clientèle who are motivated by their interest.
If they cannot buy, they still come to learn.
For us, the Ceramics Fair has always made money and for a dealer that is the most important reason to return year after year.
Because of the Fair and the seminars, I know practically every curator in the ceramics field’.
Unlike Van der Ven, London dealer Angela Gräfin von Wallwitz, who specializes in Continental Ceramics and Works of Art, has elected to exhibit only at the Grosvenor House Fair this year.
She explains her reasoning: ‘We felt that the continental ceramic market needed fresh blood, new collectors and a new image.
The ceramics market is experiencing a change of generation for the dealers as well as the collectors.
After enormous price rises in the Seventies, the market moved slowly but constantly upwards during the booming Eighties.
During the Maastricht Fair and the Basel Fair this year we experienced new and strong interest in fine quality continental pottery and porcelain.
We sold to new clients from Portugal, Italy, Spain, Belgium, France, Switzerland and Germany a very healthy sign, I think.
Although the enormous difficulties of the German economy could be felt during the Düsseldorf and Hannover fairs, both proved to be more successful for the participating ceramic dealers than last year's fairs’.
Contemporary art fairs
The preeminence of Basel
The event that traditionally brings the American buyers to Europe opens 17 June
BASEL.
Art Basel reigns supreme among art fairs for a number of reasons: for the length it has been in existence; for the fact that it was the first fair to introduce a selection committee; and because of its timing.
Basel takes place right at the end of the season after the New York contemporary art auctions, allowing it to have the last word on the state of the market.
This year the fair runs from 17 to 22 June and features 280 stands.
Two associated events are a separate section devoted to prints ‘Edition ‘92’ and an exhibition entitled ‘Transform’on the relationship between twentieth-century painting and sculpture.
Organised by the Basel Kunstmuseum, ‘Transform’ was conceived by Basel's most celebrated dealer Ernst Beyeler and features works by Matisse, Giacometti, Baselitz, Newman, Stella, Judd, Beuys, Nauman and Borofsky.
The novelty of this year's event is the introduction of guided tours, which clearly aim to introduce new clients to recession-hit galleries.
Yokohama results
YOKOHAMA.
The recent contemporary art fair held at the Pacifico Yokohama Exhibition Hall (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, pp. 17 and 19) attracted 58,533 visitors and was adjudged successful by its organisers although no sales figures were released.
3,000 works of art were displayed.
Next year's fair will be held at the same location from 19 to 23 March 1993.
A new Bernhardt by Bernhardt?
NEW YORK.
The Shepherd Gallery has discovered a terracotta self-portrait bust by the great turn-of-the century actress Sarah Bernhardt, who is less well known as a talented sculptress.
This bust may portray her in the role of Hamlet, in which she appeared in 1899.
Bernhardt stated that she continued to sculpt into old age to remain mentally alert.
The definite Art Nouveau style and the somewhat shaky signature are regarded by the gallery as indicating a date after 1900.
Following the Rodin fakes scandal, French bronze founders act to protect their good name
PARIS.
Shocked by recent scandals involving fake Giacometti and Rodin works (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, January 1992, p. 1 and No. 17, April 1992, p. 1) and alarmed by the discredit being heaped on their profession, France's fourteen leading bronze founders have met in Paris under the auspices of their professional union, the Syndicat Général de Fondeurs de France, to discuss means of combating forgery.
The Syndicat concluded that French legislation is incomplete in its definitions of reproductions and forgery.
‘There are multiple problems due to the fact there is a legal vacuum in many cases and little to distinguish between a genuine cause of fraud and someone buying in good faith.
What we need is a charter informing the client exactly what he is buying’, a spokesman for the Syndicat said.
The fourteen founders decided to work towards a text in collaboration with gallery owners and auctioneers and submit it to the French government, within the next few months if possible, in order for it to become law.
One possibility being envisaged is the creation of a document giving a detailed description of a sculpture which would accompany the work whenever it was sold.
As workmen are just as skilful now as at the turn of the century, it is almost impossible to distinguish a recently produced bronze from one cast during the artist's lifetime, the Syndicat spokesman said.
‘We want to bring morality to the production of bronzes.
The buyer of a bronze often does not know what he is buying.
Copies should be bought at their real market price.
A six-month old Rodin should not be sold for as much as one the artist himself made.
Things are even worse outside France there is practically no European legislation on the subject’, the Syndicat spokesman said.
London
From Renaissance bronzes to the passionate
Marevna in Bond St and St James's
It's been a long, frozen winter
LONDON.
After several months of a total dearth of exhibitions in grander dealers' galleries, there are signs of something approaching the usual seasonal increase.
Wildenstein is holding ‘Marevna and Montparnasse’ in association with the Musée du Petit Palais, Geneva, from 17 June to 16 September.
The ‘and Montparnasse’ of the title covers the Paris period 1912–42 of Marie Vorobieff, known as Marevna, and of over twenty of her friends there, including Soutine, Van Dongen, Laurencin and other Russian-Jewish artists.
Marevna is represented by thirty-one pictures with wide-ranging subject matter: Provençal landscapes, portraits of Braque and Modigliani, several self-portraits and still lifes.
André Lhote's ‘Bacchante’ of 1910 is particularly memorable.
From 24 June to 24 July Leger are celebrating their centenary with an exhibition of works by Samuel Palmer from public and private collections, all of which have passed through Leger since the 1930s.
Although this limits the range of material available, work from the 1840s–70s is on show, including two major Shoreham period pictures, ‘The Golden Valley’ and ‘The Shearers’, both from private collections but on permanent loan to the Tate.
Particularly beautiful is ‘A cascade in shadow’.
From 24 June to10 July at Harari and Johns, Katrin Bellinger and Trinity Fine Art are presenting a joint exhibition of Old Master drawings and European works of art.
The range of both exhibitions is impressive.
Trinity's more than fifty exhibits belong to a more  rarefied world than London is used to these days, evoking the early days of collecting Renaissance and baroque artefacts: sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Italian and German bronzes; a rare Venetian ‘calcedonio’ glass bowl; fine Italian maiolica; Doccia porcelain and an Italian silver and gilt-copper reliquary made for Cardinal Stuart in Rome about 1765.
Absent this year is the rich range of June drawings exhibitions timed to distract buyers from the major auction houses' summer sales, leaving only Bellinger's, and, in early July, Flavia Ormond's.
Bellinger's show (‘Drawing related to sculpture 1520–1620’) involves a fashionable art-historical  obsession , the working drawing.
It documents the Renaissance devotion to sculpture both past and present, ranging from Girolamo da Carpi's Antique studies to Bartolomeo Passarotti's apparently unique red chalk animal studies after Baccio Bandinelli.
Cross-currents between major Masters are represented by Tintoretto's drawing after Michelangelo's ‘Samson slaying the Philistine’.
Flavia Ormond is making her debut as a drawings dealer with an exhibition of Italian Old Master drawings c.1550–1800 at Douwes Fine Art Limited, from 1 to15 July.
Bologna, Rome, Naples, Lombardy and Venice are all represented.
Notable is a study for the hand and arm of the Virgin by the rare Lombard artist Tanzio da Varallo, preparatory for the painting of ‘The Visitation’ at San Brizio in Vagna, and a Francesco Albani Roman period study of a classical head from the Holkham collection.
A further Holkham drawing is present in ‘Julius Caesar imposing agrarian law’ by Ciro Ferri, dated to the 1550s, while an early Salvator Rosa drawing of genre figures has an Odescalchi provenance and may consequently have belonged to Queen Cristina of Sweden.
Colnaghi's outstanding group of drawings previously shown in New York and including the newly-discovered Pontormo head (see The Art Newspaper No.18, May 1992, p.19) makes a brief appearance at their London gallery from 1 to 10 July.
At The Japanese Gallery from 1 June to 29 August, is an exhibition of 150 woodblock prints all made after1800 of ‘Children in Japanese Prints’, including work by Utamaro, Eizan, Eisen, Kunisada and others.
Their principal fascination is their loving documentation of the cossetting of Japanese babies; in one, a child is dressed to resemble one of Japan's greatest poets, Shojo.
Agnew's is celebrating its 175th Anniversary with an exhibition from 9 June to 24 July of selected works from current stock.
The full range of objects from their sumptuous commemorative catalogue is not included (the Sebastiano del Piombo of Pope Clement VII, for example, has already gone to the Getty Museum), apparently due to the ongoing likelihood of sales.
May all dealers have this problem!
New York
A history of taste since 1860 through Colnaghi's archives
Celebrating a decade in the U.S.
NEW YORK.
Colnaghi is celebrating the opening of its New York gallery ten years ago (1982) against the backdrop of American patronage of Old Masters generally and, more specifically, Colnaghi's clientele from 1860.
The introduction to the celebratory publication Colnaghi in America, written by Colnaghi's USA director, Nicholas Hall, charts the firm's relationship with American collectors from 1860 to 1940, highlighting their sales through Bernard Berenson to their most important client at the time, Isabella Stewart Gardner.
Between 1894 and 1902 she bought twenty-four paintings from Colnaghi, always through Berenson.
(Colnaghi's Otto Gutekunst wrote to Berenson, ‘neither you nor we have ever had such a windfall as Mrs G. before, nor shall we ever in our lives have another…’.)
These purchases were made despite what Hall describes as her ‘antipathy for the firm’, aggravated by the fact that a Guardi which Berenson had offered to her was sold to another client, and that she learnt of a discrepancy between the price she paid for two Holbeins and the monies paid to the owners, the Pole-Carews.
This difference was caused by the commission paid to Berenson, but which he had not disclosed, and which Gutekunst subsequently advised him to disclose.
(‘Might it not be safer and better in future to do business for her openly, for 10% or 15% rather than take such risks and worries which are very trying?’.)
Hall reveals through his examination of Colnaghi documents that Berenson's recommendations at times ‘follow almost word for word, Gutekunst's own letters to Berenson’, suggesting that it is time for a re-examination of the role of dealers as well as the more famous advisers in influencing taste.
Hall also describes the conservatism of collectors in American (for example, the enthusiasm for late Rembrandt before World War I) which was catered to by the leading dealers, many of whom, including Colnaghi's, began to lag behind the more advanced taste for the Baroque that began to be expressed by museum curators.
Around 1903, Colnaghi's successful informal partnership with Knoedler's began in an atmosphere which Hall describes as characterised by ‘an affection and openness unusual among dealers of today’, and rested its success on Colnaghi's ability to supply Old Masters, particularly Dutch seventeenth-century paintings, subsequently purchased by Henry Frick, and which formed the core of his collection.
The purchase of eighteenth-century French paintings dates from after the completion of Frick's house on 70th street.
Colnaghi's dependence on the American market was increased by the outbreak of World War I, and the taste of American collectors, led by Duveen, Kleinberger, Agnew, Knoedler and Colnaghi, remained conservative.
In the documents relating to the purchase of works from the Hermitage, discussed between Colnaghi and Knoedler, no French rococo painting was singled out, only one Italian eighteenth-century painting was mentioned, and no seventeenth-century Italian or French pictures were discussed.
Nicholas Hall describes how, for the 1930 purchases from the Hermitage, Knoedler arranged that Andrew Mellon, who provided the financial backing, would pay Knoedler's a commission of 25% if he decided to buy the works and conversely, if Mellon did not wish to buy a particular work, Knoedler's would sell it for a 25% profit to be paid to Mellon.
The paintings would be acquired at a price which would allow approximately a 50% profit and apparently were selected with Mellon's taste in mind.
Hall also discusses the emergence of American museums as a force on the market.
In 1900 there were thirty museums, but by 1950 the number had exploded to 410.
While museum taste in acquisitions was wide, between 1930 and 1945 Hall notes a dominance of Dutch seventeenth-century painting and the popularity of eighteenth-century Venetian painting.
Museum purchasing shifted away from the earlier insistence by private collectors on masterpieces, towards the art-historical importance of the paintings, and selection tended to veer towards works which ‘they were unlikely to receive by gift’ from private donors.
Significantly, and with a candour unusual in books celebrating a commercial firm's history, Hall observes that many dealers were lagging behind the more advanced taste evidenced by museum curators: ‘The choices made by the trustees illustrate advances in scholarship to which the (private) clients of Colnaghi, Agnew's and Duveen were unresponsive…
Colnaghi contributed little to American museums in these years (the 1930s and 1940s) and what they did sell betrayed an unwillingness to adapt to the times.
Colnaghi, underfunded and conservative, left the field open to dealers such as Kirk Askew at Durlacher and Julius Weitzner, who aggressively promoted the virtues of the Sei- and Settecento’.
It was in the later 1940s, when Roderick Thesiger joined the firm that Colnaghi began to show its enthusiasm for Italian baroque painting and adopted a scholarly approach on which its reputation today rests.
The catalogue part of the book is devoted to important paintings sold over the last decade, many of which explain the firm's reputation today for adventurous taste.
The appendix lists a fascinating array of paintings, handled at one time or other by Colnaghi and which are today in North American public collections.
This on its own is a tribute to Colnaghi and its influence on American patronage and taste.
New York
Bye Bye Baghoomian
Basquiat's dealer disappears pursued by creditors
NEW YORK.
It is no surprise to learn that an art dealer has closed down.
It is a bit more surprising, however, when that dealer disappears without a trace.
That is what happened in late March to Vrej Baghoomian, whose gallery, a virtual airplane hangar in SoHo, had been most closely associated with the work of Jean-Michel Basquiat.
Baghoomian had been pursued by his creditors, among them the New York financing firm Rosenthal and Rosenthal, which had been a partner with Baghoomian in some lucrative secondary-market transactions.
(One angry creditor with a stick was stalking Baghoomian in the lobby of his gallery's SoHo building on 28 March, the day the gallery bolted its doors shut.)
Before opening his own gallery in the late 1980s, the Teheran-born Baghoomian was known to have operated a cash business in a SoHo basement where artists desperate for money could bring their works.
That gallery was owned by Baghoomian's cousin, the dealer Tony Shafrazi, also known for spray-painting Picasso's ‘Guernica’ at the Museum of Modern Art.
Eventually Baghoomian came to represent Basquiat, when that artist had broken ties with his previous dealers (see The Art Newspaper No. 13, December 1991, p. 3).
Baghoomian organised Basquiat's last show in New York, and after Basquiat died of a drug overdose in the spring of 1988, just a few months after that show closed, Baghoomian claimed a fifty percent share of all the works in Basquiat's estate, numbering in the hundreds.
At the time of Baghoomian's disappearance, he was engaged in a bitter legal battle with the Basquiat estate, a battle that appeared to be weighing decisively in the estate's favour.
The Basquiat estate is after twenty or so paintings, which Baghoomian says he sold for cash immediately after Basquiat's death.
Those paintings have still not been recovered, and with Baghoomian's departure, there is a void of knowledge about Basquiat's last work.
Baghoomian was the only dealer close to the artist at that time.
The dealer has also become something of a legend for his expertise in detecting the growing number of Basquiat fakes, an issue that is bound to attract further attention as the first retrospective of Basquiat's entire career opens at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York this autumn.
Cologne
Documenta spin-offs
Dealers' open house
COLOGNE.
Sandwiched between the opening of Documenta IX, the five-yearly international art show in Kassel on 10 June, and that of the Basel art fair on 17 June are Cologne's three ‘Art Days’.
From Saturday 13 June until Monday 15 June, forty of Cologne's private galleries, together with the Museum Ludwig and the Kölnischer Kunstverein, will open their doors from 10 a.m. until 6 p.m.
A bus shuttle will be available between Kassel and Cologne, and certain hotels will offer reduced rates to participating visitors.
A one-day blitz through the Belgian Viertel would include the following highlights: at Tanja Grunert, Peter Weibel's installation, ‘On justifying the hypothetical character of art and the non-identical nature of objects’; Rudolf Kicken's exhibition of sixty vintage photographs by Man Ray; and Kubinski Köln's presentation of an installation of steel sculptures by Viennese artist Heimo Zobernig.
Of special note is Miller-Nordenhake's exhibition of Los Angeles artist and Documenta participant Charles Ray, who is also a veteran of the spring show, ‘Helter Skelter’, at the L.A. Museum of Contemporary Art.
The German conceptual artist Michael Krebber will have an installation at Christian Nagel, and at Carla Stützer, French artist Patrick Raynaud will show ‘Travelling Art Works’.
Finally, Galerie Tanit has a one-woman show of Documenta participant Christa Naher.
In the Südstadt, at Mariahilfstrasse 17, Isabella Kacprzak has a group show of Miroslow Balka, Jürgen Drescher and Asta Gröting; at Mayer & Mayer, the photographic gallery which shares Kacprzak's space, are early master prints by, among others, Atkins, Fenton, Frith, Hill & Adamson, Kotzsch and Fox Talbot.
A few blocks away, at Volksgartenstrasse 10, Rolf Ricke will have sculptures by Claudio Parmiggiani.
For visitors willing to penetrate deeper into the Südstadt, Galerie der Spiegel at Bonnerstrasse 328 will exhibit small sculptures, models and sketches by Bozetti, and still further south, Galerie Gmurzynska, at Goethestrasse 65, will have a double exhibition of Malévich and Ellsworth Kelly.
Beyond the city's precincts, at eighteenth-century Haus Bitz in Frechen-Bachem, Galerie Jule Kewenig has installed sculpture and drawings by Arte Povera artist Giuseppe Penone.
Back in the centre of town, an installation by Julia Scher, with works by Pettibon, Pruit & Early, Jim Shaw and Titus is to be seen at Rudolf Zwirner; next door, Galerie Reckermann has drawings and sculptures by Ulrich Rückriem, along with‘Fragments of Memory Photography and Travel’ at Heidi Reckermann Photographie upstairs.
Michael Werner is showing new paintings by Eugene Leroy, and Aurel Scheibler is featuring American artist Jack Pierson.
Visitors requiring more information about the Kölner Kunsttage and  accommodation may telephone (49-221) 238 888 or address written enquiries to Kölner Kunsttage, Bureau III, Keygasse 1, 5000 Cologne 1.
For further information about commercial art galleries in Cologne see both the Around the Galleries section of this paper (p.21) and the profiles of eight leading gallery owners in the last issue of the paper (No. 18, May 1992, p.20).
Frank T. Sabin out of Ackermann
LONDON.
Former director of the now defunct Arthur Ackermann and Sons.
Ltd (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, January 1992, p.20), Frank T. Sabin, is opening a new sporting print gallery near to the site of the old premises at 5 Royal Arcade, Old Bond Street.
Mr Sabin's family has been in the publishing and bookselling business since 1865 and his son Mark will be joining him in the new venture, together with David Fuller, another former Ackermann director.
As well as the traditional range of British eighteenth- and nineteenth-century decorative and sporting prints, the new gallery will also represent three young sporting artists, Simon Erland, Alan Brassington and Elizabeth Turner.
Graphic art at Düsseldorf
DÜSSELDORF.
Following the six-year-old SAGA Fair in March at the Grand Palais, Paris, which specialises in limited edition prints and this year included also drawings, a new fair devoted to prints and other multiples has been launched in Düsseldorf, to be held at the Düsseldorf Stadthalle 3–6 September.
It is organised by Messe Düsseldorf and the Association of German Artwork Publishers and aims to offer works at a wide range of prices.
Record attendance at Maastricht
MAASTRICHT.
A record number of visitors visited the Maastricht European Fine Art Fair this year: 35,400 people, compared to 27,500 last year a rise of 29%.
During the fair the appointment of Hans König as Chairman of the European Fine Arts Foundation (the Fair's organisers) was announced.
Mr König was formerly Secretary-General of the International Chamber of Commerce.
A breath of fresh art
LONDON.
Fresh Art, the only fair to show the work of British graduates and post-graduates, will be held for the second time at the Business Design Centre, Upper Street, Islington, London N1 from 17 July to 1 August.
Forty colleges will show examples of their students' best work.
Over 1,000 works will be shown with prices ranging from £50 to £5,000.
Included in the fair is a ‘video box’ with twelve monitors and a competition for a large-scale sculpture or installation.
Another competition to produce a wall work on the theme of ‘Communication’ has been sponsored by BBC News and Current Affairs and Peter Palumbo's Arts Foundation.
The three winners' works will be hung on the apparently dreary corridors of the BBC Television Centre.
Fresh Art is sponsored by the Business Design Centre.
LAPADA goes green
LONDON.
The London and Provincial Antique Dealers' Association (LAPADA) will be holding its next fair at the Royal College of Art from 13 October to l8 October.
This year's show will feature sixty-five exhibitors and includes furniture, pictures, sculptures, clocks, textiles and objects.
The theme this year is ‘Foliage and Flowers in Art’.
Frankfurt Fair: the results
FRANKFURT A. MAIN.
This year's Ars Antiqua will run from 7 to 15 November and will again include two weekends to provide maximum time for viewing and reflecting on purchases.
This decision was based on a survey of 1991 visitors and exhibitors which also revealed attendance figures of 17,000.
Most visitors were German, from Hesse, Rhineland Palatinate, North Rhine-Westphalia, Baden Württemberg and Bavaria, while the largest number of foreign visitors were American.
Around 1,500 works of art were sold last year with a healthy number of sales over DM50,000.
Olympia Fair seen by many dealers as a test of the market
LONDON.
The Fine Art and Antiques Fair at Olympia runs from 4 to 14 June this year.
Dealers who exhibit generally agree that the fair is successful commercially, has improved its standard in recent years, and look to it this year to test the general market for antiques and collectibles.
One of the assets of the fair is the presence of provincial dealers who gain a London audience during this highpoint in the social and dealing season.
Given its timing before The Grosvenor House and Ceramics Fairs, the Fine Art and Antiques Fair at Olympia has the reputation for being a real trading fair with considerable dealer as well as private buying.
A series of lectures organized by the National Arts Collections Fund focusing on creating and preserving collections and will be held during the fair; it marks the first time that the NACF has initiated a project at a trade fair.
Alistair Sampson (former President of the BADA and an correspondent on antiques) will discuss English pottery; Marina Vaizey (editor of the NACF magazine) will lecture on cataloguing and building a collection of paintings, works on paper and prints; Derek Shrub (lecturer in Fine and Decorative Arts) will give advice on selecting and restoring English furniture; and Ian Pickford (broadcaster, lecturer and writer) discusses caring for and collecting silver.
Loan exhibitions also will augment the fair: an exhibition arranged by Sotheby's of pottery from the reserve collection of the Hampshire County Museum's Service at Alton will feature objects never before displayed publicly and will show the development of British pottery from the fourteenth to the early nineteenth centuries.
The Gilbert Collection Bequest to the Hampshire County Museum's Service will also be on show.
Under the auspices of the National Art Collections Fund will be an exhibition of the Hogarth Collection of Puppets and Marionettes.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this June
NEW YORK
Pillow talk this month's sleeper
Between the sheets at P.P.O.W.
For connoisseurs of drawings, sheets are the things you find pressed between mats at art dealers' shops.
For the less rarified among us they are the things you press yourself between before turning out the light.
In the history of art these two notions actually intersected in the late 1930's.
Jean Cocteau, Peggy Guggenheim tells us in her autobiography Confessions of an Art Addict, received her for the first time comfortably horizontal between the sheets, smoking opium.
Her mission was to request some drawings from him for the opening show of her London gallery, Guggenheim Jeune.
He agreed and when they arrived, some weeks later, they included two done on linen bed sheets one of which, titled ‘La Peur donnant ailes au Courage’, included a nude Jean Marais and ‘two other decadent looking figures’ complete with pubic hair: which promptly caused a huge scandal at the British customs office.
P.P.O.W. has had the bright notion of reviving that intersection this month in a show called ‘Between the Sheets’.
Ten artists among them Dara Silverman, Kathleen McCarthy, Alan Belcher, John Lindell and Carrie Mae Weems have been asked to decorate sheets and pillow cases for the occasion.
The show bound to be the sleeper of the season is on until 23 June.
Drawings on more traditional supports are featured in shows all over town this month.
Jason McCoy shows architectural studies by Frederick Kiesler, the Austrian-American visionary, for his ‘The Shrine of the Book’ museum in Jerusalem while, a few floors below, Andre Emmerich presents black-and-white drawings by Al Held, Jack Tworkov, Hans Hoffmann and others (both shows until the 26th) while the selection of tabletop sculptures and drawings by nearly forty sculptors continues on well into July.
Highlights of the exhibition include works on loan by Max Ernst, Edgar Degas, Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró.
Watercolour is, by definition, a kind of paint and Suzan Frecon underscores the notion by calling her work at Lawrence Markey until the end of the month ‘watercolour paintings’.
Until the 24th there are recent watercolours by Niasami Teraoka at Pamela Auchencloss which mix traditional Japanese techniques with contemporary subject matter (the artist has done a series, for instance, on AIDS) and watercolours, pastels and ink drawings by George Baselitz are at Matthew Marks until the 26th.
It's odd to realise that Albert Barnes, the cantankerous Pennsylvanian who amassed one of the greatest collections of Matisse, Picasso and Cézanne, went to school with both William Glackens and John Sloan.
When he decided to reform his first and misguided collecting habits, Barnes looked up both of them for advice.
Sloan no slouch himself in the cantankerous department was not of much help.
But the gentler Glackens agreed to consult and Barnes forthwith packed him off to Europe, $20,000 in hand, to buy pictures for him.
With that connection his collection began in earnest because Glackens knew his way around the prevailing cutting edge, mainly through his friendship with Gertrude and Leo Stein.
But what of Glackens' and Sloan's own work?
If your curiosity is piqued, visit the Krashaar Galleries after the 10th and you will find there a selection of drawings by these two pioneering members of New York's Ashcan School.
The show will run through July.
Paper also figures in the show at Fawbush (from 6 June until 2 July), though not in any traditional way.
Adam Rolston, taking a distinctly Warholian Pop point of view, works with cardboard, making commercial cartons in series.
He has also done a limitless edition of paper coffee cups which say, instead of the traditional ‘I  N.Y.’,
‘I  JODIE FOSTER’.
Classic Pop if such an oxymoronic designation is possible is on again this month at Gagosian (uptown) where ‘James Rosenquist The Early Paintings’ continues that gallery's succession of early 1960's shows.
Included, from 1961, are ‘Look Alive’ and ‘Let's Go For a Ride’(Rosenquist is one of the great titlers ‘Sitting Around Screaming’is an all-time favourite).
Londoners may remember these two paintings from the big Royal Academy Pop Art survey last autumn.
They each feature a huge female smile hemmed in and otherwise cropped by a gigantic soda bottle in one instance and a medley of hands and legs in the other.
Accompanying the show on all this month and until 11 July is a fully illustrated catalogue with an essay by Judith Goldman.
Lately it's been Julian Schnabel time at Pace.
Last month the artist never one to think small showed ‘The Olate Paintings’ up on 57th Street and, simultaneously downtown to Greene, ‘The End of Summer’.
The latter was a series of four gigantic canvases, each sixteen feet square.
This month, in the same space, Schnabel is back with his five ‘Hurricane Bob’ paintings.
Smaller, though not by much, each of them is fifteen by fifteen feet.
All of this means that in the past year Schnabel has applied paint and might one hope quality thought time? to an area as big as a standard tennis court with 400 square feet left over.
Curious?
Get to Pace (downtown) before 26 June.
Tim Rollins & K.O.S.
(that stands for Kids of Survival), an artist cooperative that has had an enormous success in recent years, opened its first show at Mary Boone last month.
It continues there this month, closing on the 27th.
In it are paintings which refer to some of the literary works which the group has mined for material in the past Kafka's America and Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter as well as new ones such as Pinocchio and Alice in Wonderland.
Elizabeth Koury continues to show this month (until the 30th) the new abstract paintings of John Zinsser.
His works results from the automatic interaction of various paint materials and the intervention of a wide variety of implements from the traditional (brushes) to the unexpected (turkey basters).
Another kind of abstraction- this time influenced by Zen Buddhist teachings figures in the work of Daniel Berlin, a Colorado artist who has lived in New York for the past eight years.
There are paintings and monotypes in his show at Kent on until 2 July called ‘Unseen Rain’.
Peter Halley's recent works take up residence in the cool vast spaces of the Gagosian garage on Wooster Street while down the street, at Louver, ‘Studies for the Iliad’-new paintings by Charles Garabedian are on view from 6 until 11 July.
New Yorkers, alas, can be extremely dense about British art, especially about work done before the late Fifties.
With the emergence of Pop, bells of recognition begin to go off, but otherwise it can be difficult going.
Two shows on at the moment can help to correct this.
One, at Guillaume Galozzi, is called ‘Metamorphose’ a survey of British Surrealists and Neo-Romantics from 1935–55.
Accompanied by a handsome catalogue with an essay by David Ebony, the show includes work by twenty-two artists, among them John Banting, John Craxton, Mary Adshead, Peter Lanyon, Paul Nash, John Piper, Alan Reynolds, Graham Sutherland and John Tunnard.
At the Adelson Galleries uptown there is ‘The Poetic Trace’: Aspects of British Abstraction since 1945’.
Some of the artists included here are Ben Nicholson, Peter Lanyon, William Scott, Alan Davies, Patrick Heron, Prunella Clough and Howard Hodgkin.
There is also an illustrated catalogue with an essay by the English critic Mel Gooding.
‘Metamorphose’ is on until 20 June and ‘The Poetic Trace’until the 30th.
When the Guggenheim Museum finally re-opens later this month (28 June), after what seem like decades of restoration and renovation, visitors will step into Wright's great rotunda and, looking up along the famous spiralling ramp, see…no art at all!
What they will see is light in the form of an installation by that past master of lux de luxe, Dan Flavin.
As though to prepare us for that vision, Rubin Spangle has devised a show of early Flavin works from the Sixties which will be on until the end of the month.
If Flavin has been busy trying to de-concretise sculpture all his career, Judy Pfaff, in her own very different way, has been attempting something similar.
She seems devoted to trying to arrest the elements of some primordial sculpture big bang.
Her newest airy arrestation can be seen this month, until the 27th, at Max Protech.
Even Elyn Zimmerman, happy to be working with the massive density of great chunks of granite, achieves a measure of apparent de-materialisation by mirroring rough surfaces in highly polished ones in her show, ‘Portals and Passages’, at 65 Thompson Street until 11 July.
What can happen when more than one person get together to have their picture taken?
That's a question Leslie Tonkonow, Director of the Zabriskie Gallery, recently asked.
The answer emerged in the form of a fascinating take on photographic history called ‘Multiple Exposure The Group Portrait in Photography’ seen earlier this year in the art gallery of Wesleyan University and now on view at Zabriskie (until the 27th).
Accompanied by a serious catalogue, it surveys this unique genre from early works by Arnold Genthe and August Sander to more recent efforts by Patrick Faigenbaum and Nicholas Nixon.
Do you think of yourself as a latent graffiti artist?
Got a kvetch?
Like to draw cats?
You may now let it all hang out on the walls of the 303 Gallery from 6 June to 3 July where an open-forum show called ‘Writing on the Walls’ invites public participation.
At last your big chance to show in a New York gallery.
PARIS
Animal, vegetable and mineral
JGM shows the absurd made plausible
For almost thirty years, Claude and François-Xavier Lalanne have been producing their often functional sculptures.
By engineering improbable combinations of the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms, they create a fourth, in which the surreal and the absurd become plausible: ‘Mela-bocca’(Apple-mouth), ‘Rhinocrétaire’, ‘Ippopotamo-vasca da bagno’(Hippopotamus-bathtub), ‘Conigli o vento’(Rabbits or wind) are typical of their fantastic world.
Although they have worked together for so many years, there has still been time for individual projects and exhibitions: François-Xavier has moved on from vegetable architecture to monumental fountains and sculptures; Claude's ventures include jewellery and bronze furniture for an American garden, stage props for Bob Wilson and breastplates for the angels in Wim Wenders' film ‘Wings of Desire’.
The duo's latest works are on display until 31 July at JGM, a gallery specialising in the three-dimensional.
At the Montaigne until 18 July, Marie-Jo Lafontaine, one of the first European artists to explore the aesthetic potential of video imagery, is showing two groups of works polyptychs, monochromes and, of course, videos entitled ‘We are all shadows’ and ‘Tout ange est terrible’.
Their theme is the manipulative power of hidden political, economic and social forces.
The Gutharc-Ballin is featuring the German artist Volker Saul until 19 June, to be followed by the Japanese Mamiko Uematsu, who brings the gallery's annual programme to a close at the end of July.
Uematsu paints small squares of uniform colour, traversed by a single line to achieve the effect of vibration.
Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert continue to show sculptures by Barry Flanagan until 20 June.
Meanwhile, a Scottish sculptor, David Mach, takes the stage provided, for the whole of June, by Nikki Diana Marquardt.
Mach almost always creates his sculptures in situ, using everyday objects.
Unlike other British sculptors of recent times, however, the materials he works with are not drawn from the junk-heap but tend to be artefacts symbolic of consumer society: cars, television sets and illustrated magazines.
Do not miss the Felice Varini exhibition at the Jennifer Flay gallery, now in its last few days (closing 7 June); Varini is followed by the American Karen Kilimnik, who will be setting up a large installation.
Artcurial is hosting a succinct but varied review of contemporary Spanish art, ‘23 artistes pour l'an 2000’, organised by Juan-Manuel Bonet.
The catalogue has full notes on each artist, including Pepe Espaliu, Sergi Aguilar, Dis Berlin, Perejaume, Plensa, Susana Solano, Sicilia, Irazu, Alcolea and Xesus Vazquez.
After Daniel Bonnal, Hélène de Roquefeuil is featuring the Milanese Alessandro Traina, who causes us to meditate on the notion of time by juxtaposing a variety of disparate materials.
Throughout the month, the Galerie Beaubourg is showing twelve paintings by François Boisrond.
Their jumbled stories are reminiscent of the black-bordered figures typical of so-called Figuration Libre.
The paintings combine fragments from children's books, allusions to classical history, intimate feelings, and ironic reflections on the personality of the artist a cardboard hero like any other.
Until 30 July, Hervé Di Rosa, who shares Boisrond's spontaneous populism, though in a more neo-surrealist vein and with more kitsch, is showing ten or so of his paintings at the Laage-Salomon, where they constitute a mini-retrospective of the years 1982–1992.
(He follows the synthetic artist Martin Barré.)
The British photographer Paul Graham is adept at capturing the concrete but almost imperceptible signs of a country's social unease and inherited mental attitudes.
This month, at the Claire Burrus gallery, he turns his attention to Japan, pinpointing traditional gesture, post-war americanisation and problems of sexual equality.
Yvon Lambert is showing work by Agnes Martin and Richard Tuttle, while Marie-Hélène Montenay features Webster, until 4 July, and Franka Berndt hosts ‘Plan et signes’ by the Argentinian artist Cesar Cofone.
Samia Saouma is exhibiting watercolours by Ross Bleckner until 27 June; paintings by the same artist are on show at the Ghislaine Hussenot until 18 June.
The syntagmatic volumes of Jean-Pierre Bertrand are on show at the Galerie de France, together with recent works by Rebecca Horn.
John Batho, Gérard Traquandi and Daniel Spoerri are among the artists in the Zabriskie's collective exhibition, which runs until 31 July, while Jean-Luc Blanc, Fabrice Hybert and Laura Emrick feature in a similar event at the Froment & Putman.
International art, culture and politics, as immortalised by Pino Settanni, look down on us from the walls of the Hadrian Thomas gallery until 28 June.
The accent is on Italy.
To mark the occasion, the Rome publisher Pieraldo has published a book which includes three series of portraits, and texts by, among others, Irene Bignardi and Mauro Bolognini.
The De Meo brothers are still featuring Michel Haas, until 11 June, while Alechinsky's tree exhibition continues until 30 June at the Lelong.
The Barbier-Beltz gallery is showing works on paper by the painter Erik Dietman: nordic fables, to which the energetic Swede has given the title ‘Papa pied /Papy Erik’.
‘Simply red’, on the other hand, is a collective exhibition, being staged by Gilbert Brownstone & C. Thirteen artists are taking part, including John Armieder, Marcia Hafif, François Perrodin, Imi Knoebel and Bernard Aubertin, all of whom have contributed a work based on red.
Finally, Denis Lanzenberg is an artist who frames his own richly coloured paintings, then, instead of a title or caption, appends a small black-and-white photograph, which attracts the eye and complements the viewer's appreciation of the composition.
Lanzenberg's work is being shown by Isabelle Bongard until 11 July.
BERLIN
Psychic realities and still lifes
Christa Dichgans at Galerie Springer
Over the past few years galleries have been springing up in Berlin's Fasanenstrasse and its surrounding district, making it the ideal starting point for a gallery tour.
Approaching the northern end of the street from the west, one reaches Galerie Sonne.
Here the whizz-kid from former East Germany, Via Lewandowsky is holding a one-man exhibition from 12 June until 29 August.
He was one of the East German artists who, even before the Wall came down, closely followed the tradition of Joseph Beuys.
Lewandowsky, who was born in 1963, became famous in West Germany and beyond for the ‘reproductive painting’ which form an integral part of his installations commenting on contemporary issues.
Using wood-engravings from old anatomy text books and first aid manuals, he projects images onto a screen and paints what he sees.
But this is not the whole story, since Lewandowsky chooses fragments and assembles details in order to create disturbingly powerful new images.
At his last exhibition at Sonne eighteen months ago, the artist used such inventions, laid out on stretchers, bound with iron chains or impaled on spikes, to show life-threatening wounds of which the injured themselves were unaware.
Until 25 June, Galerie Springer is exhibiting new work on paper from Christa Dichgans.
Running simultaneously at the community gallery Haus am Waldsee is a comprehensive exhibition of her output from the period 1964 to 1991.
The fifty-two year old Berlin artist's work is characterised by highly unconventional still lifes.
Layers and heaps of accurately depicted books, sun-glasses, clothing, toys, telephone and tape-recorders form static still lifes in the classical tradition.
In her more recent works, avalanches of everyday objects seem to fall from the sky.
These apocalyptic still lifes emphasise more strongly than the earlier work Christa Dichgans' preoccupation with the psychic reality of objects.
In the heart of the gallery quarter, Galerie Pels-Leusden, housed in the Villa Grisebach and the Käthe Kollwitz Museum are near neighbours.
The Galerie Pels-Leusden marks the 125th anniversary of the birth of Käthe Kollwitz with a wide-ranging exhibition of her graphic works, drawings and a selection of sculptures.
At the same time, the exhibition renews genuine links between the art trade and the artist or, more precisely, her family.
In 1986, Hans Pels-Leusden, the venerable founder of the gallery, opened the private Käthe Kollwitz Museum containing a vast range of works, collected over several decades.
The hallmark of the artist who lived in Berlin between 1891 and 1943 (she died in 1945) is simplicity of form allied with powerful emotional content.
Two themes to which she returned time and again were the plight of the needy, and soldiers.
An interesting insight into her approach is provided by a chalk drawing on blue hand-made paper dating from 1919.
On one side is a discarded ‘Frau mit totem Kind auf die Knieen’(Woman holding a dead child), on the other is a self-portrait.
The exhibitions runs from 6 June until 15 August.
At her gallery in Fasanen Passage, Thea Fischer-Reinhardt shows paintings under the collective title ‘Zeitgeister’, by the Egyptian painter Radomir who went to art school in Marseilles.
The exhibition continues until 25 July.
Meanwhile, the nearby Galerie Jahnhorst & Preuss presents the work of Japanese artist Yoshihisa Sankawa who studied in Japan and in Germany under Gerhard Hoehme.
His meditative sculptures are organic, natural shapes fashioned from straight-sawn, rectangular pieces of wood, covered with cotton fabric and painted in a variety of colours.
At the southern end of Galeriestrasse stands the Galerie Zellermayer.
Recent works by Antonius Höckelmann can be seen here until 27 June.
Between 1957 and 1961, Höckelmann trained as a sculptor with Karl Hartung, but is also an impressive draughtsman and painter influenced by Expressionism and Abstraction.
Moving along Uhlandstrasse, we come upon the Dieter Brusberg gallery on Kurfürstendamm, where Dieter Hacker's progress from panels to theatrical effects can be seen until 27 June.
At one time a stern critic of art and the art market, later the darling of ‘New Fauve’ painting in the 1980s, Hacker won acclaim in his own right as a set-designer.
His most recent ideas for stage sets were seen at the recent production of Hölderlin's ‘Oedipus’ at the Schauspielhaus in Bochum.
For the those interested in photography or sculpture, a tour of the galleries should include a detour to Schöneberg.
The third photographic exhibition at the Galerie Raab, following Robert Mapplethorpe and Martin Sewcz, features the Parisian photographic partnership of Pierre & Gilles between 2 and 27 June.
Together they devise the subject matter, the studio setting and lighting.
Pierre takes the photograph which Gilles then retouches, often using candy colours.
Borrowing from the weighty tomes published in Hollywood in the 1950s and 1960s and alluding to Spanish and Italian Baroque painting, their exquisitely-stylised artefacts are often very amusing.
For example, Nina Hagen appears as a sickly-sweet Madonna with husband and child under a halo of circus lights.
Taking the Landwehrkanal, we soon arrive at Lützowplatz and the Eva Poll gallery, with an exhibition of recent and earlier sculptures in a variety of formats by Sabine Grzimek.
Sabine Grzimek is known for her exciting treatment of surfaces.
The sensitive modelling of the lacerated skin, devouring light and shade, transforms the surface of the work into its principle means of expression.
Cologne
Paszti-Bott shows ‘the third force’
Claus Carstensen tackles the Irish question
One of Cologne's least-known galleries is also one of its best.
Paszti-Bott, a small storefront on An der Linde 25, sits in interesting isolation just behind the train station and around the corner from the Musikhochschule.
Andrea Paszti and Hans-Werner Bott (marriage as well as business partners) set up the gallery in 1988 in a former bookstore.
Their first exhibition, ‘Artist's Books’ featured unique books (often old volumes overpainted with ciphers or images) by Al Hansen, Michael Becker, Helmut Löhr, Lois Polansky, Walter Dahn, Hans-Peter Adamski and the English artist Chris Newman, among others, and was accompanied by a musical performance from Newman.
Since then, Paszti-Bott have continued to publish small editions of texts by artists, and have broadened their programme to include small paintings, works on paper and other objects that also bear an intimate link to the written word.
Paszti-Bott's Conceptualist roster is impeccable it includes such artists as Hans-Peter Adamski, Peter Bömmels, Walter Dahn, Martin Gostner, Martin Kippenberger and Jürgen Klauke yet selection of works is guided by a rare concern for materials and aesthetic values that flouts the Deconstructive ban on real presences.
Among the famous names are also those of younger artists working in Cologne, Düsseldorf and Bonn: Heike Tibes, who works with wooden cut-outs of animal forms; Manos Tsangaris, a musician, poet and sculptor; Jo Schultheis, Marina Makowski, Alexander Gyenes, Suse Wiegand and Hella Berent, who during Easter installed fourteen black paintings in Cologne's Agneskirche, and recently lectured on the colour black at a conference on colour in Bombay.
Until 15 June the exhibition ‘F.A.I.T.’(acronym for Families Against Intimidation and Terror, a neutral protective organisation in Northern Ireland) by Danish artist Claus Carstensen features green and white flags, photographs and designs relating to Carstensen's interest in what he calls ‘a third force’ in both politics and art: in this case, the middle ground represented by F.A.I.T.'s non-alignment with both the I.R.A.
and Ulster, and the special resonance that comes into being when words are coupled with images.
Intercepting Carstensen's show until 9 June will be a reading of the Musikhochschule of early twentieth-century author Hans Henny Jahn's play ‘Medea’ by poet Thomas Kling, accompanied by organ music and a five-person exhibition on Jahn at Paszti-Bott.
Working in a similar vein but on a grander and more broadly historical scale is Alfred Kren, with exhibitions at his large three-room space at Antwerpenstrasse 42 often following a diptych format.
Kren attempts to balance Cologne's sometimes rootless obsession with the new by showing painting and sculpture from the Sixties to the present by older American artists such as Philip Guston, Willem De Kooning, Raoul Hague and Robert Rauschenberg along with German artists such as Andreas Horlitz and Thom Barth.
Complementing the fine art are separate displays of artefacts and documents of the worlds of literature, photography and African and South American cultures.
Since opening in Cologne in 1986, Kren's arduously researched exhibitions have included ‘Georges Rouault/George Baselitz: Dialectic in Prints’; Brazilian Ex Votos; Frederick Kiesler; African Masks and Japanese Noh-Masks alongside drawings by American artists Feininger, Childs, Kwiatek, Ellis, Taylor and Ferro; Thom Barth and Masks from Black Africa; and in early 1992, nineteen photographs of Picasso taken by Jean Cocteau in 1916 in conjunction with African Tribal Arts.
This May, paintings by Rauschenberg from 1991–92 were paired with photographs by Allen Ginsburg taken from the early 1950s to the late 1980s to be followed, until 27 June by Raimund Girke's suite of black and white abstractions.
Girke's surprising companion will be the architectural photographer Pedro Guerrero, now in his seventies, who in the 1940s photographed Taliesin in its early stages for Frank Lloyd Wright and made several portraits of Wright himself.
Of the Guerrero-Girke combination, Kren remarks, ‘You could say that Wright's work has to do with strong control with a certain allowance for sentiment.
Girke's paintings have a similar quality, and this is what I want to show: that it is possible to be reductive and constructive but also emotional’.
As Germany begins to feel the pinch of the recession, young gallerist Otto Schweins has responded with inspiring proof that small can be beautiful.
His tiny, twenty-square metre gallery occupies the former gatehouse of Wormserstrasse 23, where, since April 1991 Schweins has launched one-man shows of young graduates of the Düsseldorf Kunstakademie: giant woodcuts by Jürgen Stollhaus, sculptures made from typewriter keys and other objects by Jörg Koch; elliptical polyester sculptures by Thomas Rentmeister; drawings and sculpture by Monika Brandmeier and an installation of wine, salt and a long white chasuble by Milan artist Giuseppe Pipoli.
From 12 June until 18 July, when the gallery closes for the summer, Schweins will cover the walls with fifty small paintings by Ralf Voltmann, who appropriates styles and techniques ranging from Nolde to Polke and Richter, and sometimes creates images by puncturing the canvas with a drill.
A fourth gallery hitherto not previously in these columns is Gisela Capitain, at Apostelnstrasse 19.
Capitain deals exclusively in works on paper, often producing catalogues in collaboration with New York publisher Thea Westreich.
Capitain's programme, which represents one of Cologne's most significant showcases for new American art, includes Raymond Pettibon, Mike Kelley, Christopher Williams, Stephen Prina and the photographers Larry Clark and Zoe Leonard.
Capitain also shows some German counterparts: Michael Krebber, Martin Kippenberger, Albert Oehlen and Marcus Oehlen.
From 5 June until 4 July, Capitain will present ten ‘Word Drawings’ by New York artist Christopher Wool.
Wool's wallpaper-like ornamental patterns are achieved through a variety of printing methods: densely stamped impressions, rolled acrylic printing and colour xerox.
In apprehension of the critical hordes sweeping through Cologne en route to Documenta and the Basel Art Fair, many galleries are ending the spring season with shows that take the long view.
At Galerie Berndt, thirteen works on paper and two objects by Meret Oppenheim are exhibited from early June until the end of July.
They range from early works such as the 1928–29 watercolour ‘Blue Ashtray and a Packet of Parisiennes’ to the exquisite, macabre 1950 ink drawing ‘A Dead Mouse’to two late pencil drawings made in 1985: ‘Face (with Neck) Rome’, and ‘Face (Roma)’.
Until 8 August, the Busche Galerie offers an overview of Hanne Darboven's oeuvre, with a series of number writings from 1971, a collection of 365 postcards mounted on twenty-seven sheets (with index) corresponding to every day of 1983, and a forty-two page collage of photographs and drawings from 1987, entitled ‘New York Trucks’.
Leccese-Spriith continues its historical perspective on contemporary art with Richard Long's 1981 ‘Scottish Stone Circle’, Sol Lewitt's 1973 sculpture ‘Open Cube’(one of several variations on this form) and Giulio Paolini's 1969 ‘Un ritratto’, two photographs printed on canvas.
Monika Sprüth opens at Wormserstrasse 23 with a more Teutonic embrace of recent Kunstgeschichte, a group show of Dahn, Kasseböhmer, Schulze, Trockel and Fischli-Weiss, until late June.
And at TransArt Exhibitions (in the Kreishaus complex) the pre-war European roots of American Abstract Expressionism are explored in a retrospective of German-born painter Hans Hofmann, with a new catalogue published by the co-curators, Andrew Kalman of the Crane Gallery in London, and Jeane Freifrau von Oppenheim of TransArt.
The twenty-five paintings and ten works on paper date from the artist's 1932 emigration to New York, where he was championed by Clement Greenberg, and exerted a powerful influence upon Krasner, Pollock and Motherwell.
Unfortunately, few works survive from Hofmann's long Matisse-influenced sojourn in Paris (1904–14) and Expressionist period in Munich (1914–32), but traces of these phases are still to be detected in Hofmann's vivid use of colour in his later abstractions.
Hofmann's fame in America is matched by an inexplicable obscurity in Europe, which this thoughtful exhibition should help to rectify.
Finally, after delays due to construction, Thomas Rehbein's gallery at Wormserstrasse 21 will open in early June with a group show of landscapes, still-lifes, portraits and figurative works by painters Peter Duka, Caroline Bitterman, Leif Trenkler, Alice Stefanek, Steven Maslin, Roberto Cabot, Ulrike Hullmann and Thomas Kocheisen.
London
Kiefer and Horn
Turske-Hue-Williams introduces Turrell's ‘Irish sky garden’
At the core of Anthony d'Offay's exhibition of new works by Anselm Kiefer (4 June-24 July) is an installation entitled ‘Die Frauen der Revolution’, which returns to a theme already investigated by the artist in a large picture of 1986 belonging to the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam.
Making reference to the emotive yet eccentric account compiled by the historian, Michelet, who had witnessed the French Revolution as a young boy, Kiefer has constructed twenty beds for the female martyrs and heroines of that great and terrible event.
Placards are hung above each bed which is covered in a sheet of lead encrusted with salt or filled, in shallow depressions, with water and dead flowers.
The installation, which is reminiscent of a Victorian dormitory or hospital ward, is dominated by a large photograph of the artist in back view, further obscured by bunches of dead sunflowers.
Other ingredients in the exhibition include a series of reworked pictures decorated with dead flowers, a group of vitrines containing small tableaux which correspond to the imagery of his paintings, and a survey of watercolours created during the last ten years and encompassing the familiar iconography of Valhallas and palettes with wings.
Another reason for a fresh visit to Dering Street is provided by enterprising young private dealer, Thomas Dane, who has joined forces with Scott Crolla's father, Romano, the proprietor of the street's cafeteria.
Now renamed O'Keefe's, the café becomes a restaurant with a delicatessen, but continues to offer its take-away service.
Alathia Bidwell, from Books for Cooks, takes charge of the kitchen which will specialise in exotic French food and fill an important gap at the north end of Bond Street.
Keen anticipation also surrounds the second exhibition of paintings by Stephen Conroy at Marlborough (19 June-25 July) which introduced the talented young Scottish artist to a salivating London audience exactly three years ago.
All the pictures in that first exhibition were sold before preview night and, in the weeks that followed, Marlborough built a waiting list of nearly 200 names.
Changing market conditions will have slimmed that list, but the gallery can count upon an enthusiastic response from its collectors.
The most important work in the exhibition is ‘The alchemist’, an enigmatic triptych deeply indebted to Caravaggio, which was previewed when the gallery reopened after its renovation of last season.
Around it will be grouped twelve large canvases, mostly of single figures and including depictions of landscape, and a series of smaller head studies.
Thirty drawings and ten etchings, proofed at Studio Prints by Mark Balakjian, who prints for Lucian Freud, form a complementary exhibition at Marlborough Graphics.
In and near Cork Street, Rebecca Horn, whose ‘Ballet of the woodpeckers’ was recently acquired by the Tate Gallery and is featured in ‘New Displays’until the middle of the month, is showing at Mayor (1 June-31 August).
‘Mr and Mrs Brown’, a pair of shuffling shoe trees, is one of several existing works which Horn is bringing to London, but greater attention will concentrate around the four new installations which the artist is creating for the gallery.
Sadly, there are no plans to screen ‘Buster's Bedroom’, the film which was previewed in Berlin last April.
At Waddington, Tim Taylor has organised an exhibition of maquettes and drawings by Henry Moore (3 June-4 July) at a time when international interest in his work appears to be reviving, with current exhibitions taking place in Sydney and in the Garden of the Bagatelles in Paris.
His selection, drawing upon Waddington's great reserve, includes a painted plaster ‘Mother and child’(1932), an abstracted figure in lead (1939) and two bronze stringed figures (1937 and 1939).
At Benjamin Rhodes, there are new paintings by Simon Edmondson (17 June-7 August), who has been living in Madrid for the last twelve months and previously showed with Nicola Jacobs.
The exhibition of light spaces by James Turrell, which Anthony d'Offay staged last September, ranks as one of the season's revelations.
A new exhibition of Turrell's art opens at Turske-Hue-Williams (4 June-31 July).
Comprising eight drawings in graphite, wash and beeswax, and three small plaster models, it introduces ‘The Irish sky garden’, the artist's ambitious environmental project being constructed near Skibbereen in Co.
Cork.
On the site of a Celtic ring fort and at the crossing point of several ley lines, Turrell is building seven skyspaces which will be completed in 1995, well ahead of the Roden Crater, which competes for his energy and financial resources.
Turrell, whose ‘Grey dawn’ is a new permanent installation at the Nordrhein-Westfalen Museum in Düsseldorf, is the first of several leading American artists who will be showing with Michael Hue-Williams in the coming months.
At a time when other galleries are extending exhibitions or raiding stock, London's younger dealers are providing a special energy which helps to alleviate the difficult trading conditions of the present market.
Apart from Hue-Williams, Charles Booth-Clibborn's Paragon Press is previewing a new print publication.
‘The London Portfolio’(ed. 40 £3,000) at Karsten Schubert (9–27 June).
The eleven participating artists, each of whom has contributed a screenprint, are drawn from the ranks of the city's exciting younger generation and include Angela Bulloch, Damien Hirst, Langlands & Bell, Michael Landy, Marc Quinn and Rachel Whiteread.
At Milch, which occupies the building opposite the TUC's Bloomsbury headquarters, provocative American artist, Nayland Blake, will be showing the results of a short residency in London (to 27 June).
In New York, where he will exhibit with new dealer, Jay Gorney, in the autumn, he has attracted much attention for his ‘Restraints’ and ‘Workbenches’which were shown at last year's Whitney Biennial.
At 1–10 Summer Street, an unrestored light industrial building in Farringdon, formerly occupied by a printing business, Jay Jopling is presenting ten plexiglass sculptures by Marcus Taylor (to 25 June), who is included in ‘The London Portfolio’.
Sharp, clean minimal arts in such a rough space will make an interesting contrast and it launches an exhibition programme by the imaginative Jopling, who will be looking for unusual spaces for showing art as a solution to the uncertainties, expenses and predictability of opening his own gallery.
Presenting art in changing places, with its links to the warehouse party circuit of several years ago, is an exciting and original development, and brings fresh stimulus to the contemporary art market.
The following exhibitions were previewed in previous editions of The Art Newspaper and should be noted before they close: Shirazeh Houshiary's new sculptures, with date paintings by On Kawara, at Lisson (to 27 June); Therese Oulton's new abstract canvases at Marlborough (to 12 June); Zadok Ben-David's sculpture at Benjamin Rhodes (to 13 June); and Danny Moynihan's still-life compositions at Grob (to 20 June).
Art Market
Unusual Tang
London, Sotheby's, 9 June.
Heading this sale of Chinese and Korean ceramics and works of art is an olive-green glazed vase of the Northern Qi to early Tang dynasty with probable Sassanian influence.
This is one of only two such vases, the other being in the T.T.Tsui Museum, and is expected to fetch £180–220,000 ($315–385,000).
A Hongwu pear-shaped underglaze-red vase decorated with the ‘three friends of winter’ is estimated at £80–100,000 ($140–175,000).
The Korean ware comes from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and includes a hexagonal vase and a square section bottle vase, both estimated at £30–40,000 ($55–70,000).
Hundred dear
London, Phillips, 10 June.
The standard-bearer in this sale of Chinese and Japanese ceramics and works of art is a two-handled famille-rose ‘Hundred Deer’ vase in the Hu style with Qianlong seal mark and of the period.
The vase bears unusual puce-coloured handles and carries a six-figure estimate.
Also included are a large green enamelled blue-ground saucer dish, Kangxi marks and of the period (est. £25–35,000; $45–60,000) and a pair of yellow and blue dragon bowls of the same period (est. £15–25,000; $25–45,000).
Productive madness
London, Christie's, 12 June.
The highlight of this sale of Victorian pictures, drawings and watercolours is undoubtedly ‘Contradiction: Oberon and Titania’ painted by Richard Dadd in 1854–1858 while a patient at Bethlem Hospital.
The meticulously detailed oval painting is expected to realize £1–1.5m ($1.75–2.65m).
‘Dulce Domum’ by John Atkinson Grimshaw is expected to fetch £300–500,000 ($530–900,000).
Other artists represented include Tissot, Moore and Fildes.
Among the drawings and watercolours the most interesting is the portrait of Marie Stillman by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, which is estimated at £70–100,000 ($125–175,000).
Elgin's wood
London, Sotheby's, 12 June.
The highlight of this sale of French and continental furniture and tapestries is to be found among pieces put up for sale by Lord Elgin and supplied to his ancestor Thomas, the Seventh Earl, by Martin-Eloy Lignereux.
This is an Empire porcelain-mounted bronze, gilt-bronze and thuya-wood secrétaire à abattant with a verde antico marble top and a fall-front inset with a Sèvres porcelain plaque, which is estimated at £120–180,000 ($210–315,000).
A Louis XVI marquetry table by Jean Riesener with galleried top and panelled frieze and three drawers, the property of the Fifth Earl of Rosebery's Trust Settlement, is expected to realize £100–150,000 ($175–265,000).
Pieces from other vendors include Louis XV marquetry bureau of small dimensions by Bernard II Van Risenburgh, estimated at £70–90,000 ($125–160,000), and a mid-eighteenth-century pair of Venetian painted arte povera centre tables, expected to sell for £60–80,000 ($100–140,000).
Pick a Peck
London, Phillips, 16 June.
This sale of furniture, tapestries, rugs and works of art will include two George II Siena and white marble chimneypieces, both from Northumberland House and sold by the joint administrators of Polly Peck.
One comes from the great Dining Room and is expected to make £30–50,000 ($55–90,000), while the other is from the Library or the Duchess's bedroom and is expected to fetch £20–30,000 ($35–55,000).
A set of eight early eighteenth-century walnut chairs in the manner of Daniel Marot, attributable to Thomas and Richard Roberts, are estimated at £30–40,000 ($55–70,000).
Among the rugs is one of only four known Esari prayer rugs from the first half of the nineteenth century, which is expected to bring £6–8,000 ($10–14,000).
American sprinkler
New York, Christie's, 17 June.
This sale of American furniture, silver, folk art and decorative arts will put on offer one of only four American sugar casters from the early eighteenth century.
Made by Jacobus van der Spiegel, it is estimated to bring $120–180,000 (£70–100,000).
A Chippendale carved walnut dressing table from the Bisham family in Philadelphia features designs by the ‘pre-Garvan carver’ and is expected to make $150–200,000 (£85–115,000).
Rembrandt's ‘Three Crosses’ at Christie's
London, Christie's, 18 June.
The second part of the important collection of Old Master prints belonging to a German family of title.
The present sale includes an impression of ‘Christ crucified between two thieves: ‘The Three Crosses’(iii/v, est. £150–200,000; $265–354,000).
Other Rembrandts in the sale include ‘The Shell’(est. £40–60,000; $70–106,000) and ‘Christ returning from the Temple with his Parents’(est. £30–50,000; $53–88,000).
Blushing bride
Monaco, Sotheby's, 18–19 June.
‘La toilette d'une jeune mariée dans le costume antique’, dated ‘Roma 1777’, is one of five large paintings by Joseph-Marie Vien commissioned by the Comte d'Angiviller and is offered at this auction of Old Master paintings with the estimate of FFr2–3m (£200–300,000; $350–530,000).
A similar figure is quoted for a large landscape with a castle by Hubert Robert, while the portrait of Countess Maria-Theresa Kinsy, painted by Louise-Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun in circa 1793, is estimated to bring FFr1.2-1.5m (£120–150,000; $210–265,000).
Fragonard's ‘La Visitation’, once the property of the Prince de Conti, is expected to sell for FFr800,000–1.2m (£80–120,000; $140–210,000)
By Jupiter
London, Christie's, 19 June.
The feature of this sale of Nineteenth-century Continental pictures, drawings and watercolours is a painting by Gustave Moreau entitled ‘Prometheus Bound’, which is expected to sell for £300–500,000 ($530–900,000).
The sale will concentrate on German Romantic works, including ‘View of Taormina’ by Karl Rottmans, estimated at £350–450,000 ($615–800,000).
French furniture in particular Monaco, Sotheby's, 19–20 June.
On offer in this furniture sale will be the second part of a private collection from an ‘hôtel particulier’ of the Faubourg St Germain, as well as pieces from other vendors.
A bronze console on two bronze sculptures made in circa 1864 by Dalou for the ‘Hôtel de la Paiva’, which is estimated to fetch around FFr2.5m (£250,000; $440,000).
A large seventeenth-century Roman cabinet in ebony and pietra dura bears the estimate of FFr1.8–2.2m (£180–220,000; $315–385,000), while a pair of Louis XVI ebony veneered cabinets by Nicolas Petit decorated with Japanese lacquer panels is expected to make FFr1.5–1.8m (£150–180,000; $265–315,000).
Aristocrat lacquer
Monaco, Christie's, 20 June.
To be held at the Hotel Metropole Palace, this sale will feature a single owner collection of Louis XV and Louis XVI furniture, porcelain and gilt-bronzes.
A set of six Louis XV fauteuils attributed to Nicolas-Quinibert Foliot are expected to realize FFr4–6m (£400–600,000; $700,000–1m) and two Louis XV lacquer commodes, one in European lacquer and the other in Chinese, probably by Jacques Dubois, bear the estimate of FFr2–3m (£200–300,000; $350–530,000).
The most striking Louis XVI piece is a console desserte in the Anglo-Chinese taste attributed to Adam Weisweiler, which is estimated at FFr3–5m (£300–500,000; $530–900,000).
A pair of Louis XVI mahogany commodes by Godefroy Dester with ormolu decoration are expected to make FFr2.5–3.5m (£250–350,000; $440–615,000), while a pair of Louis XV chenets stand out among the gilded bronze objects with the estimate of FFr700,000–1m (£70–100,000; $125–175,000).
It's not what you cook…
Monaco, Sotheby's, 20 June.
This auction will see the dispersal of forty-five pieces of eighteenth-century French silver from the collection of Arturo Lopez-Willshaw.
Examples from the Orloff and Orléans-Panthièvre services are included and one of the best pieces from the latter is a soup tureen by Edmé-Pierre Balzac, made in Paris in 1757–58 and now estimated to make FFr3–5m (£300–500,000, $530–880,000).
Also from the service is a ragoût dish made by Thomas Germain in 1734 and estimated at FFr1–1.5m (£100–150,000; $175–265,000).
A pair of cloches made by Jacques-Nicolas Roettiers in 1770 are from the Orloff service and are expected to bring FFr800,000–1.2m (£80–120,000; £140–210,000).
Other pieces include a Rococo coffee pot by François-Thomas Germain in 1756 (est.FFr1.5–2m; £150–200,000; $265–350,000), and a set of four salt cellars resembling crustaceans by Robert Hennell, 1780 (est.FFr1–1.5; £100–150,000; $175–265,000).
Borsum tankards
London, Sotheby's, 23 June.
The eighty-five lots of the Borsum Collection of German faience will form the hub of this sale of Continental ceramics and glass.
Among these is a group of signed tankards.
One dated 1730 and painted by Kordenbusch is expected to realise £30–40,000 ($50–70,000), while one dated 1771 by J.F.Fleigel and another by Wolf Rössler made in Nuremberg in circa 1690 are both expected to make £20–30,000 ($35–50,000).
In addition the sale will include a red and brown-glazed Vezzi gondola lantern dating from circa 1725.
Shaped as a tower with four columns supported by putti which in turn support a gallery and domed roof, it is one of only two such pieces known to exist and is estimated to realise £40–60,000, even though the putto on the roof is missing.
Early Australian books
London, Sotheby's, 25 June.
This auction will see the sale of the Longueville Collection of books relating to Australia and the Pacific divided into 200 lots.
Australia's first illustrated book, believed to be the first leather-bound copy of any Australian book, The Birds of New South Wales, by John Lewin, published in Sydney in 1813 with eighteen hand-coloured illustrations, is estimated to fetch £150–200,000 ($265–350,000).
Also of interest is a memorial printed in 1611 by the Portuguese explorer Pedro Fernandez de Quiros and addressed to King Phillip III of Spain.
One of only three known copies, it is expected to make £50–70,000 ($90–125,000).
God on the staff
London, Sotheby's, 25 June.
The undoubted feature of this sale of tribal art is a hitherto unrecorded Rarotonga Staff God, which is expected to fetch £200–300,000 ($350–530,000).
The best of the fifty-four, mostly Nigerian, pieces from the collection of Dr Ratner of Chicago, which are also included in the sale, is a nineteenth-century Benin bronze memorial head surmounted by a carved ivory tusk (est. £120–150,000; $210–265,000).
Saying it with flowers
London, Phillips, 29 June.
This sale of modern paintings will have as its top lot Chagall's ‘Self portrait with flowers’, 1969-70, with the estimate of £200–300,000 ($350–530,000), and will also put on offer Modigliani's drawing of circa 1914 ‘Caryatide’(charcoal on paper laid down on canvas, 71.5x49cm, est. £70–90,000; $125–160,000).
The sale will include contemporary paintings as well as works from the '20s and '30s, such as‘Femmes sur la plage’, 1932, by Picasso (est. £175–225,000; $310–400,000) and ‘Sans titre’, 1926, by Joan Mirò (est. £130–160,000; $230–280,000).
Stepping out
London, Christie's, 29–30 June.
The highlight of this auction of Impressionist and modern paintings is Chagall's ‘La Grande Parade’.
Formerly in the Pierre Matisse Gallery in New York, it is now estimated to fetch £800–1.2m ($1.4–2.1m).
Works by Surrealist artists include ‘La Famille des Centaures’, 1940, by Salvador Dalí (est. £400–600,000; $700–1m), and Victor Brauner's ‘Les Prestiges de l'Air’ of 1934 (est. £80–120,000; $140–210,000).
Otto Dix and a Picasso Harlequin
London, Christie's, 30 June.
Attracting attention in this sale of Impressionist and modern drawings and watercolours ‘Sadisten Gewidmet’ by Otto Dix.
The work was executed in 1922 and is expected to realize £60–100,000 ($100–175,000).
Picasso's ‘Harlequin à Cheval’ is estimated at £200–250,000 ($354–442,000).
Classical Chagall
London, Sotheby's, 30 June-1 July.
The complete set of Chagall's ‘Daphnis and Chloe’ prints is to be offered with the estimate of £800–900,000 ($1.4–1.6m) in this sale of Old Master, nineteenth and twentieth-century and contemporary prints.
Also featuring will be Picasso's own copy of his ‘La Tauromaquia’, a set of 83 prints to illustrate the eighteenth-century bullfighting handbook by Pepe Illo, which is estimated at £70–80,000 ($125–180,000).
The Old Master section will include a sixteenth-century engraving after Pieter Brueghel the Elder entitled ‘The large fishes devouring the small fishes’, expected to make £10–15,000 ($17,500–26,000).
The contemporary section will see the dispersal of some fifty prints by David Hockney from the Knoedler Kasmin Gallery, with estimates varying from £300–8,000 ($530–14,000).
Through a glass darkly
London, Sotheby's, 30 June-1 July.
This two-day sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture will put on offer a group of works on paper by Egon Schiele, one of which is a watercolour of his wife Edith signed and dated 1915 (est. £300–400,000; $530–700,000).
The top lot among the paintings is likely to be Van Gogh's ‘Blossoming almond branch in a glass’, which was executed at Arles in the spring of 1888 and was last exhibited in Zurich in 1924.
It is expected to fetch £550–650,000 ($950,000–1.1m).
Another interesting painting for sale is Picasso's ‘Compotier, Partition, Bouteille et Guitare devant une fenëtre à St Raphael’, signed and dated ‘19’(est. £300–400,000; $530–700,000), while his ‘Le repas du pauvre’ is a watercolour executed in Barcelona in 1904 and is expected to fetch £200–300,000 ($350–530,000).
One side of Bacon
London, Christie's, 2 July.
The 1971 portrait of Isabel Rawsthorne by Francis Bacon takes pride of place in this sale of contemporary pictures with the estimate of £180–240,000 ($315–420,000).
Also on offer are Lucian Freud's ‘Man in a Sports Shirt’ and ‘Korsika (Sonne)’by Gerhard Richter, which is estimated at £70–90,000 ($125–160,000), as well as a large collection of works by Marcel Broodhaers.
Mostly British
London, Sotheby's, 2 July.
British artists form the core of this sale of post-war and contemporary art.
Outstanding is Lucian Freud's ‘Naked Girl Asleep I’, an oil on canvas measuring 61x61cm.
Painted in 1967, it is expected to fetch £350–450,000 ($610–790,000).
Frank Auerbach's ‘Railway Arches Bethnal Green II’, measuring 109x138cm, is signed and dated ‘59 and is estimated at £180–250,000 ($315–440,000), while Ron Kitaj's ‘Primer of Motives I (Intuition of Irregularity)’ is a perfect square (151.5x151.5cm) executed in New York in 1965 and is expected to sell for £150–200,000 ($260–350,000).
Also on offer is an example of Lucio Fontana's 1962–63 ‘Fine di Dio’ series.
Signed and titled on the reverse ‘63 FD 28’ is estimated at £200–300,000 ($350–530,000).
The auction will also see the first work by Antonio Lopez Garcia to be put up for sale in London or New York and his ‘Ataud’ of 1957 is estimated at £180–250,000 ($315–440,000).
Moonshine
London, Christie's, 3 July.
Among the contemporary and modern prints on auction will be a coloured woodcut, entitled ‘Mondschein’, by Edvard Munch, which is expected to realize £60–80,000 ($100–140,000).
A second state lithograph by Toulouse-Lautrec, of three produced, entitled ‘Au Concert D. 365’, estimated at £30–40,000 ($55–70,000).
Rosebery's Rembrandt
London, Sotheby's, 8 July.
Rembrandt's portrait of Johannes Uyttenbogaert is to be offered for sale by the Earl of Rosebery in this sale of Old Master paintings (see p. 17).
An almost contemporary work by Guido Reni, ‘David with the head of Goliath’, dating from 1630, is also included in the sale.
On loan to the National Gallery in London until 1991, after its discovery in 1985, it measures 214.5x143 cm and is estimated to bring £2–3m ($3.5–5.3m).