

Why Britain doesn't need a Khalili museum
A well orchestrated campaign has been going on in the British press for the last two or three weeks, led by a PR firm engaged by the dealer Dr David Nasser Khalili himself, to persuade the British public that it would be a crying shame if there were not a Nasser Khalili museum in the centre of London.
His requirements are not modest: he would like a building of 3500 to 5000 square metres, acquired, staffed and maintained at the expense of the British government.
In exchange he would exhibit his collection there for fifteen years, keeping the freedom to exhibit it around the world, and buy and sell from it.
The collection, which he says was put together over the last twenty years, but most of which was acquired from the mid Eighties onwards in a sudden and unexplained burst of prosperity, consists of illuminated manuscripts, metalwork, coins and armour, mainly from the medieval Middle Eastern Islamic world.
Mr Khalili values it at over £1 billion.
Now there is no doubt that there are indeed some very fine pieces in this collection (too many, however, without a provenance), but, between the British Museum and the Victoria & Albert Museum, London already has the finest displays of Middle Eastern art in the world.
The Khalili collection would therefore not be adding to the range of art to be seen in the capital.
Nor would it be a significant gesture towards Britain's 2.5 million Moslem inhabitants, as he suggests, because those Moslems mostly come from the Indian sub-continent, and the Khalili collection has about as much connection with their material culture as a collection of French medieval art has with Czech baroque art.
Surely a far more significant gesture by the government towards Britain's immigrant community would be a hefty grant for the proposed Indian museum in Bradford, which the V&A wants to create in order to display the nation's holdings of Indian art, mostly in store since the closure of the Indian Museum in 1947.
The Thyssen Collection is opening to the public in Madrid this month.
Misleading parallels have already been drawn in the British press between this ‘lost opportunity’ and the Khalili offer.
Quite apart from the fact that it is ludicrous to compare the persons of Baron Thyssen and of Mr Khalili as collectors, as also to compare the status of their collections (Baron Thyssen is not proposing to buy and sell from his collection while it is on loan in Madrid), it is clear from the information we are publishing in this issue, that the rental of the Thyssen Collection was a luxury Britain could have ill afforded, and not a ‘lost opportunity’.
David Mellor and his fledgling Department of National Heritage must realise that Britain's museum world is not short of actual works of art.
What is needed is money to upgrade the ways of showing that art, and if London needs a new museum at all, it is a museum of modern art.
Nick Serota, director of the Tate, is at the moment coming in for a lot of criticism because he changes the displays every year.
He has opted for this solution to the problem of his masterpieces in storage.
A long-term, good investment would be to give him a separate building in which to tell the tale of twentieth-century art before the twentieth century is quite at an end.
Madrid
Juan Carlos opens Thyssen Collection
The collection that provoked even Mrs Thatcher to show an interest in art is inaugurated 9 October.
Did Britain miss a bargain?
LONDON.
From the moment in the mid-Eighties when it became known that Baron Thyssen was hunting a new location for his famous collection of paintings housed until only a few months ago at the lakeside Villa Favorita near Lugano, city fathers and heads of state began to vie for the prestige of exhibiting it.
Mrs Thatcher's last-minute play for the collection was in 1988, but by that time it was too late: a contract had been signed with the Spanish government (see interview with Baron Thyssen, p.6), committing the collection to a ten-year loan in Madrid.
A separate agreement has been reached with Barcelona's (Baroness Thyssen is a native of the city) municipal authorities regarding the loan to the Pedralbes monastery of eighty-two paintings (see The Art Newspaper No. 12, Nov 1991, p.2).
There is no doubt that the Baron's wife, who has transferred her main residence to Spain, was of great influence when it came to deciding where the collection should alight.
Even more important, however, were the generous terms offered by the Spanish government at a moment when the country was on the cusp of its post-Franco economic expansion.
The government has paid for the restructuring of the Villahermosa Palace to house the collection; it is guaranteeing any short-fall in the running costs after entrance fees are collected; it is paying $6 million rent a year, index-linked, for the collection; it has introduced an indemnity scheme to cover the works of art, and has given the Baron and Baroness the last word on how the collection is to be administered during the ten years of the loan, at the end of which the collection is handed back, with exemption from Spain's otherwise very restrictive art export laws.
In exchange, Spain will be able to enjoy until 2002 the best pictures collected by the Baron and by his father from the 1920s onwards.
What actually happens in 2002 depends on whether both parties are prepared to extend the loan agreement, although the Baron tells us that he considers this unlikely or whether the government can afford to buy any of the pictures.
Critics of the deal, which was worked out at ministerial level, say that it would have been more sensible to spend the money on rebuilding the Villahermosa Palace to be an annexe for the nearby Prado, which is urgently in need of more space, as well as the kind of modern facilities which have ‘put the Villahermosa among the ranks of intelligent buildings and the top museums of the Nineties’, as the press release boasts.
The neo-classical palace, whose present appearance dates from the 1770s, has been restructured at a cost of Pta4.3 billion (£23.9 million; $45.4 million) by the architect Rafael Moneo to provide 6000 square metres of gallery space (the National Gallery in London has 10,300).
The Baroness has had considerable influence on the decor; for example, she insisted on marble rather than wooden floors, and pink walls.
The hang is by the curator, Tomas Llorens, former artistic director of the Reina Sofía and a specialist in twentieth-century art, and is conventionally chronological, beginning with the thirteenth century on the top floor and working down to Cubism, Surrealism, Pop Art and Neo-Expressionism on the ground floor, with the earlier works, up to German Expressionism, outnumbering modern art by three to one.
There is no doubt that this a collection which, in its high points, could not be put together today.
Indeed the Baron himself has almost given up buying (a recent exception was Constable's ‘The Lock’, which he acquired at Sotheby's in 1991 for over £10 million), as works of sufficient importance appear so rarely on the market and cost so much when they do.
The star paintings at the Villahermosa are Holbein's ‘Henry VIII’, Dürer's ‘Christ among the doctors’, Domenico Ghirlandaio's ‘Portrait of a woman’, Carpaccio's ‘Young knight in a landscape’, Pontormo's ‘Portrait of a woman’ and Jan van Eyck's ‘Annunciation’, together with about 720 other paintings, and some sculpture, tapestries and goldsmiths' work.
The Spanish government may, of course, be hoping in the long term to be able to buy at least part of this collection at favourable rates; otherwise it must simply be gambling on the Thyssen collection being a sufficiently spectacular and alluring feather in the cultural cap of the capital over the next ten years to make its considerable investment worthwhile.
This gamble is not without its parallels: the city fathers of Bilbao have decided to build a museum of modern art, and rent works of art plus the Guggenheim name from the Guggenheim Foundation in New York for an initial period of twenty years (see The Art Newspaper No. 5 April 1992, p. 5).
The Yugoslav conflict
Bosnia's written history in flames?
The major libraries and archives reported destroyed
LONDON.
Reports are coming in, some of them confirmed by an independent observer, of large-scale destruction in Bosnia, not only of mosques and monuments (see The Art Newspaper No. 19, June 1992, p.1) but also of places of learning, together with the books, archives and manuscripts contained therein.
Television showed the National Library in Sarajevo burn to the ground 26 August.
This was also the university library, as well as containing the national newspaper and periodicals archive.
It has no cellars in which material could have been stored for safety, and it is not known how much had been removed elsewhere.
Last month, William Tribe, a British lecturer at Sarajevo university, confirmed that the Oriental Institute was shelled from above and totally destroyed.
The officials of the Institute have been heavily criticised by the administration of Sarajevo for not having stored the contents, which included numerous oriental manuscripts and material on microfilm, much of it unresearched.
Mr Tribe also confirms Bosnian Information Service reports in London that the Ghasihusrev Beg Library was at least partially destroyed when the eponymous mosque next to it was heavily shelled in May.
This housed oriental manuscripts, many of poetry, mysticism and jurisprudence, going back to the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Professor H.T. Norris of London University, author of Islam in the Balkans (in the press), says that among them were some very fine calligraphic manuscripts and beautifully illuminated Jewish haggadahs.
There at least, some of the best documents are supposed to have been removed before the complex of buildings was hit.
Professor Norris comments, ‘This barbarism is bordering on the destruction by the Chinese in Tibet; the madness is that a lot of the material relates to the Serbian community in Bosnia, so they are destroying their own history’.
In Mostar the Franciscan friary was the main historical archive for Herzegovina, full of medieval, pre-Ottoman material, which Professof Bojan Bujic of Magdalen College, Oxford, says also included some important illuminated manuscripts.
Unconfirmed reports by the Bosnian Information Service say that this is destroyed.
‘If this is true’, says Bujic, ‘it is for the Balkans as though Lambeth Palace Library had burnt down’.
The government of Bosnia Herzegovina alleges that the Serbian army is conducting a policy of cultural genocide, and, as in Croatia, deliberately targeting religious buildings and national monuments.
Certainly, the Serbian forces have publicly admitted that they had targeted the regional museum in Sarajevo: early last month the BBC's war reporter Kate Adie quoted the Serbian explanation of why they had shelled the hotel which houses all the foreign correspondents: apparently they were aiming at the roof of the museum (which contains the Bosnian anthropological material) and missed.
Ethiopia
Football fans demand return of Axum obelisk looted by Mussolini
Official campaign for restitution of sculptured stele
ADDIS ABBABA.
Ethiopians in all walks of life are demanding the return from Italy of the ancient Axum obelisk, looted in 1937 on the personal orders of Mussolini, and retained in Rome in violation of the Italian Peace Treaty of 1947.
Demands for the obelisk's return were recently voiced in a petition signed by over 500 prominent Ethiopians, including a former Prime Minister, Lij Mikael Imru, a son of Ras Imru Hailé Sellassié, a leading Ethiopian commander during the Italian invasion of 1935–36; a former Foreign Minister, Dedjazmatch Zewde Gabre Sellassié; and the internationally known artist Afewerk Teklé.
The petition is supported by numerous international scholars of Ethiopia and Africa, among them the Russian historian of Axum, Yuri Kobischanov; the British archaeologist, David Buxton; the Italian historian of Ethiopia, Angelo Del Boca; and the African historian Ali Mazuri.
An Ethiopian Committee for the Return of the Axum Obelisk was recently established in Addis Abbaba.
In a televised demonstration, held during an international football match in the Ethiopian capital, demonstrators carried posters demanding the obelisk's return, and 40,000 football fans chanted, ‘Let it return’.
The history of the obelisk in Italy began half a century ago.
Shortly after his occupation of Addis Abbaba in 1936, Mussolini ordered the seizure of one of the famous obelisks at the ancient Ethiopian city of Axum.
These finely sculptured stele date to around the first century AD and the biggest is the largest single stone ever worked on by man.
Since it was too heavy to transport, the second largest, measuring twenty-eight metres in height was taken and erected in Rome 28 October 1937, to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the fascist March on Rome.
The stele was placed in front of the Ministry of Italian Africa, today headquarters of the U.N.
Food and Agriculture Organisation.
At the end of the war Italy agreed, in Article 37 of the Peace Treaty of 1947, to return all objects looted from Ethiopia after 3 October 1935, the date of the start of the Italian invasion.
Despite Ethiopian demands for its restitution, the obelisk, by far the most important looted object, was not returned.
The Ethiopian Parliament was so exasperated that it passed a unanimous resolution in 1968 begging Emperor Hailé Sellassié not to visit Italy until the monument's return.
The Ethiopian revolution of 1974, which toppled Emperor Hailé Sellassié, postponed Ethiopian agitation about the obelisk, but this has now been taken up again with renewed force.
The demand is supported by the present Ethiopian Foreign Minister, Seyoum Mesfin, who pledges his government's ‘wholehearted and continued support’ for the ‘noble cause’of the obelisk's return.
Ethiopians consider the obelisk an integral part of their cultural heritage; they need its return as part of the restoration of their historic capital now underway.
Ethiopia's argument for the restoration of the stele is not only the moral one; it is also the legal one enshrined in international law, the Italian Peace Treaty of 1947.
ROME.
At an Italo-Ethiopian conference twenty years ago, experts who had overseen the transport of the Axum obelisk to Italy decided that it was too fragile to risk the home trip.
It seems that in compensation it was agreed that Italy should build a hospital in Ethiopa.
It is possible however that the current Ethiopian regime has ignored the compromise reached by its predecessors.
The Hague
Holland may become a haven for art thieves
With recent changes in the law governing title to stolen goods the rightful owner loses all claim after twenty years
THE HAGUE.
Due to a recent change in the law, Holland may become a clearing house for international art thefts.
This was the thesis of a recent article in the NRC Handelsblad by Joost Vermeulen (based on the views of Professor Brunner who teaches civil law at Groningen University).
A new civil code which came into force in The Netherlands on 1 January this year introduced a number of changes, among which was the reduction of the statutory time limit within which criminal proceedings must be initiated against thieves or holders of stolen property from thirty years to twenty.
After this period the original owner not only forfeits his right to claim back his property (revendication) but the person in possession of the goods also becomes the lawful owner.
Before the changes earlier this year, the thief, the receiver of stolen goods or the finder of property who had failed to declare his find to the proper authorities, never acquired title to that property.
This meant that after thirty years had elapsed the original owner could no longer claim back the property, while the factual possessor could not be designated the proper owner.
The new Civil Code tried to adjust this anomaly by laying down that the right of ownership should lapse at the same time that the right of revendication lapses.
Now the person possessing the goods after the time limit, even if he holds the goods in bad faith, may call himself the rightful owner, while the original owner promptly loses all rights.
In addition, these changes in the law not only concern property stolen within Holland but also property which was stolen elsewhere in the world and arrived in the country during the twenty year period.
The new law was principally designed to deal with thefts of bicycles and video equipment, which quickly lose their value.
It is this kind of theft that has boosted statistics to the extent that Holland has become one of the most criminal countries in the world.
In the case of works of art, however, the difference between the time lapse of thirty years and one of twenty is significant.
Because such objects gain value as time elapses it means that a profit can be realised by anyone patient enough to conceal them for twenty years.
In addition, art thefts are likely to be pursued by their rightful owners for well over twenty years.
It is difficult to see how the government can avoid further changes in the law in order to confront this issue before a major embarrassment occurs.
The irony is that the Dutch, after nearly fifty years, still take the Germans to task, albeit jokingly, for having confiscated thousands of bicycles during the occupation.
Art teaching
Conceptual guru exported
Jon Thompson, head of illustrious Goldsmiths' College, moves to Maastricht
LONDON.
After twenty years' teaching at Goldsmiths' College in South London, mostly as head of fine art, Jon Thompson has been headhunted by the Jan Van Eyck Academy in Maastricht.
One of only four postgraduate art programmes in Holland, the Van Eyck is being radically restructured: there are to be three new heads of department, Heinz Prezold taking charge of Theory, Johann Aders, Design, and Thompson Fine Art.
‘The idea is to explore art as an essential aspect of the public domain, taking it out of the ivory tower’, Thompson explains, ‘A course like this would be difficult in England, where design is dedicated to commerce, rather than broader issues which should be addressed; theory is closely prescribed, and fine art is highly individualistic’.
He can expect a change of pace in his new job: whereas he was responsible for 290 students at Goldsmiths', the Maastricht programme has eight students per year in a two-year course.
Under Thompson's direction, Goldsmiths' has developed an international reputation for its conceptually orientated graduates.
In recent years, ex-students have achieved rapid prominence: Ian Davenport, Fiona Rae and Damien Hirst were shortlisted for the Turner Prize in the last two years, while enough of the young neo-conceptual artists dominating the scene (represented in the Saatchi Collection; for instance) studied there for the style to be referred to as ‘the Goldsmiths’ phenomenon’.
The neo-conceptualism of the Goldsmiths' artists has been heavily influenced by the dominating intellectual presences there, Thompson and the artist Michael Craig-Martin, both of whom have now left.
When Thompson joined Goldsmiths' twenty years ago as head of painting, succeeding Andrew Forge, he immediately set to work amalgamating the painting and sculpture departments into a homogenous fine art course, believing that the old craft distinctions between the media were philosophically untenable.
‘They are now being reasserted in this highly reactionary period’, he says.
Thompson has also left his mark in the influential Leverhulme seminar, a think-tank on the future of art education he chaired in 1982.
In this report, Thompson advocated updating William Coldstream's 1960s notion of the ‘broad base’ on which art and design education be founded to mean ‘a balanced range of perceptual, conceptual, motor and social skills’.
Regarding ‘social skills’, he acknowledges that his recent, successful students have been uncommonly well organised in their self-marketing.
But he rejects the criticism that Goldsmiths', under his direction, has over-emphasised theory at the expense of practice.
‘It is not true.
We deal with ideas, not questions, but as they are manifest visually.
The perceptual is something much broader than hand-eye skills and representational drawing.
The depth of a student's visual literacy is what art schools should be about’.
Government indemnity schemes set up by French and Germans for loan exhibitions
PARIS AND BONN.
The French government has agreed to act as guarantor on the insurance of loan collections of works of art worth over FFr300 million (£31.5 million; $63 million) in toto, brought into the country for temporary exhibitions organised by ‘national public establishments’, but not local authorities.
The project, presented by the Minister for Culture and Education, Jack Lang, and adopted by the Cabinet on 26 August, should be operational in time for the exhibition ‘The century of Titian: from Giorgione to Veronese’ scheduled at Paris's Grand Palais from 20 February to 31 May 1993.
The huge Matisse show transferring to the Pompidou Centre from the MOMA in New York in February next year should also benefit.
Insurance premiums for works travelling to and from Paris have risen sharply over recent years, often representing more than a third of the total cost of an exhibition.
The new measures, similar to those in force in Britain and the US, were drawn up over the summer by Mr Lang's Ministry, which is said to be interested in extending the French insurance model to the whole of Europe.
The German government have already taken the initiative however and independently agreed to accept the principle of government indemnity.
The Bund will therefore bear the responsibility for the DM1 million (£357,000; $714,000) insurance premium for the exhibition opening at the Bonn Kunst- und Ausstellungshalle on 16 October, ‘Great Collections I: The Museum of Modern Art, New York, From Cézanne to Pollock’(until 10 January 1993).
The Deutsches Historisches Museum in Berlin has already called on the government to indemnify several exhibitions this year, including the ‘Entartete Kunst’ show that originated in Los Angeles.
The insurance guarantees cover works of art ‘from nail to nail’, during transport to and from a museum and during the exhibition.
If any object is damaged the government undertakes to pay for its repair or, if it is lost, for its replacement value.
The Spanish government introduced government indemnity at the beginning of this year (see The Art Newspaper No.15, February 1992, p.4) and agreed to undertake responsibility above Pta1 million (£5,500; $11,000) of an indemnity claim.
This was occasioned by the loan by Baron Thyssen to Madrid (see interview p. 6).
The Spanish system is modelled on those set up in the U.S. (Indemnity Act of 1975) and the U.K. (National Indemnity act of 1980).
Give us back our altar we think it's in the BM
CAPRI.
The mayor of the the island of Capri has suggested that negotiations be opened at a diplomatic level for the return of the Altar of Cybele from the British Museum.
In a letter written to Italy's new Ministro dei Beni Culturali, Alberto Ronchey, in August, reference is made to the United Nations resolution for the return of cultural property to its country of origin.
The motivating force behind this seems to be an Italian-based organisation called the Federmediterraneo, whose secretary, Franco Nocella, lives in Naples.
The altar was discovered at the end of the eighteenth century close to the remains of the Villa of Tiberius on Capri and is  believed to have been among objects looted by British troops in 1806.
Before its disappearance it was described by the head of the Austrian delegation at the Bourbon court in Naples as ‘two feet high and decorated with friezes of intermingled ears of corn, fruit and heads of goats’.
When The Art Newspaper approached the British Museum they pointed out that they do not possess the Altar of Cybele, nor had they yet received a letter from Ronchey.
The only analogous antiquity is a candlestick from Capri given to the Museum by Sir William Hamilton.
If anyone has any light to throw on this mystery both the Department of Greek and Roman Antiquities at the BM and the Mayor of Capri would like to hear from them.
Looks like
‘I never set eyes on Parmiggiani's installation’
Kosuth rejects French museum director's charge of copying Italian artist's work for Documenta
LONDON.
Newton and Leibnitz discovered the principles of calculus at the same time (and squabbled over it for twenty years); Darwin thought of how the species evolved, but so did someone called A.R.Wallace, and at exactly the same time.
It keeps occurring and it's called ‘morphic resonance’; something is simply in the air and more than one person picks it up.
That's what the American artist Kosuth maintains happened over the striking resemblance between his installation presented at this year's Documenta in Kassel (closed 29 September), and the installation created by Claudio Parmiggiani three years ago in Milan.
The resemblance was pointed out by Christian Bernard, director of the Villa Arson in Nice in last month's Giornale dell'Arte, our parent publication.
We reproduce here Joseph Kosuth's reply, reversed out, in Kosuth's own style.
Great minds think alike
To start with, and for the record, let me state emphatically that, while I'm familiar with the name of Claudio Parmiggiani, I am not familiar with work by this artist, never saw his exhibitions in Milan or Bologna either actually or in reproduction, and did my installations with zero knowledge of the cited installation.
But it really doesn't matter.
Mr Bernard's formalism disregards all of the significant aspects of my work.
What I gather from the photo reproduced in Il Giornale dell'Arte is that my sin consists of using hanging cloths.
My, my.
Forget the texts I spent months researching and editing, or the nineteenth-century works from the collection of the Neue Gallery under the cloths, or the texts on the walls, or my use of black and white for nearly thirty years which was used in Kassel as a reference to the Documenta IX logo; these are all mere details in the formalist's eye.
I never intended to imply that I would be the first artist to employ hanging cloth (my use of Walter Benjamin necessitated for this kind of work that I block the aura of the collection and re-route it toward another kind of signification, as well as reference a museum's depot) but I am confident that anyone who has visited my installation comes away knowing what my contribution is.
Would that I had the luxury of a museum director to track down and obtain credit for works by other artists that owe even superficial debts to my work.
Finally, one would think that in the interest of scholarship and fair-mindedness Bernard would have made contact with me about his allegation, if, indeed, his motivation was untainted.
I was never contacted.
To both Il Giornale dell'Arte and Christian Bernard I can only say: shame on you.
Missing, presumed still in Japan
I am writing with regard to the article entitled ‘Double sting of Japanese museum and leading U.S. dealer’, which appeared in the May 1992 edition of The Art Newspaper.
The story quotes me as saying of the Rousseau painting in question, that its ‘present whereabouts (are) unknown’.
During the interview with your publication, I indicated my understanding that the painting had been delivered to the Harmo Museum in August 1991, and I have no reason to believe that it has been removed.
Luke Rittner, ex-Arts Council head, to join Sotheby's
LONDON.
Luke Rittner, ex-Secretary-General of the Arts Council and founder-director of the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts, has joined Sotheby's.
He will take on the new post of Communications Manager, ‘leading and co-ordinating all aspects of our public relations’, according to Sotheby's Chairman Lord Gowrie.
Rittner ran the Arts Council from 1983 to 1990, was subsequently made Britain's Cultural Director of the Seville World Fair and is a non-executive director of Carlton Television.
Since 1990 he has been Chairman of the English Shakespeare Company.
Died this summer
John Piper, quintessential British painter whose work was inspired by the English countryside and architecture, died 28 June, aged eighty-eight.
He worked in a wide range of media: book illustrations; designs for tapestries and fabrics; theatre designs in collaboration with Benjamin Britten; prints; and stained glass.
He wrote on art and architecture in collaboration with John Betjeman, taking over control of the Shell Guides to Britain from the poet.
His depictions of the blitzed architecture of London, Bath and Coventry have become key images of World War II.
Peter Greenham, Painter and Keeper of the Royal Academy Schools, died aged eighty-two.
Greenham studied in London, and elected a full member of the RA in 1960, he took over Keepership from Sir Henry Rushbury in 1964, introducing a more flexible approach to the Schools' teaching programme.
His own work was traditional in style: landscapes, still-lifes and public portraits, including a commission from the Queen.
He was made a CBE in 1978.
John Cage, composer and performance artist who profoundly influenced the development of avant-garde music, died 12 August, aged seventy-nine.
Born in Los Angeles, Cage studied music with Henry Cowell and Arnold Schoenberg.
His first distinctive works were for percussion instruments or pianos prepared with nuts and bolts inserted between the strings.
Among his most celebrated compositions were 0'0’(1962) for which he chopped vegetables, put them in a blender and drank the juice, and the 4'33’(1952) which required the performer to remain onstage, silent and immobile for four minutes, thirty-three seconds.
He acted as musical director for Merce Cunningham's dance company while an early interest in art was maintained in his typographical pieces formed from random assemblages on paper.
David Koetser, leading Old Master picture dealer, died Zurich aged eighty-four.
In 1966 Koetser donated Titian's ‘Three Ages of Man’ to the National Gallery, London.
He set up the Koetser Foundation in Zurich in order to acquire Old Masters and donated seventy works to it.
Anthony Roth, leading sculpture dealer, died London, 15 July, aged forty-nine.
Trained at Princeton and Harvard as an art historian, Roth brought to his dealing activities a precision and expertise that was almost unrivalled.
He made a number of startling finds: an early Bernini ‘Allegory of Autumn’; a Bust of a Youth by Francesco Mochi; and a terracotta preliminary model of the executioner by Verrocchio for the relief of the ‘Beheading of the Batpist’ in Florence's Baptistery, purchased in a street market.
Joe Shuster, cartoonist who developed the original Superman comic character, died Los Angeles, aged seventy-eight.
Sir Karl Parker, died 22 July, aged ninety-seven.
Keeper of Western Art at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford from 1930 to 1945 and Keeper of that museum until 1962.
Building on the core collection which once formed part of the outstanding collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence, Parker built up the Ashmolean prints and drawings collection into one of the world's finest.
He added to it over 400 sixteenth-century Italian drawings as well as works by Canaletto, Guardi, Guercino and Piranesi.
He published on Watteau, the Catalogue complet de son oeuvre dessinée with Jacques Mathey in 1957, and catalogued the Windsor Holbein (1945) and Canaletto (1948) holdings.
David Wojnarowicz, painter, photographer, performance artist and Aids campaigner, died New York, 22 July, aged thirty-seven.
In 1989 the National Endowment for the Arts decided to withdraw funds from an exhibition catalogue of his work, but subsequently reversed their decision.
William Fagg, ethnologist and historian of tribal art, died London, 10 July aged seventy-eight.
Keeper of Anthropology, British Museum, 1969–74, he was leading world expert in the field of African sculpture.
Fagg was also Consulting Fellow in African Art for the Museum of Primitive Art, New York, and Christie's London consultant on tribal art 1974–90 and the author of many books on African sculpture.
He formed friendships with a number of artists interested in African art including Epstein, Josef Herman and Leon Underwood.
John Bratby, eccentric British painter, proto Pop artist and leading member of the Kitchen Sink School, died Hastings, 20 July aged sixty-four.
Bratby combined a talent for self-publicity with a bold but essentially traditional style indebted to Sickert, producing a large body of work of variable quality.
Co-represented Britain at the Venice Biennale in 1956 and was elected a full RA in 1971.
He wrote a number of lurid, semi-autobiographical novels in the 1960s and was Editor-in-chief of Art Quarterly from 1987–92.
Mordecai Ardon, Israel's best known artist, died Jerusalem 18 June, aged ninety-five.
Born Max Bronstein in Poland, he trained in Berlin then moved to the Bauhaus where he worked from 1921–25.
He was taught by Feininger, Kandinsky, Klee and Itten.
On his return to Berlin he worked to propagate Communism with friends who included Brecht and Kurt Weill.
By 1933 he was in Jerusalem, and became a Palestinian citizen in 1936.
One of his most important works, ‘Missa Dura’ of 1958–60, a triptych on the theme of the Holocaust, is in the Tate Gallery, London.
His later works concentrate on the theme of peace.
Dom Basil Robinson, monk, poet and artist, died Colwyn Bay, 20 July 1992, aged eighty-two.
Son of cartoonist William Heath Robinson, Dom Basil was one of the pioneers of the pottery at Prinknash Abbey, Gloucestershire and was known for his work in sculpture and stained glass.
Johnny Friedlander, painter and printmaker, died Paris, 19 July, aged seventy-nine.
He studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Breslau with Otto Mueller and Carlo Mense.
Interned from 1932–33 in a Nazi concentration camp, he fled to Czechoslovakia after the war.
He exhibited his work across Europe before settling in Paris and founding the Ermitage studio for printmakers with Albert Flocon.
Roy Bradley, chief restorer of the Royal Pavilion, Brighton, died Brighton, 26 July, aged seventy-nine.
He served as Decorative Artist to the Pavilion for forty-six years.
Fernand Hazan, leading French art book publisher, died aged eighty-five.
He founded the Editions de Cluny in 1934 with the intention of introducing the wider public to great works of art.
After World War II he reformed under the imprint Hazan Editeur.
Since 1983 his son Eric has directed the company.
Francisca Kallir, co-owner of the Galerie St Etienne, New York, died Manhattan, 18 August, aged ninety-three.
A refugee from Nazi Germany, she founded the gallery in the late 1930s.
It specialises in Secessionist and German Expressionist art but later became a showcase for the work of Grandma Moses.
Peter Corbett, Yates Professor of Classical Art and Archaeology at University College, London, from 1961 to 1982, died in London 31 August aged seventy-two.
While the Department of Greek and Roman Antiquities at the British Museum, he helped in creating the new displays for the Museum's collection of classical antiquities that had just come out of wartime storage.
He prepared the Elgin marbles for the new Duveen Gallery and reordered the component parts of the frieze of the Temple of Apollo at Bassae.
London
Witt Library threatened with closure
LONDON.
London University is proposing to cut all funding to the Witt Photographic Library, part of the Courtauld Institute of Art, on the grounds that it is in excess of the Institute's internal needs.
This world famous photo archive, which has grown to around 2.5 million images since Sir Robert Witt gave his collection of some 400,000 photos in 1944 to be freely available to any interested parties, is one of the most extensive in the world for paintings, sculpture and architecture.
At present any member of the public can consult it all day long, all year round, and there is no doubt that it has been of invaluable help not only to scholars but also to the art trade.
The Witt's only rival in size, the Marburg Fotoarchiv in Germany, has no such funding problems.
Its running expenses are provided by Marburg University, and Volkswagen and IBM are paying handsomely for its computerisation and networking to other institutions.
Unfortunately, London University's proposal that the Witt should become self-financing comes just as the Getty computer programme is ending its support of the Witt Computer Index because it has changed its policy from building up a vast database of its own to producing systems for accessing other databases.
The Witt Librarian John Sunderland rejects the idea of charging a fee for consulting the archive on the grounds that it would raise only a few thousand pounds.
He is putting his faith in an appeal to create an endowment fund, and recently he has received a grant from the new libraries programme of the EC, to exchange and coordinate information between the Witt, the Rijksbureau in The Hague, and Trinity College, Dublin.
Those wishing to support the Witt should contact John Sunderland, at the Courtauld Institute of Art, Somerset House, Strand, London WC2R0RN.
Financial donations can be sent to the same address, with cheques payable to ‘The Courtauld Institute of Art Fund’.
Musical chairs for America's top museums
National Gallery's Rusty Powell free to make key appointments
WASHINGTON, D.C./CLEVELAND/SAINT LOUIS/LOS ANGELES/NEW YORK.
Since April, when the National Gallery of Art's former director J. Carter Brown announced his retirement, America's top museum professionals have engaged in a game of musical chairs, jumping from one search committee's table to the next.
In the past several months, after interviewing many of the same candidates, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the Cleveland Museum of Art, and the Phillips Collection each hired a new director, and the Corcoran Gallery of Art appointed a deputy director.
In the process, the Walters Art Gallery bade farewell to its director, and both the National Gallery and the Saint Louis Art Museum lost chief curators.
None of these vacancies has been filled.
The Los Angeles directorship, open since Earl A. Powell III agreed to take over at the National Gallery, now belongs to Michael Edward Shapiro, formerly chief curator in St Louis.
Mr Shapiro, forty-two, is a Harvard Ph.D.
in nineteenth- and twentieth-century painting and sculpture and a specialist in American art.
When Evan Hopkins Turner retires next July, Robert P. Bergman will succeed him as director in Cleveland.
Director of the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore since 1981, and currently President of the Association of Art Museum Directors, Mr Bergman, forty-seven, is a Byzantinist with a Princeton Ph.D., and a longtime faculty member at Johns Hopkins University.
He will be only the fifth director in the Cleveland Museum's seventy-five year history.
The National Gallery's incoming director, Mr Powell, has several key curatorial posts to fill.
Senior Curator Charles S. Moffett recently left to direct the Phillips; Jack Cowart, head of the Twentieth Century department, left to become the Corcoran's deputy director and chief curator; and Curator of Twentieth-Century Art, Nan Rosenthal, moved to New York.
A spokesperson for the gallery told The Art Newspaper that Assistant curator Marla Prather is filling in for Ms Rosenthal, but the former positions of Messrs Cowart and Moffett remain unfilled.
Summer news round up
Minoan wall frescoes showing youths leaping over bulls in the Cretan manner have been discovered in the Nile Delta.
The subject matter indicates closer links between Aegean civilisation and Egypt than had previously been known.
The Henry Moore Foundation has abandoned its plans to build a gallery and study centre at the artist's home at Perry Green, Hertfordshire.
The artist's daughter Mary Moore had campaigned vigorously against the proposed work.
Planning permission was refused by the local council after complaints about the proposed design and increase in visitor numbers by local residents.
The Emperor Hadrian's British headquarters may have been uncovered at the Roman fort of Vindolanda near Hadrian's wall, Northumberland.
The massive construction has 164 ft-long wooden walls and a concrete floor.
Fragments of ornate wall paintings, bronze and carved wooden items all indicate an unusually luxurious building.
The short list for the Turner Prize, Britain's most prestigious prize for contemporary art, has been announced.
The four artists are Damien Hurst, and three sculptors David Templett, Grenville Dave and Alison Wilding.
The Irish government has decided to acquire Castletown, Co Kildare, the country's foremost Georgian house from the Castletown Foundation.
Until 1979 the house was the property of Desmond Guinness.
The British Museum has acquired Britain's most important piece of Romano-British silver, an elaborately decorated fourth-century tray called the Risley Park lanx.
Found by a farm worker in 1729, and subsequently broken into pieces, the tray is now thought to have been melted down in the eighteenth century and recast from moulds made from the original tray.
It has been purchased for £120,000 by Dr Raymond and Mrs Beverley Sackler and presented to the Museum in honour of Sir David Wilson, Director from 1977–91.
Archaeologists have discovered a complete Roman house beneath the leaning tower of Pisa, containing dinner plates and wine jugs.
The house was built between the third and fourth centuries and was located less than three feet underground.
The American House of Representatives voted by 261 to171 on 23 July to maintain funding for the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) to its current level of $176 million.
The temporary ‘window of opportunity’ which has made gifts of works of art and other property to US museums fully tax deductible since January 1991, has been extended for a further eighteen months from July.
A plan to take down Minto House in the Scottish Borders and rebuild it stone by stone as a country club in Japan has been abandoned.
In the last days of August demolition began work began on the house.
This was briefly halted after it was designated a Grade I listed building by the Scottish secretary Ian Lang but recommenced after the local council declared much of the structure dangerous.
The oldest civilisation in black Africa has been discovered by archaeologists.
Established more than 5,000 years ago, the kingdom predates previously known African cultures by more than 3,000 years.
Located in Sudan, the city covered at least sixty acres and included a 100-foot high mudbrick temple.
The site, near modern Kerma, has been known since the 1920s but the city underneath has only emerged over the last ten years.
Urban developers working on the western edge of San Salvador defied a court ban and continued to bulldoze the capital of a pre-Columbian civilisation Cuscatlan, ancient capital of the Pipil Indians to make way for a housing project.
At least one of four ancient ceremonial structures has now been destroyed, along with hundreds of domestic artefacts.
The Getty Museum acquired the ‘Venus and Adonis’ by Titian, sold at Christie's, London, in December last year to London dealers Hazlitt Gooden and Fox and Herman Shickman for £6.8 million, a record for the artist.
It is the first painting by the artist to be acquired by the Getty.
The first cathedral to be built in France this century got underway at Evry in the Essonne region.
Designed by the Swiss architect Mario Botta in a rotunda form surmounted by a garland of full-size trees, it is dedicated to the Resurrection.
The first mass will be celebrated in 1995, although the interior will not be complete until the next century.
The estimated cost of the cathedral is FFr60 million, of which FFr35 million has been raised by public donation.
The museum of sacred art also contained within its walls will cost FFr18 million, of which the Ministry of Culture has provided FFr15 million.
A complete list of art objects lost between Germany and Russia during and after World War II is to be prepared for a new, German, state-funded foundation which will aim to help both countries to regain their lost or displaced art works.
The Bremen Institute of East European studies will work with Moscow University to compile a database.
At the same time the main issues of repatriation are currently under discussion by a special Russian commission signed into existence by Russian President Boris Yeltsin on 23 June.
The Arts Council of Great Britain and the London Arts Board have launched an Institute of New International Visual Arts (INVA).
According to its declared aims ‘INVA [will be]informed by the concept of ‘new internationalism’ which places the work of non-European artists and those from minority cultures living in western states alongside their American and European peers’.
So far £277,000 ($548,460) has been allocated to employ a development consultant and to offer programme franchises.
Archaeologists working in Israel over the summer at Caesarea Philippi, the Roman town founded in 3BC, have uncovered what seems to be the earliest known Christian church.
Dated to the early fourth century, it is earlier than the church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem and the Basilica of the Nativity in Bethlehem.
British artist Francis Bacon who died on 28 April this year, left the major part of his £60 million fortune to his close friend and companion John Edwards.
Mr Edwards has stated that he will live in Bacon's house and studio for the remainder of his lifetime, then leave them to the nation.
Michael Howard, Britain's Environment Secretary, has rejected a £40 million scheme for a hotel, country club and two golf courses to be sited in Warwick Castle Park, Warwickshire.
The decision was made on conservation grounds after a public enquiry.
Venice's churches, recently  threatened with closure (see The Art Newspaper No. 18, May 1992, p.1), have been reprieved by a new scheme approved by the Ministero dei Beni culturali.
L3.8 billion (£1.7 million; $3.5 million) of government funding will be used to keep the city's principal churches and scuole open, for three years at least, and to install up-to-date alarm and lighting systems.
Creator of the Met's Department of Drawings has died
NEW YORK.
Jacob Bean, who retired as Drue Heinz Curator of Drawings at the Metropolitan Museum 1 March 1992, died on 8 September.
He was sixty-eight years old and had suffered from cancer of the oesophagus for some time.
When he arrived to head the Department of Drawings in 1931 it had only recently been split from the paintings department.
A connoisseur of French and Italian drawings, Jacob Bean managed to double the number of European drawings in the collection to more than 4,000, making it one of the largest and most distinguished in the States.
Under Bean's directorship the Met purchased 1,089 drawings by artists such as Raphael, Veronese, the Carracci, Guercino, Ribera, Goltzius, Poussin, Ingres and Degas.
In addition, 785 works were acquired by gift and bequest.
Among the many exhibitions organised by Bean was ‘Italian Renaissance Drawings from the Musée du Louvre, Paris’, which drew on his professional links with the Louvre Bean had worked at the Cabinet des Dessins as Chargé de mission à titre étranger from 1957 to 1960.
The difficult search for a replacement for Bean after his retirement did not come up with a suitable candidate (see The Art Newspaper No.17, April 1992, p.5).
Instead Helen Mules, who has been in the department for eleven years, has taken over as Associate Curator Acting in Charge.
Lawyers talk on culture
LONDON.
The International Bar Association (IBA) Education Trust has launched a major project to promote research and education in the field of legal issues affecting works of art and cultural property.
The IBA Cultural Property Law Research and Education Project will undertake a detailed review of the legal issues affecting national and international loans of works of art and antiquities.
These include problems of title, copyright issues, responsibility for conservation and security, and the effect of taxation on the lender and borrower.
Work on this project began in May and should be completed by the end of this year.
In 1986 the IBA set up Committee 20 to promote discussion on cultural property and to promote the harmonisation of relevant national and international laws.
The Committee's interests are broad, ranging from the laws affecting works of art, religious objects and archaeological finds to those affecting the preservation of architecture, the legal problems of museums and the maintenance of freedom of speech.
At the end of this year the Committee will be organising a two-part symposium on cultural property law pertaining to Eastern Europe.
The IBA is at 2 Harewood Place, Hanover Square, London W1R 9HB.
Electronic Cicerone-babble
VENICE.
Throw your Augustus Hare away and pick up your receiver; Venice is to be wired for sound.
The route most trodden by tourists, from St Mark's Square to the church of the Frari, is to be given an audio-guide circuit.
The tourist will rent a small receiver for around £2 and press a button as he approaches any of the major buildings and monuments, where a small transmitter will then spout cultural, historical, artistic and commercial information at him in a choice of Italian, German, English or Spanish, at any hour of the day or night.
The ‘Cicerones’ will be a team of experts drawn from the universities of Venice and Udine, and the electronics are by Telesia, part of Iacorossi.
How they do it in Sweden
Thomas Adlercreutz of the Central Board of National Antiquities, Sweden, has pointed out an error in the guide to statutes of limitation published on page 2 of the last issue of The Art Newspaper.
In Sweden the  original owner may repossess within three months of discovering the identity of the current owner of his stolen work of art not, as we stated, within three months of the date of unauthorised sale.
How it was then: this month's currency conversions
The currency equivalents published in this issue of The Art Newspaper are based on the spot exchange rates obtaining on 1 September.
In these the pound sterling stood at $2; DM2.8; DFl.3; FFr9.5; L2,100 (accurate to within 0.1 of a decimal place).
Museums
Thyssen Collection, Madrid
‘I have nothing any more I can only look at the pictures’
What will be the long-term future of the collection?
Baron Thyssen, can you tell us why you chose Spain for your collection?
First of all, because it is the capital; Paris didn't want it and in London it would have been at Canary Wharf, which as you know is now in receivership, so thank goodness it didn't go there, and the Getty Museum is also restricted for visitors.
So I think Madrid was the best choice: a very nice palace in the middle of the town.
And, of course, Tita [the Baroness]is very energetic and is at the museum a lot and has worked very hard on it, so I think it will be a success.
Did the British government offer anything like as good a deal as the Spanish government?
No.
In any case, the English offer came after concluding the loan, so it was a little bit too late.
Did you get the impression that Mrs Thatcher was really serious about getting the collection?
I think so, yes.
She was quite serious.
She didn't know much about art before but there was an exhibition of my Old Masters going on at the Royal Academy and she saw that, and was very enthusiastic about it, especially the Holbein portrait of Henry VIII.
Who did you principally deal with in the Spanish government back in 1988?
With Solana, the present Foreign Minister.
Who is your main contact now?
Now it is Sole Tura, the Cultural Minister.
Did the Spanish government introduce its indemnity provisions earlier this year specifically in order to be able to cover your paintings collection?
Yes.
That seems to have been a good move on their part.
It was very good to pass a special law for that.
Of course, in Switzerland they cannot do so because Switzerland is organised in cantons, and the canton of Ticino, where Lugano is, cannot afford to indemnify the whole collection.
So in Switzerland you have to cover it by insurance yourself?
Yes, and it is very expensive.
Can you explain the cultural foundation that you have set up for this loan?
You and the Spanish government are in it together.
How does that work?
It works very well.
We have 50% of people elected by our family and the other 50% by the government*.
I am the Chairman, and there is a Vice Chairman [the Baroness].
Does everybody have equal voting rights, or does it work by consensus?
Equal voting rights.
Does the private cultural foundation cover the running costs of the museum for the next ten years?
The money which is already in the foundation covers the refurbishing of the gallery and should also cover the kind of compensation I am getting for lending the pictures.
They hope the running costs will be covered by the entries and the sales of catalogues etc, but this I think depends on how many visitors we get.
We calculate one million visitors, but that won't be sufficient.
It would require two million for the costs to be covered, so the Spanish government has to make up the shortfall.
Who are the owners of the paintings today?
Is that you alone, or you with other members of your family?
The owners of the paintings are a trust in Bermuda and the beneficiary of this trust is the family; that means my wife and the four children.
I have nothing any more.
I can only look at the pictures.
How is it going to be arranged?
If one picture gets sold, then the receipts will go into that trust.
Then the trustees have to decide whether to distribute it or not; keep it for future expenses and things like that.
When the 1988 contract says that the foundation will pay an annual sum to the owners of the paintings, how much will this be?
They pay under contract $5 million indexed, so it is around $6 million now in practice, and that goes to the trust.
The trust gets money and they pay their expenses and there have been a lot of lawyers' expenses and the expenses of the Swiss foundation, which is also a beneficiary of this trust.
The 1988 contract includes a kind of hire purchase agreement whereby this sum will be used in part for the purchase by the foundation of the paintings in the collection.
How does this work?
We are negotiating that; there is nothing settled yet.
We have signed a letter of intent and we are trying to find a solution to that.
It depends on when the Spanish government would like to acquire the permanency of the collection.
At the moment it is a nine and a half year loan and then the pictures leave.
But the Spanish government couldn't afford to buy the collection.
They wouldn't buy the whole collection; they would buy the available pictures.
Big parts like the Carpaccio, the Caravaggio and the Ghirlandaio, for instance, where the heirs have renounced their inheritance those cannot be sold, neither to or from the Spanish government.
So they will neither go to your children nor to be sold, but they will stay for the future…?
They will stay in Spain and become ‘patrimoine espagnol’ after ten years.
Explain that again.
They can't be sold but they could be a kind of gift?
If the Spanish government pays an agreed sum it has to be agreed then they stay with the rest of the paintings.
What is going to happen after the nine and a half years?
If the Spanish government comes to an agreement with the family basically the trust to cover the fee of the paintings, then they stay.
Or the government, and you, could extend the loan?
To extend the loan is difficult because after ten years, any picture becomes ‘patrimoine espagnol’.
You could find yourself in the ludicrous situation where you have to take them out of the country for half-an-hour and take them back in again.
Yes.
If the foundation is wound up because the loan agreement ends, what happens?
The paintings go.
To Lugano or any other place where we make an agreement.
What is happening to the Villa Favorita in Lugano?
I think Lugano will be rather obsolete, because it is already fifty years old.
There is no air conditioning there.
I told you before I can't insure it there, there is no indemnification.
It is very awkwardly located for tourists to get there, there are no parking places.
It costs a lot of money to upkeep sufficient staff to take care of the pictures.
What about the agreement with Barcelona?
How does that work?
That is not yet signed; it is on the way to being signed this month or next.
The foundation in Madrid is going to manage that one too.
Is that a separate loan of paintings?
That is in the loan contract with Spain but then we agreed on what will go to Barcelona.
Are you going to go on with your international exhibitions?
I hope not.
From Lugano it was fine because the winter is always six months and everything is closed in any case, but here the galleries are open the whole year and the museum is easier to get to.
We might participate in special exhibitions, which we are doing right now.
But as for doing a whole exchange of shows, like with the Russians in the past well, we might do it if we got compensation for it.
Do you think you will be adding to the collection?
I have added the Constable, but at the moment I cannot buy anything.
To improve the collection is very expensive.
Is there going to be anything on display in Lugano?
Yes, there will be modern and American paintings.
About 200.
There we will have room for special exhibitions.
My daughter is planning a Tibetan exhibition.
The 1988 contract between the Spanish government and Thyssen
On 7 April 1988, the Honourable Javier Solana Madariaga, Minister of Culture of the Government of the Kingdom of Spain and the Honourable Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza (Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza) met at the Villahermosa Palace, Madrid.
The signatories hereby declare:
I.
The Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection is a collection of paintings acquired by Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza over a number of years, by inheritance or purchase.
It represents a lifetime of collecting by Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza and his late father.
The Collection is exceptional for its quality, value, diversity and state of conservation.
II.
The ‘Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection Trust’ is the owner of all the paintings in the Collection.
III.
The paintings in the Collection are divided into four different categories: ‘A’, ‘B+’, ‘B-’ and ‘C’.
All of the foregoing are in accordance with the lists held by the parties.
IV.
Both parties wish to enter into an agreement whereby category ‘A’ and ‘B+’paintings which include the most significant paintings of the Collection be loaned to a Spanish Foundation for their maintenance and public exhibition for a period of up to ten years.
As a consequence of the foregoing and in order to establish the basis of their mutual understanding they execute this document in the following terms:
First — The Spanish Government and Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza will create a new Private Cultural Foundation under Spanish law, domiciled in Madrid, to which the Spanish Government will provide rent-free (for the same parallel term of years as the loan mentioned in Clause Three below) the use of the Villahermosa Palace and which will be endowed by the Spanish Government with sufficient capital for the refurbishment of the Palace and to provide all necessary financial resources to ensure the independence of the Foundation and to ensure that it is able to meet all its artistic and curatorial commitments.
The object of the Foundation will be the exhibition and maintenance of the paintings loaned in accordance with the provisions of Clause Three below.
The Foundation shall preserve the international vocation and character of the Collection encouraging the periodical exhibition of part of its masterpieces outside Spain.
Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza shall be the Chairman of the Foundation's Council or Governing Body.
He shall be substituted for and succeeded by his wife, the Baroness Carmen Thyssen-Bornemisza.
Second — The refurbishment of the Villahermosa Palace shall be completed within eighteen (18) months, undertaken by the Foundation in co-operation with the Spanish Government and begin immediately after the establishment of the Foundation and the execution of the Loan Agreement mentioned in Clause Three below.
The approval of the Spanish Government will be required for both the Architectural Project and the final acceptance of the refurbishment.
Third — A Loan Agreement for a period of up to ten years shall be executed between the Foundation and the owners of the category ‘A’ and ‘B+’paintings.
The Foundation shall pay to the owners of the paintings as consideration for the loan an annual sum to be determined.
Such annual sum will be used, in accordance with terms and conditions to be agreed, for the purchase by the Foundation of paintings of the Collection.
The Loan Agreement will be conditional upon the completion and final acceptance of the refurbishment of the Villahermosa Palace.
Fourth — In accordance with the provisions of Article 32.1 of the Law on the Historical Patrimony of Spain (Ley del Patrimonio Historico Español), the loaned paintings shall not be declared, by action of the Spanish Government, to be of cultural interest during the ten-year term of the Loan.
Therefore, the paintings shall be free to be exhibited abroad if so decided by the competent body of the Foundation.
Fifth — It is the intention of the Spanish Government and Baron Thyssen that the Gallery in Lugano should continue to have an important rôle in the activities of the Collection.
The existing arrangements between the Foundation established by Baron Thyssen in Barcelona and the town of Barcelona will also be fully respected and it is hoped that the relationship between the two Foundations will be developed to their mutual advantage.
Sixth — It is contemplated that during the period of the loan, discussions take place to explore the possibility of achieving a longer term solution, either by way of transferring ownership of some or all of the paintings to the Foundation or extending the loan for a second or further term if the initial lease arrangement works well for all concerned.
In the event of such a solution being reached any payments or other compensation paid under the terms of the loan will be taken into account in any future financial arrangements between the parties.
Seventh — In case of dissolution of the Foundation by the termination of the Loan Agreement or for any other reason, its net worth will revert, upon liquidation of the Foundation, to the Spanish State, and in such event the paintings will be free to leave Spain.
Eighth — The parties will use their best endeavours to conclude a definitive agreement governing all important aspects of the Foundation Charter, the loan agreement and other relevant matters signed by all bodies affected by these arrangements within three months and also to establish the Spanish Private Cultural Foundation and execute the Loan Agreement of works of art and all related documents within that time.
In witness thereof, the parties sign this document, in duplicate originals, in the Spanish and English versions, both of equal validity, in the place and on the date indicated ‘ut supra’.
Madrid
Delayed wizardry: side two of ‘the magic art triangle’ opens after six postponements
The King and Queen opened the Museo Nacional de Reina Sofía,
Spain's top museum of the twentieth century, on 10 September
MADRID.
The Museo Nacional de Reina Sofía opened its permanent collection at long last on 10 September after a particularly embarrassing, last-minute rescheduling.
It was at least the sixth time over a two-year period that the unveiling had been postponed.
Museum and culture ministry officials at first refused to explain, then claimed the sudden change was made to accommodate the King and Queen's agenda.
At the press conference, the Minister of Culture's right-hand man Santiago Torres insisted that ‘today the museum is a museum’ and signaled the close of a difficult chapter in MNCARS's strife-torn history.
He spoke of what the Ministry lately refers to as ‘the magic art triangle’ formed by Prado, Thyssen and Reina Sofía museums.
‘Madrid will become a world capital of art, with three museums of indisputable quality’, he said.
Director María Corral and Board President José Lladó were more cautious.
They presented the collection as ‘an outline’, ‘a proposal’, and were the first to acknowledge its gaps.
Nevertheless, they failed to stop a deluge of complaints about the collection's shortcomings and María Corral's personal tastes.
Although the exhibition's concept and list of artists were publicly released by María Corral at congressional hearings in March, viewers were disappointed by its limited historical scope.
The collection begins in 1901 with Picasso's ‘Woman in Blue’ and peters out in the 1960s, although there are some exceptions, such as Miró's late works.
(Plans call for unveiling the collection's 1970s-to-present segment in 1994.)
The exhibition of nearly 360 works is divided into twenty-three categories, each with its own gallery, which are based on movements, time periods, or individual artists.
The entire show can be broken roughly into halves, the first of which traces the history of Spanish art from 1900 to 1960 more-or-less chronologically.
Despite the notable absence of Antonio López and Dau al Set, among others, critics agree that this half of the exhibition is the most successful due to its relatively coherent theoretical framework and some fine works by Picasso, Gris, Miró, González, and Dalí.
Represented movements include Cubism, School of Paris, Surrealism, Realism, Informalism and Geometric Abstraction.
The latter half of the show is comprised of ‘proposals’, a loose compendium of lesser known foreign and Spanish artists.
According to María Corral, the proposals represent ‘not a universal vision, but rather precise accents’.
‘Proposals’ also reflect the widely varying philosophies of the museum's changing administrations.
Newman, Kelly, Flavin, Bacon, Nauman, Solano are represented, albeit scantily, with individual artworks.
Tàpies, Fontana and Schnabel are also on view.
Detractors complained about the display's confused nature and the poor representation of contemporary Spanish artists.
The sharpest criticism levelled was that the collection amounted to little more than a reshuffling.
There are works of interest culled from 115 acquisitions (made between 1987 and 1992), but the artworks until recently under the Prado's jurisdiction supply the collections's real highlights (along with the Dalí and Miró bequests).
The remaining works, of uneven quality, are loans from the private collectors group, Colección Arte Contemporàneo (formerly Amigos del Centro de Arte Reina Sofía), the Spanish telephone company, the Museo Nacional d'Arte de Catalunya, Zaragoza's regional authority, the city of Valencia, and various collectors and artists.
About one per cent of the former Museo de Arte Contemporáneo's rather mediocre collection is on display (from a total of 8,900 paintings, sculptures, prints and drawings).
Architect Robert Luna's remodelling of the second floor possesses a few postmodern touches here and there, such as angular cutouts in gallery walls, but it is otherwise a straightforward design in which many of the massive spaces remain daunting for viewer and smaller artworks alike.
The handsome installation design by María Corral and Catalan painter Joan Hernández-Pijuán is particularly effective in the historical section.
The Reina Sofía's slow and painful birth with unhelpful political midwives
MADRID.
May 1986 The Centro de Arte Reina Sofía opens in the former General Hospital of Madrid and Atocha, a Neo-classical building designed by the Italian architect Francesco Sabatini to be even larger than the Escorial, but which never grew beyond pavilions surrounding a large courtyard.
In use as a hospital until 1965, in 1977 it was declared an historic monument and saved from demolition.
In1980, the Ministry of Culture decided to convert it into a ‘centre for modern art with contemporary outlook, to play an active role in the development of artistic life in Spain.’
At this point, the Reina Sofía is less a Centre Pompidou than a Kunsthalle, a place for temporary exhibitions and without much of a collection.
The first director is Carmen Giménez, who proposes to concentrate on collecting new Spanish art, mostly of the Eighties.
1988 the Reina Sofía tries to clarify it mission: works are to come from the Museo Español de arte contemporaneo (MEAC), to be joined with the modern holdings of the Prado, including ‘Guernica’(see p. 19).
A new building campaign begins (estimated cost, Pta 1573 million, about £9 million).
Carmen Gimenez goes to the Guggenheim, New York, as curator and is not replaced.
José Manuel Moreno Alegre becomes Rector.
May 1988 Moreno resigns.
Jaime Saavedra, former head of MEAC, becomes director after rumours that it will be the artist Antoni Tàpies.
A board is appointed to make acquisitions: Placido AArango, President of the Fundación Principe de Asturias; Ana Beristàin and Paloma Esteban from MEAC; Tomás Llorens, art historian and Simon Marcháan, lecturer in Aesthetics.
The Ministry of Culture makes available a purchase fund of Pta1000 million (about £5.5 million) for that year.
31 October 1990 The Reina Sofía reopens with the collections still incomplete, but with the travelling exhibition ‘Italian art of the twentieth century’.
Tomas Llorens is made artistic director of what is now to be a Museo nacional de arte contemporaneo.
His policy is to develop the historic aspects of the collection, rather than just contemporary Spanish art.
In the meanwhile the Partito Populare spearheads opposition by those who think the Reina Sofía is too expensive, that the Pta584 million voted for purchases that year is too much.
The museum is ‘a hugely expensive indulgence, a buttonhole in the lapel of the Socialist government,’ they say.
Llorens's policies are entangled in the row, as the works he wants to buy (Cubist, Surrealist, Informel) are thought too costly.
January 1991 The Council of Ministers replaces Llorens with Maria Corral, formerly responsible for the acquisitions of the Fundación Caja de Pensiones.
She returns to the policies of Giménez, and concentrates on more recent (and less expensive) art.
January 1992 Maria Corral announces the formal opening of the Reina Sofía, with its own collections, for May 1992.
The Partito Popolare continues its sniping with parliamentary questions about her plans: ‘Whatever Corral may have in mind,’ says the parliamentarian Miguel Angel Cortés, ‘is one of the best kept secrets in the kngdom’.
The purchase grant for 1992 diminishes to Pta300 million (£1.6 million).
June 1992, then 7 September and finally 10 September 1992 The opening is postponed three times.
A huge row blows up over the trumpeted transference of ‘Guernica’ from the Prado (see p. 19).
El Pais, Madrid's leading newspaper, says that the Reina Sofía was born and has developed ‘without a clear museographic plan, lacking in international credibility’ and exploiting ‘Guernica’to give it a prestige it would otherwise lack.
Introducing institutions
The Fundacio Pilar i Joan Miró
In Britain the Henry Moore Foundation is anguishing over how to present the artist's memory.
The Miró foundation has no such problems
PALMA DE MALLORCA.
Situated among pine and pepper trees and commanding a vew, now partly obscured by the apartment blocks and tourist hotels of modern Palma, across rocky landscape to Calamayor beach and the Mediterranean sea, the Fundacio Pilar i Joan Miró is the latest cultural initiative of Spain.
When it is officially opened next month by King Juan Carlos, it will launch ‘Any Miró’, the season of activities commemorating the centenary of the artist's birth and culminating in a major survey of his art being organised by the Joan Miró Foundation, Barcelona and the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
The foundation is a complex of buildings which includes Son Abrines, the family home still occupied by Pilar, the artist's widow, Son Boter, the old stone house which Miró employed as his graphics studio, coating its walls in charcoal sketches, the studio which Josep Luis Sert constructed for him in 1954–56 and where he worked until his death in 1983, and the new exhibition centre of Sert's pupil, Rafael Moneo, Dean of the Graduate Design School in Harvard.
The foundation has appointed, as its director, Pablo Rico, thirty-seven, formerly director of cultural affairs in Saragossa, where he was responsible for exhibitions of eighteenth-century Venetian painting, Giorgio de Chirico (1988) and Goya (1992).
Among its prominent features, Moneo's centre boasts an auditorium in which are planned concerts of composers such as Eric Satie, Stockhausen, John Cage and other friends or admirers of Miró, a large reference library, a waterpool and fountain, two external murals based upon the artist's designs and four sharply angled rooms, excavated from a space loosely designed like a star, in which the foundation's permanent collection of works by Miró will be rotated.
Temporary exhibitions of modern and contemporary Spanish and international art will take place in a tall  rectangular gallery near the restaurant.
The programme opens with ‘Homenaje a Miró’(to 31 January 1993), a loan exhibition of smaller works by Picasso, Juan Gris, André Masson, Alexander Calder, Max Ernst and Tàpies, to be followed by the fashionable young Spanish painter, José Maria Sicilia (February 1993) and fifty-two drawings and collages by Jasper Johns related to his recent series of paintings, ‘The Four Seasons’(May 1993).
These activities will be financed by an operating budget of Pta200 million (£1.14 million; $ 2.25 million), a half of which will be provided by Palma's civic purse, with the remainder gathered from entrance fees and profits in the shop and restaurant.
At present, there are no arrangements to open Miró's studio, in which are stacked some thirty boldly brushed but unfinished canvases upon which the artist was working at his end of his career.
With its floor splattered in paint, its vitrines of toys and decorative objects created by local craftsmen and members of his family, and the carpenter's workbench, covered in brushes and tins, which had belonged to Miro's grandfather, it is a beautiful and evocative shrine to the great Spanish master, and supervised access must be a priority for the new director.
St Petersburg
A dynastic appointment to lead the Hermitage
Islamicist Pietrovskiy succeeds Academician Pietrovskiy
ST PETERSBURG.
A new director has taken up his post at the State Hermitage.
He is the forty-seven year-old doctor of historical sciences Mikhayl Piotrovskiy.
He was appointed by a decree of the Russian government, by whose decision the Hermitage is now included among the number of especially important national cultural monuments.
The new Hermitage director has worked there for nearly two years as assistant academic director under acting-director Vitaliy Suslov, but he has been connected with the museum almost all his life; his father, Academician Boris Piotrovskiy (1908–90), was on the staff at the Hermitage for more than half a century, and was its director for twenty-six years before his death en poste.
Mikhayl Piotrovskiy is an Islamicist, and he has lectured at universities in Yemen, Kuwait, Iraq, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Tunisia and Algeria.
He has taken on possibly the most difficult directorship in the world, with unparalleled masterpieces in the huge collections, an enormous, sumptuous but dilapidated and unmodernised palace as his building, and wholly inadequate funding from the State.
Los Angeles
The University of California at Los Angeles absorbs the Hammer Museum
LOS ANGELES.
The late Armand Hammer's museum, which opened in December 1990 with a lavish $60 million building by Edward Larrabee Barnes (likened by one critic to a consulate in a Middle Eastern emirate), but with only a $36 million endowment, has come under the management of the adjacent University of California at Los Angeles.
This is a happy solution to the museum's underlying financial problems exacerbated by the decision to show the first of the Memphis, Tenessee, WONDERS (sic) series of exhibitions, ‘Catherine the Great’, which instead of making the estimated $3 million for the museum, actually lost it $1 million earlier this year.
Stephen Garrett, its British director, who was also the Getty Museum's first director, will be leaving at Christmas.
UCLA's head of the Art department, Henry T. Hopkins, is taking over the directorship, and he plans to show special exhibitions in the building and develop it as a cultural centre for ‘lectures, symposia, dance, film and poetry readings’.
It remains to be seen how many of Hammer's one hundred Old Master, Impressionist and nineteenth-century paintings, many not of museum quality, remain on show.
The collection also includes the Codex Leicester by Leonardo da Vinci and 10,000 lithographs by Daumier.
A still unresolved problem is the pending litigation over the collection.
This has been brought by Joan Weiss, niece and heir of Armand Hammer's wife, Frances, and she is laying claim to a large share of the collection.
London
The V&A recruits European talent
LONDON.
In accordance with Article 57 of the Treaty of Rome, which requires EC countries to recognise each other 's formal qualifications, thus allowing citizens of one country to work freely in another (see The Art Newspaper's EC supplement No. 17, April 1992, pp. 7–10), the Victoria and Albert Museum has appointed a German, Dr Norbert Jopek, to a senior post in its Sculpture department.
Indeed, of the six candidates interviewed, three were German, one was Dutch and only two were British.
Paul Williamson, head of the department, attributes the shortage of suitable British candidates to the current disfavour with which object-based studies are viewed by British universities.
Dr Jopek, forty-one, completed his doctorate on German fifteenth-century alabasters in 1984, and has worked at the Museum für Kunst und Gewerbe in Hamburg and for the episcopal administration and Amt für Denkmalpflege (protection of monuments) in Trier.
His area of responsibility at the V&A will be Northern European sculpture between 1450 and 1700, with special emphasis on German polychromed wood sculpture.
Government of Quebec spends millions on a bankrupt engineering company's collection
MONTREAL.
In a move that will prop up the market for contemporary Quebecois art, and at the same time foster the province's quest to reinforce its distinct cultural identity, the government of Quebec has guaranteed a C$5.4 million (£2.25 million; $4.5 million) bank loan on behalf of the Musée d'art Contemporain de Montreal, enabling that institution to purchase en bloc 1,300 works ninety percent contemporary Quebecois amassed by the bankrupt engineering firm Lavalin Inc.
The unique collection, assembled over the past twenty-five years by Lavalin's ex-chief Bernard Lamarre and corporate curator Leo Rosshandler, has been in the hands of an international consortium of eight creditor banks since Lavalin's failure last year.
The Francophone press has lauded the acquisition as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to ‘safeguard the patrimony’.
And Quebec dealers have breathed a collective sigh of relief because, had the hoard been auctioned, prices for contemporary Quebecois art would have plummeted and the glutted market might have collapsed entirely.
But this chorus of praise has been cancelled out by opponents who question both the fiscal and museological sense of the transaction.
Critics wonder how the debt-ridden MAC, recently relocated to the downtown Place des Arts (The Art Newspaper No.20, July-September 1992, p.4), will ever raise the money to repay the government.
With an average annual acquisition budget of around C$100,000 (£41,700; $83,300), it seems highly unlikely that the museum will be able to comply with the ten-year repayment schedule.
More probably, the government will eventually have to bail the museum out.
Moreover, prominent curators decry the museum's wholesale espousal of corporate collecting standards.
They point out that the acquisition, which now comprises more than a quarter of the MAC's permanent collection, is of extremely uneven quality, but the MAC policy practically forbids deaccessioning.
Dutch VAT rate on museums' income to be reduced in line with EC directive
THE HAGUE.
In a report prepared by the tax consultants Moret Ernst and Young for the Department of Culture in The Netherlands, proposals have been put forward to lower VAT charges on income generated by the arts from the standard rate of 18.5% to a new lower rate of 6%.
The report follows an EC directive in which the member countries are provided with the option of realigning their VAT policy by January 1993 in accord with a Community guideline that aims to prevent unfair competition between the member states.
Dutch VAT charges, currently the second highest in Europe (only Denmark is higher at 22%) would, it has been argued, put Dutch culture at a disadvantage if, and when, the Maastricht Treaty is ratified.
At the moment museums are only exempt from VAT on income generated from the display of their permanent collections.
All other activities, including special exhibitions, revenue from restaurants and museums shops, as well as subsidies and sponsorship, are subject to the standard rate of 18.5 %.
If a lower rate were to be introduced the museums would stand to benefit by around DFl.3 million (£1 million; $2 million) per year.
Fred Voncken, head of finance for the Directorate of the Arts of the Ministry of Culture told The Art Newspaper that the Minister, Mrs Hedy d'Ancona, having received the backing of the two main political parties, has urged the cabinet to accept the changes as soon as the European Parliament decides that a lower VAT band is  permissible for all cultural activities.
The decision on this issue is expected during England's chairmanship of the Community.
The director of the Stedelijk Museum retires with the Barnet Newman dispute unresolved
THE HAGUE.
Procedures are under way to find a successor to Wim Beeren, the Director of the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam.
Beeren took on the job from Edy de Wilde in 1985, before which he had been Director of the Museum Boymans van Beuningen in Rotterdam.
The last seven years have seen a considerable expansion of the museum's activities but have been coloured by the drama and eventual scandal surrounding the controversial restoration by Daniel Goldreyer of one of the museum's principal paintings, Barnet Newman's monumental ‘Who's afraid of red yellow and blue III’ which had been vandalised in 1986 (see p.15).
A single-span bridge to link the Louvre with the Musée d'Orsay
PARIS.
It is to be the new pont de Solférino, replacing the temporary structure in place since the original was demolished in the early Sixties.
It will be a single span 106 metres long, and its architect is the French engineering whiz, Marc Mimram.
He was chosen by the administrators of the Grand Louvre project from a field which included a Belgian, an Italian, a Catalan, and five French firms.
Anton Ulrich Museum closed for a year
BRAUNSCHWEIG.
The Herzog Anton Ulrich Museum is closed for a year for repairs and for a reorganisation of the present installations.
It will reopen in 1993.
The museum contains European paintings of the fifteenth to eighteenth centuries, sculpture and decorative arts from the collection of the Herzog Anton Ulrich, and drawings and prints from the fifteenth to twentieth centuries, The print room and library will stay open to the public.
Exhibitions
Anniversaries
Bassano celebrates Bassano
The local museum has been completely restructured for the show that travels to the Kimbell in January
BASSANO DEL GRAPPA, VENETO.
In 1893, the citizens of Bassano del Grappa commemorated their most famous son, the painter Jacopo dal Ponte, known as Bassano, with a statue.
Now the four-hundredth anniversary of the painter's death is being celebrated by the city in even grander style, with an international loan exhibition in the revamped Museo Civico.
The exhibition is remarkable for a number of reasons, not least because it is being co-sponsored by the Kimbell Museum in Fort Worth, where the second version of the show will be the first time Jacopo Bassano has his own exhibition in the United States.
The project has been mounted by an international team, led by Paola Marini of the Museo Civico in Bassano, Beverly Louise Brown for the Kimbell, Filippa Aliberti Gaudioso for the Soprintendenza per i Beni Artistici del Veneto, and the distinguished Bassano scholars, Roger Rearick and Alessandro Ballarin.
They have produced a core of forty-five paintings to be shown in both venues, complemented by a score of paintings and some thirty drawings selected separately for Bassano del Grappa and Fort Worth.
The Bassano exhibition is also an impressive reminder of how important such events can be for the life of Italian cities.
Bassano is at the centre of a large and prosperous area in the Veneto with one of the highest per capita incomes in Italy and therefore in Europe.
This financial  wherewithal was translated into L1.5 billion (£750,000; $1.5 million) for restructuring the Museo Civico, including a system of climate control and new lighting while L2 billion (£1 million; $2 million) were spent on the installation for the show itself; of the sixty-eight paintings on show, twenty-three were conserved for the exhibition.
The money was in large part raised through sponsorship by local firms and banks, as is the tradition in Italy, with additional funds coming from the Italian regional and national governments.
The steering committee has opted for quality, downplaying the innumerable replicas from the painter's workshop to focus on his extraordinary evolution from provincial artist to one of the great protagonists of Venetian art.
Over half of the paintings now on display in Bassano were not represented in Pietro Zampetti's pioneering exhibition of the artist in Venice in 1957, and the same is true of many of the drawings.
One of the great pleasures of the exhibition is to see so many works of high quality brought into close proximity.
In the first gallery, dedicated to the artist's origins, one can see the earliest signed work, the ‘Flight into Egypt’ of 1534, and chart the development between it and the two versions of the ‘Journey to Calvary’from the Fitzwilliam and the National Gallery, London, executed a decade later.
The same gallery presents two of Bassano's rare portraits from Memphis and Kassel for comparison.
The second gallery displays the artist's growing involvement with the work of Parmigianino, Schiavone, and his great Venetian contemporaries, Veronese and Tintoretto.
There are two studies of ‘Pentecost’, one recently discovered by Elisa Avagnina in a church near Bassano, a rare bozzetto of ‘St Paul preaching’ from Padua, and the large altarpieces of ‘Sts Peter and Paul’from Modena and the ‘Crucifixion’from Treviso.
The last of the main galleries concentrates on works from the last twenty year's of Bassano's career, including many of the genre scenes that are among the artist's most celebrated works.
There are surprises here, among them, the nocturnal ‘Annunciation to the shepherds’ from Prague and a riveting ‘Portrait of a prelate’from Boston.
The one reservation about the exhibition lies in its design, which reflects some of the baleful elements introduced into museum design by Carlo Scarpa in the late 1950s.
Flimsy metal rails and plastic counters jar with the handsome Neo-classical forms of the galleries; large panels have been built in the entrance of the three main galleries, blocking the views and making them look smaller, and because space is at a premium, the paintings are sometimes crowded together.
The catalogue is published by Nuova Alfa Editoriale, Bologna, in simultaneous English and Italian editions.
At the same time the one surviving account book from Bassano's career, Il libro secondo di Francesco e Jacopo dal Ponte, ed.
M. Murano, has been published by G.B. Verci Editrice, Bassano, 1992.
Meticulously edited, the volume sheds light on the activity of the Bassano shop from 1520–50 and furnishes new dating for many works.
One newly-attributed fresco, dated to 1537–38, is the ‘Madonna with the infant Christ and St John the Baptist’ in the chapel of Ca' Evizzo, a Bassano villa.
The exhibition closes in Bassano 6 December and travels to the Kimbell Museum, Fort Worth, from 23 January to 25 April 1993.
British portraiture
Allan Ramsay stars solo
While a whole cast swaggers at the Tate
LONDON.
The portrait is under close scrutiny in two major exhibitions this month.
‘Allan Ramsay’ is at the National Portrait Gallery from 16 October to 17 January 1993 and ‘The Swagger Portrait’at the Tate Gallery from 14 October to 10 January 1993.
Both institutions have also acquired major English portraits this year.
The Ramsay show, previously in Edinburgh, enjoyed a huge success at the Festival, with unanimously enthusiastic reviews, and it reappears minus only three portraits at the NPG; sadly, one of these is the grandiose ‘George III’.
The whole of Ramsay's Edinburgh-Rome-London career is examined for the first time, with over one hundred exhibits, including many of his fine drawings.
The ease with which he passes from provincial gaucheries to suave Franco-Italianate portraiture, which made him painter to King George III, is fully recorded.
He emerges as one of the great colourists of his period and his range of sitters is more catholic and international than Gainsborough's or Reynolds's, ranging from Rousseau to Flora Macdonald.
The Keeper of the Tate's British Collection, Andrew Wilton, has organised ‘The Swagger Portrait’.
‘Swagger’, in its earliest, Shakespearean use, conveys insolent pretension, but in this exhibition it refers specifically to conspicuously glamorous likenesses, from Van Dyck in the 1630s to Philip de Laszlo in the 1920s.
Swaggering is obviously best done in the full-length format, but tempered by the ‘unique British context of compromise, Protestant seriousness and distrust of display’, as Wilton says in his eloquent introduction to the catalogue (Tate Gallery Publications).
Seventy-nine works are included, some rarely seen outside private collections.
Van Dyck dominates, with Lawrence and Sargent as close runners-up, and Lely, Winterhalter and Boldini close behind.
With the aid of the National Heritage Memorial Fund and the National Art Collections Fund, the National Portrait Gallery has bought three distinguished portraits of important British sitters in the first half of this year: Robert Walker's ‘John Evelyn’ of 1648 shows the famous diarist with his hand resting upon a skull and it was painted as a wedding portrait for his wife, to accompany a treatise on matrimony.
Pompeo Batoni's ‘Frederick North’ was painted during the future Prime Minister's stay in Rome, and Sir Thomas Lawrence's ‘Sir Charles Stewart’(later Ambassador at Vienna) may have prompted the Prince Regent to patronise the painter.
The last two pictures were acquired by private treaty through Christie's, as was William Dobson's ‘Portrait of his wife’, of 1635–40, for the Tate Gallery, which went on display last month
Poussin
Only connect
Focus on a masterpiece
BIRMINGHAM.
The Barber Institute of Fine Arts at the University of Birmingham is holding a major loan exhibition entitled ‘Dangerous Liaisons’ putting Nicolas Poussin's painting ‘Tancred and Erminia’in context (14 October-3 January 1993).
The subject, taken from Tasso's epic poem Gerusalemme Liberata, was a favourite of the baroque age and the Barber Institute's Poussin is among its most splendid renderings.
This will be compared with a loan of the Hermitage's much larger version.
The exhibition has been arranged by the Poussin scholar, Professor Richard Verdi of the Barber.
It includes other Poussin paintings from British collections: Dulwich Art Gallery's ‘Rinaldo and Armida’(the first of his works to enter England, in 1717); Stourhead's ‘Choice of Hercules’; and another Hermitage picture, the ‘Deposition’.
Other lenders will include the Royal Collection, the National Gallery, the British Museum, the Louvre, and the Museums of Caen and Cherbourg.
Professor Verdi tells The Art Newspaper: ‘This is the first of a series of closely focused and consciously ‘educative’ shows planned between the two Birmingham museums to highlight major works in the city's collections.
For 1994 the Barber Institute is scheduling one on the ‘Harvest wagon’ by Gainsborough, to be shown first in Birmingham, then Toronto, which owns the other version’.
Danish painting from 1780 to 1850 at L.A. County
LOS ANGELES.
The Los Angeles County Museum is opening ‘The golden age of Danish painting’ on 14 October (until 2 January, 1993) in conjunction with the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where it will be shown from 10 February to 24 April, 1993.
This includes around one hundred works painted between 1780 to 1850, when Copenhagen was a major European art centre.
It introduces American audiences to landscapes, marine views, cityscapes, portraits and genre scenes by painters including Jens Juel, C.W. Eckersberg, Constantine Hansen, and Christen Kobke.
It is curated by Philip Conisbee, curator of European painting and sculpture at LACMA, and Gary Tinterow, associate curator in the European paintings department at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
London
The Tibetan art show Kissinger wished would go away
The R.A. 's exhibition is more about the survival of a civilisation than just about art
LONDON.
A major exhibition of Tibetan art opened at the Royal Academy on 18 September as reports are coming out of Tibet that the Chinese have recently completed the ‘restoration’ of the Dalai Lama's Potala Palace and the Jokhang Temple in Lhasa.
According to eyewitness accounts reported in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, about twenty per cent of the buildings and the frescoes of Budhas and Bodhisattvas that they contained have been destroyed in the process of so-called modernisation.
The frescoes have been overpainted where the walls have not been pulled down.
The exhibition in London was seen last year in New York and San Francisco, dispersed and then reassembled for its only European showing.
That it is here at all is an act of faith on the part of the Academy's management, who were well aware of the political overtones the show carried in the States and has inevitably brought with it to London.
The show was originally conceived by American film star Richard Gere who had previously founded Tibet House in New York with the blessing of the Dalai Lama.
With financial help from the Rockefeller family and Gere's own money the organising committee had a base of £300,000 from which to create the exhibition.
Loans were secured from collections in North America, Europe and the Russian Commonwealth of Independent States, of paintings, sculptures and tapestries dating from the ninth century to the present day.
As part of the celebrations of a ‘Year for Tibet’ there was no doubt that the exhibition was a strong political statement in support of the Tibetan government in exile.
At the inaugural dinner for its first showing at the San Francisco Asian Art Museum in April 1991, Rand Castile, the director, admitted to a personal call from Henry Kissinger suggesting that he drop the show, diplomatic relations with China being at stake.
The exhibition proved successful in the States, attracting 300,000 visitors in San Francisco and 200,000 at the privately funded IBM gallery in New York.
In London the R.A.
has come up with three sponsors to ‘underwrite’ half the costs of the show (£200,000) Silhouette Eyewear, Vistech Redab property developers, and The Times and hope that a box office success will make up the balance.
There has been no political pressure from the Foreign Office or elsewhere to prevent the exhibition.
Piers Rodgers, the Academy's Secretary, makes the point that this is a show about art, not politics: ‘There is a long and distinguished history of art and culture in Tibet and that civilisation is under threat at the moment.
The Academy has no view to express on Tibet's political autonomy, as happened in the States’.
Of the 160 exhibits assembled for the London show, one-third have been lent from the Hermitage collection.
Gennady Leonov, Curator of Tibetan and Mongolian art at the Hermitage Museum, has assisted in the organisation of the exhibition.
No exhibits have come from Tibet because very little art is preserved there.
In the view of Leonov, the historical balance of Tibet's medieval way of life was first disturbed by the British expedition in 1904, and slowly disintegrated from there on until the virtual annexation by China in the 1950s.
The exhibition seeks to explain the Buddhist spirituality that is central to Tibetan culture: all the works of art in the exhibition were created as objects of worship.
In demonstration of the enduring religious tradition, during the first six weeks of the show monks from the Dalai Lama's Namgyal Monastic University in Northern India will create a mandala, which represents the buddhist cosmos, in coloured sand.
The catalogue, written and edited by Marilyn Rhie and Robert Thurman, comes almost unchanged from the American shows.
Published by Abrams it costs £21.50.
‘Wisdom and Compassion: the sacred art of Tibet’ runs until13 December.
Medals in London: BM boycotts Serbia
LONDON.
This year the Fédération internationale de la médaille (FIDEM) held its twenty-third congress in London from 16 to 19 September.
Sponsored by the Royal Mint and organised by the British Art Medal Society, around 350 delegates attended the conference at the British Museum which concentrated primarily on the theme of the relationship between medals and drawings.
Accompanying the conference is a major exhibition at the Museum the first of FIDEM's biennial contemporary medal exhibitions to be held in Britain entitled ‘In the Round: contemporary art medals of the world’ featuring 1,300 contemporary medals selected by the national delegates of FIDEM (until 25 October).
The display has been shaped by current politics: the museum was advised by the Foreign Office that to display the Serbian entry would have broken U.N.
sanctions, while the Reunification of Germany and the break-up of the Soviet Union have inspired a number of new works on show.
Also until 25 October the Museum is holding ‘Designs on Posterity: drawings for medals’, a small exhibition which examines the drawings associated with medals and analyses the various stages in the design of a medal.
Designs by Dürer, Gianlorenzo Bernini and Lord Leighton are included with a number of items loaned from other institutions.
A touring exhibition, ‘Artistic Circles: the medal in Britain 1880–1918’, starts at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (until 30 October), and an exhibition on the contemporary medallist Ron Dutton at the Wolverhampton City Art Gallery (to 17 October).
What Queen Victoria and the Vanderbilts went for
WASHINGTON D.C. Originally seen at the Taft Museum, Cincinnati, the travelling exhibition ‘Cavaliers and Cardinals: nineteenth-century French anecdotal paintings’ can now be seen at the Corcoran Gallery until 8 November.
The show focuses on the work of Jean-Louis-Ernest Meissonier and Jehan-Georges Vibert.
Once immensely popular, such paintings commanded the highest prices: in the 1880s Meisonnier's ‘Information: General Desaix and the peasant’ was bought by William Vanderbilt from a German collector for $50,000.
The scenes of prelates' foibles and military history were collected avidly by the Tafts, Vanderbilts, Walters and Hyams, as well as Queen Victoria.
The show travels to the Arnot Art Museum in Elmira NY from 21 November to 17 January 1993.
Not all au pairs and Ibsen: Scandinavia in London
LONDON.
Under the title ‘Tender is the North’ suggestive of saunas and birch twigs London is hosting a festival of Scandinavian culture encompassing the visual arts, music, literature and drama.
It will run from 10 November to 13 December at the Barbican Centre with accompanying events elsewhere in the capital.
With a total budget of almost £2 million, it has been funded by the Corporation of London, the Nordic Council of Ministers in Copenhagen and commercial sponsorship from companies such as Den Danske Bank and Scandic Crown Hotels UK.
The principal exhibition in the visual arts section is ‘Border Crossings: fourteen Scandinavian Artists’(11 November to 7 February) which includes work by Munch, Strindberg, Carl Fredrik Hill, Asger Jorn, Per Kirkeby and work by Finnish and Icelandic artists.
The Barbican Concourse Gallery will display the work of one of Norway's best known artists, Frans Widerberg (11 November to 15 December) and the work of four Icelandic photographers (10 November to 13 December).
In addition, a range of contemporary jewellery, ceramics, glass and textiles will be on sale in the Concourse Gallery and foyers.
Outside the Barbican, the National Gallery is mounting ‘Edvard Munch: the Frieze of Life’(12 November to 7 February) which focuses on the cycle of paintings of that name which the artist codified and  modified over the years.
The cycle contains seminal works including ‘The Dance of Life’, ‘Death in the Sickroom’, ‘Jealousy’, ‘Vampire’ and ‘The Scream’.
Paintings, drawings and prints will be lent mainly from the Oslo Munch Museum and National Gallery and the Rasmus Meyer Collection in Prague.
A catalogue edited by the exhibition's guest curator will include essays by Munch scholars such as Arne Eggum, Reinhold Heller, Gerd Woll and Carla Lathe.
At the Design Museum, London, ‘Allies in the same battle: Scandinavian Design in Britain 1930–1970’ is a display of furniture, textiles, lighting products, ceramics and glass which traces the influence of Scandinavian style on design and consumer taste in Britain since the 1930s.
‘New Directions in Scandinavian Design’ looks at the latest developments while ‘Ethics and Aesthetics: design agencies of Scandinavia’examines the role and ideologies of Scandinavia's design agencies and their achievements in the promotion of good design and better living and working environments.
From 12 November to 28 February 1993.
1994 is Piet Mondrian year
AMSTERDAM.
The £970,000 ($1,823,600) in profits raised by the van Gogh exhibition in 1990 will go towards financing a major exhibition on the Dutch artist Piet Mondrian fifty years after his death in 1944 and twenty-five years after the last retrospective, held at the Orangerie in Paris.
The show, in the Gemeentemuseum, The Hague (1 February -30 June 1994), will consist of fifty paintings and 150 drawings by this austere theoretician of the Modern movement, best known for his canvases painted with horizontal and vertical lines in primary colours.
The exhibition moves on to the National Gallery, Washington, the following month.
Complementary events will be a ballet inspired by Mondrian's paintings, performed by the Nederlands Dans Theatre, and, if the organiser of the exhibition, the collector Frits Becht, has his way, Jean-Luc Godard will have directed a film about the artist's life.
Becht confidently predicts 800,000 visitors for the exhibition, which would put it on a par with the van Gogh exhibition and such heavily marketed block-busters as ‘The Celts’ at the Palazzo Grassi, Venice.
Bridget Riley at the Hayward Gallery
LONDON.
An exhibition of twenty-five large, brightly coloured abstract canvases created by veteran Op Art painter, Bridget Riley, during the last ten years opened at the Hayward Gallery in the middle of last month (to 6 December) and moves on to the Ikon Gallery, Birmingham (16 January-20 February 1993).
Curated by Andrew Dempsey, the South Bank's Assistant Director, it coincides with fresh recognition of her achievement in the field of British abstract art and a new interest being taken in her work by collectors.
New York
Are we ready for a Basquiat revival?
Whitney director, David Ross, gambles on his political correctness
NEW YORK.
Jean Michel Basquiat, the former graffiti artist whose short and turbulent career ended with his death by a drug overdose in 1988, is the subject of a retrospective which opens at the Whitney Museum of American Art towards the end of this month (23 October-14 February 1993).
It is the first occasion that Basquiat's art will have been studied by an American institution and it comes at a time when David Ross, who replaced Thomas Armstrong as the Whitney's director in bitter circumstances nearly two years ago, is under considerable pressure to ignite a new and visionary exhibition programme at the museum (see The Art Newspaper No.6, March 1991, p.5).
Dismissed in the last months of his life as a spent force who would not match the powerful energy invested in the compositions which he had created at the beginning of his nine-year career, Basquiat briefly recaptured, by the unhappy circumstances of his death, an image of glamour and a wave of speculation which pushed the prices of virtually unsaleable pictures to $500,000.
But his work has been a spectacular casualty of the realignment of the contemporary art market, aggravated by disputes about the ownership of his estate (see The Art Newspaper No.19, June 1992, p.20) and concern over forgeries.
Against this background of shifting perceptions, Whitney curator, Richard Marshall, has launched a bid for reappraisal with a selection of more than 150 paintings and works on paper strongly favouring the imaginative achievement of 1981–83, and excluding those collaborations made with Andy Warhol in 1985.
The exhibition tours to the Menil Collection, Houston (11 March-9 May 1993), the Des Moines Art Center, Iowa (22 May-15 August 1993) and the Montgomery Museum of Fine Arts, Alabama (18 November 1993–9 January 1994).
London
Major Gris show at the Whitechapel
More than one hundred paintings and works on paper curated by Christopher Green
LONDON.
A major survey of the art of Juan Gris has opened at the Whitechapel Art Gallery (to 29 November).
Comprising some seventy paintings and forty works on paper, it has been selected by Christopher Green, Professor of the History of Art at the Courtauld Institute and author of Cubism and Its Enemies, for which he was awarded the prestigious Mitchell Prize for Twentieth-Century Art in 1987.
The exhibition will subsequently be shown at the Stadtsgalerie, Stuttgart (18 December-14 February 1993) and at the Rijksmuseum Kroller-Muller, Otterlo (6 March-2 May 1993), but will not travel to the United States.
Described by Douglas Cooper as ‘the third of the true Cubist painters’, Gris has received undeservedly thin scholarly attention since the publication of Cooper's catalogue raisonné fifteen years ago.
He has never been studied in a comprehensive exhibition in this country, although twenty-two oil paintings and fourteen works on paper were prominently included in ‘The Essential Cubism’ which Cooper curated, with Gary Tinterow, for the Tate Gallery in 1983.
Tinterow's retrospective for the Prado, Madrid, followed in 1985.
By contrast, this period has witnessed an enormous revival of interest in the Cubism of Picasso and Braque, culminating in William Rubin's nearly definitive exhibition, ‘Pioneering Cubism’, at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 1989.
Papers delivered by Edward Fry, Theodore Reff, Mark Roskill and other experts at that exhibition's symposium have just been published by the museum.
The present exhibition, then, meets the pressing urgency for a proper reevaluation of the development of Gris' career.
It comes, too, at a vital moment in the critical fortunes of the Whitechapel Art Gallery itself.
There has been concern that, since Nicholas Serota moved to the Tate Gallery in 1989, its exhibition programme had lost the momentum gathered through his energy and vision.
Divided into six chronological sections which plot Gris' activity from the winter of 1910, when he began to create Cubist pictures under the inspiration of Picasso, until his death in 1927, the exhibition challenges the traditional view of the artist as the logician of Cubism by revealing him to be a more unpredictable and experimental artist.
In particular it demonstrates just how powerful and distinctive was his employment of colour.
Istanbul
Aulenti's Biennial
ISTANBUL.
Conceived as part of the Turkish government's determined programme to put Turkey on the artistic map the International Istanbul Biennial was launched in 1987 with the second exhibition of contemporary art in 1989.
This year marks the Third Biennial.
Whereas previously the exhibition sites for the participating countries were scattered throughout the city, this year the entire show will be housed in the Feshane, a nineteenth-century fez factory which the Italian architect Gae Aulenti is converting into Istanbul's first museum of contemporary art the Nejat Eczacibasi Museum.
Artists have been selected from fifteen countries, including Christian Boltanski from France, Francisco Quintillana from Spain and Damien Hirst from the United Kingdom.
Each country has been responsible for arranging its own section within the theme of the ‘production of cultural difference’(a declared blow against Euro-centrism) while a general catalogue, coordinated by the director of the Third Biennial, Vasif Kortun, will be published in Turkey.
Funding for the exhibition has come from the Istanbul Foundation for Culture and the Arts.
While in the 1970s Turkish law prevented any art or antiquities from leaving the country, for whatever reason, in the 1980s the Turkish government woke up to the prestige and international recognition that could accrue from sending travelling exhibitions abroad.
Medieval Russian church treasures at the Walters Art Gallery
BALTIMORE.
Until 18 October, the Walters Art Gallery is showing ‘Armies of light: treasures of medieval Russia’, in association with the Ministry of Culture of the Soviet Union and the Walters Art Gallery.
It is the first United States exhibition on Russian art from the Russian Orthodox Church's golden age, when Moscow was the ‘Third Rome’.
Included are around one hundred objects from the Russian State Museum, St Petersburg, including icons, objects in precious metals, textiles, painted wooden sculpture and ecclesiastical jewellery.
The exhibition then travels to other American museums and to the Victoria and Albert Museum, London.
Asher Edelman curates a Lichtenstein show as ‘Post-Human’ moves to Turin
LAUSANNE.
A survey of the art of Roy Lichtenstein opened at the FAE/Musée d'Art Contemporain, Pully/Lausanne, at the end of last month (to 31 January 1993).
Curated by the Foundation's creator, Asher Edelman, with his colleague, Chantal Michetti, it comprises nearly forty oil or acrylic paintings, twenty collages and drawings and ten painted bronze sculptures, and will subsequently be shown at the Tate Gallery, Liverpool (17 February-21 April 1993).
A major retrospective of the artist's career is scheduled to take place at the Guggenheim Museum, New York, from May 1993.
Edelman's exhibition contains several important historical canvases such as‘Whaam!’(1963, Tate Gallery) and ‘Eddie Diptych’(1963, Sonnabend), as well as four pictures in the recent ‘Reflections’ series previewed at the Castelli Gallery in 1990, and one new ‘Interior’painting (1991).
A documentary section features invitation cards, posters, catalogues and other Pop ephemera borrowed from Leo Castelli's archives and the artist's library.
‘Post-Human’, the Foundation's previous exhibition, imaginatively curated by Jeffrey Deitch and featuring the work of thirty-six younger international artists, has moved to the Castello di Rivoli, Turin (to 22 November), and will then be seen at the Deste Foundation for Contemporary Art, Athens (3 December-14 February 1993) and at the Deichtorhallen, Hamburg (12 March-9 May 1993).
First North American show for Luciano Fabro
SAN FRANCISCO.
An exhibition of more than fifty works of art created by Luciano Fabro, a leading figure in the Italian school of Arte Povera, opens at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art at the beginning of this month (1 October-29 November).
Difficult to pin down on account of his constantly changing styles, and less widely known, though not less important, than his contemporaries, Jannis Kounellis and Mario Merz, Fabro was due for reassessment, and this exhibition, selected by the museum's curator of painting and sculpture, John Caldwell, surveys a career of thirty years.
During that time, the artist has worked slowly but will be making a new sculpture, ‘Colombo’, for this occasion.
Golden age of Dutch painting
Three shows from private collections, historic and modern, Scots, English and American
Don't miss the chance to see the Lord Mayor's Samuel Bequest pictures
EDINBURGH/ LOS ANGELES/ RICHMOND, VA.
The grandest showing of Dutch seventeenth-century art, still on until 18 October, must be the superb assembly at the National Gallery of Scotland.
‘Dutch art and Scotland, a reflection of taste’ offers ten great Rembrandts in the company of many other first-quality pictures with past or current Scottish connections.
These include works by Vermeer, Cuyp, Jacob van Ruisdael and Saenredam, many from Scottish country house collections which rarely lend.
From 22 October to 17 January, 1993, the Los Angeles County Museum is displaying thirty-six Dutch paintings from the collection of Mr and Mrs Edward William Carter.
The collection is one of the most important of its kind in the United States and focuses on landscape and still life.
Included are works by Avercamp, Cuyp, Jacob van Ruisdael, Saenredam and the van de Velde family.
This autumn, the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond is host to another of the finest collections of Old Master paintings formed in recent times: ‘Dutch and Flemish seventeenth-century paintings: the Harold Samuel Collection’ runs from 13 October to 6 December.
The collection was formed by the late shopping-centre magnate Sir Harold (later Lord) Samuel who, on the advice of dealer Edward Speelman, amassed mainly small, highly finished cabinet pictures on copper or panel that were very much to the taste of eighteenth-century collectors but are not often seen in American collections: notably, five town-views by Jan van der Heyden; a ‘Winter Landscape with Skaters’ by Adriaen van de Velde, and a seven-by-nine inch masterpiece by Jan Steen of a couple sleeping at a table beneath an arbour.
Sir Harold rarely bought at auction and never lent his treasures out for exhibition, so most of the pictures are little known, with the exception of Frans Hals's ‘Merry lute player’, which is in fact in danger of overexposure.
Sir Harold left his collection to the Corporation of the City of London, but rather than include them in the Guildhall Art Gallery, he left instructions that, due to the fact that he believed his pictures looked best in domestic surroundings, the pictures be installed in the Lord Mayor's residence, where, unfortunately, they will mostly be inaccessible to the public.
The five-city U.S. tour is the last time many of the fifty-four pictures will be seen in such optimum conditions.
The show is accompanied by a catalogue by Peter Sutton of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
After closing in Virginia, the exhibition moves on to the Frick Art Museum, Pittsburgh (19 December-14 February 1993); the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (13 March-9 May 1993) and the Seattle Art Museum (3 June-25 July 1993).
Wallraf-Richartz Museum
Flemish baroque painting for Cologne, Antwerp and Vienna
The organisers hope for more visitors even than the Rembrandt show the insurance premium is already higher
COLOGNE.
The idea of a major exhibition that would focus on sixteenth-century Mannerist painting north of the Alps was first mooted at the Ludwig and Wallraf-Richartz Museums in 1985.
It was postponed when the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam presented its ‘Kunst voor den beelderstorm’ exhibition in 1986 in order to avoid a conflict of art- historical effort, but remained a long-term project for Ekkehard Mai, deputy director of the Wallraf-Richartz Museum and curator of Dutch and Flemish painting.
He found support in the Musée Royal des Beaux-Arts and Rubenianum in Antwerp who were able to secure funds from the Crédit Communal de Belgique for an exhibition that would display the achievement of Flemish painting as part of Antwerp's celebrations in 1993 as Cultural Capital of Europe.
The title of the exhibition crystallised as ‘From Breughel to Rubens.
The golden century of Flemish painting.
The Antwerp School from 1550–1650’, while the Director of the Rubenianum, Hans Vlieghe, worked with Dr Mai to secure loans that would set the Antwerp painters in a wider European context.
The search for a third museum able to contribute financially to the project ended when the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna agreed to participate in 1989.
They have been able to add loans from the important Viennese holdings of Flemish baroque paintings.
The cooperation of the Austrian government has allowed it to garner political capital to help promote Austria's bid to join the EC.
Christiane Stukenbrock, co-organiser of the show in Cologne, where it continues until 22 November at the Wallraf-Richartz Museum, emphasises that the exhibition has much to offer both the general public and the art historian.
‘The golden century’ aims to provide an overview of Flemish baroque painting while also focusing on the importance of Antwerp as a major centre for trade and artistic patronage in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, when it was still part of the Hapsburg Empire.
It charts the development of still life, genre and landscape painting, the importance of historiae, the changing fashions in portraiture, and the role of art in a period of political and economic flux.
This is the first exhibition since ‘Le siècle de Rubens’ in Brussels in 1965 to tackle such a wide field.
Works by major artists such as Brueghel, Aertsen, Mor, Rubens, van Dyck, Jordaens, Snyders and Teniers will be shown alongside less well known artists such as Van Balen, Diepenbeeck, Van Thulden and Boeckhorst.
Apart from paintings from the Antwerp, Vienna and Cologne collections loans have come mainly from the European public collections, from Stockholm to Berlin.
Canvases by Rubens include the Vienna and Cologne self-portraits, ‘Lot and his daughters’ from Schwerin and the ‘Decius Mus’oil sketch from Washington.
London's National Gallery has loaned van Dyck's ‘Portrait of George Gage’ and Jordaens's ‘Mary with the infant Jesus and Saints Zacharias, Elisabeth and John the Baptist’.
Madrid has sent Snyders's ‘Concert of Birds’, Jan Breughel the Elder's ‘Venus and Cupid in a gallery’ and Teniers's ‘Ape painting’.
Important Jordaens paintings are supplied by the Liechtenstein Collection in Vaduz and the Hermitage, St Petersburg, the latter lending the famous ‘Family portrait’.
The most important altarpieces by Rubens and his circle, which are prevented from travelling, are present in the form of contemporary prints and preparatory sketches.
Altogether around 150 paintings, eighty drawings and some 180 prints will be exhibited.
The show moves to the Musée Royal des Beaux-Arts in Antwerp in a reduced form from 12 December 1992 until 8 March 1993.
It can then be seen in Vienna at the Kunsthistorisches Museum from 2 April until 16 May.
A conference is planned in Vienna to discuss the reactions of scholars to the show.
Topics anticipated are the social function of art and the art market's development in Flanders 1550–1650, as well as debate over the attributions of the works displayed.
The exhibition in Vienna coincides with the reopening of the rooms of the permanent collection of Flemish art in the Kunsthistorisches Museum.
The catalogue, edited by Hans Vlieghe and Ekkehard Mai, contains essays by Frans Baudouin, Christopher Brown, David Freedberg, J. Müller Hofstede and Karl Schütz.
The dates of the parallel drawings exhibition are six weeks shorter than the main show: Wallraf-Richartz Museum, Cologne, until 18 October; Musée Royal des Beaux-Arts, Antwerp, 12 December 1992–24 January 1993; Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, 2 April to 16 May 1993.
From the age of Breughel
AMSTERDAM.
To mark the publication of The Netherlandish and German drawings of the XVth and XVIth centuries of the Frits Lugt Collection by K. G. Boon, the Rijksmuseum is mounting an exhibition of one hundred outstanding sixteenth-century drawings from the collection (until 8 November).
One of the greatest private European drawings collectors of this century, Frits Lugt (1884–1970) also collected prints, paintings, artists' letters, frames and Indian miniatures while his book on collectors' marks remains the standard reference volume.
The collection is now under the care of the Fondation Custodia, Paris, whose director Carlos van Hasselt has continued to acquire Dutch and Flemish drawings to augment the original group.
Included in the exhibition are a Lucas van Leyden ‘Portrait of the Emperor Maximilian’, a portrait of Christian II of Denmark by Jan Gossaert, an album of coloured drawings of flowers and insects by Jacques de Gheyn II made for the Emperor Rudolf II, a number of drawings by Goltzius and two sheets by Dürer.
Canberra
The first exhibition of Angkor-period art to leave Cambodia
Australia makes capital out of the 1991 peace accord in Cambodia and demonstrates its newly established diplomatic ties
CANBERRA.
The unprecedented exhibition at the Australian National Gallery until 25 October, ‘The age of Angkor: Treasures from the National Museum of Cambodia’, shows thirty-three stone and bronze works that have not been seen outside Cambodia before.
Made possible by the peace accord between the four warring Cambodian factions ratified on 23 October 1991, the sculptures have all come from the National Museum of Cambodia in Phnom Penh.
Although two of its directors were killed during the fighting between 1975 and 1979 and the building suffered badly from neglect, most of the National Museum's collection survived.
The exhibition arose out of a cultural visit made to Cambodia in December 1990 by the head of conservation at the ANG, Andrew Darren, which established links with the Director of the Cambodian National Museum, Pich Keo.
The possibility of obtaining loans from the Phnom Penh museum was then followed up by the curator in Asian art at the ANG, Doctor Michael Brand: ‘Normally it would have been the ANG's desire to have more time, but 1992 was chosen because the Japanese were trying to borrow some objects for a show to be held in 1993.
The Cambodians felt they would prefer to have an exhibition in Australia first, therefore we had to bring the date of the exhibition forward’.
In September 1991, the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth Evans was asked to support the project.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Senator Evans said: ‘It was the infrastructure of our mission in Phnom Penh [established on 30 October 1991]that was important in making everything work.
We were closely involved in trying to set up the transport arrangements: we had to get the airforce to ferry the pieces from Phnom Penh to Bangkok and then the Australian national carrier Qantas to bring them to Australia.’
The exhibition introduces both Hindu and Buddhist art and explains the balance of goddesses and gods, with an emphasis on Shiva and Vishnu, gods of special importance to the Khmer kings.
These kings chose Angkor at the beginning of the ninth century for their residence and remained there until 1431, when they were defeated by the Thais.
During this period, fifty temples were built on a site of 200 square kilometres around the most prestigious of all, Angkor Wat.
Religion was the only subject treated by the Khmer artists of the Angkor period: temples were lavishly embellished with sculptures of gods and goddesses, and bridges represented the rainbows that united people and their gods.
In a process that gathered momentum in the late nineteenth century, most of the free-standing sculptures were detached from the monuments which once housed them.
Fortunately, many of these works entered the collection of the National Museum of Cambodia.
Twenty-six objects in the exhibition are from the Angkor period, including the sculpted sandstone Kneeling Woman (dated to around 1150) from Bayon, the Mountain Temple of Angkor Thom.
The temple, 65 metres high, represented the centre of the earth, to which the kneeling woman presented her respect.
Angkor Thom, erected under the reign of King Jayavarman VII, witnessed the transition from Hindu to Buddhism.
Six objects from the pre-Angkor period are also present in the show.
The overall cost of the exhibition was A$400,000, mostly sponsored by the Australian Telecommunications Corporation.
An A$700,000 appeal was launched by Prime Minister Paul Keating during the opening ceremony to provide an aid and assistance package to the National Museum of Cambodia.
Apart from the restoration of the museum, help will be given in the form of training for Cambodian staff in restoration, conservation and museum techniques in Australia.
Some workshops will be run by ANG staff at the Phnom Penh Museum.
The Australian Government and the ANG are jointly providing A$325,000, leaving A$375,000 to be contributed by the public.
The opening of ‘The Age of Angkor’ comes at a time where Australia is endeavouring to raise its profile among Asian countries.
Although Senator Evans tried to minimise the political overtones of this exhibition, Prime Minister Keating's opening speech was seen as a prelude to his forthcoming trip to Asia, while a message from Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia was a clear indicator of the new diplomatic links between the two countries.
Fort Worth
‘Egypt's dazzling sun: Amenhotep III and his world’
Cleveland's seventy-fifth anniversary exhibition includes important new discoveries
FORT WORTH.
In the past decade and a half, three major Egyptian shows have travelled the U.S. and Europe: ‘The Tomb of Tutankamen’, ‘Rameses the Great’, and most recently ‘Cleopatra's Egypt’.
Now there is a fourth, organised by The Cleveland Museum for its seventy-fifth anniversary in conjunction with the Réunion des Musées Nationaux and the Louvre, and now on the second stage of its tour at the Kimbell Art Museum.
‘Egypt's Dazzling Sun: Amenhotep III and His World’ focuses on Tut's and Rameses' illustrious ancestor, pharaoh Amenhotep III (reigned 1391–1353 BC).
Amenhotep's foreign diplomacy fostered political stability and international trade, enabling him to spend lavishly on domestic programmes that virtually rebuilt his empire stretching from Syria to the Sudan.
He redeveloped Luxor, formerly Thebes, raising one of history's most renowned temples, and erecting the Colossi of Memnon to guard his own mortuary temple on the Nile.
For these latter partially surviving monuments actually sphinxlike incarnations of the deified pharaoh himself Amenhotep had two 720-tonne quartzite blocks transported 750 miles from a quarry near Cairo.
At least 1,000 life-size or larger portraits exist of the self-proclaimed Dazzling Sun Disc depicting him and his queen, Tiy, from youth to old age in an array that outstrips any of his predecessors in both scale and number.
The present exhibition assembles 143 works loaned from thirty collections in the U.S., Europe, and Egypt.
On display are colossal and smaller statues, wall paintings, inscribed scarabs, funerary equipment, ritual implements, jewellery, high quality glazed ceramics, and rainbow-coloured glass.
The show emerged from the work of Arielle P. Kozloff, Cleveland's Curator of Ancient Art, who since 1977 has been compiling a photographic census of eighteenth-century Theban wall paintings in the Valley of the Kings, with an aim towards identifying specific hands among the artisans.
She was joined by Betsy M. Bryan, Alexander Badawy Assistant Professor of Egyptian Art and Archaeology at The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, who since 1984 has been collecting material on the position of women in New Kingdom society.
Together with Lawrence M. Berman, Curatorial Assistant in the Department of Ancient Art at Cleveland, they examined more than 2,000 objects in fifty-one collections in forty-four cities on four continents, and visited numerous tombs, temples, and other sites in Egypt and the Sudan.
They applied what might be called a Morellian analysis, recording precisely the minute details of the ancient works, dividing statues into as many as 300 measurable parts, and entering the results into a database.
Their work allowed them to identify working methods and the characteristics of particular ateliers.
They show, for example, that relief carvers repeat standardised figures, probably squaring and transferring master draughtsmen's models.
They demonstrate the likelihood that carvers of hard stone, like quartzite, were probably not the same artisans who worked softer minerals like granite or granodiorite.
By close attention to variations in surface texture and polish, they conclude that certain statues dedicated to later rulers, like Rameses II, are in fact reworkings of earlier portraits of Amenhotep III.
The illustrated scholarly catalogue, published with the assistance of the Getty Grant Program, includes essays by the curators and by Elisabeth Delange of the Musées Nationaux.
In addition to new information on some of the touchstones of Egyptian art, it publishes for the first time the large-scale sculptures recently unearthed in the Sun Court of the Luxor Temple.
‘Egypt's dazzling sun: Amenhotep III and his world’ is presented at the Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth from 24 October to 31 January, 1993, and the Grand Palais, Paris (2 March-31 May).
London, Chicago, Berlin, Durham NC
The Columbiade continues
Four exhibitions on pre-Hispanic art latch onto the 1492 bandwaggon
LONDON.
The Hayward Gallery plays host to a major exhibition of Pre-Columbian sculpture and pottery until 6 December.
‘The Art of Ancient Mexico’, originally shown in Venice in 1989 sponsored by Olivetti, shows 125 pieces divided according to their respective cultures, including sixty loans from the British Museum.
The design is by Paul Williams, who achieved notable success with ‘English Romanesque Art’ in 1985.
While conveying the Mexican attitude to the artefacts as items of great aesthetic value, the curator Andrew Dempsey also examines the various reactions to Pre-Columbian art after the Spanish conquest and the nineteenth century's interest in Mayan culture at the expense of more ‘primitive’ ones such as the Olmec.
The influence of Mexican architecture on figures such as Frank Lloyd Wright is set out with photographs and text and there is a section on archaeology in Mexico.
At the Art Institute in Chicago ‘The Ancient Americas: Art from Sacred Landscapes’(10 October to 3 January) has borrowed roughly 300 objects from collections in Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, the U.S. and Europe.
The exhibition focuses on the crucial relationship that obtained between mountains, the sun, animals, and plants, and the city plans, temple sites, representational images, and graphic symbols of the pre-Columbian civilisations of South America.
To illustrate this, small-scale goldwork, textiles, ceramics, and carvings are displayed alongside photomurals of their find sites.
The 400 page catalogue from Prestel Verlag contains essays by twenty-five leading archaeologists and ethnographers.
After Chicago the show travels to the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (14 February 1993–18 April) and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (6 June-15 August).
An ambitious exhibition for Columbus year at the Martin-Gropius-Bau in Berlin until 3 January has tackled three broad themes: Europe at the time of Columbus's discovery, the New World in 1492 and the consequences for both continents.
Among the 2,500 objects, borrowed from collections world wide, is an autograph letter from Columbus to his youngest son that had been preserved in Rostock.
A full scale model of Columbus's favourite ship, the Niña, has been installed in the Gropius Bau's central court as a spectacular fulcrum for ‘Amerika 1492–1992, Neue Welten, Neue Wirklichkeiten’.
Duke University Museum of Art at Durham, North Carolina, has mounted an exhibition of pre-Columbian art from their own holdings.
DUMA's collection was initiated in 1973 and now contains nearly 3,300 objects and textiles.
‘American Art before Columbus: Mexico to Peru’ runs until 3 January.
What it costs to appreciate Matisse this month
With the Matisse exhibition just opened at the Museum of Modern Art in New York (until 12 January; see interview with the curator, John Elderfield, The Art Newspaper No. 20, July-September 1992, p. 8), the discerning visitor should budget for the complete experience with the following:
Pair of admission tickets to MOMA's exhibition: $25
London-New York by Concorde return (for European visitors): £5,030
Henri Matisse: A Retrospective, John Elderfield's exhibition catalogue: $37.50 (soft cover)
‘Femme en Maillot se Reposant’, original charcoal drawing (1944) from Waddington Galleries: £225,000
The Etruscans in reality and myth, courtesy of FIAT
PARIS.
When the organisers at Palazzo Grassi, the FIAT Foundation's Venetian exhibition space, approached the scholar Massimo Pallottino with the suggestion that he organise an exhibition on the Etruscans he expressed surprise: there have been numerous Etruscan shows in Europe since the large touring exhibition of 1955–56, the most recent being the ‘Progetto Etrusco’ in 1985 which involved the whole of Italy.
What convinced him that it was nonetheless a worthwhile project was, firstly, that it was to be an international collaborative effort between the Réunion des Musées Nationaux in Paris, the Staatliche Museen Preußischer Kulturbesitz in Berlin and the FIAT group and, secondly, that there was scope to examine an unexplored area: the rediscovery of the Etruscans and their influence on recent European culture.
The exhibition that has just opened at the Grand Palais with the title ‘Les Etrusques et l'Europe’ therefore has two parts: the world of the ancient Etruscans; and their latter day reemergence as a cultural influence from 1554 with the discovery of the ‘Chimera’at Arezzo (which immediately entered the Medici collections).
There is a section on the Etruscan Revival of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and the fascination of the Etruscans for D.H.
Lawrence and Aldous Huxley who created their own myth of a lost Etruscan Eden.
The show continues until 14 December, moving to the Altes Museum in Berlin from February to May 1993.
It will not visit Venice.
The Royal Academy's survey of Sisley moves to Paris
LONDON.
The retrospective exhibition of the art of Alfred Sisley which opened at the Royal Academy of Arts at the beginning of July closes in London on 18 October but continues, with a slightly different selection of works, at the Musée d'Orsay, Paris (30 October-31 January 1993) and at the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore (14 March-13 June 1993), its only venue in the United States.
Selected by MaryAnn Stevens, the Academy's Librarian and Head of Education, and Christopher Lloyd, Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures, it comprises seventy-one pictures, but no pastels nor drawings.
Their most useful contribution has been a fresh appraisal of his later work created at Moret-sur-Loing where his art culminated in the marvellous series of depictions of the south-west facade of the town's church (1893–1894).
The exhibition is accompanied by a catalogue (Yale University Press, £35 cloth, £18.95 paper), and there is a new monograph (Phaidon Press, £45) by Richard Shone, the Burlington Magazine's Associate Editor, who presents fresh biographical information, identifies subjects and places, and proposes a revised chronology for Sisley's development.
A new sculpture and wall drawings by Richard Serra in London
LONDON.
One of the smartest initiatives of the Tate Gallery's director, Nicholas Serota, is his series of installations of contemporary sculpture which take place each autumn.
The series was inaugurated by Richard Long in 1990, and Anthony Caro showed new and recent work there a year ago.
Now Richard Serra is installing ‘Weight and Measure’, a pair of large, rectangular forged steel blocks of  slightly different height, each weighing nearly forty tons (to 17 January 1993).
Designed especially for the North and South Duveen Galleries, this work is closely related to ‘Two forged rounds for Buster Keaton’, the pair of steel cylinders shown at Larry Gagosian's downtown space in New York exactly a year ago.
Serra is also making an exhibition of eight black rectangular drawings created in thick paintstick on large sheets of fine linen pasted to the walls of the Serpentine Gallery (3 October-15 November).
Serra discusses his new work in the context of his career in an evening lecture at the Tate Gallery on Thursday 1 October (for tickets call 071–828–1313).
Thematic exhibition of Picasso's still-life art opens in Paris
PARIS.
‘Picasso et les choses’, the exhibition of Picasso's still-life work curated by Jean Sutherland Boggs, opens at the Grand Palais at the beginning of this month (3 October-28 December), having already been shown in Cleveland and Philadelphia (see The Art Newspaper No.15, February 1992, p.8).
It comprises nearly 150 oil paintings, collages, gouaches and sculptures from all periods of Picasso's career and is a rich illustration of the opinion advanced by John Richardson in the first volume of his biography of the artist that still-life was a subject which Picasso ‘would eventually explore more exhaustively and develop more imaginatively than any other artist in history’.
The catalogue (Rizzoli, $75) contains additional essays by Marie-Laure Bernadac and Brigitte Leal, both of the Musée Picasso, Paris.
Conservation
Venice
A bad ‘Titian’ becomes a superb medieval crucifix
Surprise find by restorers in course of celebratory cleaning
VENICE.
As part of the five-hundredth  anniversary celebrations of the consecration of the Frari church in Venice, the Sovrintendenza (the state administration of ancient monuments and works of art) has been taking stock of the restoration projects carried out in the Basilica over the last twenty years.
The most exciting discovery this year has been of a very fine Umbrian crucifix of around 1250 hitherto completely concealed by mediocre seventeenth-century painting optimistically attributed to Titian in the nineteenth century.
What gave the restorers the courage to risk sacrificing the overpainting, especially as a thick layer of white lead made X-rays useless?
First, there was the fact that the crucifix is mentioned in documents as far back as the 1500s, and since what was visible clearly was later in date, restorers reasoned that there must be something underneath it; then there were the traces of thirteenth-century paint at the foot of the cross.
The gamble has paid off, so tourists and faithful can now contemplate a moving image of the tormented body of the dead Christ in a remarkable state of conservation except for the loss of the skin colour pigments, which have been abraded down to the greenish underpainting.
The next restoration project will be of the melodramatic pyramid memorial to Canova, which is in a dangerously precarious state.
Entry fees make the Boboli Gardens flourish
FLORENCE.
In June and July, the two months following the decision to make visitors to the Boboli Gardens pay at the gate, a total of 88,000 tickets were sold for a revenue of L364 million (£173,300; $346,700).
The reduction in the numbers visiting the gardens has allowed the grass to remain green and cut down on the amount of litter dropped and graffiti scribbled.
Soprintendente ai Beni Architettonici for Florence, Domenico Valentino, hopes that this will still be the case when local residents have been issued with free passes.
In the meantime the L600 million allocated for the restoration of the Amphitheatre and additional private sponsorship will allow vital restoration work on the statues and architectural features to begin next January.
A Franco-American conservation prize
PARIS.
The Franco-American association Friends of Old French Houses, founded ten years ago, will celebrate its anniversary in style over two days (24 to 26 October) at the château de Versailles.
Funds collected from the event will be put towards the restoration of two seventeenth-century sculptures which flank the entry to the Court of Honour at Versailles.
The association, which has raised over $1 million towards the restoration of French and American buildings and other monuments, has this year awarded its main prize to the restorers of the château de Clairvaux in the Vienne region of France.
A guide to decorative tiles
LONDON.
The Victorian Society, London, has issued the second in its series of attractively produced booklets on the theme of Care for Victorian Houses.
Following the care of doors, the second issue is devoted to tiles and contains much valuable historical and practical information on the production, care and restoration of decorative Victorian tiles.
Illustrated in colour, the eight-page text concludes with a list of notable tile collections in Britain (including two pubs) and a booklist.
The next issue will be on fireplaces.
Decorative Tiles costs £3 and is available from The Victorian Society, 1 Priory Gardens, London W4 1TT.
Tel: 081 994 1019.
Mosaic floor of Otranto cathedral so precious that services are banished
OTRANTO.
Otranto cathedral, founded in 1080 by Bishop Guglielmo I with money from the Norman king Ruggero I, is open again after six years of restoration work on the mosaic floor.
The mosaic extends the length of the nave as far as the presbytery, into the apse, and down the two arms of the transept and survives as a visual encyclopedia of the medieval mind.
Created by Pantaleone in 1163–65, the mosaic is now fully visible with the removal of the pews, but is protected by ropes that prevent visitors from walking across it.
Mass and other services will now take place in the crypt while the upper part of the cathedral will be reserved for the more important feast days.
Forensic confirmation of overpainting on the Stedelijk's Barnett Newman
AMSTERDAM.
The City council of Amsterdam has instructed a New York lawyer to investigate the possibilities for legal action against Daniel Goldreyer, the restorer of Barnett Newman's ‘Who's afraid of red, yellow and blue III’ which was badly damaged with a Stanley-knife in 1986.
(See extensive coverage in The Art Newspaper for February, March and May 1992.)
According to recent analysis performed by the Forensic Laboratory in Rijswijk in the Netherlands, Goldreyer restored the canvas and then simply painted over the surface, in some areas using up to six layers of alkyd paint, more usually applied to furniture and floors.
Wim Beeren, the Director of the Stedelijk museum in Amsterdam who, in the face of deafening criticism, has always defended the restoration, admitted that Goldreyer did not bother to inform him in time about his plans for the last phase of the restoration in which the painted surface was to be treated.
Goldreyer has always maintained that he meticulously applied up to 2 million dots of paint and that he did not repaint the canvas.
The Stedelijk's Barnett Newman, worth DFl. 5.4 million just before it was vandalised in 1986, is now said to be worthless.
In a further twist, a book by Theodor B. Donson, entitled Prints and the Print Market, published in 1977 and brought to the attention of The Art Newspaper by a restorer from Chicago, is now being used as evidence to back up the defence against Goldreyer's extraordinary libel suits against critics of his restoration, totalling no less than $125 million.
Donson uses Goldreyer as an example of how ‘clumsy restorers can created falsified proofs unwittingly’.
According to Donson, Goldreyer once sliced off the margins of a linocut by Picasso, pasted the marginless composition onto another sheet of paper and furnished a fresh Picasso pencil signature for the new lower margin.
Japanese barter the restoration of Urbino's walls in exchange for a Raphael exhibition
URBINO.
After the collapse of a section of the sixteenth-century city walls, weakened by water infiltration (see The Art Newspaper No. 20, July-September 1992, p.1), a Japanese consortium have come forward with an offer to supply the large sum needed for repairs.
Tatsuro Akanegakubo, head of the Japanese group Italplanning which specialises in architectural restoration and the conservation of works of art, has put together a package of sponsors that includes multinationals, banks, Nippon TV, and the daily newspaper Yomiuri Shimbun.
In return for their financial support the Japanese have requested that they should be allowed to organise several exhibitions on Raphael, Urbino's most famous artist, with loans from the Brera and Uffizi.
This is a difficult decision for the Ministero di Beni Culturali in Rome, and its new head Alberto Ronchey, as it is unable to provide all the funds for the extensive restoration work that needs to be done to the city fabric of Urbino to prevent any further deterioration.
The soprintendente in Florence, Antonio Paolucci, has declared himself utterly opposed to the Japanese proposal, describing it as ‘blackmail’.
Archaeology
The Brindisi bronzes
Carabiniere bags exquisite Greek foot
150 fragments have surfaced since July
BRINDISI, PUGLIA.
A chance find by Major Luigi Robusto of the local Carabinieri while diving off Punta del Serrone near Brindisi on 19 July started an underwater excavation that has run through the summer.
At a depth of 16 metres he came across a larger than life size bronze foot sticking out of the sand that proved only to be the tip of a large area of buried statues dating from the fifth century BC to the fourth century AD.
Systematic excavation was begun on 30 July by a team of underwater divers from Stas (the underwater archaeology team set up by the Italian government in 1986) headed by Claudio Mocchegiani Carpano and Roberto Petriaggi, together with the underwater unit of the Naples Carabinieri.
With the use of metal detectors they were able to plot an area of 300 metres square that held a large quantity of metal.
Among the most important pieces raised over the summer were two heads, one bearded and probably dating to the fourth century BC, the other with hellenistic features that place it either in the second century BC as a Greek original or several centuries later as a Roman copy.
In addition a bronze arm was found, 133 cm in length, which probably belonged to a colossal statue.
Close to a rocky outcrop were discovered the remains of two bronze statues covered in marine concretions a draped figure 170cm high with no base and only half its head preserved and a bust with a badly corroded head.
These were raised to the surface in a type of stretcher supported by floats.
A restoration lab was set up nearby to treat the bronzes immediately they came out of the water to prevent deterioration.
Two, the statue and the bust, were taken to Florence in early September for conservation and removal of the marine encrustations by Francesco Nicosia and his team, who cleaned the Riace bronzes that were found in 1975 and 1980.
The Director General of the Ministry of Culture, Francesco Sisinni has made it clear that once restored in the Florence Istituto Centrale del Restauro the bronzes will return to Brindisi.
Given the wide range in dates represented by the fragments; the fact that no two have yet been found to fit together and vary considerably in size; and the lack of any signs of wreckage; the current hypothesis is that the statues were already broken when they were loaded into the transport ship to be taken for re-use elsewhere.
Most probably they were thrown into the sea to lighten the load when the ship found itself in difficulties.
While it is likely that the ship was sailing from Brindisi, on the heel of Italy, towards Rome, it is also possible, given the terminus ante quem of the fourth century AD when Rome was in decline, that the destination was one of the new power bases of the Empire in the East: Thessalonica, Constantinople, Nicomedia or Antioch.
At the time of going to press more than 150 fragments of classical statues had been recovered and more finds were being brought up every day.
Given the funds of L100 million (£50,000; $100,000) made available by the Italian government Mocchegiani Carpano was confident that the whole area could be excavated, most probably by the end of September.
In addition it should be possible to conduct a survey of the surrounding sea bed to prospect for wreckage or other surviving finds.
How the Italian government regulates exploration of its underwater sites
In Italy the protection of underwater sites of special artistic, historical or archaeological interest is overseen by the Ministero dei beni Culturali acting through the regional Soprintendenze.
Their authority is based on the law passed in 1939 that governs Italy's entire artistic heritage (legge di tutela No.1089) and backed up by the specialist department for underwater archaeology, set up in 1988 within the central office of the Ministero dei Beni Culturali, with the cooperation of the Ministero della Marina Mercantile (whose regulations are enforced by the harbour offices of Italy's ports).
The two ministries together coordinate underwater exploration and the policing of excavations.
The Ministero dei Beni Culturali, for example, arranges for army frogmen to take courses in underwater archaeology, while the Ministero della Marina Mercantile makes available the results of underwater surveys so that areas of archaeological interest can be identified.
The heightened interest in underwater archaeology caused by the find of the Brindisi bronzes has prompted the new Ministro per i Beni Culturali, Alberto Ronchey, to propose changes in the law: first, to extend the limit of Italian territorial waters beyond the six miles off the coast currently in force and beyond the seabed on the continental shelf (no distance has yet been specified); second, to consider allocating underwater ‘concessions’ to non-government teams who would take a course in the theory and practice of underwater excavation and make up the shortfall in trained divers.
Paros museum robbed of Cycladic figurines
ATHENS.
The spate of museum robberies in Greece has continued unabated this summer.
On the night of Saturday 27 June a gang broke down the door of one of the galleries of the unguarded archaeological museum on the Cycladic island of Paros and stole eighteen exhibits, mostly marble figurines, dated to the Cycladic early Bronze Age (3200–2100 BC), with an estimated value of just under £300,000.
The figurines come from a number of important sites around the island, some excavated in the 1960s by Professor Christos Doumas.
The Greek police, with the full co-operation of the Archaeological Service, have launched a major international hunt for the thieves and the objects, but it is feared that some of the objects, particularly the much sought after Early Cycladic figurines, will be smuggled abroad and sold to collectors.
The fact that the thieves confined their attention to the Early Cycladic display case, ignoring many other important works, suggests that they may have been stealing to order something which is a matter of concern to museum staff and archaeologists in Greece.
In a separate incident a gang of thieves broke into the Alea town museum and removed everything that was easily transportable only large statues were left behind.
The little museum is  particularly rich in classical objects because the modern town of Alea stands on the site of ancient Tegea, the capital of Arcadia.
The Uffizi's ‘Wounded warrior’ is a Greek original
FLORENCE.
While examining the Uffizi's collection of statues in the course of a restoration programme of the classical examples, Luigi Beschi realised that the statue of the wounded warrior was an unrecognised Greek original from the classical period.
He detected an inscription of Kleomenes on the figure's clothing, obscured by a dense network of incisions.
The statue is known to have been in Florence from the sixteenth century onwards and is documented as being in the Uffizi from 1676, but was always  thought to have been a copy of a Greek original.
The statue will from now on be displayed in the Sala delle Niobe; the reattribution is documented in the publication Statua del guerriero ferito.
Storia, prospettive esegetiche, restauri, published by Centro Di.
Peru
Your Inca gold probably isn't: it's Sicàn
An intact tomb has yielded golden gloves, crowns and other treasures, redating much of the world's ‘Inca’ and ‘Chimó’gold and treasures
PERU.
An international team of archaeologists, working under the direction of Dr Izumi Shimada of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University and Carlos Elera of the Museo de la Nación, Lima, Peru, have unearthed a remarkable1,000 year-old tomb in the Poma National Archaeological Reserve in the Batán Grande region on the north coast of Peru.
The find was made in the context of the first scientific documentation of Sicàn culture elite tombs, a previously little studied culture which Dr Shimada's work has defined.
Prior to the commencement of the Sicàn Archaeological Project by Dr Shimada in 1978 the Sicàn (also known as Lambayeque) culture was known mainly through gold objects such as funerary masks or ceremonial knives looted from deep tombs in the area.
Having found their way into museums and institutions around the world they were usually identified as Inca or most often Chimó.
The extraordinary intactness of the present find means that gold objects of this type can now be correctly dated and identified.
Dr Shimada's work has been carried out under the aegis of the Peruvian government, sponsored by the Shibusawa Ethnological Foundation of Tokyo.
The first tomb to be excavated in 1991 was one of the largest ever to be scientifically excavated in the New World.
Although partly looted, it still contained nine skeletons and numerous previously unknown examples of painted cloth carefully pasted over gilded sheet metal up to 2.5 x 1.5 m in size.
These sheets lined different areas of the tomb and separated different groups of offerings such as ceramic vessels, bronze implements, llama limbs and shell beads.
The latest tomb to be found is situated some 250m west of the first at the base of an adobe truncated pyramid called Huaca Loro and contains a wide range of funerary offerings weighing in all around 1.2 tons.
It appears to be that of a forty to fifty year old prince or aristocrat.
The cinnabar-covered skeleton (simulating blood) found at the bottom of a forty foot man-made shaft was wearing a gold death mask with eyes made of emeralds and large silver ear decorations, still covered by hundreds of thousands of turquoise, crystal, lapis lazuli and seashell beads.
Next to the skeleton (accompanied by the skeletons of two young women and two children) were six gold crowns, four gold headbands, four gold rattles, six pairs of gold ear decorations and a pair of three-foot long gold alloy gloves.
Originally decorating the crowns were 150 feathers made of beaten gold, found nearby.
Other items in the tomb were symbolic crescent knives made of thin beaten gold, nearly 400 cast bronze implements, some 400 shells, ceramic vessels and assorted beads.
A large deep pit dug into the floor of one of the niches carved into the sides of the burial chamber was packed with offerings including beads made of shell, turquoise, quartz and amethyst crystals, lapis lazuli and a local form of amber, together with gilded sheetmetal masks and head ornaments and gold foil.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Dr Shimada stressed the importance of this discovery within the context of his fourteen-year project.
The intactness of the tomb meant that for the first time it was possible to analyse fully how the many objects found within it were used, and their ritual and social implications within the Sicàn culture better understood.
He noted that only a small part of the ancient Sicàn capital, covering an area 1.5 x 1 km, had been excavated so far.
While the area had been designated a National Archaeological Reserve, he expressed fear of looting from the site.
Cave paintings
Radiocarbon dating, a penguin, plus fakes
Carbon dating for the Altamira caves, a penguin troubles sceptics at the submerged Grotte Henri Cosquer, and the sponge is a give-away at Alave
LONDON.
Hailed two years ago as one of the most important archaeological discoveries in Europe, the painted caves at Alave in northern Spain are decorated with images of animals, symbols and splashes of colour.
The results of further tests released this summer have proved them to be skilful fakes.
The Spanish student who discovered them is now thought to have painted the cave with natural pigments but using modern rubber sponges, fragments of which were found on the walls.
Presumably more by good luck than judgement, the Spanish student avoided the use of charcoal underdrawing in his scheme at Alave.
Such underdrawing has now provided a significantly more accurate way of dating the famous palaeolithic cave paintings at Altamira and El Castillo, Spain, and Niaux in the French Pyrenees has been developed by a team of French and Spanish scientists.
Until recently the dating of the famous wall paintings of bison and other animals relied largely on external evidence such as the dating of bones and other remains found in the caves, together with stylistic analysis of the paintings.
The traditional C14 carbon dating method could not be used on the walls as the process consumes the object being tested.
Using radiocarbon dating by accelerator mass spectrometry, which requires much less material, means that only a tiny amount of the charcoal underdrawing is required for an accurate dating to be obtained.
At Altamira three bisons at the centre of the painted ceiling were sampled and produced a mean average dating of 14,000 BP* plus or minus 400 years.
This is consistent with the previous dating of the paintings to Early Style IV, placing them in the Early Magdalenian era.
At El Castillo two adjacent bisons were dated to 13,060 BP plus or minus 200, and 12,910 BP plus or minus 180.
At the French Pyreneean cave of Niaux a bison painting in the Salon Noir was found to be 12,890 BP plus or minus 160 years old.
The findings mean that, contrary to previous opinion, people of the same cultural background may have been responsible for the paintings at El Castillo and Niaux.
In general, however, the authors of the article point out that this type of method may not be applicable to other caves as many paintings of this type contain little if any datable pigment.
Stylistic methods of dating will still be needed in the  foreseeable future.
The new method may prove useful in resolving a number of rather incongruous features which have emerged in relation to the paleolithic cave paintings discovered in September 1991 in a cave thirty-seven metres below sea level between Marseilles and Cassis (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, January 1992, p.14).
In addition to the horses, stag, bison, seals and marine birds scratched and painted into the cave's surface, the image of a penguin has been detected.
Other odd features include the representation of hands one with the fingers cut off, the other painted red and the fact that the lower edge of the painted horses coincides very neatly with the water level.
Replying to these  criticisms (which have raised the possibility of an elaborate forgery) in the newspaper El Pais, the Spanish pre-historian Antonio Beltran noted that although he had not previously been aware of depictions of penguins, rare animals such as snow hares and seals were found in cave paintings.
Commentary
Madrid
I loathe ‘Guernica’…
I detest William S. Rubin
The permanent collections of the Reina Sofía opened officially on 10 September with Picasso's masterpiece as its holy of holies after its much contested transfer from the Prado in July.
Now the famous Spanish abstractionist, Antonio Saura, intones a litany of revulsion
MADRID.
I detest the dawn in which ‘Guernica’ publicly relinquished its place of ignominy, rising again like the Phoenix and transforming its ashen presence into a concrete threat to the future.
I hate ‘Guernica’ 's penultimate journey postponing its last, triumphant voyage into nothingness.
I detest the armoured, air-conditioned truck that deprived me of my final opportunity to desecrate the holy relic that is ‘Guernica’.
I loathe the metal crate in which ‘Guernica’ travelled along ‘the most controversial kilometre in the history of contemporary art’, to settle in its new mansion, where it will serve as a pernicious example to future generations.
I despise the sinister bacchanalia that marked ‘Guernica’ 's last night in the annexe to the Prado, the orgy of explosions, the slow cavalcade, the deployment of the military to escort ‘Guernica’'s coffin from its mausoleum of the Prado annexe, the Casón del Buen Retiro, to the fish tank of the Reina Sofía [MNCARS].
I detest the fact that ‘Guernica’ was not taken from its stretcher and rolled up so destroying at last the inferior, flimsy substance with which it was painted.
I loathe the metal anti-bazooka sheeting fixed to the museum walls and the twelve-millimetre-thick glass panel which, while protecting ‘Guernica’, will only allow visitors to view the painting from a distance of three and a half metres.
I detest the Sevillian architect Roberto Luna whose armour-plated chamber shields the obscene dance that is ‘Guernica’.
I loathe the ‘Guernica’ window display at El Corte Ingles department store.
I despise the removal of ‘Guernica’ since it demotes it from a work inspiring extreme reverence to just another large painting.
I loathe the transfer of ‘Guernica’ because it means that never again will other works by Picasso be acquired, bankrupting the State in the process and providing an example of how not to paint.
I detest the room on the second floor of the Centro de Arte Reina Sofía next to the permanent collection, appropriately called El Grano (the pimple), designed to protect ‘Guernica’ from the ravening hordes.
I detest ‘Guernica’ being taken to that bus station known as the Reina Sofía.
I detest the fact that so many famous paintings have been moved in the past, against the wishes of their creators; and that the transfer of ‘Guernica’ has been justified on the grounds that it belongs to the State.
I despise the theological problem posed by the removal of ‘Guernica’, the sanctification of ‘Guernica’, the violent controversy surrounding ‘Guernica’, the Last Supper status accorded to ‘Guernica’.
I hate to see ‘Guernica’ picked up and cast aside like an old sock.
I detest the ‘why?’ writ large by the critic and historian Francisco Calvo Serraller, defender of scruffy artists, who proposes that the benediction of ‘Guernica’by the Opus Dei be delayed, thereby showing his rejection of those who take advantage of culture rather than advancing its cause.
I detest the architect Francisco Rodríguez Partearroyo who became famous for using a pick-axe to create two recesses in the Casón del Buen Retiro to make room for the ‘Guernica’ carnival to burst into life.
I loathe the fancy designer lifts at the Centro Reina Sofia which, when dismantled, enabled the pestilential ‘Guernica’ to enter the museum.
I despise the stupidity of those painters who defended the removal of ‘Guernica’ to its new air-conditioned penthouse because, in setting such a precedent, they are passing up the opportunity of bequeathing their own works to the Prado.
I detest the Minister of Culture, Jordi Solé Tura, for compelling members of the Board of Trustees of the Prado to vote by raising their hands, like the woman on the right hand side in the painting, rather than by secret ballot, in order to secure expert and moral support for the flight of ‘Guernica’ 's bird of ill omen.
I loathe Solé Tura, the man responsible for forcing such a decision, who lost not a moment's sleep over the nightmare of the final decision on ‘Guernica’.
I loathe the Board of Trustees of the Prado for showing their grief at the departure of ‘Guernica’ with its revolting stench of disaster.
I loathe the plots hatched by the Spanish government to slip ‘Guernica’ surreptitiously into Spain with the promise that it would be put on show at the whorehouse they call the Prado and then moved it to that pigsty, the Reina Sofia.
I detest José Mario Armero, the leading ‘Guernica’ campaigner, who admits that the installation in the Casón ‘was seen as a trick, as they had originally meant to use one of the rooms in the main building’.
I detest William S. Rubin, former head of Paintings and Sculpture in the Museum of Modern Art in New York, who spotted the deception too late, and then unintentionally justified the removal of ‘Guernica’ by stating that ‘the Reina Sofia will find it hard to acquire a collection of twentieth-century masterpieces to match ‘Guernica’’, and that its removal reflected a wish to ‘attract crowds to a museum which would otherwise have only a handful of visitors’.
I detest the noisy unanimity of Picasso's heirs, in particular that of Bernard and Paloma Picasso: the former thinks that ‘the Reina Sofia is a wonderful place for ‘Guernica''s last journey, while the latter believes that Guernica''s last journey should have been to the Prado’.
I detest the American critic Dore Ashton who rightly declared that Guernica' is not contemporary art but history’.
I detest the painters: Antonio Lopez, who sincerely believes that ‘all a painter can demand is that his work be exhibited with dignity’; Luis Gordillo, who has condemned the blandishing to tourism of the previous presentation of ‘Guernica’; Eduardo Arroyo, who confuses the vulgarity of Madrid's status as cultural capital with the praiseworthiness of a perverse act; José María Sicilia who has mistaken ‘Guernica’ for a prostitute, maintaining that ‘if one accepts a gift one must fulfil the conditions it implies’; and lastly, Antoni Tàpies, father of so many aberrations, for whom the transferral of ‘Guernica’is as if , ‘finally, contemporary art had a father-figure’.
I detest Javier Tusell, protector of ‘Guernica’ who, after condemning the Ministry of Culture's high-handed attitude, proposes a referendum to decide the fate of the painting.
I detest the economist Ramón Tamames, who condemns the broken engagement between the two multinationals MOMA and MNCARS; who criticises the Reina Sofía's ‘weird ultra-avantgarde artistic creations’ and yearns for the musty progressive reproductions of ‘Guernica’.
I detest the writer Manuel Vázquez Montalbán who, unconsciously referring to the horse in ‘Guernica’, asserts that Spanish museums, devoid of works of art, ‘prefer the biggest donkey even if it is lame’; and the sculptor Jorge Oteiza, champion of the Casón, who fears that his works will shrivel on contact with the bogeyman that is ‘Guernica’.
I despise the relocation of ‘Guernica’ because its arrival marks the long-awaited inauguration of the Museo de Arte Moderno after three aborted attempts.
I detest María Corral, director of the Reina Sofía, who, by allowing the removal of ‘Guernica’ to her museum where it will be ‘the pivot of the permanent collection’, and by accepting the funerary gifts of Dalí and Miró, will ultimately succeed in putting together a collection of degenerate art without the State having forked out a cent for acquisitions.
I loathe Picasso's confusion of republic and monarchy when he bequeathed ‘Guernica’, that delayed time-bomb, to the Spanish people.
I detest Picasso who, instead of handing ‘Guernica’ over to the town whose name it usurped, left his battered and decrepit work to the Reina Sofía hospital after its reanimation in the Prado clinic.
I despise Picasso's negligence in not leaving documentary proof of his wish that ‘Guernica’ be housed in the Prado, so precluding that its lasting and ridiculous presence there might make visitors fall about laughing.
I loathe the documents that prove that ‘Guernica’ was not a generous gift to the nation but was in fact sold by Picasso for FFr150,000, the largest sum the painter had so far earned, thus permitting the work to be shown at the Centro Reina Sofía.
I shudder to imagine what Picasso would have thought had he known that ‘Guernica’ would arrive in Spain under a monarchy, protected by the Guardia Civil, with Calvo Sotelo as prime minister and a priest as director of the Prado, his painting encased in a glass urn guarded day and night by machine-guns, and, years later, at the whim of an anti-Marxist Socialist government, in a bullet-proof fish tank.
I detest Picasso's farsightedness when he declared: ‘On my death, it will be like a shipwreck, and when a large ship is wrecked a lot of people go down with it’.
I detest Santiago de Torres, Under-Secretary at the Ministry of Culture, ‘who personally blocked all possible sources of information’, so as not to present any obstacle to the successful removal of that shoal of piranha fish that is ‘Guernica’.
I detest Eduardo Vallejo, mayor of Guernica, when he says that Picasso's words ‘have often been interpreted to serve special interests’, and glosses over the special interests served by the transfer of ‘Guernica’.
I detest Iñaki Anasagasti, parliamentary spokesman for the Basque Nationalist Party, who requests that the title of Picasso's painting be changed from ‘Guernica’ to ‘Madrid’, as if the name chosen by poor old Pablo after the work was completed were the whole basis of its conception.
I detest Lourdes Ortiz who weeps for the incorruptible corpse of ‘Guernica’ seen one quiet Sunday in its mausoleum, with the endless queues of happy people when our democracy was still in the making, with the Casón as its banner.
I detest the painting's extra-pictorial implications and its ‘cry of anguish at the bombings’.
I detest Alvaro Delgado-Gal, who advocates the return of the painting to France, believing that ‘the glorious dead should be left in the graveyard where they chose to rest’; Juan Pedro Aparicio, who suggests carrying ‘Guernica’ in procession all around Spain in a high speed train; the old anarchist Carlos Semprón Maura, who protests at the Reina Sofía's injection of morphine into ‘Guernica’to prolong its deep coma; Joan Barril, for whom the dilemma posed by moving ‘Guernica’from the shrine of the Buen Retiro to an apartment with freezer in the ‘Sofidou’could be resolved simply by sending it to Sarajevo, Bangkok or Lima, places where its political message would be more relevant.
I detest Federico Jiménez Losantos, who confuses ‘Guernica’ with Pelé the footballer, and talks about it being ‘signed up’to turn the Reina Sofía into a swollen-headed museum presided over by a sinister fetish.
I loathe ‘Guernica’ because, in the words of another writer, it can be seen as ‘the cherry on the great cake of contemporary art’.
I detest the architect Luís Fernández-Galiano, according to whom the mirror that is ‘Guernica’, like a chameleon changing colour, will acquire the golden hue of its true commercial destiny in its seventh incarnation in the armour-plated chamber ‘designed to be the flagship of socialist cultural policy’.
I detest Fernando Sánchez Alexanco, the Tenerife discotheque owner, who spent over 8,000 hours producing a replica of ‘Guernica’ composed of 40,000 coins bearing the likeness of Francisco Franco, well-known connoisseur of the bitter wine of ‘Guernica’.
I despise that dauber Antonio Saura, admirer of Picasso and supporter of the transfer of ‘Guernica’ to the Centro de Arte Reina Sofía.
I loathe the transference of ‘Guernica’, relic of a world betrayed, because even after the shipwreck it will perhaps continue to throw its passion and fire in the faces of the killers of culture, a constant reminder of the insults hurled in its name.
I hate to see ‘Guernica’ in a museum whose sights are set on the future, having left once and for all its mausoleum in the Valley of the Fallen, to prove to the world what it is: an extraordinary composition suffocated by an excess of sentimentality, distorted by the deranged howls of the media.
The only answer to this is silence and the conscious exercise of our capacity to forget, in order fully to appreciate its artistic importance.
I detest this litany, intended as a requiem for a mouldering ‘Guernica’, but which many will take to be a glowing celebration of its resurrection into heaven.
For the record
Exclusive
Andropov himself let me leave the Soviet Union
For the first time, the late collector George Costakis's dramatic tale, in his own words, as some of his most prized works go on show in the New York Guggenheim exhibition ‘The Great Utopia: the Russian and Soviet Avant-garde 1915–32’
ATHENS.
I bought some pictures by avant-garde artists, took them home and hung them up next to some Dutch paintings.
It felt as if I had been living in a room with closed curtains, and all of a sudden its windows had been thrown open and the sun had come bursting in.
From then on I decided to leave all that I had and collect nothing but Avant-garde.
That was in 1946.
It proved not to be easy.
First, in those days their things were all banned, and whoever had any was not especially keen to draw attention to the fact.
They were hidden away, and people tried not to let anyone see them.
Nor was anyone eager to buy them then.
I decided that I needed to get some support, to find someone who could, let us say, take charge of me and give me advice.
That was how I got to know Nikolai Nikolaevich Khardzhiev.
He was, at the time, a well known art expert who knew Malevich well, had done some work on Mandelstam's poetry, and was regarded as an expert on Mayakovsky.
In a word, he was right in touch with the Avant-garde.
We met up, and I told him that I intended to collect pictures by the Avant-garde artists.
‘You know, George Dionisovich’, said Nikolai Nikolaevich, ‘this is all very interesting, but it's a lost cause.
No-one has any need for the Avant-garde, it's completely finished.
That kind of art has been forbidden since 1932.
It's no longer exhibited at museums, interest in it has lapsed; it's been ‘buried’.’
I listened closely to what he had to say, but I then pressed him to name the best-known avant-garde artists for me.
He mentioned Chagall, Kandinsky, Malévich, Larionov, Goncharova, Olga Rozanova…
And that, you might have thought, was all there was.
He said Popova and Klyun were unoriginal, adding that there was nothing interesting about them, while Rodchenko was no more than a photographer.
‘Generally’, said Khardzhiev, in final judgement, ‘there's no need to spend your time on these artists.
All it will do is clutter up your collection with rubbish’.
I, however, saw it my own way.
I had already seen pictures by Popova, Klyun, and other artists who were then totally unknown.
What struck me was how they all seemed to look so very much alike and yet, at the same time, so totally different.
In a word, I began collecting the artists of the Avant-garde.
Many of my friends and even relatives felt sorry for me.
They thought I had made a huge mistake in getting rid of the old collection in preference for collecting what they unanimously regarded as ‘junk’.
In the circles of Moscow's collectors I acquired the not entirely flattering nick-name of the Odd-Bod Greek who bought the rubbish that no-one needed.
The search for these things was very hard and complicated.
At first I managed to get hold of two pictures by Popova, then the thread broke off and, completely by chance, I stumbled back on the right trail.
Popova had died in 1924.
I became acquainted with her brother Pavel Sergeevich Popov, a university professor.
He was a very tall and good-looking gentleman.
He lived in a big Moscow flat down one of the side-streets in the Arbat.
I duly went along to see him and, in the first room in which he received me, I noticed one or two small Popovas up on the wall.
I told him that I had heard a great deal about his sister.
He said, ‘Yes, as you know, she died young, but I've got quite a number of her works’.
I then told him that I was collecting her works and would like to buy them from him.
His answer was, ‘Why not?
I've got a lot of them and, if you want, I'll show them to you now’.
He led me through to the next room, and up against the wall there lay a stack of some ten to fifteen canvases.
They were all first rate, so I bought them from him.
He found it very hard selling me the smaller works.
When I told him that I would also like to buy a smaller Popova, he objected, ‘No, I'm keeping this because it's small and it can always be hung anywhere, but these big ones…where can they go?’
This Pavel Sergeevich had an adoptive son living in Zvenigorod.
Once he said to me, ‘You should go and see my adoptive son in Zvenigorod.
I think he should also have some of my sister's pictures’.
So off I went…and arrived at a country house with a large garden.
It was right in the blossom season, and all the soft pink apple and cherry trees were, like everything else, out in bloom.
I was very well received.
Anyway, the first thing I noticed as I was going upstairs was one of Popova's pictures with a bath-tub hanging over it…
Then we went for a walk out in the garden.
And I saw that the shed window had been boarded over with some plywood, and the board had a number beneath which was the signature ‘Popova’.
I went inside and saw a beautiful work which the artist had done on the other side.
I immediately suggested buying it from him, to which my host answered by saying, ‘No, I can't do that.
If it rains everything in the shed will get wet.
You first bring me some plywood, and then I'll give you the picture’.
So I had to go to Moscow and look for some plywood.
I could not find a piece big enough, so I bought two smaller pieces and took them back to the dacha.
The owner then swapped me the beautiful picture with which he had boarded his shed window.
The other pictures he sold to me, but very cheaply.
So I acquired most of Popova's works from her family.
By that stage I was already working at the Canadian Embassy, and I let the staff buy some of the pictures from me, but again it was very cheaply.
Hauser bought one of them, and so did Collins, Moore, and someone else as well.
Altogether, I did them a good turn.
Collins, for example, bought a very fine work off me for 600 roubles.
That was very cheap.
I made nothing out of it.
I sold them for the same price that I had paid myself.
When they bought them from me, I said, ‘For the next ten to fifteen years don't sell these, because by then they will be worth a great deal’.
For the most part, they heeded my advice.
But Hauser…either he needed the money, or alternatively…anyway, he sold his pictures very cheaply to a ‘Modern Art’ museum.
And that is where they are hanging now, and they are worth a great deal.
The actual process of collecting was very complicated.
I have already said that anathema had been pronounced over the Avant-garde from the beginning of the Thirties, and that made it very difficult for the avant-garde artists themselves, as well as for their families.
I remember going to see some works by the artist Klement Redko.
I was met by his widow.
I asked if she could show me his works from the Twenties.
And she replied by saying, ‘Well, they're up in the loft.
I can get them down for you.
But why are you so interested in his early works?
My husband thought they were a failure and felt embarrassed about them, and for a long time he wouldn't let me see them.
He thought his best period was the pictures he did in the Thirties, when he worked in France’.
She went up to the loft and brought them back.
Many of them were frayed and not in very good condition.
Altogether, she probably showed me about twelve to fifteen works, and she asked, ‘George Dionisovich, tell me quite honestly, do you really like them?’
I replied, ‘Very much’.
‘Well’, she said, ‘if you want, you can have all of them’.
I said, ‘Have them?
No, I'll buy them from you’.
‘Well, you can pay me just a bit’.
In brief, I bought the pictures from her, and she told me, ‘There's one more thing, if you'd like to have a look at it; it's called ‘Revolt’’.
And from somewhere beneath a cupboard she produced an enormous canvas draped in a sheet and showed it to me.
I gasped.
It was an absolutely amazing thing shaped like a rhombus, and in the centre was the entire government, including Trotsky, Lenin, and Bukharin.
All around them were battles, with machine-gunners and troops.
The background showed buildings rising up in a fiery glow (see illustration).
The overall effect from the picture was that if you got any closer you would be engulfed in fire; I was staggered when I saw it.
I bought that one, too.
Now it is in the Tretyakov Gallery.
1946: Stalin cracks down on ‘poisonous’ and ‘apolitical’art the old Avant-garde
It was, indeed, ‘not a simple time’.
Collecting got harder and harder; people grew frightened.
For example, I would get hold of an address, go there and negotiate.
Maybe there was a Chagall or a Kandinsky being sold somewhere, and a sale would be agreed.
Next day there would be a telephone call, ‘Is that George Dionisovich?’
‘Yes’.
‘You know, we've changed our mind about the sale’.
And everyone expected things would get nasty once Zhdanov's famous article* appeared.
It left us quaking in our own home.
We had first hung the avant-garde pictures in our main room, but as the man in charge of our building, and a local policeman, sometimes called on us, my wife and I decided to hang the pictures in the bedroom and put the icons in the living room.
So whenever anyone came in they would see the icons.
They were not so forbidden, and we were too frightened to leave our pictures out on view…
Such were the times, and what was more I was a man with a foreign passport and working in an embassy, and that made it much harder for me to collect.
Opposite my house on Bronnaya Street there used to live the remarkable actress Alice Koonen, the wife of Taírov, and she and I were very fond of each other and got on very well together.
She also had quite a few things two small Picassos and a picture by Robert Delaunay called ‘The window’ that Taírov was given when they were in Paris on tour together, and a very fine Yakulov.
I often used to go to Koonen's.
She had the whole of the second floor completely to herself.
She was an utterly charming lady who was by then well into old age.
I always used to kiss her hand with pleasure.
We drank tea, and very often I would arrive some five to ten minutes earlier than the appointed time, so the maid would tell me that I was to wait as madame was still resting.
I bought the two little Picassos from her, and that Delaunay, and the Yakulov.
Overall, the period when I was collecting had its successes, but there were also some failures.
Once I was given the address of Mikhoels' wife, Anastasiya Pavlovna Pototskaya, and I was told that she had a lot of Chagalls, and that she may possibly want to sell them.
That was when she used to live in the TASS building on Tverskoy Boulevard.
Mikhoels, as you know, had been killed, and she was left with her two daughters.
I went to Anastasiya Pavlovna's, introduced myself, and she said, ‘I've got some works by Chagall, some studies that he did for the Jewish Theatre and several other works as well’.
I noticed there were two late Chagalls up on the wall, evidently from his Parisian or American period…along with some fairly large gouaches.
One was ‘Fire in a Russian village during the war’, and the other one done in shades of green was ‘Madonna driven from Europe’.
Well, we had a talk and she invited me to come back in a few days' time.
However, on the first day that I got to know her I had a feeling that there was something peculiar about the woman.
The next time I went to see her she offered me another two Chagalls one was the goat and bride from his Parisian period, and the other I can no longer recall, but it was another gouache.
So I bought them.
She promised to find something else to sell me, and said that she would give me a ring.
I waited and waited, but she still did not ring me.
Then I telephoned myself and went back to see her again.
And she said, ‘You know, I'll have to look in this trunk here, but I haven't got the time, I must be off now…’.
That went on for a long time.
Finally I said, ‘Let me sort through the trunk for you!’.
To my surprise, she agreed.
‘Well’, I thought, ‘thank God for that!’
Anyway, so I began sorting through the trunk.
There were some files, some books, some sheets of paper, stacks of dust and…nothing.
Anyway, so off I went with nothing.
And the two things that I had noticed on the first day were still left hanging there…
And, as I was leaving, just on the off-chance I asked, ‘Well, fine, Anastasiya Pavlovna, but how about these things?’.
And she said, ‘George Dionisovich, at the moment I don't want to sell them, but if I change my mind I'll let you know’.
Incidentally, they were things that Mikhoels had brought back from Chagall as a gift for the Tretyakov Gallery.
Probably half a year went by.
Suddenly her daughter telephoned me and said, ‘My mother asked if you could come as she has agreed to let you have those two things you wanted.
She's getting a tombstone for my father, so she needs the money’.
I took the money and set off.
In my own mind I had valued the things at 4000 roubles each.
I arrived.
The Chagalls were still hanging there.
She offered me tea.
So we drank tea for a while.
Then she took the pictures down.
‘Here you are,’ she said, ‘George Dionisovich, if it isn't too much to ask, I'd like three to four thousand for both of them’.
Well, I said nothing, covered them up and tucked them to my side.
She must have been mad!!!
I took out the 8000 and put them down on the table.
When she saw the money she was dumbfounded, and said, ‘What are you doing?
That's an awful lot!!!’
And I replied, ‘Anastasiya Pavlovna, you have valued these things wrongly, and I do not want to nor can I take advantage of your ignorance’.
She was, of course, very pleased.
I have written before that a collector ought not to haggle.
For a collector, it is better to pay too much rather than too little.
The person who has sold to you must remain satisfied, because a month will pass, then two, then three, and he will have neither the money nor the thing, but you will still have the thing.
The skulduggery begins
The authorities regarded my collection as some kind of joke; no-one paid any serious attention to it.
But then it started being written about in magazines and newspapers in America and England, and the ‘Voice of America’ and West German radio did some broadcasts on it.
Finally, foreign museums started contacting the Ministry of Culture and asking if they could buy, let us say, a picture by Malévich or Popova, and then it became clear that I had the pictures.
Gradually, all was revealed that is, people, including the authorities and the KGB, realized that the Odd-Bod Greek who had spent all those years collecting the ‘rubbish’ that no-one needed had in fact made a collection that was now worth a great deal of money, and it reached a point when it became awkward living in Moscow with the collection.
We were constantly frightened of being burgled our doors would have opened at the touch of a finger.
In the end I was burgled, and they got away with a large number of the works that I kept stored.
It took me about two weeks to catch up with the loss.
I went to the store to check up on some things, and saw that eight Kandinskys which I had bought from the widow of Kandinsky's secretary were missing.
A big stack of drawings and gouaches by Klyun were missing…
Overall, there was a lot that was missing.
I informed the police and their answer was, ‘There's nothing we can do’.
A year later another theft took place, and, once again, it was from the store.
The funny thing was that on the day of the theft a man who often used to come and see us, and was generally regarded as a friend of the house, had been and invited the entire family Zina, myself, and both our son and daughter somewhere miles out of town to go and have a barbecue.
I remember that I had a bad feeling about it.
I suddenly thought that might be a day when something else would happen.
We got back home and everything was still hanging on the walls, but there was more missing from the store.
I was dreadfully upset.
Then another two or three days went by, and my brother's wife telephoned from Bakovka (where there was a dacha containing a collection of pictures by some young artists, along with a great many works and drawings by Anatoly Zverev): ‘Fire!!!
Come as soon as you can!’
By the time I got there half the house had already burnt down.
The firemen were there, but they had no water and nothing to put the fire out with.
I went upstairs and, in the place where Zverev's works had been kept, everything was drenched in water, and a lot of things were missing.
There had been some hefty wooden icons hanging up on the walls, and, if they had burnt, then there would have been something left of them lying around on the floor.
In other words, someone had set fire to the dacha, and the things had been stolen from it before the fire had started.
When I opened an upstairs window and looked into the ravine (this was in winter, so it was easy to see the tracks), Zverev's works, and those of some other artists, were lying out in the snow.
The thieves had obviously been back and forth over the ravine ferrying everything back to their car.
That all took place in 1977.
It was quite dreadful.
I decided to apply for some help, so my daughter Lilya (Aliki) and I wrote a letter to Andropov and Brezhnev, and I explained in these letters that what had been stolen was a large number of works from the collection that I had intended to give to the Tretyakov Gallery.
The magazine America had already written about this; it had published an interview in which I announced that I wanted to hand my collection over to the Tretyakov Gallery as a gift, and saying that I intended to make Lilya curator of the collection.
Personally, what I wanted was to spend the rest of my life in Moscow together with my collection of icons.
I was asking for help.
I had a fair idea as to who had done it, and I passed on my suspicions about so-and-so and so-and-so, and asked for something to be done about it.
Once I had written these letters, I then applied to the Department that was officially responsible for serving the Diplomatic Corps.
I told them that I would like an audience with Andropov because I had something very important to discuss with him.
Two of their representatives came along, obviously from the KGB.
‘You know, Comrade Andropov is getting ready for the Party Congress, so he cannot receive you at the moment, but you can make a detailed written statement of everything, saying who it is you suspect, and so on and so forth’.
So we did that, and they said, ‘We can see it's handed over, if you want’.
‘No’, I replied, ‘I'm going to send this to both Andropov and Brezhnev directly via the Central Committee’.
Of course, neither Brezhnev nor Andropov ever received the letters.
Then I was summoned for a talk: ‘Don't worry, we'll get this man you suspect in for interrogation and the truth will triumph’.
And time went by, and suddenly I found out that the man I suspected (who was married to an Englishwoman) was planning to leave for England.
I said, ‘How can that be?’.
‘That's how it is’, they answered, ‘he's due to go on such-and-such a date’.
I duly notified ‘the appropriate authorities’, and they replied that they could not prevent him from going because he was an English subject.
I said, ‘What rubbish!
He's got a Soviet passport; it's just his wife's who's English’.
Just the same, off he went, as calm as could be, and so the theft remained undetected.
I realized that I had been tricked, so I then turned to some American and French correspondents.
I went and told them, ‘One way or another, what's happened to me is that I've been burgled…’.
And then the ‘voices’[Western radio stations]all started doing broadcasts on it.
It was even reported that virtually the entire collection had been stolen…
After that they began openly persecuting and provoking me.
At first, I was again summoned and warned, ‘If you want to make a scandal out of it, it'll get worse’.
They said, ‘We will publish material on how you've used the pictures for speculation, etc.’.
I answered back, ‘You, please, do not try to intimidate me.
I warn you that I'm no coward.
If you come up with that sort of material, then the American and English newspapers will publish an interview that I'll give them’.
Then they started intimidating me.
I would be sitting at home, and suddenly the telephone would go: ‘You mother-fucking crook, you've sent lots of pictures abroad.
You're no collector, you're a speculator!
It's all going to be taken away from you, we're going to appeal to the Ministry of Culture and the Foreign Ministry’, and so on.
Another two or three days went by, and again the telephone rang.
It was the artist Vasil'ev, ‘George Dionisovich, just what has happened to you?’
His tone made me think he was phoning because he sympathized and wanted to help.
I replied, ‘There it is, you know, one way or another I've had this and that stolen from me’.
Suddenly he said, ‘George Dionisovich, now why are you telling lies?
Nobody's stolen anything from you, you stole it all yourself and sent it abroad, and now you're just looking for someone to blame.
You really must bring this outrage to an end.
We're going to appeal to the Ministry of Culture and whoever else we have to ask them to deprive you of this collection.
A man like you ought not to be in possession of any Russian works of art’.
Then a car would appear near the house, sometimes even two, with those sort of antennae they have for bugging.
The telephone kept on clicking as they took recordings.
But the main thing, after all, was that I had sent nothing abroad, although some diplomat friends had offered to do this for me.
‘You never know what will happen’, they said, ‘so let us help you get something abroad’.
I kept refusing.
In brief, we got thoroughly exhausted.
I stopped sleeping at night.
It was so frightful that my daughter Lilya and I stopped travelling by car together.
We even stopped going across Vernadsky Avenue, just where the bridge was, because we were afraid that a lorry might come and shove us into the river.
We used to make a detour going down Lenin Avenue.
Lilya would go in her car, and I would go in mine.
And that kind of thing went on for a long time, until I could stand it no longer and decided to leave the USSR.
But even that proved to be hard.
I had offered to leave most of my collection, comprising the best part, in the USSR, and had simultaneously asked if they would let me take part of it with me.
What else did I have to support my family on in the West?
I arrived at the Ministry of Culture and went to see Khalturin.
He said, ‘George Dionisovich, something's happening, someone somewhere is putting the brakes on this and, evidently, nothing is going to come of it.
But maybe you'll just sell us the collection and take some money for it?
The state can pay you 500,000.’
So I answered back, ‘And what am I meant to do with these 500,000?
Firstly, I can't stay here any more, nor do I want to stay’.
In the meantime the scandal had received such widespread publicity that every collector in Moscow and Leningrad had got to know of it, and they were all afraid of having anything to do with me.
They had stopped coming to see me and never telephoned any more.
I was left on my own, with no help from anyone.
So that was when my daughter Lilya and wife Zina suggested that I should turn to Vladimir Semenovich Semenov.
Semenov had at one time been the Deputy Foreign Minister.
I knew him well as he was a collector.
He had a very good collection from the period before the Avant-garde, including a lot of works by Falk, Lentulov, and Pavel Kuznetsov.
They were fine and select items.
I often used to go and see him, and he used to come and see us.
He was a very nice man who was always very kind to me.
And Lilya said, ‘Why don't you ask Semenov if he can help you?’
I said, ‘Lilya, I cannot ask Semenov, because the KGB has me completely surrounded, and no-one can fight against them.
And Semenov won't be able to do anything, either’.
But Lilya insisted.
So I went to see Semenov.
He lived in a government building on the Moscow River.
I arrived there.
It was a big flat with eight or nine rooms, all of them covered in pictures.
And I told Vladimir Semenovich just what had happened.
He spent a long time listening, and then said, ‘You know, George Dionisovich, you've fallen into to the hands of the Mafia.
As a state politician I feel awkward talking about it, but our KGB has its own ‘Mafia Department’ for the nasty work, and it does just as it pleases.
They work ‘in the open’, that is without cover.
If anything happens, then they're not around…
Well, those are the ones who are left to do as they please.
It's good that you came to me.
Let's have some vodka and food, and we'll talk things over.’
We each filled ourselves a small glass of vodka, and he said, ‘George Dionisovich, I will try to help you for your kind heart and for your kind deeds’.
I wondered why he had said that, and I understood.
A year beforehand, Chudnovsky, who was a collector from Leningrad, and a very well-known one, had been to see me and asked if I could help him.
He had wanted to know if I knew a good cardiologist, because he had a granddaughter with a rare heart condition who needed an operation, or else in a year's time she would have died.
I told him, ‘Well sure, there's my friend Burakovsky.
He's the Head of the Cardiological Institute.
I'll give him a ring tomorrow.’
I telephoned Burakovsky, who ordered the child to be brought in, examined her, but said there was nothing they could do because, unfortunately, they did not have the right kind of specialists.
There were specialists in the USA, where the operation cost $4000, and two good specialists in London, where the operation would cost just as much in pounds.
Altogether, it would have come to about $7000.
The next day Chudnovsky came to me in tears, ‘You know, nothing can be done’.
I immediately thought it over and said, ‘Go and ask Semenov to issue a visa to your son's wife, so that she can take the girl to London’.
‘But where's the money?’ he asked, ‘it's so expensive, you know!’
I said, ‘I'll give you the money.
I've got some dollars in Canada.
It'll be hard getting the visa, but the Russians are very sentimental people, and when it comes to saving a child's life, they might agree to it’.
The next day I went to the State Bank, and there I was told, ‘That's fine, only we can't give the money to the person here.
You send us a cheque from Canada, and we'll issue a cheque to our bank in London, and the payee will then receive the money there.’
So that is what I did.
Afterwards Chudnovsky went to Semenov and, apparently, in the course of their conversation he notified him that he had received some money from Costakis.
So, you see, that is why Semenov had said ‘I will try to help you for your kind deeds’.
Semenov promised me that he would have a word at the highest level, with Yury Vladimirovich Andropov.
‘Yury Vladimirovich is my closest friend, he and I are like two brothers, we used to play football together when we were little.
And whenever I come to Moscow, like now, we always meet up why, I saw him only recently.
I'll tell him who you are, and what you've done for Russian art, etc.
At the moment I can't promise you anything, but I must tell you that Yury Vladimirovich Andropov is a remarkable man.
He is a very honest man.
He works at the KGB like Jesus he clears out all the filth and drives people away, because they have a lot of crooks there’.
He kept his word.
In defence of my friend Costakis
MOSCOW.
George Dionisovich Costakis (Costaki) was a man who was exceptional in many regards.
Greek by nationality, he was born and spent most of his life in Russia, returning to the land of his ancestors only at the very end of his days, where he shortly thereafter died.
George Dionisovich had no special education in art.
He was an entirely self-taught man whose taste and inquiring mind were purely natural endowments, and whose ineradicable attraction to excellence was an ingrained quality of spirit.
A fascination for art led Costakis to start a collection of paintings, graphics and icons.
He became a collector with a truly worldwide reputation, the owner of a unique gallery of works by artists of the Russian Avant-garde.
In Moscow at least, in official circles the activity in which he saw his life's meaning was never given the recognition that it deserved.
In the pre-war years, as well, indeed, as in the following decades, he did nothing to draw attention to what he was doing.
That was a time when a foreign passport offered little defence against arbitrary injustice from the authorities, and the very mention of the Avant-garde artists' names incurred the risk of repression.
But Costakis took that risk.
He was the first person in the Soviet Union who realized what the avant-garde meant in terms of world art, as he set about searching for and collecting drawings, pictures, canvases…
He saved much that had been thrown away as rubbish, and would otherwise have perished without trace.
Unlike his predecessors who had patronised the arts before the Revolution, Costakis had no fortune of millions at his disposal.
He worked throughout his entire life, having a large family and just the same burdens on his shoulders as the rest of us.
His limited means, however, were made up for by the passion of his yearning to collect.
And the time came when all round the world people started talking about the Costakis collection with reverence.
Anyone who came to Moscow, be it a major figure of state or a simple artist, made a point of visiting the flat on Vernadsky Avenue in order to get acquainted with its rare collection.
The only ones who turned their backs on Costakis were the ‘proprietors’ of Moscow's museums and their bureaucratic sponsors from the Ministry of Culture, while he, for his part, nevertheless persisted in offering his collection as a gift to the state.
Finally the hot-blooded Greek's strong character was broken by the obstinacy and indifference of the stalwart servants of state, and, much as he loathed to, he quit his beloved Russia.
He gave most of his collection, which Western experts valued at fabulous sums, as a gift to the Tretyakov Gallery.
Together with his large family he moved to Athens.
It took no more than a year before exhibitions of the works that he had brought out of Russia (these being just part of what he had owned before leaving his best works to the Russian people) began their triumphant tour of the prestigious galleries of Europe, America and Canada.
Evidently succumbing to the charms of the luxurious catalogues received from abroad, our museum bosses gradually then started exhibiting Costakis's gifts.
Only they were, for some reason, too ‘shy’ to put the former owner's name on the labels!
But there is no masking the truth and, when Costakis learnt of this ‘bashfulness’, it came as a painful blow to his self-esteem as a collector.
In 1990, after several years of enforced separation (I was forbidden from leaving Russia for a quarter of a century), I went to see George Dionisovich in Athens.
He was by then mortally ill, but his strength of will and love of life were indomitable.
We spent a few days talking about our friends in Moscow and Leningrad.
He even managed to do some work in front of the Greek television cameras, so enabling me to make the Central Television programme ‘At Home with Costakis in Athens’.
Sadly, it was broadcast on the same day that this remarkable man died…
Three years ago, when the establishment of a museum of modern art in Moscow was being considered, I did all that I could to welcome the idea.
But I thought the main concern would be finding the right building for a museum of this type, and that there would be no need to buy any pictures for it.
By mixing with remarkable artists in a number of Russian towns, I have come to know how willing they are to hand their works over to the museum free of charge, but not into the custody of the Ministry of Culture.
Yet it transpires that none of the money that is so essential for restoring endangered architectural treasures is ever paid to the great figures of modern art.
I have for a long time had on file one respected artist's offer to arrange an exhibition of a hundred of his works, and then to hand them straight over as a gift to the Russian Cultural Foundation.
And now I learn that the Foundation has just had to purchase a number of canvases from this very donor for a far from meagre amount.
As George Dionisovich and I were finally parting, he passed on a suggestion to Dimitri Likhachev and the USSR's then Minister of Culture, Nikolai Gubenko, about concrete assistance for the establishment of the museum.
What it essentially boiled down to was for a suitable building to be found in Moscow, while Costakis would provide the resources and materials necessary for the building's restoration.
The Tretyakov Gallery would release hundreds of the works that he had given from its stores, and then the museum of the Russian Avant-garde would open.
Living artists would keep adding to it by making contributions from their works.
However, the civil servants at the Soviet Ministry, headed by the legendary figure who had charge of the entire country's fine arts, the ‘unsinkable’ Genrikh Popov (as the experts euphemistically dubbed him), along with the Director of the Tretyakov Gallery, Yuri Korolev, did everything they could to ensure that the project was never realized.
I still have the entire documentation of this sorry episode in my archive.
During his life George Costakis had to fight and to demonstrate that white is white, and in no sense black.
His persecution may be accounted a cost of the Bolshevik dictatorship and the laws of totalitarianism.
But how petty and unseemly are the semitransparent hints which keep appearing, like people spitting after a departing train, suggesting that this self-sacrificing collector was unscrupulous.
Costakis cannot answer his slanderers.
The dead are not sullied by the ill that is spoken of them.
I therefore offer readers an extract of my elder friend's memoirs, taken from the book which his daughter Aliki Costakis and I are currently preparing for publication.
Books
Piero della Francesca monographs
Books to celebrate the five hundredth anniversary of the birth of Piero
The definitive survey may have to wait until the year of reassessment is over
These two monographs have been published to coincide with the five hundredth anniversary of the birth of Piero della Francesca.
To celebrate this date an international conference will be held in Urbino, Arezzo and Sansepolcro from 5 to 12 October, along with various exhibitions throughout the year.
Not coincidentally, a research centre dedicated to Piero studies recently opened in his birth place of Sansepolcro.
These books also represent attempts to fill a gap in the art historical book market.
There has been no full-scale monograph on Piero in English since Kenneth Clark's some forty years ago.
However, considering the small amount of solid information known about the painter's commissions, study of his work must now be one of the most saturated areas in Renaissance art history.
The problem in accentuated by the non-expressive nature of Piero's paintings.
His immutable figures and symmetrical designs seem to allow authors to project views onto the work that may not be particularly relevant.
Fortunately, these new monographs both generally avoid the traps of studying Piero.
As the books have appeared simultaneously, it is difficult not to compare them, especially as they frequently reach different conclusions.
Lightbown's book is essentially the work of an antiquarian.
It is written with close focus and in a clear style.
The text is based on a series of sixteen short chapters presenting Piero's career in chronological order.
There is no catalogue or other scholarly apparatus.
The text tends to concentrate on visual descriptions of the paintings along with discussions of iconography and patronage that are both very complete and pleasingly sober in their analysis.
The most original observations in the book result from this detailed scrutiny.
Lightbown's thorough approach leads him to investigate aspects of the artist never before considered, such as costume and ornament.
Lightbown's critical grasp of the bibliography and reading of the documents are superior to Bertelli's.
Consequently, his statements about the patronage of Piero's works are generally more probing and trustworthy.
Thus Lightbown revives a strong argument for the mysterious ‘Flagellation’ in Urbino being a Sforza commission and that one of the portraits represents Francesco Sforza, Count of Pesaro (Bertelli does not even attempt to identify the three mysterious figures in the foreground of the painting).
Lightbown argues on the basis of all the published evidence that Piero's National Gallery ‘Baptism of Christ’ was painted for the Pieve in Sansepolcro (which was the only church in the town where baptisms were performed before 1520) and not the Priory of San Giovanni Battista d'Afra as most, including Bertelli, believe.
Carlo Bertelli's monograph is a translation of a work that appeared in Italian in 1991.
It is immediately noticeable that the illustrations in Bertelli's book are of much higher quality than those in Lightbown's.
Bertelli's text is shorter, but does include a catalogue of the surviving paintings and a chronological table.
The book consists of seven thematic chapters, beginning with a general overview of Piero's career.
This is followed by single chapters on his major commissions, the National Gallery in London's ‘Baptism of Christ’, the Rimini fresco, the True Cross cycle in Arezzo, the Urbino ‘Flagellation’, and the Montefeltro altarpiece in the Brera in Milan.
The final chapter attempts to deal with Piero's writings.
Bertelli is particularly good at citing the available technical information about the paintings.
Yet even when dealing with individual commissions, Bertelli is selective about what he discusses.
The author also generally refutes some of the excessive parallels drawn between contemporary history and Piero's work, dismissing the idea that the angels in the London ‘Baptism’ allude to the meeting of the Council of Florence of 1439.
Yet the book is rather difficult to read and the general reader may become discouraged after picking it up, despite the attraction of the illustrations and lay-out.
The text can be highly discursive and reads like a series of points rather randomly formed into short paragraphs.
This is partly the fault of the translation which is infuriatingly unclear in places.
The notes are generally long and impenetrable.
There can be no doubt that both of these books advance Piero studies.
They summarise and frequently criticise a vast literature and make many original connections and observations.
There is still room, however, for scholarly work on the artist.
There are certainly more archival documents concerning Piero's life and work to be discovered.
Both authors are rather weak on attributions and the role of assistants in Piero's workshop a problem that also needs further investigation.
Whatever the merits of these texts, the various exhibitions and major symposium will create a need for yet another monograph to take into account the new material presented.
The search for the definitive monograph on Piero, if such a book can ever be written, will continue.
André Chastel's library goes to French state
PARIS.
The library of art history books belonging to the famous scholar of the Italian Renaissance, André Chastel, who died in 1990, has been acquired by the French state.
The twelve to fifteen thousand volumes, together with periodicals and his own notes, will be lodged at the Bibliothèque Nationale.
St George's Gallery bookshop: latest news
LONDON.
Following extensive refurbishment, which includes shop floor reorganisation, a new lighting system and distinctive new green shelving, St George's Gallery Books reopened at the beginning of the summer.
The owner, Christer von der Burg, is consolidating his Han-Shan Tang mail order business on the premises, providing the largest stock of publications on Oriental art in Europe, including publications from China, Japan and Korea.
In order to  accommodate this the basement is now given over to office space while the ground floor continues to carry monographs and catalogues of Western art.
This has in effect reduced the amount of space devoted to Western art to 25% of what it was before.
Meanwhile Jo Walton, former manager of St George's, has entered into partnership with Shaunagh Heneage, publisher of The Art Book Review Quarterly, to launch a new bookshop.
The Atrium Bookshop will occupy the Cork Street gallery recently vacated by Odette Gilbert and will stock a wide range of books on fine and applied arts.
The new shop opens in October.
Mexico to the fore at the Frankfurt Book Fair
FRANKFURT.
For the second year running the theme of the world's leading book fair (until 5 October) has been Hispanic.
The Mexican Nobel prize-winner Octavio Paz gave the inaugural address, and the Kongresshalle houses a big exhibition on Mexican written culture, with inscribed tablets, stele and Prehispanic codices, through to the present day.
Actually, the former Soviet Union had been invited to do the honours but declined, not being up to it organisationally nor economically at present.
Far from feeling second best, the Mexicans have taken up the challenge with vigour: ‘We aim to be a cultural invasion of Frankfurt and the rest of Germany’, said the Mexican commissioner, Eugenia Meyer.
Dutch paintings: the state collection
ZWOLLE.
Promised for October, Waanders publishers in Zwolle will be producing an Illustrated Summary Catalogue of the 3,600 paintings in the possession of the Dutch state.
Directly after the war a special bureau the Stichting Nederlands Kunstbezit was set up under the aegis of the Ministry of Finance and charged with the recovery of illegally removed works of art under the German occupation and their subsequent return to their rightful owners.
Under the scheme thousands of works of art were returned but the Dutch State also gained possession of over 3,000 works.
These had been voluntarily sold to the Nazis, or were not repurchased by the owners who had sold them under duress, or were part of the estates of Dutch citizens who died during the war leaving no heirs.
Now administered by the Netherlands Office for Fine Arts, all paintings in the State collection (including a number of works bequeathed by Dutch citizens to the State as well as those works recovered after the war) painted prior to 1900 have now been fully catalogued and will be published by Waanders publishers, Zwolle, in October.
All the paintings are reproduced in small, black and white format accompanied by details of date, attribution, condition and some discussion of iconography.
Price DFl.l75.
Publications received
AFRICAN ART
Kate Ezra Royal Art of Benin, The Perls Collection (The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 1992) 344pp. 250 ills.
$60
The art of Benin first became known to the West in 1897 when a British military expedition confiscated thousands of works of art from the royal palace and exiled the king, Ovonrramwen.
The Perls Collection is a recent gift to the Metropolitan Museum; this is the catalogue of the exhibition of 149 sculptures and other items from Southern Nigeria, including the Yoruba kingdoms of Owo and Ijebu, dating from the fourteenth to nineteenth centuries, many of great beauty, which closed 13 September.
Good bibliography.
Peter Adler and Nicholas Barnard Asafo!
African Flags of the Fante 1850–1957 (Thames and Hudson, London, 1992) 96pp. 210 col. ills.
£12.95
Book to accompany an exhibition at London's South Bank Centre 3 November to 6 December.
The Fante people of Ghana formed strategic alliances with their European invaders in their fight against the Ashanti Empire from the earliest arrival of the Portuguese in 1471.
The warrior groups of the Fante, known as Asafo, adopted the structure and  hierarchy of the western army and with it the flag form which they turned into a remarkable art form.
Three by five foot in size, the flags are made in patchwork from European trade cloth with the designs appliquéd and occasionally embroidered.
More prosperous groups own banners up to 300 foot long to be processed at village festivals.
Scenes of village life, war, ships, trains, birds and beasts, all incorporating the Union Jack in one corner, combine a remarkable feeling for design and colour with a distinctive vigour and humour.
ART THEORY
Walter S. Melion Shaping the Netherlandish Canon: Karel van Mander's Schilde-Boeck (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1992) 386pp. 114ills. £35.95
This is the ultimate overall analysis of the Northern Vasari, Van Mander's crucially important Book on Picturing, published in 1604, on which the entire modern canon of fifteenth- and sixteenth- century Northern art was based.
Michael Wheeler and Nigel Whitely (ed.)
The Lamp of Memory (Manchester University Press, Manchester.
1992) 224pp. 20 b/w ills.
£40
An assembly of nine essays aimed at the informed specialist, on aspects of Ruskin's links with tradition.
Among the most interesting is J.B. Bullen's on Renaissance historiography: Ruskin thought Hugo's Notre Dame de Paris ‘the most disgusting book ever written by man’.
AMERICAN PAINTING
Sally Webster William Morris Hunt (Cambridge University Press, 1992) 244pp. 154 ills.
£55
The first study in recent years of this important Boston painter and teacher whose Paris training stood him in good stead in introducing into America a fascinating mixture of French Academicism, Barbizon and early Impressionism.
Marianne Doezema George Bellows and Urban America (Yale University Press, London, 1992) 244pp. 94ills. £29.95/$50
Thoroughly researched discussion of major themes in Bellows's work, centering on his painting of the excavation of the foundations of Pennsylvania Station, New York, his boxing pieces and his depictions of working class life in and around New York City.
Doezema draws on a wide variety of primary sources, particularly magazine and newspaper articles, to assess the artist's work within the context of contemporary American society.
Lincoln Kirstein Paul Cadmus (Pomegranate Artbooks, San Francisco, 1992) 144pp. many col. and b/w ills.
This brings up to date the edition of 1984 on this renowned homo-erotic painter with one foot still in the closet, including all of the artist's paintings since that year.
ARCHAEOLOGY
Ronald T. Ridley The Eagle and the Spade: The Archaeology of Rome during the Napoleonic Era 1809–1814 (Cambridge University Press, 1992) 328pp, 78ills. £50
The period in question was one of make or break for the conservation of Rome's antiquities, and this book explores in satisfying depth the activities, notably of the French, in saving them.
Preservationists such as Camporese and Valadier are seen against the background of the various commissions, and individual buildings' histories are scrutinised.
Albeit a recherché subject, an absorbing study.
ARCHITECTURE
Alexei Tarkhanov and Sergei Kavtaradze Stalinist Architecture (Laurence King, London, 1992) 192pp. 209 col. and b/w ills.
£35
A visually outstanding picture book revealing the megalomania of Stalinist architecture both on paper and as realised with amazing diversity in popular palaces deriving most from Boullée, Piranesi and the Gothic cathedral.
Big can be beautiful, and surprisingly few of the buildings here display the empty pedantry conspicuous in contemporary paintings and sculpture.
Hotels, apartment blocks, ports, cinemas and the Moscow metro reveal that the American architectural dream of the 1930s and 1940s was never far away, but also that Mother Russia kept a firm hand on her children.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
Linda Schele and Mary Ellen Miller The Blood of Kings.
Dynasty and Ritual in Maya Art (Thames & Hudson, London 1992) 335pp. 373 ills.
123 in colour.
£19.95
A book based on the exhibition held at the Kimball Museum, Fort Worth in 1986.
All works shown in the exhibition are catalogued and illustrated with additional comparative material and essays (with footnotes) on themes such as‘The Royal Person’, ‘Kingship and the Rites of Accession’ and ‘Kingship and the Maya Cosmos’.
Bibliography, charts and diagrams.
An excellent introduction to the subject.
COLLECTIONS AND COLLECTING
Elizabeth Conran et al.
The Bowes Museum (Scala Books, London, with the Bowes Museum, 1992) 96pp. 9 b/w 135 col. ills.
£12.95 h/b
Another in the Scala series of highlights from great collections.
Were the Bowes Museum located in London rather than one of the greener parts of County Durham in the north of Britain it would surely rank alongside the Wallace Collection in prestige and public affection.
As it is, the magnificent nineteenth-century French-style château and its collection of Old Masters and outstanding eighteenth- and nineteenth-century furniture, objects and treasures from Europe and the Orient needs to be better known.
This book should help, and the lively and accessible text written by the curators makes it an interesting read.
Warren I. Cohen East Asian Art and American Culture (Columbia University Press, New York, 1992) 264 pp. 34 b/w ills.
$44 h/b
A fascinating topic encompassing art, politics and war, charting the impact of Oriental culture on American civilisation with particular reference to collectors and museums.
Written by the University Distinguished Professor of History at Michigan State University author of a number of books on East-West relations it is delivered in a grindingly dull style: ‘From painting, drawing, engraving, and imagery on china-ware, Americans were left with no doubt that the Chinese were culturally as well as physically different from Europeans.’
The ideal undergraduate textbook.
Geoffrey Ashton Catalogue of paintings at the Theatre Museum, London (Victoria and Albert Museum Publications, 1992) 128pp.123 b/w 4 col. ills.
£37.50 h/b
A detailed catalogue of the outstanding collection of theatrical paintings acquired by the museum a branch of the V&A since 1947.
Works by Lely, Sickert, Roger Fry, Duncan Grant, Ruskin Spear, and portraits of theatrical greats such as Garrick, Mrs Siddons, Kean, Henry Irving, Nijinsky and John Gielgud.
Every entry illustrated, thirty theatrical biographies, an index of plays, artists and previous owners.
Meticulously prepared by Geoffrey Ashton who sadly died, aged thirty-nine, before its publication.
René Gimpel Diary of an Art Dealer (Pimlico, London, 1992) 465pp. 8 b/w ills.
£9
New paperback edition of the delightful, fascinating and ultimately poignant memoirs of the art dealer and friend to artists.
A heady mixture of reminiscence and connoisseurship of the least pretentious, most illuminating sort.
Andrew Moore with Charlotte Crawley Family and Friends: a regional survey of British portraiture (HMSO, London, 1992) 264pp. 22 col. 280 b/w ills.
£19.95
A combined survey and exhibition catalogue on the theme of portraiture in Norfolk collections and portraits of or by people connected with that county, as well as works in Norfolk collections which reflect general trends in the history of British portraiture.
Introductory essays on various Norfolk-related themes and on more general subjects such as‘The Civic Face 1700–1900’.
Worth having for the illustrations of lesser known works, some of considerable merit.
Accompanies an exhibition at Norwich Castle to 29 November 1992.
PHOTOGRAPHY
Graham Clarke (ed.)
The Portrait in Photography (Reaktion Books, London, 1992) 242pp. 65 ills.
£23 h/b, £9.95 p/b
This aims to bring the reflections of literary and cultural historians to bear on photographic portraits and how they are ‘read’ historically in the context of their production, potential viewers and currently fashionable theories.
Portraits by Julia Margaret Cameron, Emil Otto Hoppe, August Sander, Nadar, Paul Strand, Garry Winogrand, Duchamp, as well as Daguerrean photographers and portraits from family albums are discussed.
The book departs from more ‘mainstream’ histories of photographic portraiture and is stimulating.
James Cotier Nudes in Budapest (Aktok/Central Books, London, 1992) 62  1 pp. 28 b/w ills.
h/b £25
Rather remarkable set of photographs by James Cotier of elderly Hungarians, photographed nude in the Art Deco splendour of the Gallert Turkish baths or in the artist's studio using platinum prints.
Some beautiful compositions wrinkled hands, a Rodin-like head next to the scroll of a cello are spoiled by strangely gauche captions, possibly intending to reproduce the sitters' own words: ‘He came back from apparent death twice.
Chess and horses are his pastime now’.
Sarah Kent's introduction tries to bring in the fall of Communism, which is probably pushing it a bit.
Diego and Frida with gringos
Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo pose with American artists Lucille and Arnold Blanch in 1930.
A photograph from Carla Stellwegg (ed.)
Frida Kahlo: the Camera Seduced (Chatto & Windus, London, 1992) 104 b/w ills.
£14.99.
A moving collection of photographs of artist/muse/feminist icon Kahlo taken between 1930 and 1953 (the year of her premature death aged forty-seven) by Imogen Cunningham, Ansel Adams, Nickolas Muray and others.
Accompanied by a biographical essay by art historian Stellweg and a memoir by Mexican writer Elena Poniatowska, the images are strong enough to require no explanation.
The intimate details of Kahlo's and Rivera's life together are also the subject of a Mexican/U.S. -financed film which started to be made last month by the American director Luis Valdez.
He is basing it on the book by Martha Zamora Frida, el pincel de la angustia.
The Art Market
India
A new jewel in the crown
Julian Thompson, Chairman of Sotheby's Far East, discusses their first sale in new delhi this month
LONDON.
Sotheby's are to hold their first sale in India at the Taj Palace Inter-Continental Hotel, New Delhi, on 8 and 9 October.
It will include Indian, European and Oriental paintings and works of art with particular emphasis on areas traditionally collected in India such as Victorian paintings, silver and gold cigarette cases, Art Nouveau and Art Deco bronzes.
There will also be a section devoted to contemporary Indian art, which is not subject to the one hundred year-old export cut-off date which will prevent the legal export of any of the other items in the sale.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper Julian Thompson, Chairman of Sotheby's Far East operation, explained that the present scheme evolved from a successful charity sale held in Bombay in 1989.
‘Tremendous interest’ from India's new wealthy business classes and professionals suggested a ready market to Sotheby's.
Such a client pool could best be exploited by setting up sales within the country rather than wooing clients to bid at international level, which is currently their approach in Korea, another target area in their long-term world-wide strategy.
India's desire to open up to foreign investment evident in the relaxation on rules restricting foreign advertising, for example have further encouraged the present move.
Crucially, it seems likely that the Indian budget next March will abolish exchange controls on the rupee and there are also moves to lessen the swingeing import taxes on works of art into the country which has currently restricted much purchasing in London sales to NRI's non resident Indians or to collectors who keep their works of art outside the country.
New Delhi rather than Bombay has been selected as the present venue as sales taxes are lower in that city.
At present there are only local house-sale type auctions in the country, which fail to take advantage of a ready pool of consigners, including maharajas whose grandparents purchased European paintings in the late nineteenth century.
Many of these works are in a poor state of conservation and would benefit, according to Mr Thompson, from a transfer into fresh ownership (probably private rather than public, as Indian national museums are currently badly underfunded).
The continuing Indian enthusiasm for nineteenth-century works of art means that the export ban is unlikely to prove a problem.
How contemporary Indian art will fare is less certain although Mr Thompson hoped that European dealers would attend the sale.
In all cases estimates have been pitched fairly low.
The issue of smuggling and of the sale of items of national significance is central to the present scheme.
‘We are very keen in principle to run auctions in countries where works of art are not exportable, and are happy to act as ‘local auctioneers’’ said Thompson.
He felt that the smuggling would in fact become less of an issue when the rupee became fully convertible (thus cutting out the trade in works of art in exchange for hard currency) and when prices for works of art sold within the country equalled those achieved in London and New York.
When import restrictions become less onerous he felt it was not unlikely that an important Indian piece consigned in London would be sent by Sotheby's to India for sale.
The heritage implications were again viewed positively: in India all items of national importance should be registered with the ASI (Archaeological Survey of India) by their owners.
According to Mr Thompson, offering a correctly listed work at auction in India will establish a firm provenance for it, making it a difficult subject for subsequent smuggling and re-sale on the European market.
A spokeswoman for the Victoria and Albert Museum, which has an active Indian department, relayed a wholehearted endorsement of the Sotheby's project.
The museum agreed that sales held within India would help to combat smuggling and the drain on works of art from the country.
On the question of provenance the V&A's acquisition policy states: ‘Every effort must be made to prevent the acquisition of objects illegally excavated, appropriated or exported’.
New York
Brodsky bill passes in NY State Assembly
Bill to regulate chandelier bidding closer to becoming law
NEW YORK.
Proposed regulations on the use of house bids at auctions in New York state (see The Art Newspaper No. 6, March 1991, p. 17) moved closer to becoming law in the lower body of that state's legislature.
In late June the New York State Assembly passed a bill requiring auctioneers to disclose when a bid was offered by the auction house itself, a practice referred to variously as ‘consecutive bidding’, ‘chandelier bidding’, or, in the proposed legislation, ‘sham bidding’.
The proposal's legislative future, however, is uncertain, since the state assembly has ended its regular two-year session and the legislature reconvenes in special session after the November elections, at a time when the art market may not be the most urgent item on legislators' year-end calendars.
Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, who introduced the disclosure requirement for house bids (and other proposals that failed to win the support of his colleagues) rejected the notion that the bill's passage in the assembly was a hollow victory at the legislative eleventh hour.
Brodsky insisted that the state senate could vote on the measure in special session if it wished.
Acknowledging that he would have to reintroduce his entire regulatory bill if the senate fails to act, Brodsky declared, ‘We are not going to go away’.
‘It's a deceptive trade practice’, he said.
‘The heart of this thing is quite simple.
One element of the business community alleges that they need the right to pretend someone's making an offer when no one actually is’.
Marjorie Stone, general counsel at Sotheby's, warned that more regulation of auction houses threatened to slow any recovery of the art market in general.
Stone added that Sotheby's and Christie's, which had no comment on the matter, had been informed by clients that if new regulatory legislation passed, they would not consign works with the auction houses'New York rooms.
Brodsky countered that the broadening of the auction houses' public accountability could only help the market.
One art dealer who supports the assemblyman is Richard Feigen, who maintains that new buyers entering the market are most in need of the proposed consumer protection.
‘The neophytes start at the auction level.
They certainly don't know that they're bidding against a phantom bid or they wouldn't bid’, he said.
‘We've had the art market fuelled up to unrealistic heights because of the auction-house hype and the phony bidding’, Feigen added.
‘We have a lot of bad paintings hanging over the market in Japan because of this chandelier bidding.
Is this kind of volatility good for the market?
Has it helped anybody?
Has it even helped the auction houses?’
Feigen admitted, however, that primary market dealers were more likely to support the auction house practice.
While the legislation seems halted for now, Marjorie Stone of Sotheby's sees no cause for optimism.
‘We're at ground-level zero again’, she remarked.
Sotheby's and Christie's have hired one of New York State's largest lobbying firms to rally opposition to the Brodsky bill.
Munich
Bavarians consult British Minister on Thurn und Taxis sale
MUNICH.
Bavaria is facing the first major sell-off of an historic private collection since the war, and they have consulted Britain on how to respond, as England is all too used to such dispersals (Yet another took place last month with the sale of Pitchford Hall).
Early last month Culture Minister Dr Zehetmair visited David Mellor, the Secretary of State for National Heritage, to discuss private treaty sales and tax inducements to sell to the nation.
He also visited Lord Gowrie, head of Sotheby's, which has announced the auction on 17 November in Geneva of goldsmiths' work and jewellery valued at SFr20 million (£8 million), with a second sale to come next year, from the collections of the Fürst Thurn und Taxis of Regensburg.
The death of the Eleventh Fürst, Johannes Thurn und Taxis, in 1990, after a lavish life lived in anachronistic, princely, style, has revealed the financial disarray of a family previously thought to be enormously rich.
Banking debts and death duties owed not so much on the estates (which under German law enjoy tax concessions designed to hold historic estates together), but on business investments, have led the Dowager Fürstin, Gloria, to decide to sell.
An agreement reached in the early Forties between Bavaria and the family, which effectively enshrines the strict historic laws of entail (Fideicommiss), limits her in what she can dispose of: archives, libraries, and, to an uncertain extent, the furnishings and works of art intrinsic to the family seat, are all protected.
That leaves goldsmiths' work, jewellery, and the furnishings of the twenty-five castles sold by the family between 1920 and 1970 and brought to Schloss St Emmeram, their main seat, in Regensburg.
In the second half of September the Bavarian Cultural Ministry was still in discussion with the Fürstin over what should be included in the sale, with particular efforts being made to acquire, or cause to be withdrawn, items with strong Bavarian or Regensburg connections.
The Director of the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Dr Rheinhold Baumstark, did say though that, while the collection was rich in such items, it did not contain really major works of art no Rubens, nor a Giambologna, for example.
This last month, the Bavarians have been going through the painful experience of learning that, where an historic collection is concerned, it is the whole which is greater than the parts, and no saving of individual items can make up for the erosion of that whole.
Freud's Bowery bums up for grabs
LONDON.
The issue of British artist Lucian Freud's split from his dealer James Kirkman rumbles on.
The high prices brilliantly engineered by Kirkman for Freud's works at the height of the market have recently caused problems for the hard-pressed dealer.
The marketability of Freud is also thought to be suffering due to the artist's recent penchant for painting the backside of performance artist Leigh Bowery, a subject of seemingly little appeal to traditional Freud collectors.
Discussions over who may represent the artist in future are currently underway between a number of distinguished London galleries including Thomas Gibson, Marlborough and Lefevre.
Christie's to get Guinness head
LONDON.
Christie's have confirmed that Sir Anthony Tennant, the outgoing chairman of the drinks giant Guinness, will be joining the Board of Directors.
Tennant succeeds Lord Carrington who is due to retire after a five-year term as Chairman of Christie's International next May.
Tennant took over at Guinness in 1987 in the wake of the scandal following its hostile take-over of Distillers; the company is now the seventh-biggest in Britain with a stock-market value of £10.7 billion.
Christie's recession-hit shares have recently stood at 105 p, far from their 1990 peak of 413p.
Looking back in order to look forward: a selection of last season's sales
Hard times ahead for Christie's and Sotheby's
LONDON/new york.
After some initial cautious optimism over Christie's and Sotheby's annual figures released in June, more recent results have indicated the grave difficulties the major houses are still facing.
Sotheby's reported an increase of 5.8% in auction sales for the first six months resulting in sales of $567.7 million (£317.5 million) and pre-tax auction profits of $9.1 million (£5.08 million).
Christie's declared a 6% increase in sales totalling $602 million (£336 million) for the last six months although sales totals for the whole 1991–92 season were down by 8%.
An acrimonious dispute between the two houses greeted the announcement of the figures.
Sotheby's were angered that Christie's had included £22 million ($39.2 million) worth of private treaty sales in their figures, which Sotheby's had left out.
They also rejected Christie's claim of a continuing rise in market share vis à vis Sotheby's, resulting in a 49% share this season (the highest since the mid-1950s) and a 54% market share in Europe, making them the largest European auction house by sales.
On 17 September Christie's announced that it had cut its interim payment down to 0.5p compared with 2.3p in the first half of last year.
Pre-tax profits fell to £2.1 million.
Shares fell 3p to 105p.
In looking at overall trends, Sotheby's pointed to the strength of the decorative arts and jewellery, while noting an improvement in results at Impressionist and Modern sales.
Christie's looked to Old Master pictures (up 23%), furniture (up 18%), Oriental works of art (up 20%) and books (up 42%).
Phillips declared themselves satisfied with their turnover of £85.3 million ($168 million) for the twelve month period ending July 1992.
This total puts them almost four times ahead of Bonham's, their nearest UK rival.
Of the £85.3 million 38% was generated from sales held out of London, 3% from house sales and 5% from sales held in Paris, Düsseldorf, Geneva and New York.
In a fairly low-key assessment Christopher Weston, Chairman and Chief Executive for Phillips, noted an encouraging increase in new buyers.
The company is promoting its outside sales, in particular house sales, which attract private buyers willing to bid considerably above estimate.
The season in France
PARIS.
The results for Drouot salerooms for the first six months of 1992 proved to be almost ten per cent down on those of 1991, a clear case of bad to worse which the Paris auctioneers said showed the art market had ‘stabilised’.
Recession or not, however, remarkable works sold consistently well.
On 12 June auctioneer Jacques Tajan sold Gauguin's powerful Breton coast scene ‘Le joueur de flageolet sur la falaise’ of 1889 for FFr16.5 million (£1.75 million; $3.4 million).
His former partner Jean-Louis Picard sold a charcoal and chalk drawing by Maillol of a nude to Dina Vierny, who had posed for it in 1938, for FFr2 million (£212,765; $423,404) on June 3.
The same auctioneer set a world record on 22 June for a Louis XV commode by Jacques Dubois which he sold for FFr1.4 million (£148,936; $282,978).
Géricault's only known erotic painting was sold by Poulain et Le Fur on 26 June for FFr3.5 million £372,340; $740,957).
A world record for work by Eileen Gray was set at Drouot on 3 July when Paris dealer Cheska Vallois parted with FFr1.16 million (£123,404; $245,574), double the estimate, for a rectangular red lacquered table by the Art Deco designer.
Competition meanwhile pushed bidding for a very fine pair of still lifes by Anne Valayer-Coster, ‘Vase de fleurs et fruits, fleurs dans un vase’ of 1776 to FFr4 million (£425,531; $846,808) on 7 July at Drouot.
New Beijing auction
Eastern promise or Chinese whispers?
This month sees Beijing's first state-sponsored auction of Chinese artefacts.
Fiasco expected
BEIJING.
A Netherlands-based company called the China Art and Antique Foundation has announced an auction of Chinese art and artefacts to be held in the Century Theatre and Beijing Grand Hotel on 9 October.
Over 2,000 lots will be offered, three-quarters of which date to before 1795, according to the publicity information.
The idea has the backing of the China State Bureau of Cultural Relics (the country's national heritage body) and the Beijing Foreign Exchange Centre for Cultural Relics.
According to Walter van Halder of the Art and Antique Foundation, the project was conceived by a Dutch businessman two years ago and was welcomed by the Chinese authorities as one means of controlling smuggling of artefacts from the country.
The objects offered in the present sale have been culled from ‘[secret]warehouses dating back to the start of the Revolution in 1949 and also from the time of the Cultural Revolution’.
A further 20% has been consigned by private Chinese people and about 15% from the storehouses of state-owned antique stores.
All objects have been catalogued and vetted by Chinese experts and the results discussed with experts from Brussels, Paris and Hong Kong, the names of whom Mr van Halder would not disclose.
Proceeds from the auction will be used for restoration projects and the creation of small provincial museums.
The Foundation declined to say who would receive the 12% commission or whether private vendors would be paid in any way.
Objects purchased will be issued with an automatic export licence; normally objects dating prior to 1795 cannot be exported from China.
Estimates will apparently be pitched slightly lower than comparable items in Western sales, and payment can be made in any Western currency.
In Mr van Halder's words: ‘The preservation of a cultural past does not have a leading position on the list of national priorities in China; in other words, the Ministry needs the money’.
Asked who will be the principal purchasers at the sale, he pointed to ‘private collectors, dealers, some middlemen and a few museums.
Country-wise the main interest comes from the UK and USA, followed by Japan, Hong Kong, and then Belgium, France, the Netherlands etc.
The internal market is very limited.
Dealing is done by the State and the smugglers.
These two will now go to war with one another’.
European reaction to the sale has been muted; one London auction house expert pointed to the poor quality of a number of the items illustrated in the publicity material (items which will apparently be in the sale), several of which date to the early years of this century.
In addition he noted that the illustrations were mainly of late blue-and-white ware readily available in the West rather than the grave goods (inlaid bronze, terracottas and jade) which form the bulk of smuggled objects.
The trade was equally pessimistic: ‘I anticipate a fiasco’, was one comment, ‘goods of this quality are already available in Hong Kong.
Most dealers don't intend to go’.
Phillips to close down its European operations
LONDON.
The auctioneers Phillips Son and Neale are winding up their activities on the Continent to concentrate on their London sales and the provincial English market.
Their Managing Director, Europe, Niccolò Caderni, who was recruited from the banking world two years ago, left the company last month, and Phillips's European offices will close as the contracts fall in.
Thus their Italian operation ends 1 February 1993, and Paris, Amsterdam, Copenhagen and Stockholm will terminate at unspecified dates, but almost certainly before Christmas.
The joint venture set up by Caderni with the auctioneers Thomas Kraus in Düsseldorf, and which is in profit, will continue.
Phillips has been under financial pressure ever since the expensive failure of its venture into the US market.
Harrods to host new antiques fair
LONDON.
Brian and Anna Haughton, organisers of a number of London's art fairs including the silver and jewellery fair and the ceramics fair, are preparing a new, less specialist event to be held in Harrod's, the Knightsbridge department store, from 12 to 17 November1993.
The initial idea for the show came from the shop's owners, the El Fayeds, who recently visited the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers show in New York, another Haughton event.
Around seventy-five firms will be showing a range of objects on the third floor of the shop, all of which will be vetted by an independent committee prior to the event.
According to the organisers there has already been considerable interest from a number of European and American dealers.
The German market lures US auction house
SAN FRANCISCO AND LOS ANGELES.
The West Coast auction house Butterfield and Butterfield, which is already represented in Brussels, has announced the opening of a new office in Munich.
Butterfield saw an increase in sales of 12% last year, making it the largest American auction house.
The Munich office will be headed by Maria Nestel von Eichhausen, formerly of Sotheby's.
Dealers & Galleries
Venice
Marina Picasso's Picassos in the Serenissima
VENICE.
Picasso's grand-daughter, Marina, is selling forty-eight of his works which came to her in the share-out among the family of his estate, and which are normally kept at the Geneva freeport warehouse.
The proceeds will go towards her school for refugee children.
Stefano Contini's gallery in Campo S. Stefano is showing these mostly small-scale sketches and drawings until 15 November.
They include a dozen pre-Cubist works, half a dozen or so Cubist drawings and paintings, some Thirties landscapes, and end with three heads of cavaliers from the Sixties.
All are listed in Zervos's fundamental catalogue of the artist's work and many have travelled widely during the Eighties, from Germany to Japan to London, in touring exhibitions of the collection.
The fully illustrated catalogue acknowledges the cooperation of Galerie Jan Krugier of Geneva.
Krugier has been Marina Picasso's adviser ever since she came into her inheritance and he helped her choose her works from Picasso's estate.
She has sold extensively through him over the years, and the appearance of her pictures at this ambitious Italian gallery is not a sign of a rift between the two, but of a desire to give the works wider exposure to the market.
During the summer, Galleria Contini was showing the pictures at their branch in the rich Italians' play-ground of Cortina d'Ampezzo.
In brief Thomas Brod, London Old Master picture dealer, succumbed to the recession in July.
Thomas Brod, the current owner who took over the business started by his father in 1954, referred to a lack of passing trade.
Brod's premises were on St James's Street a few yards away from Christie's.
Mr Brod hopes to continue to trade privately.
Marlborough Gallery has announced a major expansion programme in the United States and Europe.
The New York gallery will be expanded to almost double its present size, to19,000 square feet.
It also plans to develop its print publishing and dealing activities.
In early October it will be opening a new gallery on the Calle Orfila, Madrid, designed by New York architect Richard Gluckman.
The gallery will represent Marlborough's Spanish artists.
London picture dealer David Messum succumbed to the recession in late August.
His St George's Street gallery has closed.
Henry Weldon, a New York collector of Staffordshire pottery, has successfully sued Lindsay Antiques, London, for a refund of the £435,000 plus 15% interest which he spent on items of Staffordshire pottery from 1988.
Tests on the items at the Oxford research laboratory for art and archaeology revealed them to be modern.
Lindsay Antiques have resigned from the British Antique Dealers Association.
Sonnabend Gallery, New York, has failed in its lawsuit against its former artist Peter Halley who recently defected to the Gagosian Gallery after six years, taking eleven works with him.
The judge rejected Gagosian's claim that the works were their property.
Arthur Davidson has closed his London antique shop of that name under pressure of mounting debt.
The Jermyn Street shop was known in London and abroad for its flamboyant stock.
Receivers have instructed Sotheby's to auction the stock.
The stock of the Nigel Greenwood Gallery, London, which closed this summer, is being offered in a single sale by Sotheby's.
The approach may represent an attempt on Sotheby's part to woo the ever-increasing number of bankrupt dealers to offer their stocks at auction.
Tomonori Tsurumaki, Japanese industrialist who bought Picasso's ‘Les Noces de Pierette’ for £33.1 million ($51.6 million) at auction in Paris in 1989, is rumoured to be burdened with heavy debts.
A report in the September issue of the Giornale dell'Arte cites the economic investigative agency Teikoku Databank who have revealed that Nihon Tritrust, Mr Tsurumaki's property company, already had debts of 127 billion Yen by June 1990.
It seems that Mr Tsurumaki has used ‘Les Noces de Pierette’ as security on bank loans to finance an building complex known as Autopolis comprising a museum, hotel and race track.
Malcolm Franklin, specialists in English furniture, have moved premises from 57th Street, New York, to larger premises at 762 Madison Avenue.
Business as usual at Piero Corsini Inc. who have announced their new exhibition ‘Baroque Paintings’(9 October to 16 November).
Eighteen paintings, the majority previously unpublished, include works by Agostino Carracci, a Ribera ‘Portrait of a Man’ currently showing in the Ribera exhibition at the Metropolitan, a sketch for the Brera San Carlo Borromeo altarpiece by Procaccini and a ‘Christ on the Mount of Olives’by Preti.
FIAC: who's going and showing
PARIS.
This year's FIAC (Foire internationale de l'art contemporain) takes place at the Grand Palais from 24 October to 1 November.
In all, 700 artists will be represented by seventy-four French and eighty-six foreign galleries, of which Italy is fielding the largest contingent, of twenty-four.
Exhibitors include Galerie Neuendorf, Frankfurt, and Michael Werner, Cologne; Berggruen, San Francisco; Barbara Mathes Gallery and Marlborough, New York; Brownstone et cie, Galerie Lelong and Jeanne Bucher, Paris; Lisson and Waddington, London; Galerie Gian Enzo Sperone, Galerie Toninelli and Galerie Sprovieri, Rome; and Satani Gallery, Tokyo.
Last year official sales figures were FFr200 million ($34.78 million), a 30% drop on the previous year although attendance figures remained constant at 140,000.
In 1989, at the height of the boom in the contemporary art market, 5,000 of the 7,000 works on show were sold, making a total of FFr400 million.
Turin fair: not just ethical but seen to be ethical
TURIN.
The Piedmontese capital, home of Fiat and many of Italy's richest industries, is making a bid to rival the country's two top art and antiques fair, the alternating Milan and Florence biennials.
Turin is launching its own fair ‘Antica ‘93’ from 26 February to 7 March 1993 in the prestige premises of the Fiat-owned former factory, the Lingotto, famous for its roof-top race-track.
The chief organiser is Giancarlo Gallino, president of the Piedmontese association of antique dealers.
He and his board have identified the main problem of Italian fairs as being a lack of buyer confidence in the vetting procedures.
They have therefore gathered together an impressive group of sixteen experts and devised cast-iron vetting rules.
The chairman of the vetting committee is Federigo Zeri, and it includes Everett Fahy, curator of paintings at the Metropolitan Museum, New York; John Ayers, former Keeper of Far Eastern art, Victoria and Albert Museum; Carmen Ravanelli Guidotti, director of the Ceramics Museum, Faenza; Ester Cohen, lecturer in contemporary art, university of Florence, and Anna Somers Cocks, formerly Assistant-Keeper, Metalwork, V&A.
All items will be inspected well ahead of the opening of the fair, and nothing which has not been vetted, and whose description has not been approved, may be exhibited at any stage during the fair.
The organisers are confident that this rigour will set a new standard for fairs in Italy, and hope, despite the world-wide economic gloom, to stimulate the Italian buying public, which has, even this year, remained active in the price-range up to £50,000 ($100,000).
Piú Forte
LONDON.
Forte Plc has decided to resume the management of The Grosvenor House Antiques Fair, taking over from the Evan Steadman Group which was recently purchased by Reed Exhibition Companies Ltd.
Next year antique dealer David Pettifer will remain Co-Chairman, together with Olga Polizzi, a Forte Main Board Director.
Olympia changes dates
LONDON.
The autumn Fine Art and Antiques Fair at Olympia will be held at the later date of 18 to 24 November this year in order to attract pre-Christmas buyers.
The shift in dates follows research within the trade.
Botero on the Champs Elysées orchestrated by Jacques Chirac and Didier Imbert
PARIS.
In order to publicise his efforts to redesign and brighten up the Champs Elysées, the Mayor of Paris, Jacques Chirac, has given the go-ahead to an open air exhibition devised jointly by his own City Hall and gallery owner Didier Imbert.
Thirty-one monumental sculptures by the sixty year-old Colombian artist Fernando Botero, a Paris resident for nineteen years, will go on display along the lower part of the avenue, from the place de la Concorde to the Rond-Point des Champs Elysées from 22 October 1992 to 30 January next year.
Other Botero shows are planned to coincide.
Mayor Chirac's environmental attachée, Jacqueline Nebout, has devised a scheme for city gardeners to create flower beds at the Rond Point after original cartoons by Botero.
Galerie Didier Imbert, just off the Rond-Point on avenue Matignon, is putting on an exhibition of fifty Botero pastels, watercolours and drawings and twenty sculptures for the same duration as the open air show down the road.
Another display entitled ‘La Corrida’ featuring 120 paintings and drawings by Botero on the theme of bullfighting is at the Grand Palais from 20 to 29 November.
The magazine Paris-Match is organising an exhibition of fifty photographs by Botero, also at the Grand Palais.
Barbizon paintings in Paris and London
PARIS/LONDON.
Three prestigious French and British galleries have collaborated in a mixed loan and selling exhibition of works by Barbizon artists.
Brame and Lorenceau, Paris, are showing forty-six works by major exponents of the school from 7 to 30 October, including paintings by Daubigny, Diaz, Huet and Millet, with eleven by Théodore Rousseau including a beautiful little ‘Paysage à la colline’ from a London private collection and a freely-worked ‘Bourg en Auvergne’from a Basel private collection.
The catalogue recalls that in 1938 Brame and Lorenceau held an exhibition of Rousseau's work which contributed to the revival of interest in that artist's work, and goes on to express the hope that eventually a museum devoted to Barbizon painting may be set up.
The exhibition was the joint brainchild of Jean Lorenceau, Julian Agnew and David Bathurst of Artemis.
In London the exhibition runs at Agnew's from 18 November to 18 December.
The New York Armory Show
NEW YORK.
This year's International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show takes place at the Seventh Regiment Armory from 24 to 29 October.
Seventy-eight dealers will be taking part, the majority from America and Great Britain.
Newcomers this year include Galerie Bruno Meissner from Zurich, while Spink from London will be returning after an absence of a few years.
Among old hands Asprey will be present: ‘If the Americans won't come to us, we'll have to go to them’, was antiques department head, Charles Truman's comment.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this October
New York
Dressing the turkey
Stella at Knoedler and poultry art at Leo Castelli
If someone told you that a major ensemble of some twenty bronzes has recently been permanently installed in a public park hard by Wall St and that its subject is an allegory of greed, would you believe it?
Believe it.
Tom Otterness, the sculptor, has created a true epitaph for the Eighties in his ‘The Real World’ a pocket Disney and-by-way-of-Hieronymus Bosch in which diminutive doll figures cute at first encounter — cavort in the open air among what are, for them, giants huge Molochian beings awash in and sometimes even exploding with money, money symbolized by thousands of larger-than-life one-cent pieces.
This is only a glance at the complexity and detail of the work's program; full delectation of its supreme subversity means a visit to Battery Park, the City's hugely agreeable landscaped park and esplanade along the Hudson River from Chambers to Barclay streets.
Otterness is busy these days.
His newest commission is a huge work for the city of Mainz.
There he will create a towering bronze armature to which various body parts, heroic in size, will be affixed.
The artist has carved full-sized models for these parts out of laminated plywood and they, along with other materials relating to the project, continue to be on view at Brooke Alexander until the tenth of this month.
At Pace's 57th St space until 17 October, Claes Oldenburg has returned to the possibilities of human scale sculptures of harps, saxophones, scent bottles, a tie etc after his monumental commissions that have occupied him since the 1980s and which include ‘Match Cover’ in the Olympic village at Barcelona.
Tom Otterness of the allegory of greed got himself a lot of unfortunate notoriety some years ago by shooting a dog as a work of performance art.
At least Chris Burden, in a dangerous folie de jeunesse, got himself shot as an art event.
Ever since then he has been solidly in the ranks of the anti-Establishment, commenting in his work on the political evils of the day particularly the arms buildup of recent years.
His latest sculptural indictments are on view at Josh Baer until 17 October.
Like Rembrandt, Max Beckmann was preoccupied throughout his long life with the delineation of his own image.
And as with Rembrandt we can watch his face and figure change, in countless paintings, prints and drawings, from that of a young to that of an old man.
‘It is the quest of our ego that drives us along the eternal and never-ending journey we must all explore…what am I?
This is the question that constantly persecutes and torments me’, Beckmann wrote.
The Gagosian Gallery has opened its season with a loan show, ‘Max Beckmann: The self portraits’ that gathers together numerous examples of the artist's response to those persecutions and torments.
It runs until the last day of this month.
Eight paintings, supplemented with a generous selection of drawings and prints, have been lent by private and public collections.
Among the latter are the Sprengel Museum in Hanover, the University of Michigan Art Museum, the Brooklyn Museum, the Detroit Institute of Arts, the Museum am Ostwald in Dortmund and New York's Museum of Modern Art.
MOMA, incidentally, lends its ‘Self portrait with a cigarette’ in which the artist appears in a dinner jacket Marlboro Man as bon vivant.
Peter Selz has written a book, accompanying the show in the guise of a catalogue, which surveys the entire scope of Beckman's self portraits.
Meanwhile, Galerie St Etienne follows up on this year's National Gallery retrospective with ‘Käthe Kollwitz in celebration of 125th anniversary of the artist's birth’ with working drawings and proof states of prints.
The American painter Abraham Walkowitz was almost an exact contemporary of Max Beckmann, though the two were very different kinds of artists indeed.
Walkowitz was one of the hundreds of artists from all over the world who flocked to Paris during the opening decade of our century and came away profoundly changed by the experience.
Walkowitz influenced on the one hand by the high-key irrationality of Fauvist colour and on the other by the filmy watercolours of August Rodin, became a confirmed modernist.
The Forum Gallery has gathered a group of paintings, drawings and pastels by Walkowitz, on view until 17 October and if you hurry you can catch a show of drawings that Walkowitz did of the dancer Isadora Duncan until 9 October at Zabriskie.
In one sense Milton Resnick has always been a Minimalist: his paintings characteristically consist of a single all-over field of colour.
But minimal is not an adjective that comes easily to mind when you pour over his sensuously-worked surfaces and layers of tonally-related hues.
New work by this veteran artist ‘The Judgment of Paris series’ is being presented at Robert Miller until the 17th of this month.
A true minimalist of the distinctly younger generation, a Frenchman living in New York named Bruno Rousselot, exhibits his close-valued, linear abstractions all this month at Lennon-Weinberg.
A small painting of his provided a moment of calm reflection among those of his more raucous colleagues in Alana Heiss' ‘Slow Painting’ show last summer at P.S.I.
Richard Tuttle, master of nothingness-as-art, shows new work until the end of the month in an unaccustomed milieu Mary Boone.
And arch-Minimalist Robert Irwin takes the discipline once again into his usual arena of installation at Pace downtown until the 24th.
Other installationists abound this month.
Ilya Kabakov, the Russian expatriate and one of the participants in MOMA's ‘Dislocations’ show last season, presents ‘Incident at the Museum, or Water Music’at Feldman until 17 October.
Also until the 17th, Adrian Piper who also had a room in ‘Dislocations’ presents ‘Decide who you are’(a daunting demand) at John Weber.
Eva Gerber addresses issues of feminism at fiction/non-fiction all this month.
She takes as her working material clothing scavenged from thrift shops and garage sales, women's clothes mostly from the 1950s, and combines them with various substances including hair, urine and even faeces.
At Jay Gorney from 10 to 31 October, he has created a room full of furniture-sculpture complete with wallpaper and frieze-like shelving.
And new paintings by Lawrence Gipe make up an installation downtown at Blum-Helman, opening 10 October and running until 21 November.
They are based on notions of the future as envisioned in the first major exposition of the 1930s in America Chicago's 1933 ‘Century of Progress’.
Two well known New York galleries have been on the move.
Kasmin has opened in more spacious quarters at 74 Grand St and they are presenting in it only one painting but a big one by Peter Schuyff 6 to 31 October while Hirschl & Adler Modern have abandoned the  rarefied reaches of upper Madison Ave.
to become building-mates with Leo Castelli and Ileana Sonnabend at 420 West Broadway (they took over the floor lately occupied by the now defunct 47th Parallel Gallery).
Their opening salvo is Joan Snyder, an artist of great exuberance and attack who is never afraid to wear her heart or anything else she's got on her painterly sleeve.
Her new work along with photographs by Lynn Davis documenting natural phenomena of western Australia and the western United States is on from 3 October until the end of the month.
Two seasons ago Metro Pictures treated us to a collection of ‘found art’ paintings by anonymous amateur limners purchased mostly at thrift shops by a West Coast artist named Jim Shaw.
It turns out that Mr Shaw also makes ‘found art’, in a way, himself.
This month from the 10th to the 31st we get to see it at Metro.
Frank Stella, Al Held and Larry Poons comrades-in-arms from the late fifties Avant-garde all show new work this month.
Stella is at Knoedler (10 October-12 November), Held at Emmerich (8 October-7 November) and Poons at Salander O'Reilly (until 21 October).
Writing to the pioneering American dealer Curt Valentin in 1937, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner characterised his artistic struggle in this way: ‘…
I tried to find a method whereby I could seize the effect of motion…how to arrest a movement in a few bold strokes, catching the passing moment and finding new forms…my goal was always to express emotion and experience with large and simple forms and clear colours’.
Motion and emotion two prime hallmarks of German Expressionism are in plenty of evidence at Borgenicht in ‘Die Brücke: major paintings and works on paper’, until 10 October.
Included are examples by Kirchner, Schmidt-Rottluff, Nolde, Pechstein and Erich Heckel.
Meanwhile down in SoHo to coincide with the Soviet Avant-garde show at the Guggenheim, Rosa Esman has accumulated ‘The Great Experiment: art and design of the Russian Avant-garde’.
In the show are evidences of post-Revolutionary artistic ferment in the form of textiles, graphic design, ceramics, sheet music, posters and architectural studies until 24 October.
The award for the most original group show idea of the month goes to Amy Lipton for conjuring up ‘Shapeshifters’, an exhibition in which twenty women executed precisely 300 years ago in the infamous Salem witch trials.
(Because they were thought to be able to change their form at will, the accused were branded ‘shape shifters’).
Among those present until the 17th are Annette Messager, Kiki Smith, Sue Williams, Kathe Burkhart and Mary Beth Edelson.
Next month, of course, is national election time here in America.
It is also, traditionally, the month of Thanksgiving.
And this year of all years, with its great debate on what constitutes family values you will want to make sure to order your Thanksgiving turkey well ahead of time.
And Leo Castelli is just the guy to see.
He's got plenty of turkeys in stock, as it turns out and you can order yours, already stuffed and dressed, perhaps even by telephone.
The turkeys, actually, are by Meyer Vaisman one of the baddest of the art world bad boys and they have been set out in a big free-range area at Castelli until the 17th of the month.
Each turkey, fresh from the taxidermist, has been tarted up in one sort of drag or another from Parlour maid to Kabuki actor and, who knows? maybe even Uncle Sam.
LONDON
Maak gallery opens in North London
Sharp launch for d'Offay's new season
After a demoralising season of gallery retractions and closures, more severe than even the most pessimistic expectations of a year ago, it is gratifying to report a promising new gallery which opened in a large industrial space in West Hampstead in the middle of last month.
The inaugural exhibition of Maak, its name deriving from the initials of its directors and situated in Blackburn Road, is a group of nine sculptures by Phillip King (to 5 October) dating from the early years of his career and previously shown in the recent survey of his art at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park.
Then gallery manager, Catriona Colledge, formerly Fabian Carlsson's assistant, will exhibit large volumetric wood or bronze sculptures by Jeff Lowe, who showed with Nicola Jacobs in 1988 (14 October-20 November).
There is a related exhibition of Lowe's drawings and sculpture of a domestic scale at Austin Desmond (16 October-10 November).
The most exciting exhibition of the new season is ‘Strange Developments’(to 16 October), curated for Anthony d'Offay by Jeffrey Deitch, former Citibank art advisor and responsible for ‘Post-human’, his entertaining vision of virtual reality as advanced by an international group of younger artists.
They feature prominently in his present selection which includes Janine Antoni, Rachel Evans, Damien Hirst, Jeff Koons, Simon Linke, Paul McCarthy, Marc Quinn, Charles Ray, Cindy Sherman and Kiki Smith, each creating work of humour laced with a thread of menace.
There is a small, supplementary exhibition of Andy Warhol's Polaroids (to 20 October).
Ellsworth Kelly's Documenta paintings open towards the end of the month (20 October-20 November).
In other galleries in Dering Street, Annely Juda has reinforced her floor for an exhibition of three large steel sculptures, with a selection of smaller works and drawings, collages and gravitations, by Eduardo Chillida (1 October-14 November).
The leading Spanish master, who has not shown in a commercial gallery in London since 1965, was the subject of a study at the Hayward Gallery in 1990.
His retrospective at the Royal Palace in San Sebastian, the city where he lives, closed last month.
Anthony Reynolds has a three-part, changing exhibition of paintings by European and American artists grouped under the title ‘And what do you represent?’(to 19 December).
Part I features Douglas Gordon, Dan Walsh and John Wilkins (to 10 October).
Timed to coincide with a survey of her oil paintings which opened at the Hayward Gallery last month, Karsten Schubert is showing twelve works on paper by Bridget Riley (15 October-14 November) with an accompanying catalogue essay by Richard Francis.
They date from the last ten years when an interest in colour, triggered by a visit to Egypt in 1982, assumed a dominant position in her work.
Beginning to be seen as an important influence on recent developments in abstract art, her decision to join Schubert's gallery is an intriguing move for both parties.
Her former dealer, Alec Gregory-Hood, has opened an office in Dover Street for The New Rowan Gallery and will be organising exhibitions in other spaces in due course.
In other galleries in Soho, there is an installation by Gladstone Thompson at Laure Genillard (to 10 October), to be followed by four cibachrome portraits, of the dealer, a critic, a collector and the artist, mounted on lightboxes by Catherine Yass (16 October-23 November).
Frith is showing ten new photographic prints by Craigie Horsfield (to 30 October), who was the subject of a recent exhibition at the ICA.
Lisson's collaboration between Michael Joaquin Grey and Randolph Huff, with sculpture by Tony Cragg's pupil, Wilhelm Mundt (to 10 October), will be followed by new works by John Latham and a new installation by Christian Boltanski (20 October-21 November), a photographic record of the pupils of the gallery's local school, North Westminster Community School, which he compiled on a visit to London last month.
Gillian Jason's enterprising series of weekly exhibitions of pairs of family artists, which opened in the middle of last month with Lynn and Daniel Chadwick, continues with Mary Cozens-Walker and Anthony Green (to 3 October), Arthur and Jamie Boyd (5–10 October), Gwen and James Hardie (12–17 October), Ann Grebby and Paul Hodges (19–24 October), Rose Warnock and Paul Storey (26–31 October) and concludes with Anne Maddan and Louis Le Brocquy (2–7 November).
In the West End, there are two exhibitions worth noting in Davies Street.
Gimpel is showing a dozen new paintings by Albert Irvin under the title ‘Three Score Years and Ten’.
Not without biblical significance, the exhibition marks the artist's seventieth birthday and coincides with a revival of interest in his work.
Since his survey at the Serpentine Gallery in 1990, he has pursued a busy curriculum of foreign commitments which have coincided with the loan of ‘Tabbard’, a new abstract canvas from a private collection in Washington, to the Tate Gallery.
Next door, Lumley Cazalet has assembled a selection of works by Elisabeth Frink (15 October-13 November).
‘Goggled Head’(1969) is the most important of seven sculptures being shown with three large drawings and a survey of fifty prints, about a half of her graphic production.
In Cork Street, William Jackson has organised a two-part exhibition of new work by Adrian Wisniewski.
Its title is ‘Empty Vessels’.
Part I features seven neon murals, texts or figurative  compositions , a new departure for the artist although they were previewed at his exhibition at the Fruitmarket in 1991.
They will be shown with related paintings (to 24 October).
Part II includes other paintings, with drawings and prints (28 October-21 November).
At Millbank, RAAB has assembled more than thirty international and gallery artists, including Baselitz, Rainer Fetting, Ken Currie and Mimmo Paladino, for ‘Fantastic Works on Paper’(to 14 November).
Long and Ryle exhibits large still-life paintings of ordinary objects, such as a piece of rope or a bus ticket, by Martin Constable (7 October-31 October).
In Knightsbridge, Crane is making an interesting juxtaposition between French painter, Robert Combas, and Jean-Michel Basquiat, whose survey opens at the Whitney Museum, New York, towards the end of this month.
Although these two artists did not meet, there are affinities in their work and director, Andrew Kalman, has selected ten pictures by each of them to make his point (15 October-27 November).
The following exhibitions were discussed in last month's column in Il Giornale dell'Arte: Victor Pasmore's new paintings and prints at Marlborough (to 23 October), works on paper by Robert Kushner at Mayor (to 31 October), twelve biomorphic paintings by Ed Albers, with ten drawings from the estate of Arshile Gorky, at Salama-Caro (to 7 November), new photographs by Andreas Gursky at Victoria Miro (to 16 October) and Andy Goldsworthy's floor of clay at Turske-Hue-Williams (to 31 October).
BERLIN
Nierendorf's classic modern
New works by Fetting at Raab
Despite retrenchment to an upper floor, more than 200 watercolours, drawings, graphics and paintings by thirty-one classic modern artists, are brought together at the Galerie Nierendorf's traditional autumn exhibition.
As always, German Expressionism takes centre stage.
The spotlight falls on characteristic paintings by Kirchner, Heckel, Schmidt-Rottluff, Mueller and Nolde and sculptures by Karsch and Barlach.
Surrounding them are lesser-known works, such as collages by the Dadaist painter Hannah Höch, paintings and woodcuts by Georg Schrimpf, representing the Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity) movement, and Max Beckmann lithographs from his 1922 ‘Berliner Reise’ series (until mid-November).
How does one recognise the paintings of the ‘Jungen Wilden’ whose work embodied the vitality of Berlin in the early 1980s?
By their loud, garish colours, their swift, violent painting style and their continuing relationship with the figurative.
Rainer Fetting, one of the leaders of Berlin's New Expressionist movement, provides evidence of his artistic development with an exhibition of new works at the Galerie Raab.
He still uses primary colours, but the subject for example, the yellow New York taxis with their red tail lights appears to dissolve into a wash of more subtle hues.
Alongside views of New York, landscapes, nudes and portraits are recurring themes in Fetting's work.
Experimentation with colour and support has become a major preoccupation for him.
After working with chipboard, he extends his exploration even further with paint applied extremely thinly on jute.
Running parallel to his one-man exhibition at Ingrid Raab's Berlin gallery (until 7 November), more of Rainer Fetting's work is on show at the gallery's London branch (from 13 October until 14 November).
Pels-Leusden in Berlin, and Wolfgang Werner's Berlin and Bremen galleries and Edwin Vömel in Düsseldorf are collaborating on a large-scale project designed as a tribute to a largely undiscovered sculptor, Hermann Blumenthal (1905–42).
One of the most important sculptors of the first half of this century, Blumenthal was killed on active service in Russia.
The hallmarks of his style are simple, archaic-looking figures, reduced to essentials, with a brittleness of form and an emphasis on angular movement.
The exhibition commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of Blumenthal's death includes fifty-two reliefs and sculptures executed between 1927 and 1940 and numerous drawings and sketches (from 8 October until 18 November).
Gunnar Barthel presents a multifaceted panorama of the work of painter and graphic artist Michael Morgner dating from the period between 1975 and 1992.
Born in 1942, Morgner developed his own inimitable hand as member of the Chemnitz-based artistic group ‘Clara Mosch’.
Using a wash of water and black Japanese ink, he creates a translucent background against which symbolic figures and pictogram-like signs combine (until 28 October).
Galerie Jahnhorst & Preuss provides a platform for a calmer but no less original artist.
Until 13 October visitors will have the opportunity to get to know the Austrian painter Alois Riedl as a draughtsman.
The drawings with their restrained colours give a feeling of peace and contemplation.
A totally different type of behaviour characterises thirty-four-year-old Martin Von Ostrowksi whose exhibition entitled ‘Aggressive Romantik’ is at Galerie Nikolaus Sonne (until 24 October).
More painterly analysis of the great names in the history of art (from Dürer to Runge) can be expected from this ardent performer and holder of a doctorate in art history.
Constructed layer by layer, Ostrowski's canvases range from the sublime to the ridiculous, presenting many paradoxes in the process.
Anyone wishing to enjoy a wonderful abridged version of more than thirty years of life in the gallery business should not miss the jubilee show at Galerie Brusberg.
The gallery was founded in Hannover and has recently celebrated ten years at Kurfürstendamm 213, Berlin.
The exhibition entitled ‘Zehn Freunde’(Ten Friends) occupies an area of over 500 square metres.
It consists of the kind of works Brusberg has always championed: pictures of people.
People are seen by Horst Antes as slender silhouettes.
For Fernando Botero they are omnipotent and corpulent; for Bernhard Heisig they are wild and aggressive, while for Rolf Szymanski they represent spiritual energy.
Heike Ruschmeyer and Jürgen Brodwolf are concerned with people approaching or already at the end of their physical existence, while Gerhard Altenbourg explores the landscape of the psyche.
These paintings, sculptures and drawings are complemented by works, some large, some small, some museum pieces, by the fathers of classical modern art.
Brusberg names Max Ernst, René Magritte and Henri Laurens as the three patron saints of his gallery.
He is to be congratulated on his excellent choice of guardian angels.
From 7 November, Brusberg is staging an exhibition of sculptures by American Jim Lawrence on the theme of the Old Testament figure of Job.
COLOGNE
Disasters at Paszti-Bott
Apocalyptic shelving units
In the no-nonsense art world of Cologne where the word hand-written, printed, or tele-generated prevails, naturalistic painting occupies an ambivalent zone, a hot seat encircled alternately by irony or slightly apologetic nostalgia.
A modern painter untouched by either is twenty-eight year old Alexander Schlieffen, whose exhibition of seven paintings at Désiré Feuerle runs until 14 October.
Schlieffen, whose peripatetic studies included stints at the Kunstakademies of Vienna and Düsseldorf, and who was a master student of A.R.Penck, paints compositions of figures or objects in which the main formal issue is an ever-changing, often dislocated relationship between subject and ‘background’.
His early work, which sometimes drew upon medieval and Renaissance costume and imagery, featured lone or replica figures against a plain ground, executed with a severity reminiscent of David.
His signature subjects a table carefully laid with talismanic objects, portraits of subjects in period dress, and figures (now recognisably present day) standing in enigmatic relationship to one another are set against flat chequerboard backgrounds of piercing primary and secondary colour.
The strongest painting in the show reverts to Schlieffen's earlier, plainer style: two pale, draped androgynous figures are poised in a mysterious mid-dive, with no swimming pool in sight.
From 18 October until 22 November, Paszti-Bott are also showing a painter who plays with tradition in order to cast out in new directions.
Andreas Kopp has reinvented Goya's ninety ‘Desastres’, on environmental surfaces such as old metal shelving units, evoking an unsettling aura of apocalypse from the harmless debris of domestic life.
The Schneiderei's six-member managing committee of writers, musicians and visual artists (Margaret Bozionek, Heinz Conrads, Jutta Rinas, Ingrid Roscheck, Manos Tsangaris and Thomas Witzmann) abhor the description ‘alternative’, but the collective's soft-sell policy by which works are sold to further the gallery's own activities rather than for profit has helped it to weather the uneasy times faced by traditional commercial galleries.
Since opening in September 1989 the committee have accompanied each exhibition with a concert or reading and an inexpensive multiple.
(Their activity and philosophy of the past three years are celebrated in an anthology, A glance backward at the future: A book for the pre-modern, published this September.)
The tiled walls of the space, formerly a tailor's and originally a milk shop, were left as is, and the gallery's artists, which include Norbert Prangenberg, Hans-Peter Schmidt, Ute Langanky, Tina Haase, Rainer Barzen and Christoph Gesing, have had to develop original ways of working with the storefront atmosphere.
The Schneiderei is located at Gereonswall 8 in Eigelstein, a neighbourhood with many Turkish shops and resident artists tending to work in small flats rather than ateliers.
In October the Schneiderei is showing thirty large watercolours by founding member Ingrid Roscheck, who also exhibits at Galerie Jöllenbeck.
A sculptor as well as a painter, Roscheck's watercolours are intended to provide ideal landscapes for her sculptures.
Roscheck, who studied Egyptology, mathematics and astronomy as well as art, paints delicate webs of lines which resemble human inventions hieroglyphics, roads, pipes, circuitry, weapons as well as the arteries and organs of the human body.
A musical performance by Thomas Witzmann, entitled ‘Watercolour’, will accompany Roscheck's exhibition; the storefront window is to be covered in bubble wrap against which Witzmann will play various instruments, including a garden hose.
Otto Schweins has brought together two thirty-year old artists, Michael Schulz and Jürgen Stollhans, in an exceptionally consonant collaboration which both artists at first resisted.
Provisionally entitled ‘Black Nature’, Stollhans has created a room within a room by papering the small gallery with a high dado, printed in black and white from woodcuts based on sixteenth- and seventeenth-century floral patterns.
Schulz, who will be featured at the Sydney Biennial in December, makes fetish sculptures using natural materials.
The main sculpture is a small scarecrow made of canvas stuffed with dried leaves.
In a cognate meditation on the destructability of nature, Galerie Berndt is featuring, until the end of October, the first one-woman show in Germany of Korean artist Eunjoo Hur, who lives in Cologne.
Hur applies dried leaves to square canvas stretcher bars, constructed according to a preliminary drawing.
(When a work is sold, the client receives the drawing and stretchers, but must him-or herself continually renew the dried leaves.)
Another world in a small room is to be encountered at Leccese Sprüth, where Alighiero e Boetti's fifty-one knitted Afghan pieces, each one metre square, will cover the walls through November.
Boetti's tapestries usually display his own words, but here he collaborated with the Sufi poet Berang; the piece was shown in the exhibition ‘Magiciens de la Terre’ three years ago in Paris, and coincides with the Boetti retrospective at the Bonner Kunstverein until 22 November, and with a small exhibition at Cordula von Keller, Spichernstrasse 44 (by appointment only, tel. 0221–519 564).
A world little seen by the West until now and on view at Galerie Carla Stützer until 31 October is that of Czech photography of the 1930s and '40s, by photographers Feyfar, Chochola, Medkovà, Novák, Lehovec, Berka and Reichmann, all of whom (except Reichmann) are still living and working, and many of whom attended the opening in September.
Finally, Alfred Kren is exhibiting two important pieces by Calder, a mobile and a stabile, until 24 October.
PARIS
Unknown sculpture by Max Ernst
Touchaleaume shows twelve casts from an unfinished project
The world of Giuseppe Gallo's painting is a vibrant one, full of allusions to living forms, half-written stories, and suggestions of forms, cultures and fragments of the unconscious.
It has an insidious fascination, and is given added mystery by the surrounding emptiness, which is not simply a physical background to a carefully composed work.
Recent paintings and drawings by this Italian artist will be on display at Di Meo throughout October and until 21 November.
At Louis Carré & Cie curves of white-painted knotted gauze reveal another side to the artist Christian Jaccard, best known for his mainly oval ‘ignigraphs’.
These ‘Objets/reliefs’ consist of geometric shapes, mobiles, and knotted sculptures paying homage to Malévich's white square on a white background.
Artifice has run riot, replacing and controlling the warmth and vitality of nature.
The exhibition, open until the end of the month, comprises a dozen knotted constructions and a series of ‘combustions’ produced by Jaccard over the past three years.
Sylvana Lorenz combines mystery and humour in an exhibition entitled ‘Tableaux volés’(Stolen paintings), the results of an investigation by Frank Perrin, with works by Duplo, Farrel, Gambier, Petzet, Robert, Rockenschaub, Samore, Staehle, Sturtevant and Zobernig.
Eric Touchaleaume looks back more than fifty years, with twelve almost unknown works by Max Ernst.
These are bronze casts of cement bas-reliefs and sculptures which the German artist made for his house at Saint-Martin d'Ardèche in 1938.
These are now privately owned and only emerged from obscurity again a few years ago: sphinxes and winged sirens, the heads of minotaurs and owls, personifications of night and masks with invisible eyes.
The bronze versions are very recent and faithful to Ernst's instructions: when he returned to France after the war, he had planned to work on the project but did not manage to reach agreement with the current owners.
Opalka is still on display at Froment-Putman and ‘Obsessions’(Creten, Ming, Pensato, Segre and von Stockhausen) at Anne de Villepoix.
Giuseppe Penone is replaced at Durand-Dessert by Helmut Federle, with paintings which trace the outlines of the canvas, simple crosses made from doughy material, full of spirituality.
This exhibition begins on 17 October and lasts until mid-November.
Vladimir Nemuchin, the Russian Avant-garde artist of the 1950s and '60s, explores the theme of chance in a series of playing cards on show throughout the month at Monde de l'Art.
This arts and exhibition centre was formerly a hundred-year-old majolica factory and until recently was home to the Musée de l'Affiche.
Nemuchin's work is on display alongside that of another Russian artist, Vladimir Yankilevsky, with boxes symbolising the isolation of the conformists, and Andrei Lekarski, the Bulgarian painter and sculptor who superimposes statues and forms from Classical antiquity onto surprising three-dimensional collages.
Jennifer Flay provokes the eye and ear alike: after Claus Closky, Jean-Jacques Rullier and Xavier Veilhan, whose work is on show until 17 October, the gallery will be displaying a sound installation by the leading US experimental musician Christian Marclay, and sound sculptures by France's Marylène Negro.
There are no sound installations at Lara Vincy, though Jean-Luc André, on show until 17 October, is a member of the experimental music group ‘Déficit des Années Antérieures’.
His assemblage of rudimentary levers, pennants, billboards and drawings of blocks of letters is entitled ‘Fracas fossilisé d'un chaos lointain’(Fossilised cacophony of a distant chaos).
Recent paintings by Peter Joseph on display at Laage-Salomon will be followed on 10 October by two artists chosen by the critic Françoise Claire Prodhon: Laurent Joubert (conceptual paintings) and Germany's Jutta Koether.
Sadock & Uzzan has an exhibition of sculptures, drawings and paintings based on experimental work or actual projects by contemporary architects.
This little-explored area, where technology and imagination meet, reflects the debate in France and the United States on the limits of architectural awareness.
This month and next will be the turn of America's Thom Mayne, founder of the Morphosis group in Los Angeles.
Ernst Caramelle's work is on show at Crousel-Robelin-Bama until 20 October, whilst Paul Rebeyrolle is exhibiting at two galleries, Lelong and Templon, until 17 October.
The exhibitions of work by James Welling at Samia Saouma and engravings by Cy Twombly at Vidal-Saint-Phalle are scheduled to continue for the whole of the month.
Isabelle Bongard has a group exhibition on the theme of night, to include Bavcar, Boeno, Bouchard, Burattoni, Danoy, Donnadieu, Filippi, Marcheschi, Marshall, Mercadier, Privé, Tromeur, Vincendeau and Vogel.
The exhibition of recent drawings by Stephan Balkenhol at Roger Pailhas ends on 17 October and will be replaced by Julien Blaine, whose name is still associated with art journals of the 1960s, visual jokes, mail art and concrete poetry.
Angela Grauerholz arrives from Montreal after the exhibition of her work at Kassel this year.
Her photographic portraits, landscapes and scenes from everyday life are on show at Claire Burrus until the end of the month.
Montaigne has an exhibition of diptychs, photographs, monochromes, video sculptures and wall writings by Marie-Jo Lafontaine, under the titles of ‘We are all shadows’ and ‘Tout ange est terrible’.
This event lasts until mid-October.
And the Beaubourg gallery has recent assemblages by the French sculptor César until 7 November: cut-out, compressed, superimposed statues of Communist leaders brought down by last summer's events in Moscow and entitled ‘Ave Lenin’.
Art Market
La Défense
New York, Sotheby's, 5 October.
This inter-seasonal sale of Impressionist and modern pictures features a large figural group in bronze by Rodin entitled ‘La Défense’(est. $200,000–300,000; £103,100–154,600).
A set of six large canvas panels by Fernand Léger commissioned for the Rockefeller's Fifth Avenue home were the artist's first private commission in America.
Known as the ‘Rockefeller Murals’, they are expected to sell for $100,000 to 150,000 (£51,500–77,300).
The auction will also feature work by de Chirico, Utrillo and Lynn Chadwick.
Pots for money
London, Sotheby's, 7 October.
The second part of the John Philip Kassebaum Collection of English Delftware and continental faience will include tin-glazed and lead-glazed ceramics from Spain, Italy, France and Germany dating from the fourteenth century.
The whole sale is expected to total £500,000 ($970,000).
Among the apothecary wares are numerous ointment pots and drug jars, the most important of which is a polychrome drug jar bearing the arms of the Apothecaries Society (est. £40,000–60,000; $77,600–116,500).
Another important English piece is a fecundity dish dated 1674 and decorated in polychrome relief on a white ground (est. £30,000–40,000; $58,200–77,600).
One of the finest Continental pieces is a Tuscan or South Italian vase made around 1470 painted with the arms of the Duke of Calabria (est. £15,000–25,000; $29,100–48,500).
All wrapped up
New York, Christie's, 8 October.
Christo's ‘Pont Neuf Wrapped’ should prove the most expensive lot of this auction of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art (est. $120,000–180,000; £61,800–92,800).
From the same part of the sale may be noted Neil Jenney's ‘Herd and Flock’ from the Estate of Fredrik Roos (est. $100,000–150,000; £51,500–77,300).
The Impressionist section of the sale will offer ‘Femme au Flambeau’ by Marc Chagall (est. $50,000–70,000; £25,700–36,100) and ‘Eglises à Rouen’by Utrillo (est. $40,000–50,000; £20,600–25,750).
More art than craft
London, Christie's, 9 October.
A unique collection of Arts and Crafts jewellery assembled over the last twenty years.
Comprising over 200 pieces, the Larner collection is the largest single-owner collection of its kind to appear at auction.
Proceeds are expected to be in the region of £150,000 with estimates ranging from £200 to £7,000.
Important pieces include nearly thirty Guild of Handicraft objects such as a brooch by Charles Ashbee in the form of a jewelled cockerel set in yellow and white metal with pearls and moonstones (est. £7,000–9,000; $13,580–17,450).
Glasgow style jewellery designed for Liberty and Co. includes a gold and seed pearl necklace by Jessie M. King (est. £4,000–6,000; $7,750–11,650).
An unusual brooch incorporating a watercolour portrait of a girl set in gold by William Russell Flint is estimated at £2,000–3,000 ($3,900–5,800).
Oriental slaves for sale
London, Sotheby's, 9 October.
A sale of nineteenth- and twentieth-century sculpture usually caters for all tastes and pockets and this is no exception.
At the top of the scale is a marble work by Scipione Tadolini entitled ‘The oriental slave’ showing a partially-draped young woman gazing downwards estimated at £40,000–60,000 ($77,600–116,400).
There is a strong selection of sculpture with an Arab theme, including a bust of a negress by Charles Henri Joseph Cordier (est. £12,000–15,000; $22,900–28,700) and many mythological bronzes with estimates ranging from £1,500 to £20,000 ($2,800–38,300).
Also on offer are two Zulu warriors in bronze coated plaster by Daisy Borne (est. £3,000–5,000; $5,750–9,600).
Back to the Futurists
Lugano, Finarte, 10 October.
Thirty drawings by Umberto Boccioni including ‘Muscoli in velocità’(est.
SF 60–65,000; £23,800–25,800; $46,100–50,000) form the centrepiece of this sale of work by Italian Futurists.
An oil by Ardengo Soffici called ‘Compenetrazione di piani plastici’ painted in 1913 is expected to fetch SF350,000–450,000 (£139,000–158,600; $269,000–307,700).
Over one hundred drawings dating from 1912 to 1915 by Giacomo Balla will also be dispersed with estimates varying between SF 1,200 and SF 22,000 (£476–8,725; $923–16,900.
Also represented will be Gino Severini with a study for ‘Mer=Danseuse’ and Carlo Carrà.
Grand gleanings galore
London, Christie's, 12–14 October.
Over 1000 lots of architectural furnishings and garden statuary from the 100-year-old firm of T. Crowther & Son Ltd will go on the block in a three day sale on their premises.
In this decorators' dreamland may be found marble columns, ornamental birds, chimney pieces, lecterns, windows and plaster busts.
Highlights include a wood-panelled room from a Mayfair house and a Georgian shop front with its original glass as well as a carved pine chimney piece set with Wedgwood plaques which originated from Belvedere in Kent, rebuilt by James ‘Athenian’ Stuart for Lord Eardley.
The Royal arms of Princesse Charlotte (1796–1816), daughter of George IV, are also of interest.
The arms were granted to the princess on her marriage to Prince Leopold of the Belgians and are especially rare because she died just a year later in childbirth.
These arms were commissioned at the time for a New Bond Street warehouse at a cost of 20 guineas.
The sale offers a rare opportunity to buy seven feet high stone figures of Nelson and the Duke of Wellington but those in search of period doorknobs, window-frames and vases will also be satisfied.
Cremonese house-sale
Cremona, Christie's, 14 October.
Over 500 lots of furniture, paintings, ceramics, textiles and works of art will be offered in the sale of the furnishings of Casa Bassani near Cremona.
The best furniture is Lombard, such as an 18th-century walnut bureau from Bergamo (est.
L60–80 million; £28,000–37,400; $54,400–72,500) and a mid 18th–century walnut drop-front bureau (est.
L50–70 million; £23,400–32,700; $45,300–63,500).
Amongst the paintings on offer are a female portrait by Lorenzo Lotto (est.
L70–90 million; £32,700–42,000; $63,500–81,600) and an allegory on Charity by Gaspare Landi (est.
L40–60 million; £18,700–28,000; $36,300–54,400).
…
And now for something completely different
Hockworthy, Phillips, 14 October.
For those weary of collecting paintings or objets d'art, this dispersal of the John Willett Collection of African Ungulates offers that long-awaited opportunity to purchase the complete skeleton of Megaceros Hibernicus (est. £30,000–40,000; $15,500–20,700).
Less than 70 shopping days to Christmas.
Nazareth and elsewhere
Tel Aviv, Sotheby's, 20 October.
This sale of nineteenth- and twentieth-century paintings, drawings and watercolours will feature a striking representation of a vase of flowers by Moise Kisling, painted in 1951 shortly before his death (est. $180,000–220,000; £92,900–113,500).
Reuven Rubin strove from the 1920s to forge a distinctive national style of Israeli art and a good example, entitled ‘Nazareth, Galilee’ will go under the hammer (est. $40,000–60,000; £20,600–30,900).
Also of note is ‘Stones and sand’ by Mordechai Ardon which vividly illustrates his distinctive glazing technique (est. $60,000–80,000; £20,600–41,300).
Several watercolours and oils by Marc Chagall will be offered, amongst which ‘Paysage au poisson rouge’, an accumulation of images inspired by his home town of Vitebsk (est. $70,000–90,000; £36,100–46,400).
Ceremonial steel
New York, Christie's, 22 October.
Japanese swords and sword fittings from the collection of Dr Walter A. Compton, who amassed the finest private collection of swords outside Japan will be offered in this, the second session of the sale.
Highlight of the sale will be a Bitchu Aoe tachi blade by Tsugunao dated 1347 and estimated at $100,000–150,000 (£51,500–77,300).
Veronese Baroque
Verona, Sotheby's, 24–25 October.
The furnishings of one Veronese, one Lombard and two Roman palaces will be offered in this two-day sale.
Amongst the best of the Veneto pieces are a lacquered drop-front bureau estimated at L100–120 million (£46,700–56,100; $90,700–108,800) and four Venetian carved walnut armchairs dating from the beginning of the eighteenth century.
Decorated with putti supporting the arm-rests and legs in the form of leafy trees, these chairs are expected to realise L120–150 million (£56,100–70,100; $108,800–136,000).
There will also be a number of paintings on offer, including a number of still lifes and capricci.
Americana
New York, Sotheby's, 25 October.
Furniture and folk art from this burgeoning field will be offered in this sale of Americana.
An important pair of classical mahogany pier tables are estimated at $350,000–550,000 each (£180,400–283,500).
Another table from the same suite sold for a record $594,000 (£306,200) in 1988.
A Federal carved mahogany serpentine-front chest-on-chest from Salem, Massachusetts , dated circa 1795, carries an estimate of $400,000–600,000 (£206,200–309,300).
Only three examples of this type are known, the other two being in the Yale University Art Gallery and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
There will also be a good selection of pieces from the William and Mary period on offer.
From the folk art section may be noted a collection of 25 weathervanes, including an 18th-century gilded and carved pine example from Portland, Maine (est. $100,000–150,000; £51,500–77,300).
A private collection of New England and Pennsylvania slip-decorated Redware will also be dispersed in this sale.
Saying it with flowers
Madrid, Edmund Peel, 27 October.
A recently discovered pair of still lifes by Antonio Ponce forms the highlight of this Old Masters paintings sale.
Both pictures depict a glass vase set on a stone plinth with variegated tulips, daffodils, irises and other flowers.
In the execution of the flowers and stone plinths, these unpublished works very much reflect the influence of van der Hamen to whom he was related.
The pair is estimated at Pta40–60 million (£220,000–331,800; $429,000–643,300).
A portrait of a child by Luis Paret y Alcazar (1746–1799) which has remained in the same family since it was painted is expected to sell for more than Pta40 million (£220,000; $429,000).
The luxurious dress, ornate chair and intimate setting reflect the rococo spirit of the period.
Luís de Morales, known as ‘El Divino’ will be represented by a ‘Christ at the Column’(est.
Pta18–22 million; £99,500–121,600; $193,000–236,000).
No tulips
Amsterdam, Christie's, 28 October.
The Dutch Romantic school and Dutch Impressionists form the mainstay of this sale of nineteenth-century European pictures, watercolours and drawings.
Among the highlights are a view of Amsterdam by Cornelis Springer estimated at DFl. 150,000–200,000 (£47,300–63,000; $91,700–122,000), a beach scene with children playing by Jozel Israels and a portrait of a nude by his son Isaac Israels, estimated at DFl. 70,000–90,000 (£22,000–28,300; $42,800–55,000).
No name
Paris, Loudmer, 28 October.
Maître Loudmer is coinciding his sale of abstract and contemporary paintings held at Drouot with the FIAC.
One of the priciest works on offer will be ‘Zodiaque’, an oil on canvas painted in 1958 by Jean-Michel Atlan and estimated at FFr 700,000 to 800,000 (£73,300–83,750; $142,100–162,500).
César's ‘Panneau debout’, a bronze dating from 1959, is expected to realise FFr 600,000 to 800,000 (£62,800–83,750; $121,850–162,500) while ‘Sans titre’ of 1963 by Manolo Millares carries an estimate of FFr 500,000–600,000 (£50,250–62,800; $101,500–121,850).
Market day in Venice
Milan, Finarte, 29 October.
The most important work on offer in this sale of nineteenth-century Italian paintings and drawings is an oil on canvas by Giacomo Favretto entitled ‘Al mercato.
Mercato in Campo San Polo’.
Executed in 1884, it depicts in detail a group of typical characters set against the bustle of the market.
Various versions of this picture are known (a study for a later reworking was unsold in Finarte's June sale at L440 million (£205,800; $399,000)).
This picture is indisputably one of his finest works and the rareness of his oeuvre (Favretto died aged just 37) has fuelled expectations of a record price.
The estimate ‘on request’ is set at about L1,000 million (£468,000; $907,000).
Horses for courses
New York, Christie's, 30 October.
‘At the racetrack’ by the ‘unknown Impressionist’Giuseppe de Nittis is expected to realise $500,000–700,000 (£257,700–360,800) in this sale of nineteenth-century European paintings, drawings and watercolours.
Other paintings include ‘Napoleon on horseback’ by Horace Vernet (est. $500,000–600,000; £257,700–309,300) and a view up the Champs Elysées to the Arc de Triomphe by Louis Marie de Schryver (est. $150,000–200,000; £77,300–103,100).
Two Courbets will on offer: ‘Cascade, chevreuil, biche et son faun’(est. $200,000–300,000; £103,000–154,800) and ‘Marine’(est. $100–150,000; £51,600–77,400).
Other French works include ‘La toilette de Jean Guérard’, a masterly genre painting dating from 1889 by Norbert Goeneutte (est. $120,000–180,000; £61,900–92,900) and a good selection of Barbizon works by Daubigny, Jules Dupré and Troyon.
Of the English pictures of note, the finest is undoubtedly a watercolour by Turner, ‘The sea!
The sea!’, reproduced in Wilton's biography (est. $120,000–180,000; £61,900–92,900).
Venice to Vienna
Vienna, Dorotheum, 4 November.
This sale of 430 Old Master paintings will concentrate on Venetian works of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries.
A masterful view of the bacino di San Marco and the Dogana by Michele Marieschi is expected to sell for Sch 3,300,000–3,500,000 (£166,500–176,600; $323,000–342,600).
Two works by Palma Giovane will also be offered: ‘The gathering of Manna’ and ‘Moses drawing water from the rock’.
Dutch paintings in the sale include a youthful painting by Hobbema estimated at Sch 1,700,000–2,500,000 (£85,800–126,000; $166,500–245,000), a village scene with peasants by Pieter Brueghel the Younger (est.
Sch 1,600,000–1,800,000; £80,700–90,900; $156,600–175,800) and works by Adriaen and Isaak van Ostade (est.
Sch 600,000–800,000; £30,300–40,400; $58,700–78,300 and Sch 1,000,000–1,200,000; £50,500–60,500; $97,900–117,500 respectively).
Finally, a painting by the popular Jean-Etienne Liotard ‘Mademoiselle Lavergne de Lyon’ is expected to fetch Sch 2,100,000–2,500,000 (£105,100–126,200; $205,000–244,800).