

FACTSHEET NO. 1 September 1990
SMOKING STATISTICS
Number of Smokers
Since the early 1970s the proportion of adult cigarette smokers (over 16) in Great Britain has been decreasing steadily [1].
Although cigarette smoking prevalence has remained higher among men than among women, there has been a narrowing in the gap between the proportions of men and women who smoke cigarettes.
Smokers have been a minority in the adult population since 1976.
It has been estimated that there are about 14 million adult smokers in the population of Great Britain and about 10 million ex-smokers.
Cigarette consumption
Average weekly cigarette consumption in 1988 was 120 for male smokers and 99 for female smokers.
Cigarette consumption among men reached a peak in 1976 of 129 per week, then decreased to an average of 115 in 1984 and 1986.
The increase to an average of 120 cigarettes therefore suggests a reversal of the trend to lower consumption among male smokers.
Cigarette consumption among women also rose between 1972 and 1976, from 87 to 101 and has since remained more or less constant at just over or just under 100 cigarettes per week.
Sales of packeted cigarettes fell by nearly 25 per cent between 1972 and 1984.
Sales of cigars and cigarillos have also decreased since 1978 (1,730 million in number to 1,450 million in 1986) and sales of pipe tobacco have continued to decline (2.8 million kilos manufactured weight in 1986).
Handrolling tobacco sales rose slightly between 1980 and 1982 but fell again to 4.8 million kilos manufactured weight in 1986.
Sales of snuff remain constant (0.1 million kilos manufactured weight).
[6].
Cigarette Smoking and Socio-Economic Group
GHS figures confirm a link between cigarette smoking and socioeconomic group, showing a continuing trend of more men and women smokers in manual than in non-manual groups.
For each of the nonmanual groups the proportions of men and women who smoked were similar but prevalence was higher among men than among women in the  manual groups [1].
Cigarette Smoking and Age
People aged 16–19 are slightly less likely to smoke than those aged 20–59, as are those 60 and over.
The difference in prevalence between men and women is greater for those aged 60 or over than for any other age group.
Sex differences in prevalence among 16–19 year olds disappeared in the late 1970s and in 1988, 28% of both men and women in this age-group were cigarette smokers.
Deaths Caused by Smoking
The Royal College of Physicians has estimated that 100,000 people in the UK are killed by smoking each year [7].
It has been estimated that out of 1,000 young UK smokers of 20 or more cigarettes a day, one will be murdered, 6 will die in road accidents and 250 will die prematurely as a result of their smoking [8].
Most die from one of the three main diseases associated with cigarette smoking: lung cancer, chronic obstructive lung disease (bronchitis and emphysema) and coronary heart disease.
Approximately 90% of deaths from lung cancer and bronchitis are caused by smoking.
Cigarette smoking is also responsible for at least 20% of deaths from heart disease [9].
About a third of deaths caused by smoking occur in people aged under 65.
FACTSHEET NO. 2 October 1989
THE CONSTITUENTS OF TOBACCO SMOKE
Tobacco smoke is made up of ‘sidestream smoke’ from the burning tip of the cigarette and ‘mainstream smoke’from the filter or mouth end.
Tobacco smoke contains thousands of different chemicals which are released into the air as particles and gases.
Many toxins are present in higher concentrations in sidestream smoke than in mainstream smoke and, typically, nearly 85% of the smoke in a room results from sidestream smoke [1].
The particulate phase includes nicotine, ‘tar’(itself composed of many chemicals), benzene and benzo(a)pyrene.
The gas phase includes carbon monoxide, ammonia, dimethylnitrosamine, formaldehyde, hydrogen cyanide and acrolein.
Some of these have marked irritant properties and some 60, including benzo(a)pyrene and dimethylnitrosamine, have been shown to cause cancer when applied to living tissue.
WHAT IS TAR?
All cigarettes produce tar but the brands differ in amounts.
The average tar yield of British cigarettes (as measured by a standard machine method by the Government Chemist) has declined from about 30mg per cigarette in the period 1955–61 to 13.6mg today.
There have also been reductions in nicotine (from an average of about 2mg in 1955–61 to about 1.3mg by 1980) and to a lesser extent in carbon monoxide (20.6mg in 1955–61 to 14.7mg in 1985)[2].
As a result of a voluntary agreement between the tobacco industry and the government, a system of four tar groups has been established:
LOW TAR Less than 10mg
LOW TO MIDDLE TAR 10mg but less than 15mg
MIDDLE TAR 15mg but less than 18mg
HIGH TAR 18mg and above
Filter tip cigarettes, which account for some 97% of cigarettes sales in the UK, yield less tar than plain cigarettes although some filter brands yield more carbon monoxide.
Pipe and cigar smokers
The smoke from most cigars and pipe tobaccos has a higher tar content than that from cigarettes but because most life-long cigar and pipe smokers do not inhale, they take in less tar than an average cigarette smoker.
However, cigarette smokers who switch to pipes or cigars usually continue to inhale the smoke and so probably are no better and may be worse off [3].
Herbal cigarettes and other non-tobacco cigarettes have no nicotine but produce tar and carbon monoxide.
Smoking induced diseases
There is moderate reduction in lung cancer risk associated with lower tar cigarettes but research in the UK suggests that the assumed health  advantages of switching to lower tar may be largely offset by the tendency of smokers to compensate for the reduction in nicotine (cigarettes lower in tar also tend to be lower in nicotine) by smoking more or inhaling more deeply [4].
There is no evidence that switching to lower tar cigarettes reduces coronary heart disease risk (see also Factsheet no. 5 in this series, ‘Tobacco, the Heart and Circulation’).
The Department of Health publishes tar tables to encourage smokers who cannot or will not give up smoking to switch to lower tar brands on the grounds that this may at least lower their risk of lung cancer.
The tables emphasise that the government's advice is to stop smoking.
Tobacco industry
Government policy also favours a progressive lowering of average yields of tar in all cigarettes.
The cigarette companies used this to justify tobacco advertising: they have maintained that, to reduce average tar yields, new brands will have to be introduced (despite the fact that substantial changes have already been made to existing brands by simply altering their yields) and advertising will be needed to make the public aware of these new brands.
NICOTINE
Nicotine, an alkaloid, is an extremely powerful drug.
The US Surgeon General has affirmed that the way in which nicotine causes addiction is similar to drugs such as heroin and cocaine [7].
Only 60mg of pure nicotine placed on a person's tongue would kill within minutes.
Nicotine is contained in the moisture of the tobacco leaf: when the cigarette is lit, it evaporates, attaching itself to minute droplets in the tobacco smoke inhaled by the smoker.
It is absorbed by the body very quickly, reaching the brain within seven seconds [5].
It stimulates the central nervous system, increasing the heart beat rate and blood pressure, leading to the heart needing more oxygen.
CARBON MONOXIDE
Carbon monoxide is present in all cigarette smoke and is also the main poisonous gas in car exhausts.
It binds to haemoglobin much more readily than oxygen, thus allowing the blood to carry less oxygen.
Heavy smokers may have the oxygen carrying power of their blood cut by as much as 15% [6].
In conclusion
Any reduction of risk brought about by switching to lower tar/lower nicotine/lower carbon monoxide cigarettes will be small compared to the reduction achieved by giving up all together.
FACTSHEET NO. 3 March 1990
THE ECONOMICS OF SMOKING
Smoking is primarily a health problem, although it does play a significant economic role in the community.
While cigarette tax is rich source of revenue to the Treasury, the costs of smoking to the economy include not only the expense of treating diseases caused by smoking, but also other costs such as working days lost and social security payments.
The Costs of Smoking to Industry
The cost of smoking to industry results from lost productivity due to sickness absences, impaired productivity due to poor health, and interruption of production from time given to smoking.
The Royal College of Physicians has estimated that smoking-induced illness results in the loss of 50 million working days every year [1].
Surveys have shown that smokers of more than 20 cigarettes a day have twice as much time off work due to illness as do non-smokers [2].
In addition, there is the cost of accidents and fires resulting from smoking as well as cleaning and maintenance costs.
Fires
Cigarettes and other smoking materials are a common cause of fires.
In 1987, the third most frequent source of fires in dwellings was smokers' materials (other than matches) which started 6221 fires.
Matches were the source of another 4,013 fires [3].
Cost to the Smoker
In 1990, a 20-a-day smoker will spend about £600 on cigarettes.
Of course, smokers also pay with their health: the proportion of men aged 35 who will die before reaching retiring age is 40% for heavy smokers (25 or more cigarettes a day) compared with 15% for non-smokers [4].
Death is usually due to one of the three major diseases caused by smoking — lung cancer, chronic obstructive lung disease and coronary heart disease.
Many who suffer from these diseases experience years of ill-health and subsequent loss of productivity.
Cost to the Department of Health
The DoH estimates that the cost to the NHS of treating diseases caused by smoking is £500 million a year [5].
Other costs include the payment of sickness or invalidity benefits to those suffering from diseases caused by smoking and the payment of widow's pension and other family social security benefits to the dependant's of those who die as a result of their smoking.
Tobacco Taxation
The Treasury earned £6,040 million in revenue from tobacco duty and VAT for the financial year 1988/89 [6].
(In contrast, the government spent less than £5 million on anti-smoking campaigns.)
Tobacco is the Chancellor of the Exchequer's third biggest source of consumer revenue after VAT and hydrocarbon oil [7].
The price of tobacco is accepted by both the tobacco industry and those concerned with health to be the single greatest influence, at least in the short term, affecting tobacco consumption.
In the 1970s the real price of cigarettes fell about 30% because cigarette taxation did not keep pace with inflation.
It rose during the early 1980s but has fallen 9% since 1986 and is now about the same level as in the mid 1960s.
The Tobacco Industry
About 13,500 people in Great Britain are employed in the tobacco industry [8].
Since 1979 the government has given grants to the tobacco industry worth more than £27 million [9].
Three of the world's seven largest tobacco companies are based in Britain: British American Tobacco (BAT Industries), Imperial Tobacco and Rothmans International.
BAT is the fifth largest company in the UK and recorded pre-tax profits of £1,641 million in 1988 [10].
The UK cigarette market is currently dominated by three companies.
Imperial Tobacco (owned by Hanson) holds the greatest share of the cigarette market.
Imperial manufactures the brands John Player Superkings (the second most popular cigarette with 6.2% of the UK market), Embassy and John Player Special.
Gallaher, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the US company American Brands, manufactures the top selling brand in the UK, Benson and Hedges (with 18.4% of the total market).
The third, Rothmans International, a multi-national company based in Britain but controlled from South Africa, manufactures the brands Rothmans, Dunhill and Peter Stuyvesant [11].
FACTSHEET NO. 4 July 1991
SMOKING AND LUNG DISEASE
It is estimated that smoking causes some 100,000 premature deaths every year [1].
The respiratory system is vital to life and anything which prevents it functioning can result in death.
Often cancers of these organs are not discovered until it is too late to cure them: less than 8% of lung cancer patients are alive five years after diagnosis [2].
Over a third of smoking induced deaths are from lung cancer and another quarter are from chronic obstructive lung disease — bronchitis and emphysema.
Lung cancer
Lung cancer kills more people than any other type of cancer and 90% of these deaths are caused by smoking.
In 1989, 39,646 people in the UK died from lung cancer [3].
Although it has been declining slightly among men under 65 during the past 20 years, it is still rising in women.
It is the most commonly found cancer in men in the UK and, in Scotland and some parts of England, has overtaken breast cancer as the leading cancer of women [3].
One in four smokers dies prematurely: of these, one in ten will die of lung cancer and more than one in eight if they smoke over 25 cigarettes a day.
The risk of lung cancer increases directly with the number of cigarettes smoked.
In a study of male British doctors [4], deaths from lung cancer in smokers and non-smokers were as follows:
Increased risk of developing lung cancer
No. of cigarettes smoked per day
Annual death rate per 100,000 men
78 (8 times that of nonsmokers)
127 (13 times that of nonsmokers)
251 (25 times that of nonsmokers)
Age at time of starting to smoke is important.
The younger a person is when he or she starts smoking, the greater the risk of developing lung cancer.
Death rates increase approximately in proportion to the duration of smoking: doubling the duration of smoking from 10 to 20 years increases the incidence of lung cancer 16 times if daily cigarette consumption remains constant [2].
The amount of tar in cigarettes is also important but less so than the number smoked or duration of smoking.
For information on other forms of cancer induced by tobacco use, see Factsheet No. 12 in this series and for the effects of pipe and cigar smoking on the lungs, see Factsheet No. 13.
Chronic obstructive lung disease
Chronic obstructive lung disease (including chronic bronchitis and emphysema) is a progressively disabling disease.
It can cause prolonged suffering due to difficulty in breathing because of the obstruction or narrowing of the small airways in the lung and the destruction of the air sacs in the lung due to smoking.
These are essential for the exchange of oxygen in the blood: when they break down, the lung loses its elasticity and there is less surface in the lung to absorb oxygen.
The onset of the disease is very gradual and breathlessness only becomes troublesome when about half of the lung has been destroyed.
The disease is rarely reversible once established.
Smoking is the main cause of chronic obstructive lung disease: it is very rare in nonsmokers and at least 90% of the deaths from this disease can be attributed to cigarette smoking [5].
In 1989, 31,814 people in the UK died from this disease [3].
The risk of death due to the disease increases with the number of cigarettes smoked.
In the last 20 years, the death rate from chronic bronchitis in the UK seems to have been declining steadily.
This has been attributed to cleaner air, social improvements, fewer male smokers, a reduction in tar yields of cigarettes and advances in treatment.
Nevertheless, there is some indication that this decline may be less marked than at first appears due to the nomenclature of the diseases involved.
Morbidity in the young
There is evidence of the ill effects of tobacco smoke at all ages.
Children of smoking parents have more respiratory illnesses than those of nonsmokers and children who smoke have more chest illnesses than nonsmokers.
(For more information, see Factsheets No. 6, ‘Children and smoking’ and No. 7, ‘Passive smoking’, in this series
The benefits of giving up
The risk of lung cancer, like all other cancers, increases steeply with advancing age.
When smokers give up, their risk of getting lung cancer starts decreasing so that after 10 to 15 years an ex-smoker's risk is only slightly greater than that of someone who has never smoked [6].
Other factors can cause lung cancer but they are much less important than smoking.
They include certain substances used in industry, in particular asbestos.
However, less than 3% of all deaths from lung cancer are thought to be caused by these substances [3].
For smokers who are exposed to such substances as asbestos, their risks of developing lung cancer tend to multiply together and become very large.
In the cases of chronic obstructive lung disease, if a young person gives up smoking, their lung function will improve.
However, in older people, such improvement is not possible although after cessation further deterioration will run parallel to that of nonsmokers.
Passive smoking
Nonsmokers are at risk of contracting lung cancer from exposure to other people's smoke.
After scrutinising epidemiological studies on the effects of passive smoking, the UK's Independent Scientific Committee on Smoking and Health found that the research findings were consistent with an increased risk of lung cancer in nonsmokers of between 10% and 30% [7].
On this basis, passive smoking is believed to be the cause of several hundreds of lung cancer deaths in nonsmokers each year.
(For further information on passive smoking see Factsheet No. 7 in this series.)
FACTSHEET NO. 5 October 1989
SMOKING, THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
It is estimated that smoking causes 100,000 premature deaths every year [1].
Coronary or ischaemic heart disease is the leading cause of death in the UK and in many developed countries.
In 1987, 99,479 men and 78,699 women died of heart disease in the UK of which about one in four were in people under the age of 65 [2].
Cigarette smoking is responsible for at least 20% of these deaths — a third of all smoking induced deaths.
Since the late 1960s, deaths from heart disease in the UK have only declined by some 10% for men and some 2% for women as compared with Canada and the USA which have achieved reductions of some 40% and 50% respectively [3].
What is Coronary Heart Disease (CHD)?
CHD has two principal forms — angina and heart attacks.
Both occur because the arteries carrying blood to the heart muscle become blocked or narrowed, usually by a deposit of fatty substances, a process known as atherosclerosis.
Angina is a severe pain in the chest brought on by exertion and relieved by rest.
A heart attack is due to obstruction of a coronary artery either as a result of atherosclerosis or a blood clot: part of the heart muscle is deprived of oxygen and dies.
Sudden death is the first manifestation of CHD in a quarter of patients and resuscitation alone can lead to recovery.
Risk factors for Coronary Heart Disease
Cigarette smoking, raised blood cholesterol and high blood pressure are the most firmly established, non-hereditary risk factors leading to CHD.
A cigarette smoker has two to three times the risk of having a heart attack than a nonsmoker.
If both of the other main risk factors are present then the chances of heart attack can be increased eight times [4].
At least 80% of heart attacks in men under 45 are thought to be due to cigarette smoking [5].
At this age, heavy smokers have 10 to 15 times the rate of fatal heart attacks of nonsmokers.
The role of smoking in CHD
The main constituents of tobacco smoke thought to cause heart disease are nicotine and carbon monoxide.
Nicotine is a powerful drug which stimulates the production of adrenaline, increasing the heart beat rate and blood pressure.
This leads to the heart needing more oxygen.
Carbon monoxide is present in all cigarette smoke and is also the poisonous gas in car exhausts.
It binds to haemoglobin much more readily than oxygen, leading to the formation of carboxyhaemoglobin: the blood can therefore carry less oxygen.
Heavy smokers may have the oxygen carrying power of their blood cut be as much as 15% [6].
Smoking also increases  atherosclerosis and a tendency to thrombosis [7].
Thus nicotine makes the heart work harder, carbon monoxide reduces the supply of oxygen it needs while obstruction to the coronary arteries  also occurs.
Other effects of smoking
Smoking is also significantly related to stroke and the risk increases with the number of cigarettes smoked [8].
For younger women, smoking and the use of oral contraceptives increases the risk of a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular disease by tenfold.
This effect is more marked in women over 45 [1].
Atherosclerosis may also narrow the arteries of the legs, causing pain on walking.
Over 90% of patients with arterial disease of the legs are cigarette smokers [9].
Continued smoking can cause gangrene and lead to amputation of the toes, feet or limbs.
(For further information see Factsheet no. 10 in this series, ‘Smoking and Arterial Disease’.)
Aortic aneurysm (a dilation in the wall of the aorta which may rupture) is much commoner in smokers.
The benefits of giving up
Whatever age a person is, it is never too late to give up smoking.
Blood is less likely to clot, the heart can pump more blood (and therefore oxygen) around the body with less effort.
Smoking low tar cigarettes does not reduce the risk of heart disease [10].
Giving up smoking reduces the risk of a heart attack and is particularly important for those who have other risk factors such as high blood pressure, raised blood cholesterol levels, are overweight or diabetic.
Some studies have shown that, within five years of giving up, the risk is reduced almost to that of a nonsmoker.
Giving up smoking after a coronary attack can halve the chance of a recurrence.
Stroke risk decreases significantly in two years and is about the same as for nonsmokers after five years [8].
Passive smoking
Recent research in the USA suggests that there is a small but measurable risk for heart disease among nonsmokers who live with smokers [11].
FACTSHEET NO. 6 May 1991
CHILDREN AND SMOKING
Smoking prevalence
Children become aware of cigarettes at an early age.
Three out of four children are aware of cigarettes before they reach the age of 5 whether the parents smoke or not; at 10 years old as many as 40% of boys and 28% of girls have had at least a few puffs of a cigarette [1]and about one third of those who become regular smokers have started before age 9 [2].
Large regional studies of children's smoking habits during the 1960's and 1970's showed that more boys smoked than girls and that boys started earlier [3].
In 1982, at ASH's instigation, the government commissioned the first national survey of smoking among children and found that 11% of 11–16 year olds were smoking regularly [4].
Since then, there has been a fall in prevalence among boys (from 13% in 1984 to 8% in 1988) and less markedly among girls (from 13% to 11%)[5].
The 1988 survey included for the first time results from saliva tests from half the children surveyed; this double check may have encouraged them to be more honest about their smoking habits.
The proportion of regular smokers increases sharply with age: the 1988 study found that in England 1% of 12- year old pupils smoked, 12% of 4-year olds and 23% of pupils aged 15 were regular smokers [5].
What factors influence children to start smoking?
Children whose parents smoke are more likely to smoke themselves and parents' approval or disapproval of the habit is an even more significant factor [1].
Numerous studies have shown than most young smokers are influenced by their friends' and older siblings' smoking habits.
While it is difficult to prove that cigarette advertising encourages children to start smoking, children tend to smoke the brands that are promoted most heavily and advertising reinforces the smoking habit [6].
Advertising also creates the impression that smoking is a socially acceptable norm.
Sports sponsorship by tobacco companies and particularly the televising of sponsored events increases children's awareness of the brands [7]and those children with favourite advertisements have been shown to have more positive views on smoking than those without.
Children also identify the use of cigarette brand imagery for other products or services, eg Silk Cut Holidays, as advertisements for cigarettes and are attracted to the imagery conveyed [8].
Smoking and children's health
Children who smoke are more susceptible to coughs and increased phlegm and are more likely to have chest illnesses than those who do not smoke [9].
A recent study revealed that children who smoke are 3 times more likely to have time off school [10].
The earlier children become regular smokers and persist in the habit as adults, the greater the risk of dying prematurely.
Children are also more susceptible to the effects of passive smoking and cotinine levels found in the saliva of children whose parents smoke indicate that in households where both parents smoke, the children are receiving a nicotine equivalent of smoking 80 cigarettes a year [11].
Bronchitis and other respiratory illnesses are significantly more common in the first year of life in children who have one or two smoking parents [12].
Children of parents who smoke during the child's early life run a higher risk of cancer in adulthood [13]and the larger the number of smokers in a household, the greater the cancer risk to nonsmokers in the family.
Children whose mothers smoke ten or more cigarettes a day after the fourth month of pregnancy tend to show poorer progress at school, at least up to the age of 16 [14].
Smoking Prevention
Anti-smoking campaigns conducted in the 1970's were not generally successful in preventing children from taking up the habit although pupils' awareness of the associated health risks was improved [3].
During the 1980's, campaigns were more successful in preventing the uptake of smoking, especially those in which children took an active part in promoting the antismoking message [15].
New initiatives include Smokebusters, a network of regional clubs for children aged between 10 and 13 which encourage children to accept non-smoking as the norm.
The recently launched Parents against Tobacco (PaT) is a forum for patents to involve themselves in anti-tobacco campaigning on behalf of their children.
Economic factors have an important effect on children's smoking habits and evidence from the USA suggests that teenagers are even more responsive to price increases than are adults.
The Health Education Authority has also launched a Teenage Smoking Programme, which aims to reduce by one third the number of 11–15 year olds smoking by 1994.
Children, smoking and the law
Under the Protection of Children (Tobacco) Act of 1986 it is illegal to sell any tobacco product to anyone below the age of 16.
In spite of the law, however, it is estimated that children aged 11–16 in Britain spend up to £90 million a year on cigarettes [16].
The 1986 OPCS survey found that as many as 89% of regular smokers said that they bought cigarettes from shops.
Although the number of prosecutions and level of fines has increased in recent years, there were only 61 convictions in 1989.
PaT's campaign for more vigorous enforcement of this law has led to the introduction of a Private Member's Bill into the House of Commons which is now in the final stages of its passage through Parliament and will become law later in 1991.
The new law increases fines for shopworkers found guilty of selling cigarettes to children to £2,500 and tightens up the previous legislation in a number of other ways.
Since 1984 the British Medical Association has campaigned for the minimum age for the sale of tobacco to be raised to 18 years.
FACTSHEET NO. 7 February 1989
PASSIVE SMOKING
Breathing other people's smoke is called passive, involuntary or secondhand smoking.
The nonsmoker breathes ‘sidestream’ smoke from the burning tip of the cigarette and ‘mainstream’smoke that has been inhaled and then exhaled by the smoker.
Smokers are also exposed to sidestream smoke from their own and others' cigarettes.
Many people spend much of their lives indoors and tobacco smoke can make a significant, measurable contribution to the level of indoor air pollution [1].
What's in the smoke?
Tobacco smoke is highly complex and contains thousands of chemicals which are released into the air as particles and gases.
Many potentially toxic gases are present in higher concentrations in sidestream smoke than in mainstream smoke and nearly 85% of the smoke in a room results from sidestream smoke [2].
The particulate phase includes tar (itself composed of many chemicals), nicotine, benzene and benzo(a)pyrene.
The gas phase includes carbon monoxide, ammonia, dimethylnitrosamine, formaldehyde, hydrogen cyanide and acrolein.
Some of these have marked irritant properties and some 60 are known or suspected carcinogens (cancer causing substances), including benzo(a)pyrene and dimethylnitrosamine.
How does this affect the passive smoker?
As well as causing annoyance by making hair and clothes smell unpleasant, involuntary smoke exposure can cause symptoms such as eye irritation, headache, cough, sore throat, dizziness and nausea and produces small but measurable changes in the air passages in the lungs of otherwise healthy adults.
Adults with asthma experience a significant and substantial decline in lung function when exposed to sidestream smoke for one hour [3].
People with allergies and other respiratory and heart ailments may be more seriously affected.
The effects of long-term exposure
In March 1988 the Government's Independent Scientific Committee on Smoking and Health (ISCSH) published its fourth report, dealing in particular with passive smoking [4].
The Committee scrutinised epidemiological studies on the effects of passive smoking and found that the overall findings were consistent with an increased risk of lung cancer in nonsmokers in the range of 10%-30%.
This means that, if the risk of lung cancer in nonsmokers is, say, 10 per 100,000, the risk in an exposed group would be 11 to 13 per 100,000 per year.
This means that several hundred of the 40,000 deaths from lung cancer each year may be caused by passive smoking.
When this risk is compared to other cancer risks, it is found that the lifelong risk from passive smoking is more than 100 times higher than the estimated effect of 20 years' exposure to chrysotile asbestos normally found in asbestos-containing buildings [5].
What is important is that (a) large numbers of people are involved;(b) some of them are at a greater risk than the general population due to pre-existing cardiac or respiratory conditions and/or prolonged exposure in homes or at the workplace; and (c) there is no ‘safe’ level of exposure to carcinogens.
Recent studies have found an increased risk of diseases other than lung cancer in passive smokers.
A prospective cohort study [6]carried out on a general population in the west of Scotland found that mortality from all causes was higher in passive smokers than in a control group of nonsmokers, as were all causes of death related to smoking, including mortality from lung cancer and ischaemic heart disease.
When passive smokers were divided into high and low exposure groups on the basis of the amount smoked by their cohabitees, those highly exposed had higher rates of symptoms and death.
Similarly, as with other studies, it was found that amounts of cotinine, a derivative of nicotine, in nonsmokers exposed to other' smoke were similar to the amounts found in light smokers.
Are young children at risk?
Infants of parents who smoke are more likely to be admitted to hospital for bronchitis and pneumonia in the first year of life.
Chronic cough and phlegm are also more frequent among children of parents who smoke.
The ISCSH said: ‘By enhancing the frequency or severity of childhood respiratory illnesses,[passive smoking]could contribute to the development of respiratory disease in adult life among nonsmokers.’[4].
The ISCSH also found evidence for an association between exposure to passive smoking and low birthweight and said that, since active smoking confers a hazard on the health of the unborn baby, passive smoking confers a hazard on the health of the unborn baby, passive might be expected to confer one also, albeit a smaller one [4].
(See also Factsheet No. 8 in this series, ‘Smoking and Reproduction’ for information on the effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy.)
Should nonsmokers be protected?
Experts have concluded that, given public health initiatives to minimise or eliminate involuntary public exposure to other environmental pollutants with less carcinogenic potency than several of the substances in tobacco smoke, similar efforts to prevent involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke are necessary.
In the USA, some 40 states restrict smoking in public places and workplace smoking policies have increased dramatically in the 1980s.
According to a survey carried out by the Bureau of National Affairs in 1986, 36% of the responding organisations currently had a smoking policy, 2% were to implement one during 1986 and another 21% had such a policy under consideration [7].
The ISCSH said that:
‘The health risks to nonsmokers [of passive smoking]provide added argument for the reduction of smoking in the community, and nonsmoking should be regarded as the norm in enclosed areas frequented by the public or employees, special provision being made for smokers, rather than vice versa.’[4].
FACTSHEET NO. 8
SMOKING AND REPRODUCTION
Fetal Growth and Birthweight:
Babies born to women who smoke are on average 200 grams lighter than babies born to comparable non-smoking mothers.
The relationship between maternal smoking and low birthweight is independent of all other risk factors which influence birthweight including maternal size, race, socioeconomic status and the sex of the child.
(1) Furthermore, the more cigarettes a woman smokes during pregnancy, the greater the probable reduction in birthweight.
However, if a woman stops smoking before the 20th week of pregnancy, her risk of having a low-weight baby will be similar to that of a non-smoker.
Low birthweight associated with maternal smoking is due to a restriction in the growth rate of the baby caused by a reduction in the oxygen supply reaching the baby through the placenta.
When a pregnant woman smokes she inhales various poisons, including nicotine and carbon monoxide, which are absorbed into her body and pass to the baby.
Each of these may deprive the baby of oxygen.
(2,3).
Spontaneous Abortion:
Tobacco use during pregnancy causes a two-fold increase in the risk of spontaneous abortion.
(4).
Complications of Pregnancy:
On average, smokers have more complications of pregnancy and labour which can include bleeding during pregnancy, premature detachment of the placenta and premature rupture of the membranes.
(1).
Perinatal Mortality:
(defined as still-birth or death of an infant within the first week of life) increases directly with the number of cigarettes smoked during pregnancy.
In on large study, the perinatal mortality risk increased by 20 per cent for the infants of smokers of less than 20 per day and by 35 per cent for smokers of 20 or more per day, compared with that of non-smokers. (5) The risk is greater in women who are poor, anaemic or have had several children.
Smoking or chewing tobacco in pregnancy may therefore be especially hazardous to women in developing countries.
(6).
Breast Feeding:
Research has shown that smoking cigarettes may contribute to inadequate breast milk production.
Nicotine has also been found in the breast milk of mothers who smoke, although the effect on the baby is not yet fully understood.
(7).
Long-term Growth:
Studies of long-term growth and development give evidence that children of mothers who smoked in pregnancy may have slight but  measurable deficiencies in physical growth and intellectual development throughout childhood and into early adulthood.
(8) Infants of parents who smoke are also more susceptible to chest infections and bronchitis and pneumonia than the children of non-smokers.
(See Fact Sheet No 7) for more information on these effects.)
Smoking and oral contraceptives
Women who take the contraceptive pill and who also smoke cigarettes are more likely to have a coronary attack, stroke or blood clot in the leg veins, which may shift to the lung (pulmonary embolism) than non-smokers who are on the pill.
One study has shown that for women aged 25–34 on the pill the relative risk of death from circulatory disease was 1.6 for nonsmokers but 3.4 for smokers; for women aged 35–44 the risks were 3.3 and 4.2 respectively and for women over 45, 4.6 and 7.4. (9) There is also a considerably increased risk for women on the pill who smoke and who have one or more known risk factor for coronary heart disease.
These include raised blood pressure and raised blood cholesterol levels.
It is therefore important that women of all ages who take the contraceptive pill should not smoke.
Smoking and cancer of the neck of the womb (cervix)
There is some evidence that cervical cancer is more common in women who smoke cigarettes, especially heavy smokers or women who have been smoking for several years.
The relative risk of carcinoma in situ has been found to be 3.6 for smokers compared with 1.0 for women who have never smoked.
The risk of severe alteration of the lining of the cervix which may proceed to cause cancer is also increased in smokers.
(10).
Smoking and menopause
The natural menopause occurs on average 2 to 3 years earlier in smokers.
(11).
Smoking and male fertility
Studies have suggested that cigarette smoking may induce sperm abnormalities and thereby reduce male fertility.
(12) Some doctors now advise couples who are having difficulty starting a family that both partners should give up smoking.
FACTSHEET NO. 9 January 1990
WOMEN AND TOBACCO
Trends in women's smoking
Cigarette smoking amongst women, as amongst men, is on the decrease.
The habit became popular among women from the 1920s onward and particularly after the Second World War.
In 1972, 41% of women over 16 were daily cigarette smokers (a figure that had been fairly constant since the 1950s) whilst in 1986 that figure was 31%, compared with 52% and 35% for men [1]: this has given rise to the assumption that women find it more difficult to give up smoking than men.
Despite this apparent discrepancy in cessation rates, it would appear that women give up at a rate very similar to men's: women almost exclusively smoke (and therefore give up) cigarettes, whilst men sometimes switch from cigarettes to a pipe or cigars [2].
Girls' smoking
In 1982, the government's first national survey of children's smoking found that 11% of both boys and girls aged 11–16 smoked regularly.
By 1984, this figure had risen to 13%.
In 1986, smoking among boys fell to 7% with girls at 12% [3]; in 1988, in England, boys' smoking remained at 7% but girls still smoked more at 9% [4].
A number of theories have been put forward to explain this difference in smoking rates.
Parental attitude to smoking and peer influence are factors which affect both boys and girls taking up the smoking habit.
For girls themselves, anxiety about weight control, smoking to ‘calm the nerves’ and low self-esteem are also important.
Many girls and young women also read women's magazines with cigarette advertisements [5].
For further information, see Factsheet 6 in this series, ‘Children and smoking.’
Mortality
Early studies suggested that relative mortality risks among female smokers were less than those of male smokers but it is now clear that these studies were comparing the death rates of a generation of male smokers with a generation of women amongst whom smoking was a much more recent phenomenon.
As the smoking characteristics of the two sexes become more and more alike, the rates of smoking induced diseases are drawing closer together [6,7].
Women are certainly not immune to the damaging effects of tobacco use.
Death rates from lung cancer, coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive lung disease, peripheral vascular disease and overall mortality rates are significantly increased among women as well as men smokers.
For instance, the risk of a heart attack is greatly increased by smoking and more so if combined with use of the contraceptive pill.
For more information on these diseases see Factsheets 4, 5, 10 and 12 in this series.
Yet some diseases caused by smoking have characteristics specific to women.
Cervical cancer
Epidemiological studies have established that cigarette smoking is a risk factor for cancer of the uterine cervix and that the risk increases with duration of smoking.
Cigarette smoking is associated with a decrease in particular cells — Langerhans' cells — which form an important part of the body's immune system, the cell count being related to the number of cigarettes smoked daily [8].
The risk of severe alteration of the lining of the cervix which may proceed to cancer is also increased in smokers [9].
Smoking and oral contraceptives
Smoking combined with the use of oral contraceptives increases the risk of a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular disease by tenfold.
This effect is even more marked in women over 45 [10].
Reproduction
Smoking can reduce a woman's fertility.
Babies of mothers who smoke during pregnancy are on average 200 gms (8 ozs) lighter than babies born to comparable nonsmoking mothers.
Smoking during pregnancy also increases the risk of miscarriage, complications during pregnancy, stillbirth and perinatal mortality; it also affects the children's physical and intellectual development.
These issues are covered more fully in Factsheet 8 in this series, ‘Smoking and Reproduction’.
Smoking and hormonal effects
Recent research suggests that smoking acts directly on the endocrinological processes controlling menstruation.
A significant association has been found between smoking habits and abnormal menstrual patterns (except for premenstrual syndrome), with current smokers experiencing the worst symptoms [11].
The natural menopause occurs on average 2 to 3 years earlier in smokers [12].
The loss of oestrogen at the onset of menopause may also be greater in smokers than nonsmokers.
A reduction in bone density tends to begin at the menopause.
Smoking has been found to be an important factor, increasing this loss of bone density and resulting in an increased risk of osteoporosis [13].
FACTSHEET NO. 10 October 1988
SMOKING AND ARTERIAL DISEASE
The arteries are the flexible pipes which carry oxygen-rich blood from the heart to various parts of the body.
In childhood the arteries have very smooth internal linings.
With age the lining of the arteries becomes narrowed and roughened: this process is known as atherosclerosis.
As the arteries become narrower with advancing atherosclerosis, people may notice tight cramping pain when insufficient oxygen-rich blood gets to the heart muscle (angina) or leg muscles (intermittent claudication).
These symptoms are often the first evidence of advancing arterial disease.
The condition may lead to coronary heart disease (CHD)(see Fact Sheet no. 5) or arterial disease affecting the legs or the brain.
Smoking as a cause of atherosclerosis
Arterial disease due to smoking is the largest cause of premature death in industrialised societies, killing even more people than lung cancer.
Smokers with disease of the leg arteries, called peripheral vascular disease (PVD), who ignore the warning of early symptoms and continue to smoke are more likely to develop gangrene of a leg [1,2].
Over 90% of people with symptoms of arterial disease of the legs are smokers [3].
There are over 2,000 amputations a year in England, the majority of which are due to PVD from smoking.
The main risk factors for arterial disease, apart from family history, are cigarette smoking, a diet rich in saturated fats and high blood pressure, together with insufficient exercise, obesity and diabetes.
Smoking is probably the most important preventable cause of premature arterial disease [4].
Cigarette smoking combines with other factors to multiply the risks of atherosclerosis.
Patients who continue to smoke after surgery for PVD are most likely to relapse, leading to amputation, and are more likely to die earlier [5,6].
Many surgeons offer patients an operation only on condition that they give up smoking — and often find that the ensuing improvement makes surgery unnecessary.
Smoking tends to increase blood cholesterol levels.
Cigarette smokers have blood which is stickier than non-smokers; they also have raised fibrinogen levels and platelet counts which makes the blood more sticky.
Carbon monoxide attaches itself to haemoglobin much more easily than oxygen does.
This reduces the amount of oxygen available to the tissues.
All these factors make smokers more at risk of developing various forms of atherosclerotic disease.
As the atherosclerotic process progresses, blood flows less easily through rigid and narrowed  arteries and the turgid blood is more likely to form a thrombosis (or clot).
This sudden blockage of an artery may lead to a fatal heart attack, a stroke or gangrene of the leg.
Aneurysm
Is a ballooning of the wall of an artery which leads to risk of bursting or clotting, which may lead to catastrophic results.
Smokers are very much more likely to die from a ruptured aneurysm of the abdominal aorta than nonsmokers [7].
Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger's Disease)
This is a rare form of PVD, and is virtually always due to heavy cigarette smoking [8].
Few sufferers are able to stop and many of them end up with multiple amputations.
Stroke
It is now known that smokers are more likely to develop a cerebral thrombosis (stroke) than non smokers.
A form of cerebral haemorrhage (subarachnoid) is more common in smokers, especially women who also take the contraceptive pill [9,10].
Women and atherosclerosis
As more young women start to smoke and older women continue to do so, all forms of arterial disease are becoming more common in women.
Conclusions
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of arterial disease, whether of the heart, brain or legs.
Those who stop smoking considerably reduce their chance of developing one of these diseases.
Stopping smoking is the most effective single treatment for those who have had a heart attack or have developed arterial disease of the legs.
FACT SHEET NO. 11 March 1990
SMOKING CESSATION AIDS
Most smokers start smoking cigarettes before the age of 16 [1]and the habit of smoking quickly develops.
Many adult smokers continue smoking not through unfettered choice but because they are addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
In a major review of nicotine addiction, the US Surgeon General concluded that ‘the pharmacologic and behavioural processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine’[2].
Thus, for both pharmacological and  psychological reasons many smokers experience difficulty in giving up the habit.
The desire to stop
Surveys have shown that a majority of adult smokers want to give up the habit.
A National Opinion Poll survey found that of those who expressed a desire to give up smoking, over a third were very keen to stop [3].
The same survey found that the more a person smokes the less faith that person has in believing that he or she can stop.
The most important element of the cessation process seems to be the smoker's decision to give up, with the aid or method being of secondary importance.
Breaking the habit
The majority of smokers who give up do so by simply deciding to stop but they may be helped by the informal support of the family, friends or colleagues.
Stopping smoking is a personal decision which smokers have to carry through for themselves.
Nevertheless, dependence on nicotine is a major part of the problem for many smokers and smoking cessation aids may help such people in their attempts to stop smoking.
Types of smoking cessation aids
Nicorette , a chewing gum containing nicotine, is by far the most widely tested cessation product.
The gum is designed to be used after stopping smoking to alleviate withdrawal symptoms while the new exsmoker comes to terms with breaking the habit of lighting up and smoking cigarettes.
Careful instruction on its use is necessary: the user needs to understand that it is not a miracle cure but that it can provide real if limited help.
Nicorette is only available on prescription.
Studies have shown that given the support and guidance of a general practitioner, Nicorette can be a useful aid to stopping smoking, especially for more dependent smokers [4].
Other oral products are available from pharmacists without a prescription, including lozenges, capsules and tablets.
Some of these contain nicotine while others aim to reduce the cravings or to produce  an unpleasant taste when a cigarette is smoked.
Few of these products have been clinically tested although they may be of assistance to some people.
It should be noted, however, that many of these products do not give clear instructions or a recommended dose [5].
Dummy cigarettes , which consist of a plastic tube containing a variety of substances such as menthol or eucalyptus, may help those smokers who have problems overcoming the ritual of handling cigarettes.
There is, however, little more than anecdotal evidence that these are effective.
Cigarette filters are designed to trap some of the tar and nicotine enabling smokers to wean themselves off cigarettes gradually.
However, smokers may inhale more in order to compensate for reduced nicotine intake and may eventually take in as much, or possible more tar [6].
Smokers who are motivated to give up the habit may benefit from cessation clinics or self-help groups , although smokers should be cautious about claims of high success rates made by some clinics.
Smoking clinics usually provide health information, group discussion and mutual support rather than specific treatment.
Studies have shown that long term success rates (ie at one year follow up) of 10–20% can be achieved [7].
There is little evidence to support the effectiveness of either acupuncture or hypnosis as a means of eliminating smoking behaviour but such methods may suit some smokers who want to try this form of treatment [6].
New cessation aids currently being tested include a nicotine nasal spray and a transdermal nicotine patch.
A preliminary trial of the skin patch suggests that this may help some smokers overcome the craving and withdrawal symptoms associated with giving up smoking [8].
Herbal cigarettes are not recommended as an aid to giving up smoking because they contain both tar and carbon monoxide.
Some brands have an equivalent tar content of the middle or high tar cigarette brands.
In addition, the use of herbal cigarettes reinforces the habit of smoking which smokers need to overcome.
Realising the health hazards of smoking cigarettes, some smokers switch to pipes or cigars in the belief that this is a less dangerous form of smoking.
However, such smokers may incur the same risks and may even increase them, especially if they inhale the pipe or cigar smoke [9].
(See also Fact Sheet 13 in this series.)
The only way of eliminating further health risks is to stop smoking altogether.
FACT SHEET NO. 12 February 1990
TOBACCO AND CANCER
It is estimated that one in three people will develop cancer at some stage in their lives.
In 1986, there were nearly 160,000 deaths in the UK from the various forms of cancer, about a quarter of all deaths.
Of these, up to one third can be attributed to smoking.
Lung cancer
Lung cancer is the cancer most commonly associated with smoking.
It kills more people than any other type of cancer and 90% of these deaths are caused by smoking.
In 1987, 40,187 people in the UK died of lung cancer [1].
Although lung cancer during the past 20 years has been declining slightly among men under the age of 65, it is still rising in women.
It is the most commonly found cancer in men in the UK and in Scotland, lung cancer has overtaken breast cancer as the leading cause of cancer deaths among women [1].
One in four smokers dies prematurely: of these, one in ten will die of lung cancer, more than one in eight if they smoke over 25 cigarettes a day.
(See also Factsheet 4 in this series, Smoking and Lung Disease)
Cancers of the mouth and throat
Smoking cigarettes, pipes and cigars is a risk factor for all cancers associated with the larynx, oral cavity and oesophagus.
The risk for these cancers increases with the number of cigarettes smoked and those who smoke pipes or cigars experience a risk similar to that of cigarette smokers.
Heavy smokers have laryngeal cancer mortality risks 20 to 30 times greater than nonsmokers [2].
The risks associated with tobacco and alcohol multiply when exposures occur simultaneously: for those who both smoke and drink heavily, their habits are responsible for nine out of ten cases of laryngeal cancer in this category [3].
Tobacco and alcohol also act synergistically in the case of oral and pharyngeal cancers.
Among consumers of both products the risk of these cancers was increased more than 35-fold among those who smoked two or more packs of cigarettes a day and took more than four alcoholic drinks a day.
It has been estimated that tobacco smoking and alcohol drinking account for about three quarters of all oral and pharyngeal cancers [4].
Cervical cancer
Epidemiological studies have established that cigarette smoking is a risk factor for cancer of the uterine cervix and there is evidence that the risk increases with duration of smoking.
Cigarette smoking is associated with a decrease in particular cells — Langerhans' cells — which form an important part of the body's immune system, the cell count being related to the number of cigarettes smoked daily [5].
The  risk of severe alteration of the lining of the cervix which may proceed to cause cancer is also increased in smokers [6].
Pancreatic cancer
Cancer of the pancreas is a rapidly fatal disease with a fiveyear survival rate of only 4%.
Cigarette smoking is a strong and consistent predictor of pancreatic cancer although the risk diminishes to that of a nonsmoker ten years after cessation.
The relative risk for male smokers of more than 20 cigarettes a day is over 5 times that of nonsmokers and for women 6 times that of nonsmokers [7].
Bladder and kidney cancers
Smoking has been found to be contributory factor in both bladder and kidney cancers.
A study in West Yorkshire found that the overall risk for bladder cancer for male smokers was 1.7 and for female smokers 1.4 [8].
Leukaemia
A recent study of mortality among 248,000 US veterans of whom 723 died of leukaemia during 16 years of follow-up shows a significant increase in the risk of leukaemia associated with cigarette smoking, together with a dose response relationship between risk and the amount smoked.
The risk was calculated to be 1.53 for current smokers and 1.39 for ex-cigarette smokers.
These last two forms of cancer are now considered by experts to be in the category ‘diseases for which the excess mortality in smokers may be partly or wholly attributable to smoking’.
Smokeless tobacco
Smokeless tobacco can be inhaled, chewed or sucked and, as with smoking, can cause cancer in humans — most particularly cancers of the oral cavity.
Such oral cancers are a particular problem in India and certain other Asian countries where the use of oral tobacco is widespread.
Nevertheless, in the last 20 years there has been a sharp increase in the production and sale of smokeless tobacco in some developed countries.
In the USA, several studies have found a significantly high relative risk of cancer among oral snuff users and, in India, a study of 2005 cancer cases found a highly significant relative risk for cancers of the oral cavity, some parts of the pharynx, the larynx and oesophagus [11].
Passive smoking
A recently published report revealed that there is an increased risk of lung cancer among non-smokers of between 10% and 30%.
(See Fact Sheet 7 ) in this series, Passive Smoking.)
FACTSHEET NO. 13 February 1990
PIPE AND CIGAR SMOKING
Prevalence
In 1986, 44% of British men were current smokers: 35% were daily smokers, 10% smoked cigars and 6% pipes: these percentages add to more than 44% as some men smoked more than one type of tobacco.
As hardly any women smoke cigars of pipes, the inclusion of these products made no difference to the overall proportion of women smokers — 31% [1].
Of male pipe and cigar smokers, nearly three quarters are ex-cigarette smokers.
Sales of cigars and pipe tobacco
From October 1987 to September 1988, cigar sales totalled £398 million and other tobacco sales (including pipe tobacco) £545 million: this compares with total cigarette sales of £6,924 million [2].
At present, only cigarette packets are required to carry a health warning but, as from 1 January 1993, an EEC directive comes into force which requires all tobacco products to carry one of 16 different warnings.
Pipe and cigar smoke
The smoke from most cigars and pipe tobaccos has a higher tar content than that from cigarettes but because most life-long cigar and pipe smokers (‘primary smokers’) do not inhale, they take in less tar than an average cigarette smoker.
However, cigarette smokers who switch to pipes or cigars (‘secondary smokers’) usually continue to inhale the smoke and so probably are no better and may be worse off [3].
Risk to the pipe or cigar smoker's health
In the classic studies of smoking, such as those by Doll and Peto, the overall risk of premature death was raised some 70% in cigarette smokers compared with nonsmokers.
In comparison, the risk for pipe and cigar smokers was only up to 10% higher than nonsmokers.
However, in such studies, pipe and cigar smokers were usually defined as those who had never smoked cigarettes: these primary smokers tend not to inhale and so are exposed to relatively low amounts of tar and other harmful constituents of the tobacco smoke compared with cigarette smokers.
Nowadays, with most pipe and cigar smokers being ex-smokers of cigarettes, they may also have transferred their inhalation techniques, despite the irritancy of the smoke: in this case, they will be at significantly greater risk of disease than pipe or cigar smokers who have never smoked cigarettes [4].
Lung cancer
Mortality rates for lung cancer in those who have always smoked only cigars and pipes are significantly higher than in nonsmokers but are lower than for cigarette only smokers.
The risk of lung cancer  increases in relation to the number of cigars or pipefuls smoked each day and the degree of inhalation.
This lower risk of lung cancer among pipe and cigar smokers is due to the lesser amount smoked and the lower degree of inhalation.
Nevertheless, carcinogens are found in similar levels in the smoke of all tobacco products and experiments indicate that smoke condensates from pipes and cigars are equally if not more carcinogenic than condensates from cigarettes [5].
Other cancers
Smoking pipes or cigars increases the risk of oral cancers almost as much as cigarettes, particularly if intake is heavy.
Tobacco and alcohol act synergistically in the case of oral and pharyngeal cancers, multiplying the risk of contracting the disease [7].
Cancer of the larynx is also developed by pipe and cigar smokers at rates comparable to those of cigarette smokers (ie. several times that of nonsmokers)[8].
Although the oesophagus is not directly exposed to tobacco smoke, its constituents condense in the mucous membranes of the mouth and pharynx and are swallowed.
The oesophagus also receives mucus cleared from the lungs by the ciliary mechanism or by coughing which is also swallowed.
Epidemiological studies indicate similar mortality rates for cancer of the oesophagus in smokers of cigars, pipes and cigarettes.
As with oropharyngeal cancers, alcohol consumption in combination with tobacco smoking increases the risk substantially [8].
Respiratory disorders
Pipe and cigar smokers experience higher mortality from chronic obstructive lung disease as compared with nonsmokers although not as high as that of current cigarette smokers [9].
Heart disease
In one study, cigar smokers who had taken up cigars after stopping cigarettes and smoked at least five cigars a day had a risk of non-fatal myocardial infarction about four times as high as that among ex-cigarette smokers who did not smoke cigars.
Among those who had never smoked cigarettes, there was very little increased risk [6].
Passive smoking
Nonsmokers are at risk of contracting lung cancer from exposure to other's people's smoke.
The UK's Independent Scientific Committee on Smoking and Health found that the research findings were consistent with an increased risk of lung cancer in nonsmokers of between 10% and 30% [7].
On this basis, passive smoking is believed to be the cause of several hundred lung cancer deaths in nonsmokers each year.
(For further information on passive smoking see Factsheet No. 7.)