

INFORMATION BULLETIN
In this issue:
New data confirms risk to children's health from passive smoking 1, ii
Mintel report shows 61% in favour of tobacco ad ban 2, i
New Zealand smoking rates down following tobacco ad ban 10, ii
1.
SMOKING AND DISEASE
i Cigarette smoking is believed to reduce fertility and to increase the frequency of abortion of chromosomally normal  foetuses .
Although no differences were noted in the fertilization rate and pregnancy rate between smokers and nonsmokers undergoing in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) in one study, the outcome of these pregnancies was not recorded.
A retrospective analysis was undertaken of the results of the first attempt at in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment to evaluate the effects of cigarette smoking by either partner in events preceding and during oocyte recovery, fertilization, implantation, and early pregnancy in a group of patients undergoing IVF-ET.
Subjects were 447 couples undergoing IVF treatment at the Foothills Hospital, Calgary, Canada, between March 1984 and March 1989.
In 124 couples the female partners smoked cigarettes, and in 236 couples they did not.
(The smoking habits of 87 couples were not recorded.)
A total of 69 pregnancies (19.2%) were achieved, 50 in nonsmokers (21.2% per cycle) and 19 in smokers (15.3% per cycle).
There were no significant differences in these cycles between the two groups in peak estradiol level achieved, the number of eggs retrieved, fertilization rates, or implantation rate.
The rate of spontaneous abortion was higher in smokers (42.1%) than in nonsmokers (18.9%).
Consequently, the delivery rate per cycle of IVF was significantly lower in the smoking group (11 of 124, 9.6%) than in the nonsmokers (40 of 236, 17.0%).
There was no effect when only the male partner was a smoker.
From these data, smoking by women appears to reduce significantly the chances of successful pregnancy after IVF treatment.
The authors note that no corrections could be made for other confounding variables that might lead to miscarriage in women who smoke and they caution against overinsterpretation of the apparent effect of one single variable in IVF-ET.
Nevertheless, the findings suggest that smoking may seriously reduce the chances of pregnancy after IVF- ET.
ii The National Study of Health and Growth (NSHG), a surveillance study including, each year, around 9000 children aged 5–11 years, has previously reported results relating to two effects of passive smoking in children: firstly, a possible negative relation between children's height and the reported number of cigarettes smoked by parents in the home, and secondly, a dose-response relation between prevalence of respiratory symptoms and parental smoking.
Both reports were from data collected in 1982 from a quasi-representative sample of 4000 English children and nearly 1000 Scottish children.
An analysis of the 1987 survey was undertaken to estimate the dose-response relations of height and respiratory symptoms to passive smoking.
The study population included 5002 English from the representative sample (69.1% of total eligible), 2903 English inner city children (42%) and 3319 representative Scottish children (75.6%).
The authors found no significant relation between child's height and total parental smoking in the home in contrast to the previous conclusions drawn from the 1982 data.
For respiratory disease, however, the relative risk for persistent wheeze on exposure to 20 cigarettes per day was 1.35, compared to no exposure.
Risk of at least one respiratory condition attributable to passive smoking reached 8.1% in white English inner city children.
The authors conclude that the risk of respiratory conditions resulting from passive smoking, although small, is not negligible.
2.
ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION
i As the new voluntary agreement on tobacco advertising is about to be published, a survey by the market research group Mintel has revealed that 61% of Britons believe that tobacco advertising should not be allowed.
A ban on tobacco advertising is favoured particularly by the older age groups (69% of those aged 55–64) but 56% of 15–19 year olds also support a ban.
The survey also revealed that people do not trust the advertising industry to regulate itself: 56% think it should not be left to its own devices and 66% believe that the Government should monitor advertising.
ii The Tobacco Advisory Council has ended its advertising business with Saatchi and Saatchi amid speculation that it is poised to launch a major campaign combating EC moves to ban tobacco advertising.
The TAC has short-listed Horner Collis & Kirvan and Bainsfair Sharkey Trott to bid for the account.
It is thought that the tobacco industry's trade body could increase its marketing budget from £300,000 to £2 million.
iii Silk Cut Travel is likely to change its name to Meon Worldwide in response to EC Directive in tobacco advertising.
The company, once owned by Gallaher, is now independent and is ready to break away from its tobacco brand association if required to do so.
3.
SPONSORSHIP
i The following tobacco-sponsored sports were among those receiving press coverage during the past month:
4.
TOBACCO INDUSTRY
i Shares in BAT Industries fell sharply following the announcement of a substantial loss of £189 million at Eagle Star, BAT's insurance subsidiary.
The company is faced with estimated claims of £165 million from banks and building societies that have suffered losses from repossessing homes during the recession.
Profit forecasts for BAT have now been cut from £1.37bn to £1.152n.
6.
HEALTH PROMOTION
i Pubs and tobacco shops act like street-corner drug pedlars, an addiction expert told a recent meeting of the British Society for the Advancement of Science.
Professor Griffith Edwards of the Institute of Psychiatry urged the Government to ban cigarette advertising and tax alcohol more heavily.
Tobacco advertisements linked a ‘dirty and dangerous product’ with sophistication and magic moments, he said.
‘A similar attempt to glamorise heroin or cocaine would be no more nor less obscene but would probably render the publisher liable to a criminal prosecution.’
Professor Edwards said that cultural myths about illegal drugs disguised the much greater damage being caused by alcohol and tobacco.
ii An Australian study has attempted to analyze the bodyrelated attitudes of female current, ex, and never-smokers by using a questionnaire that assesses a wide range of attitudes towards the body.
Despite the increase in knowledge of the health effects of smoking, many female smokers continue to smoke.
It has been argued that the best predictor of behaviour is not the possession of knowledge per se but behavioural intentions which are themselves predicted by attitudes and the subjective norm for the acceptability of the behaviour in question.
The subjects of this study were 504 women in a metropolitan area of South Australia.
The results revealed that current smokers felt significantly less attractive than non-smokers.
There were no other differences in the body-related attitudes of current smokers and current non-smokers.
The differences in feelings of attractiveness that were seen were not affected by the age, socioeconomic status or current occupation of the smokers or nonsmokers.
There were no differences in the body-related attitudes of current smokers compared with ex-smokers.
Thus, whilst women who smoke may know that smoking could damage their health, there is no evidence that they experienced smoking as having any immediate impact on their self-perceived strength and fitness.
The authors conclude that anti-smoking campaigns should consider increasing the emphasis on the extent to which smoking is an unattractive habit as attractiveness appears to be an area in which  women smokers are already vulnerable.
7.
SMOKING CESSATION
i Several studies have shown that smoking habits vary between socioeconomic groups, i.e that people from lower social groups with less education or in manual occupations are more likely to smoke than those from other socioeconomic groups.
However, socioeconomic preconditions and reasons for giving up smoking have not been investigated to the same extent.
Data from a Swedish survey were analyzed to see whether socioeconomic and demographic factors, tobacco consumption level or illness could explain why some smokers succeeded in stopping smoking.
The subjects were 1905 smokers taken from a random sample of 4424 persons among the Swedish population interviewed in 1974 and 1981 as part of the Swedish Level of Living Survey.
On average, 28% of those who smoked in 1974 had stopped smoking by 1981.
The data revealed that senior salaried employees were most successful in quitting (35% success rate), well educated persons (33% quit), and those who smoked less than 10 cigarettes per day (36% quit).
By contrast, only 20% of divorced parents with children succeeded in stopping smoking.
Tobacco consumption was the most important factor to explain the variance.
The probability of smoking cessation increased by 40% if a person smoked less than 10 cigarettes per day.
However, the low explained variance, 6%, of the multivariate approach indicates that socioeconomic and demographic factors, consumption level or illness have marginal effects on the decision to stop smoking.
The authors conclude that it is more likely that many other factors should also be included in the analysis such as motivation, nicotine dependence, personality type, self-efficacy, therapeutic support, etc, which act together in a complex way and would substantially increase the explained variance of smoking cessation.
8.
PUBLIC PLACES AND THE WORKPLACE
i A coach tour operator has been  fined £800 for allowing smoking on a coach tour which had been advertised as a smoke-free holiday.
Land Travel of Bath admitted making a false statement under the Trade Descriptions Act.
The company was sued by a Nottingham couple who had specifically checked to make sure that smoking would not be permitted on the coach.
A spokesman for Land Travel said the company had not set out to mislead the public but when the non-smoking trip did not attract a full complement of passengers it ‘consolidated’ it with a smoking holiday.
ii Greater Manchester buses and Lancaster City Transport have banned smoking on their services.
Other transport bodies which have recently introduced no-smoking policies include KLM's Cityhopper flights from Gatwick to Rotterdam and Majesty Cruises which has pledged to introduce the world's first smoke-free dining room and 132 non-smoking cabins on its new ship, Royal Majesty.
iii The betting shop chain William Hill is to ban smoking at its Doncaster shop from 9 September.
If successful, the policy is likely to be extended to other branches around the country.
10.
INTERNATIONAL
i Canada : The Canadian Government has announced that it will appeal against the Quebec Superior court decision declaring Canada's advertising ban to be unconstitutional.
The federal government contends that the trial judge erred on 38 points of his ruling.
These include his referring to the advertising ban as a ‘totalitarian step’, casting doubt on the ban as a health measure.
The government also maintains that the judge erred by not weighing evidence that firms spend huge sums in advertising to promote their products.
The Department of Justice has announced that tobacco companies will not be permitted to advertise while awaiting the new ruling.
ii New Zealand : Tobacco sales are falling rapidly due to the advertising ban on tobacco products that took effect on 17 December 1990, according to Health Department officials.
Tobacco sales were down 7.6 percent in the first three months of this year compared with the same period last year and 9.6 percent in the second three months.
Tobacco released to the market was down 11.3 percent in the first half of 1991 compared with the same period of 1990 and 17.7 percent down compared with the second half of 1990.
There has also been a drop in the number of cigarette smokers.
25.1 percent of the adult population of New Zealand currently smokes, down from 26.7 percent last December.
Mr. Murray Laugesen of the New Zealand Health Department believes that the ban on tobacco advertising and the fall in consumption are linked.
The decline in smoking prevalence and tobacco sales is particularly significant because in March of this year, the Health Department reported that there had been a 14 percent rise in tobacco advertising during 1990, apparently in anticipation of the advertising ban.
Excise tax data showed a 4 percent increase in smoking in 1990, and household surveys carried out by the Health Department confirmed the increase.
iii Thailand : Thailand's largest department store chain will ban the sale of cigarettes as soon as current stocks run out.
A spokesman for Central Department Stores said that the stores will ban both foreign and domestic brands.
In addition, smoking in the stores will be restricted to a few designated areas.
The ban is part of a campaign for a better environment and includes using recycled materials for packaging.
Other members of the Thai Department Store Association are expected to follow Central's lead.
11.
MISCELLANEOUS
i The second edition of ‘UK Smoking Statistics’ has just been published.
This comprehensive manual includes date on tobacco consumption, prevalence, market shares of cigarette brands, regional trends, and much more.
The two primary sources of data on smoking habits are the General Household Survey and surveys conducted by the tobacco industry.
Consumption date is given from 1870–1988 and includes  information on all tobacco products.
The second edition replaces the previous edition by providing all the information included in the first volume as well as more recent data.
The new edition includes a new chapter on smoking among pregnant women.
ASH gratefully acknowledges the generous financial support of the British Heart Foundation with the cost of maintaining the ASH Information Service and of producing the Information Bulletin