

INSIDE:
This issue of Supporters News has been given over almost entirely to the campaign on the proposed ban on all tobacco advertising and promotion, put forward in a draft European Community Directive in May.
Indeed, we have delayed publication so as to incorporate a large part of the ASH detailed brief on the subject in the paper.
Health warning victory: ad ban fight continues
The government has announced that from January 1992, cigarette, cigar and pipe tobacco packets will carry two health warnings instead of one.
On the front of the packet will appear ‘Tobacco seriously damages health’, while on the back, one of six new warnings will appear.
These will be: ‘Smoking causes cancer’, ‘Smoking causes heart disease’, ‘Smoking causes fatal diseases’, ‘Smoking kills’, ‘Smoking when pregnant harms your baby’, and ‘Protect children: don't make them breathe your smoke’.
The warnings will cover six percent of the relevant face of the package and will no longer be attributed to the ‘Health Departments’ Chief Medical Officers’.
The changes are being made under the Tobacco Products Labelling (Safety) Regulations 1991,which were laid before Parliament by the Secretary for Health, Mr William Waldegrave, on 11th July.
The Director of ASH, David Pollock, warmly welcomed the new health warnings.
‘These new warnings are tougher, starker and tell the truth about the deadly effects of tobacco.
They are a victory for common sense.
For the first time, there's a legal requirement for tobacco companies to put proper health warnings on their product’, he said.
Packets will also carry quantified information about tar and nicotine content for the first time.
But the tobacco industry isn't very pleased
The Tobacco Advisory Council's initial response was to issue a statement deploring the new warnings and stating: ‘This seems to be a personal crusade by the Secretary of State for Health against the industry’.
It followed this up with threats to withdraw from the UK altogether and threats to refuse to sign the new voluntary agreement which is now being drawn up.
A spokesman for the Tobacco Advisory Council said: ‘It's deplorable the way Mr Waldegrave has discriminated against the UK industry’.
Round three
However, it appears that Mr Waldegrave might not support the proposed European directive to ban advertising if the industry decides to sign the voluntary agreement after all.
A spokesman from the Department said: ‘There is nothing stopping us from asking for a total ban.
There is no great argument against it.
At present, his advisers have told the Secretary of State that a ban would not be effective, but that advice could change.’
This is his greatest test yet.
A Minister for Health, not for the Tobacco Industry
By introducing tough new health warnings and refusing to give in to the tobacco industry's demands, Mr Waldegrave has already shown himself to be the most effective Health Minister since Sir George Young's short tenure.
He has earned the congratulations of many anti-tobacco campaigners: David Pollock remarked that ‘after years of the Secretary of State either acting as referee between the industry and the anti-tobacco movement, or actively joining the industry side, it is good news to have a Secretary of State for Health joining the anti-tobacco side.
At last there is a Minister for Health, not for the Tobacco Industry’.
What you can do
Read the brief, produced in a condensed form on the inside of this special issue of Supporters News .
As a Supporter of ASH, you are no doubt already aware of why ASH and other health and medical bodies want to see tobacco advertising banned.
Our brief supplies all the hard facts to support our campaign.
Read the enclosed leaflets.
We can supply you with more copies if you would like to send them out to other people: please ring us for more information.
Write to your MP, giving your views on the subject.
Write also to your MEP.
If you are not already an active Supporter, contact your local branch to find out what is being organised in your area.
A list of branches is enclosed with this issue.
Let us know about any unusual tobacco advertising or promotional activity being organised near you.
Has a salesperson tried to offer you a free sample in a shop without asking if you smoke first?
Have you seen salespeople handing out free samples at public events without checking if the recipients smoke?
Do you know of any discos or clubs in your area listing events under a cigarette brand name?
The case against tobacco advertising — more evidence
The Coronary Prevention Group is another charity playing a leading part in the advertising ban campaign.
It has just launched a booklet ‘The Case Against Tobacco Advertising’, which has been sent to all MPs and is endorsed by other charities, medical organisations, the Health Education Authority, NHS Authorities and Trusts and the trade union movement.
Never before has such a wide spectrum of organisations made such a call.
The CPG's Vice-President, Sir Richard Doll, says in the document's foreward, ‘A ban on tobacco advertising will reduce the pressures on children to take up smoking.
We must be aware that the children of today are the cancer and heart victims of tomorrow.’
Speaking at the launch of the booklet, David Pollock, Director of ASH, said that the government has accepted since 1965 that cigarette advertising is harmful, especially to children — that's why it was banned from TV.
Since then the government has forbidden cigarette ads from appearing within sight of schools, in the cinema and in young women's magazines.
But the tobacco industry still reaches its target through general interest publications read by young people, through overt product placement in films and through lengthy coverage of tobacco sponsored sport by the BBC.
Your campaign action update
It is not difficult to see what has been keeping the ASH office busy over the past three months.
We have:
Played a crucial part in setting up a network of anti-tobacco organisations to campaign in the most effective way possible for a ban on tobacco advertising
Produced a detailed brief for health professionals on the ad ban directive
Assisted with the launch of Doctors for Tobacco Law
Checked data for other major campaign publications on the directive
Attended a conference in Finland, and an ASH branches conference in Edinburgh
Played host to a film crew for an HTV children's programme on tobacco use
Received visitors from ASH Australia, California and Spain
The new Assistant Director of ASH
The new Assistant Director of ASH, replacement for Joyce Epstein, who left in March, is actually someone who will already be familiar to many Supporters.
Mark Flannagan, formerly Director of ASH Workplace Services, has been promoted to this post and has not had time to snatch a wink of sleep since.
After taking a degree in Mediaeval History at St. Andrew's University, in which he specialised in mediaeval medicine, Mark joined ASH Scotland in 1986 as a Project Development Officer.
He was involved in the successful campaign to get Skoal Bandits removed from sale in the UK and in preparing information to be sent to all prospective Parliamentary candidates in Scotland, as well as working on many other projects.
In 1987 he joined the national office to run projects on smoke-free air in public places.
He focused particularly on the issue of smoking in the workplace.
He was promoted to the post of Assistant Director in April of this year.
Passive smoking publications
Both of these new publications are available from the ASH Office .
Passive Smoking Questions and Answers is a free leaflet: write in enclosing an A5 SAE for your copy .
Passive smoking: a health hazard is a much more detailed booklet, price £3.95.
Please write to ASH but make cheques payable to the BMA.
Doctors join in the fight
To lend yet more weight to the advertising ban campaign, a coalition of 29 medical organisations, representing virtually all the UK's 85,000 doctors, has been formed under the title ‘Doctors for Tobacco Law’.
As well as pressing the government to support the proposed directive, it also supports the introduction of a model Tobacco Act, which will cover sales of tobacco to children, restrictions on smoking in public places, better education on the health risks of smoking, increased taxation levels and more provision of smoking cessation resources.
Speaking at the launch of the coalition, the Chairman, Professor John Moxham, said: ‘We doctors can no longer just sit by and watch this tragedy, under the guise of acceptable promotion…
The government can no longer close its eyes to the health facts.
It is condoning promotion of a drug which kills 110,000 people a year…it is, quite simply, unethical.’
Doctors for Tobacco Law will now take up an important role in the campaign, working closely with ASH, the British Medical Association, the Coronary Prevention Group, the British Heart Foundation and many other medical organisations.
‘I've only got a death warning on my packet!’
‘Smoking kills’How the warning will appear on the back of the pack 
Brief on the European Directive to ban all tobacco advertising
This brief summarises the arguments in favour of the European Commission's proposed ban on all tobacco promotion and advertising throughout the Community and answers the most common counter-arguments.
A ban is justified on health grounds.
Tobacco is the most dangerous consumer product known.
Smoking causes six times as many premature deaths as road accidents, all other accidents, suicides, murder, manslaughter, fires, illicit drug use and AIDS put together .
It is highly addictive, comparably so to heroin or cocaine according to the US Surgeon General, and the health risks are long-term ones, so that starting is easier and quitting is more difficult.
The promotion of such a product should no longer be tolerated.
No one claims that advertising is the only determinant of tobacco consumption or smoking prevalence: to do so would be absurd.
It is equally absurd, however, to claim (as the industry does) that advertising does not expand (or slow the contraction of) the market and that it does not in fact recruit new smokers.
Advertising is a potent force in maintaining smoking as an apparently socially acceptable habit: it swamps the health education message, reinforces the habit for those already hooked and recruits new smokers,the great majority of whom start as children.
We owe it to our children and grandchildren to spare them from the epidemic of smoking-related disease, disability and death from smoking that has marked the middle and later years of the 20th century.
An advertising ban will save many children from being misled into thinking smoking is a smart, sophisticated practice.
It will help adult smokers to quit.
And it will mark society's rejection of the morally indefensible promotion of addiction to what for at least 30 years has been recognised as a most dangerous drug.
The Government's Position
The Government's present position is one of scepticism about the value of a ban on tobacco advertising, but Secretary of State William Waldegrave has said ‘I do not rule it out for ever, certainly: but it is just not the highest priority at the moment…
’(News at Ten, 4.6.91).
In his Green Paper ‘The Health of the Nation’ he suggests a target of reducing smoking to 21% of women and 22% of men by 2000 and refers to the need for ‘continued recognition of the importance of controls on advertising of tobacco’.
The best control is abolition.
As his Minister for Health, Virginia Bottomley, has said: ‘If cigarettes were introduced today, their production and sale would probably be banned’(Hansard, 20.7.90, col. 1340).
There is no proposal to ban cigarettes — only their advertising and promotion.
In the hope of saving 100 lives a year, the law now compels the wearing of seat belts in the back of cars: smoking kills three times as many every day.
If the Government is serious about their Green Paper target of reducing smoking prevalence by one-third by the year 2000, it cannot afford to reject this proposal.
What the Draft Directive proposes
Article 1 defines advertising widely, including:advertising while it is not specifically mentioning the product, tries to circumvent the advertising ban by using brand names, trade marks, emblems or other distinctive features of tobacco products.
It defines tobacco products to include those for smoking, sniffing, sucking and chewing.
Article 2 says that:all forms of advertising for tobacco products shall be banned in the territory of the Community.
It bans the use of tobacco brands and trademarks to advertise other goods and it bans the use by tobacco products of brands and trademarks established by other products.
It also bans free distribution of tobacco products.
Article 3 allows advertising at the point of sale inside tobacco sales outlets (defined in Article 1 as specialist retailers only).
Article 4 requires that persons or organisations with a legitimate interest must have the opportunity to take legal action against breaches of the ban.
Article 5 allows more stringent control of tobacco advertising by Member States if they wish.
Article 6 requires legislation by Member States to take effect by 1 January 1993.
Support for a ban on tobacco advertising
General Public : An EC survey in 1987 showed 74% support in the UK for a ban on tobacco advertising.
There was 73% public support across the whole European Community.
Health and Medical Organisations : All the leading British and international medical and health organisations that have studied the problem of smoking have called for a total ban by legislation on the promotion of tobacco.
These include:
Legal basis for the Directive and procedure for its adoption
The legal basis of the Directive is the Single European Act 1986 which amended the Treaty of Rome in preparation for the establishment of the Single Market on 1 January 1993.
Under Article 100A(3), measures of harmonisation are based on a high level of health protection .
The draft Directive is based on the ban already existing for health reasons in several Member States.
(An existing Directive already bans television advertising, and a proposal supported by the UK Government and currently in course of approval will ban not just advertising but production and marketing of oral moist snuff — Skoal Bandits and the like.)
The proposed Directive is being discussed by the Health Working Groups — national civil servants under a Council chair.
It will probably be passed alto to a small committee of the European Parliament, but the Parliament has already voted by a large majority in favour of a ban and a further reference may be deemed unnecessary.
It then goes to the Council of (Health Ministers, which meets towards the end of each six-monthly presidency.
This will be on 11 November 1991 , under the Dutch presidency.
The Directive will be subject to a ‘qualified majority’ voting procedure in the Council of Ministers.
Member states have weighted votes, and 54 votes are needed out of the total of 76 in order to adopt the Directive.
The following states are broadly in favour of the Directive:
Belgium: 5 votes, France: 10 votes, Greece: 5 votes, Ireland: 3 votes, Italy: 10 votes, Luxembourg: 2 votes, Portugal: 5 votes, Spain: 10 votes.
This makes a total of 50 votes, 4 short of the required total.
The following states are potentially hostile to the Directive:
Denmark: 3 votes, Germany: 10 votes, Netherlands: 5 votes, United Kingdom: 10 votes.
The conversion of the UK vote is thought to offer the best chance of reaching the required total of 54 votes.
Other countries with advertising bans
Three European Community countries have introduced legal bans on tobacco advertising:France , where ban comes fully into effect on 1.1.93,Italy , where the ban came in 1962, partly to protect the state monopoly tobacco company, and was badly enforced until the mid-1980s and Portugal , where the effects appear indecisive but hard evidence is not to hand.
Elsewhere:
Norway banned all tobacco advertising in 1975, with excellent results, especially for prevalence of smoking among teenagers.
Finland introduced a ban in 1975.
Iceland banned advertising from 1.1.85.
Canada has banned all tobacco promotion including sponsorship (effective date 1.1.89).
Australia The states of Victoria and Western Australia and the Capital Territory have passed laws eliminating or severely restricting tobacco advertising since 1987.
New Zealand banned all advertising of tobacco in 1990.
There have been total bans in many other countries dating from more than five years ago.
These include Singapore, Brazil, Argentina, Sudan, Jordan, Mozambique, Algeria.
The prevalence of smoking in adults and children
In Great Britain, the proportion of smokers has been more or less static for several years at around 32% for men and 30% for women.
Smoking — and therefore the disease and death it causes — is much more prevalent in the CDE social classes than in the AB group.
Among children, 61% admit to having experimented with smoking by the age of 15.
One in five 15-year-olds admit to regularly smoking at least one cigarette a week — and one in four 15-year-olds admit to smoking at least one cigarette ‘last week’.
At the age of 15, smoking rates are very close to whose for adults aged 16+.
The effect of cigarette advertising on children
Growing numbers of academic studies demonstrate that cigarette advertising predisposes children to smoking and reinforces the habit in those who have started.
In a study of 848 children aged 11–14 by the Advertising Research Unit at the University of Strathclyde, P P Aitken of D R Eadie found that smokers tended to be more adept at recalling, recognising and identifying cigarette advertisements.
This suggests they tend to pay more attention to cigarette advertising.
Moreover, this greater awareness and appreciation was independent of other important predictors of under-age smoking…
These findings…indicate that cigarette advertising is reinforcing under-age smoking…
Promotional devices which help determine and reinforce adult cigarette brand preferences have an even greater effect on under-age smokers.
In a study of 6000 children aged 10–12,‘children who approved of cigarette advertising were twice as likely to become smokers as children who disapproved’with the smoking behaviour of those who were ambivalent about advertising falling between that of the two groups…
Children [who already smoked]who disapproved of cigarette advertising were more likely to quit than those who approved of it.’
The industry claims — absurdly — that tobacco advertising does not induce children and adolescents to start smoking.
Commonsense as well as academic studies dictates otherwise.
Why, after all, did the Government ban cigarette advertising on TV and force the industry to agree not to place advertisements in sight of schools?
Even a Tobacco Advisory Council spokesman said on TV recently:
‘Every industry has to recruit new customers.
We recruit new customers once they're over the age of 16.
Of course they see the advertising before that age; of course, they see people smoking before that age.
They make up their — their decisions [sic]before that age.
But’— he went on lamely —‘we're not interested in that market under the age of 16…‘
In the USA they are less mealy-mouthed.
Huge sums are paid to get cigarette brands ‘placed’ in children's films.
Phillip Morris paid $42,500 to have Marlboro featured in Superman II , in which (contrary to the comic-book characterisation) Lois Lane is a smoker (New York State Journal of Medicine , July 1985).
They also paid $350,000 to have another brand featured in the James Bond movie Licensed to Kill .
In Beverly Hills Cop , Eddie Murphy holds up a pack of Lucky Strikes and says ‘These cigarettes are very popular with the children’; and in ‘Who Framed Roger Rabbit?’ detective Eddie Valiant is offered Lucky Strike cigarettes by a teenage boy and Camel cigarettes by the cartoon character Betty Boop (Tobacco & Youth Reporter , Spring 1989).
None of these references to smoking and cigarettes has any significance for the plot: they are paid advertising aimed mainly at children.
(Whether the draft Directive would have any effect on them is unclear.)
It is at least plausible that the cryptic advertisements widely adopted by cigarette advertisers in the UK work insidiously but effectively on children by offering them the reward of deciphering the hidden messages in (for example) the Benson & Hedges Pure Gold adverts: if they can understand and recognise them, they join an adult conspiracy or club.
‘Advertising helps promote new low-tar brands’
It is argued by the tobacco and advertising industries that advertising is necessary in order to promote the use of low-tar brands, particularly those newly introduced to the market.
Not so!
Under the draft Directive, advertising will be allowed inside specialist retailer's premises, where smokers (but not children) will see any useful information.
Experience shows the industry's argument is in any case unfounded.
In 1988, after 13 years with no advertising, the average tar level in cigarettes in Norway was 13mg.
In Sweden, with advertising, it was 15mg.
Similarly, in Denmark, with advertising, took to low-tar cigarettes more slowly than Norway, without.
In 1984, a new low-tar brand was launched in Norway without advertising.
In one year it won 6% of the market!
Finland banned advertising in 1978.
In the next 5 years, cigarettes yielding less than 10mg were introduced and were taken up by 46% of smokers.
Studies of the effect of banning advertising
The New Zealand Toxic Substances Board produced two reports in 1989 in which they compared consumption in 33 countries and prevalence in 20 advanced-economy countries over periods between 1970 and 1986.
In their second report (the statistical methods in the first were flawed) they compared prevalence and consumption in two groups of countries:(1) those with total health-inspired bans on advertising or else tobacco promotion in only a few media, and (2) those with promotion in most or all media.
(The latter included the UK.)
The result was to show that the chance of advertising bans or very rigid controls affecting prevalence was about 95%, and the chance of it affecting consumption was about 90%.
In Norway, a ban on advertising was introduced in 1975.
During the 1970s there was no significant change in the level of health education and the real price of cigarettes was if anything falling.
Prevalence of smoking, especially by young people, showed a sharp reversal in 1975 from steady advance to steady decline, which has continued to date.
Overall prevalence among 13–15 year olds has declined from 17% in 1975, the year the ban was introduced, to 10% in 1990.
Advertising has been banned in Iceland since 1971; surveys of 12–16 year olds in Reykjavik (where 40% of the entire age- group live) have been carried out since 1974 and show a very clear trend.
In 1974 23% of teenagers described themselves as daily smokers.
In 1986 this had fallen to 9%.
The argument about the loss of sponsorship
Value:Much is made of the money tobacco companies put into sport and (to a limited extent) the arts.
Sports sponsorship is worth about £12mn according to the Tobacco Advisory Council (Daily Express, 17.5.91)— roughly 10% of the total received from sponsors.
This is slightly over half their gross revenues (after deductionj of tax) from illegal sales to under-16s.
The same sum could be raised by a hypothecated tax of 0.5 pence per packet of 20 cigarettes.
Sponsorship is Advertising:The following quotations are equally valid for sport as for arts sponsorship:
‘Sponsorship is another name for advertising’— Luke Rittner, first director of the Assn for Business Sponsorship of the Arts (ABSA)
‘The art of getting cheap publicity’—FT headline.
Evasion of Voluntary Agreement:Sports sponsorship blatantly circumvents the Voluntary Agreement's provision that ‘advertisements should not imply that smoking is associated with success in sport’.
Very few sportsmen smoke; very many of them resent strongly having their efforts and endeavours subverted in this way.
(Sportsmen opposed to smoking include Gary Lineker, Paul Gascoigne, Peter Roebuck, Tessa Sanderson, Sebastian Coe, Will Carling, etc.)
Alternative Sponsors:Other sponsors will step forward if tobacco sponsorship is banned.
For example:
Snooker:‘If we had to replace our tobacco sponsors, we believe we could do so…’— David Harrison, Chief Executive, World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association (WPBSA).
[Yorkshire Post , 17.5.91]
Cricket:Benson and Hedges Tournament: ‘We get a number of inquiries asking when a contract comes to an end.
I expect we would be able to sell the Benson & Hedges again to a new sponsor.’
— Peter Smith, Test & County Cricket Board.
[Yorkshire Post , 17.5.91]
Motor Racing:Michael Horst, vice-president of corporate affairs, Philip Morris [Marlboro], is reported to ‘admit that the removal of corporate or brand images would lead to an enforced evacuation from sport in general, and the Philip Morris subsidiary, General Foods, incorporating Kraft and Jacobs-Suchard, could decide part of the vacuum was worth filling’[Glasgow Herald , 20.1.91]
Under the draft directive, sponsorship will continue to be allowed provided that no display is made of the ‘brand names, trade marks, emblems or other distinctive features of tobacco products’.
Televising of tobacco-sponsored events:Tobacco-sponsored sport has not been televised since 1987 by the independent companies.
The BBC, however, provided the tobacco industry with 364 hours of coverage in 1989, including about three minutes each hour showing the brand logo and/or name on screen.
No wonder 64% of children aged 5–16 indicated in a survey in November 1989 that they thought cigarettes were advertised on TV.
[Source: Beathing the Ban, HEA, 1990]
‘A voluntary agreement is more flexible and effective’
This is the Government's and the tobacco industry's customary line.
But:—
(a)
If it is wrong to advertise cigarettes in some media (e.g., TV) or in some places (e.g., in sight of schools), why is it acceptable to advertise them in other media (e.g., in the TV Times ) and other places (e.g., on the fronts of shops close to but not visible from schools)?
Either there is no ethical objection to promoting tobacco, or its promotion should be banned outright.
(b)
The voluntary system is flexible mainly in allowing the tobacco industry to evade its apparent provisions.
The UK agreements are not concerned with principle or with the ‘spirit’ of the agreement: they are trickily worded and legalistically interpreted so as to maintain the maximum freedom to advertise.
For example, the voluntary agreement seems to protect young women (aged 16–24) from cigarette advertising by requiring that no advertisement be placed in magazines whose primary readership is women in that age range.
Tobacco advertisers nevertheless reach a collective readership of 7mn such women by using magazines that don't fall within the tight definition in the agreement; and they increased their spend on cigarette advertising in women's magazines by 10% in real terms between 1984 and 1988.
[Smoke Still Gets in Her Eyes , ASH, 1991].
A second example: the monitoring committee for the voluntary agreement holds that there is ‘no set playing position’ in the game of indoor bowls, and therefore tobacco brand names may be displayed immediately behind the customary position from which players bowl, in full view of the TV cameras.
(c)
The voluntary agreements are negotiated in secret between the Government and the tobacco industry.
No independent health interests are represented.
They are not subject to Parliamentary scrutiny.
The industry refuses to allow publication of research commissioned by the monitoring committee.
(d)
The agreements represent the concessions the industry is willing to make.
For example, the most recent announcement is of a 50% cut in shop-front advertising — something the industry probably wanted anyway as the amount of clutter on shops was becoming counterproductive.
The concession served to fend off a ban that might have been imposed under a private member's Bill.
Again, before offering in 1985 to put health warnings on shop facias and canopies, the industry expanded hugely the number of such signs without warnings.
When they agreed to halve their poster advertising, they chose a base year when spending was unnaturally high due to a competition war.
Without the threat of legislation (which Sir Normal Fowler reportedly used to obtain the ban on cinema advertising),the Government has no cards; if they are willing to threaten it, they might as well use it.
(e)
The agreements in any case regulate only style and media, not the amount of advertising, and there is no evidence that the restrictions have limited its effectiveness.
The reverse may well be true.
It is untrue that there are wide-spread breaches of the voluntary agreement.
Why breach it when you can walk round it?
The argument about the economic effect of an advertising ban
The reason for supporting an advertising ban is not economic: it is to improve the nation's health.
This needs always to be stressed.
Nevertheless, it has to be recognised that several interests may feel threatened by an advertising ban.
How much is spent on tobacco advertising?
Wildly varying estimates are quoted for the value of tobacco advertising in the UK — no doubt because ‘the tobacco manufacturers have formally stated that they will not cooperate in the production of these estimates’(Media Register).
However, an overall total of £87.4m per annum can be estimated by using a variety of sources.
With sponsorship, tobacco promotion thus totals about £100mn a year.
There are three main potential losers from an advertising ban, apart from the tobacco companies themselves: the advertising industry, the press, and the employees of the tobacco companies.
The advertising industry
Tobacco accounts for ‘little more than 1% of the $50bn (£28.9bn.) spent on advertising in the EC in 1990’(Financial Times , 20.5.91) and advertising industry forecasts are for a strong rise in total advertising expenditure throughout the EC, so that the removal of tobacco advertising can be absorbed easily.
In the UK, according to Piers Merchant, Director of Public Affairs for the Advertising Association, ‘The total advertising spend for last year in all media was £7.5bn. so as a percentage of that tobacco advertising is very small…
‘(Daily Telegraph , 16.5.91).
The press
Tobacco advertising revenue (at £60.4mn) is marginal (average 2.4%) for all but a tiny number of publications (source: Media Register).
Campaign (15.6.90) shows that various media receive between 6.5% (women's weeklies) and 0.1% (quality dailies) of their advertising revenue from tobacco: most types of media receive less than 2% from tobacco.
Compare these potential losses with the fall due to the recession, estimated by the Henley Centre for Forecasting at 9% in 1990 and a further 6% in 1991 but for the national press at 11% in 1990 and a further 12% in 1991 (Media Week 8.7.91 — and the recession will be coming to an end by the time any tobacco advertising ban is introduced.
Employees in the tobacco industry
These total only about 13,000 altogether, and the threat to their job is probably greater from rapidly advancing automation than from the decline in the market that can be expected from an advertising ban, whose effects will be felt only gradually.
(Tobacco industry employment declined between 1980 and 1988 by 57%, mainly through automation, in a period when tobacco consumption declined by only 20%.)
(Of course, according to the tobacco industry, there should be no effect on employment, since advertising has no effect on the size of the market!)
The argument about free speech
The industry has its ‘front men’ in advertising and the press like to suggest that an advertising ban is a denial of freedom of speech.
They make much of tobacco being a ‘legal product’ which it should therefore, they allege, be legal to advertise.
Denial of freedom of speech:There are precedents in limitations for similar reasons on the promotion of other goods.
For example, prescription medicines are not allowed by law to be advertised to the general public [Medicines (Labelling and Advertising to the Public) Regulations 1978].
Further, under the British Code of Advertising Practice, no advertisement to the lay public is allowed in respect of a long list of diseases and conditions, including cataracts, glaucoma, kidney disease VD, tuberculosis, any heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, cancer, epilepsy and so on.
Article 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights says:
1.
Everyone has the right to freedom of expression…
2.
The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, amy be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society…for the protection of health…
And in a relevant case the US Supreme Court drew a distinction between civic and commercial freedom of speech.
Besides, how valuable is the freedom of speech involved in promoting a dangerous drug for profit and in the process corrupting the language by using words like ‘mild’, ‘smooth’ and ‘luxury’to describe it?
What would we think of an advertising campaign for glue that concentrated in its aromatic qualities?
Glue has uses other than for glue-sniffing: cigarettes have none: they kill when used as their maker intends.
From the Director
The European Commission has proposed a total ban on tobacco advertising and promotion.
This is the most exciting thing to happen on the UK tobacco control front for many years.
It has created the real possibility of effective legislation (and an end to the voluntary agreements) for the first time.
It has also put the UK in the spotlight: the balance of votes between EC member states is such that the UK vote will very likely decide the issue one way or the other.
Since the directive was issued, we have been working overtime in the ASH office.
Sixty-hour weeks have been chalked up several times!
We have to grasp the opportunity, and we hope that all ASH Supporters will join us in persuading people of the case for a ban on advertising.
Tobacco is, after all, the most dangerous product on general sale.
ASH has been working closely with all the other organisations in the tobacco control field.
We have produced the detailed brief already referred to, plus a singlesheet brief and a leaflet for the general public, written in popular language but packing a great deal of detail, ‘Give Kids a Chance!’.
Both of those are being sent out with this issue of Supporters News .
The Coronary Prevention Group has produced a booklet, ‘The Case Against Tobacco Advertising’, which ASH and a long list of eminent medical organisations endorsed and which has been sent to all MPs.
I spoke at the press conference to launch this booklet.
I was able not only to point out the inconsistencies of the so-called ‘voluntary agreements’ but also to the confusion in the ranks of the tobacco industry.
William Waldegrave, Secretary of State for Health, has shown himself to be no friend of the tobacco industry over the past few weeks.
They were shocked that the UK chose the stark warning ‘Smoking Kills’ as one of the rotating warnings on the back of cigarette packets, especially as he followed the health community's advice and dropped the attribution to the Chief Medical Officers and increased the overall size of the warnings.
But when he insisted that the same warnings should be used on advertisements, and be bigger than at present, he got them furious.
Accusations of a ‘personal crusade’ and threats that the industry would decamp abroad are measures of how threatened the industry feels.
Unfortunately, it seems likely that Mr Waldegrave may be preparing a basis on which to reject the EC call for a ban.
He seems to be making his demands for concessions from the industry on the basis that otherwise he will go for a ban.
When he gets his way in a new ‘voluntary agreement’(which is likely once the industry gets over its panic on finding a Minister for Health rather than a Minister for Tobacco in the DoH) he may feel bound to reject the ban.
Meantime, our campaign continues, with the widest possible backing from doctors, medical bodies, charities and the general public.
ASH Supporters will by now no doubt have made known their views to their MPs, but many will wish to ensure that the word is spread through every contact they have: PTAs, school governors, WIs, trade unions, clubs, Scouts and Guides, churches sports clubs and so on.
If everyone who agreed with us wrote to his or her MP, no government could hold out against us!
NEWS FROM…
USA
A new brand of cigarettes called ‘Death’ has been selling in Los Angeles for the past two months.
The cigarettes come in a package that has a picture of a skull and crossbones on the cover, along with the warning: ‘Manufacturer's Advice: Cigarettes are addictive and debilitating.
If you don't smoke, don't start.
If you smoke, quit.’
Charles Southwood, head of Death Tobacco, says he hopes the product will encourage smokers to quit.
He claims to have sold packs without any advertising.
‘With a name like Death,’ he says, ‘you don't have to advertise.’
France
The French city of Quimper launched an ‘advertising kills’ initiative to combat the effects of tobacco advertising.
During the campaign, which ran from 17 to 29 April, the city displayed posters mocking the ads of Marlboro, Camel, Gitanes and Gauloises.
The posters were withdrawn after the tobacco industry sued the city council.
Australia
The widow of a Melbourne barman who died of lung cancer has been awarded A$20,000 from the man's employers because he suffered from the adverse effects of passive smoking, despite the fact that he himself smoked 10 cigarettes a day.
Specialist medical evidence in the case showed that he had developed lung cancer as a result of active and passive smoking.
Hong Kong
As a result of successful anti-tobacco campaigning by several groups, an increase of 200% in tobacco taxation was introduced in Hong Kong.
However, the tobacco industry mounted a protest against this move and succeeded in bringing the increase in taxation down to only 100%.
This still means that the price of a packet of 20 cigarettes is now 50% higher than it was at the start of 1991.
80 years young!
ASH staff and officers joined many other prominent health campaigners and senior physicians at a reception in June to celebrate Professor Charles Fletcher's 80th birthday.
Professor Fletcher was one of the doctors responsible for the foundation of ASH in 1971 and is currently ASH's President.
He has a long and distinguished career in public health medicine: he was the first doctor to give a patient penicillin in 1941 and then moved to the post of director of the Medical Research Council's Pneumoconiosis Research Unit, investigating diseases of the lung.
He carried his interest in chest medicine to his next post as Professor of Clinical Epidemiology at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School.
Professor Fletcher went on to become secretary of the Royal College of Physicians working party on atmosphere pollution, smoking and health, and the resultant report was a best-seller for the college and ultimately led to the founding of ASH.
His interests have not been confined to chest disease and smoking, however: Professor Fletcher has been a tireless campaigner for better communications between patients and doctors.
He incurred the wrath of many members of the medical profession when as long ago as 1949 he suggested that patients should be given pamphlets explaining what was wrong with them and what treatment they would be receiving.
At a time when even the British Medical Journal was in opposition, Professor Fletcher was a champion of the ground-breaking BBC TV series ‘Your life in their hands’ which included footage of operations.
Not content with breaking down barriers between medical professionals and patients, Professor Fletcher has shown by example that it is possible to conduct a lengthy and demanding career while living with insulin-dependent diabetes for over fifty years.
However, even he admitted that the condition took some getting used to in his speech at the reception.
He would quite often lose track of the time at work and the resulting drop in his blood sugar level would affect his behaviour.
Not long married, he would race home from the office and inform Lady Fletcher that as the world was about to end, he wanted to be with her.
She would always reply: ‘That's very nice dear, but before the world ends, I think you should have some sugar!’
He would then unaccountably find that the world was no longer about to end and would be able to go back to work.
The reception was hosted by the Royal College of Physicians and jointly organised by the College and by ASH.
Professor Fletcher and his family were presented with a video recorder as a gift from his many friends in the health campaigning world.
PaT Bill becomes law
MPs have now completed work on the Bill drafted by Parents against Tobacco to prevent the sale of cigarettes to children.
The Bill, which will become law in 1992, makes the existing legislation on selling cigarettes to the under-16s more effective.
It will ban the sale of single cigarettes, tighten control on the use of vending machines and make mandatory the display of notices stating that it is illegal to sell cigarettes to under 16s.
Andrew Faulds, the Labour MP for Warley East who introduced the Bill, said he was pleased that the objectives he had set were being largely met.
Green dragon at green show
This friendly dragon visited the ASH stand at the  recent NEC Green Show with a non-smoking message.
He is helping West Midlands Transport publicise it new smoking policy on buses and commuter trains throughout the area.
The ASH stand at the Green Show attracted a lot of other interest too, and our staff would have been unable to cope without the tremendous effort made by West Midlands ASH volunteers.
Thank you!
Eat, drink and sleep smoke-free this Summer
The ASH guide to eating, drinking and sleeping smoke-free was launched at the Hilton Hotel: special guest was TV personality and consumer rights campaigner Esther Rantzen.
Copies of the guide are available from the ASH Office, price £7.95.
But hurry!
This special offer price includes post and packing and is only available until the end of August.
Seen left is the gorgeous cake specially baked to commemorate the launch of the Guide.
It has been iced to resemble the cover of the guide.