

A RIGHT ROYAL BREAK
For over two hundred years in Britain, almost anybody who is anybody has enjoyed a break in Brighton & Hove.
The fashion began as far back as 1783 when King George IV, then Prince of Wales, first paid a visit.
He found the clear air and sparkling waters the perfect pick-me-up.
The pleasure-seeking Prince was soon joined by friends and court followers anxious to discover the delights of ‘London by the sea’.
Many built homes in Brighton & Hove.
Bespoke shopkeepers, celebrated chefs, jewellers, craftsmen and artists arrived to cater for exclusive tastes.
Before long, Brighton was a centre of high society second only to London.
The final seal of royal approval was given when the Prince built his own holiday retreat in Brighton.
This was the Royal Pavilion: an architectural profusion of oriental design that remains unrivalled to this day.
Recently restored to its original splendour, the visitor to these former royal apartments slips back into an age when elegance was king.
Superb Regency architecture, Hove
Palace Pier at sunset
Regal influence is still to be found elsewhere.
The chefs of Brighton & Hove's excellent restaurants can whip up a piquant sauce every bit as good as George IV's French cooks.
The jewellery and antique shops of the famous winding alleyways called the Lanes continue to serve discriminating tastes.
The hotels and guesthouses still treat their visitors like royalty.
The elegant squares and delightful crescents retain their original charm.
And the sport of Kings is still pursued on the nearby downland at the famous Brighton Race Course.
Today Brighton & Hove is very much a resort where past and present meet, merge and coexist perfectly.
On a stroll along the famous five-mile seafront, from Brighton's bustling Marina to the sheltered calm of Hove Lagoon, you'll encounter Britain's original electric railway, the Victorian Palace Pier, Peter Pan's Playground, the King Alfred Leisure Centre and a host of other attractions.
Whatever your kind of break, the abundance of things to see and do makes Brighton & Hove the right place to head for any time of year.
Lazy days of summer
The King Alfred Leisure Centre
The Lanes
Hove Museum
BREAK OUT OF THE ORDINARY
If it's happening anywhere, it's sure to be happening in Brighton & Hove.
That's because the town can boast of more entertainment to the square mile than any other resort in Britain.
If live theatre turns you on you can choose from several plays or musicals each night.
That can often include a sneak preview of productions bound for London's West End.
The highlight of the cultural year is the Brighton International Festival which celebrates its 25th season during 1992.
Among this year's overseas guests are the Nuremberg Pocket Opera, Ballet du Nord, Brabant Orchestra and Cumbra Flamenca.
A Brighton & Hove break will hi-jack you taste buds in record time.
There are more restaurants than anywhere outside London.
(And where in London can enjoy seafood dishes with a tableside view of the sea?)
The choice covers every culinary pleasure from French haute cuisine to authentic Greek, Spanish and Italian food.
You can even add to the atmosphere by dining al fresco.
Our vegetarian restaurants are among the most adventurous you'll experience.
Or you can cross the intercontinental frontiers of flavour with Thai, Creole, Tandoori, Szechuan, American — even Mongolian food.
If you're enjoying Brighton & Hove on a budget there are also bistros, pizza places and good old fish and chips.
All that jazz
So many great places to eat
But how will you spend the rest of your time at Brighton & Hove
Aficionados of art and antiques will make a bee-line for the towns' museums and art galleries.
The more energetic will be off to the King Alfred Leisure Centre to risk their dignity on the Wild Waters and on the three 100-metre slides.
Those for whom relaxation means minimum effort will find that watching the world go by from a deck chair on the Prom is a riveting experience.
There is, after all, so much more to watch going by in Brighton & Hove.
Or you can take it easy amid the blooms of Stanmer or Preston Parks.
You'll also find the special park for the blind at St. Ann's Well Gardens, where the flowers are chosen for their fragrance, a delightful experience for everyone.
How about breezing along the sea-front on Volk's Railway?
Or spend an afternoon watching Brighton & Hove Albion or listening to the sound of leather on willow at the Sussex County Ground.
A visit to the new Sealife Centre really makes the oceans come to life: there are fish there you can actually touch!
You can also walk on water at the nearby Palace Pier where you can enjoy fun, food and fabulous views with the waves lapping beneath your feet.
And the new Sussex Toy and Model Museum is a star attraction for people who consider toys and models far too important to be left only to children.
For sporting types who prefer to be players rather than spectators, there is no shortage of golf courses, tennis clubs, squash courts and riding stables happy to welcome visitors.
As evening approaches, other exciting opportunities jostle for your attention.
The Brighton Centre is a major venue for rock shows, concerts, ice spectaculars and sporting events.
There's greyhound racing at Hove's celebrated stadium where a restaurant overlooking the track gives diners a ring-side view.
Or rediscover the drama of the big screen at one of Brighton's luxury cinemas.
And enjoy a Hollywood spectacular without having to take the video back next morning.
As dusk falls a glittering array of discos, jazz clubs, night clubs and casinos add their names to the town's neon nightscape.
Or after the exertions of a day in a deck-chair, simply unwind in a wine bar, cocktail lounge or one of our friendly ‘locals’ with a pint of real ale.
Cricket at Hove
Brighton Festival Opera
Discover an Old Master
A night out at the dogs
SOLD ON SHORT BREAKS
One of the pleasures of a short break is the luxury of shopping at a leisurely pace.
You've left all your cares behind you, remember.
Brighton & Hove is one of the best shopping centres you'll find outside of London.
Its particular advantage is that everything is contained into a smaller central area.
So you can be footloose without being footsore.
The choice in shopping ranges from department stores to chic boutiques. curios to high fashion.
You'll find the familiar and the unexpected, the avant-garde and the downright ridiculous.
In fact, if you can't find it in Brighton & Hove is probably isn't worth buying.
The most famous of the town's shopping areas is The Lanes: an inviting labyrinth of seventeenth century red-brick streets full of antique shops, jewellers, perfumeries, fine china and stores for everyone with a passion for fashion.
Nearby, the North Laine shopping area has an ambience all its own.
Bargain hunters could spend hours browsing in Gardner Street's bric-a-brac market and the fashion is as likely to come from unknown designers as the Establishment of haute couture.
Next, you'll be making tracks for your hotel to prepare for whatever the evening brings.
Brighton & Hove has a tradition of fine hotel-keeping and hospitality that goes back to the Prince Regent's days.
The choice is wide with something to suit every pocket.
It includes magnificent five-star establishments on the sea front and more modest, but equally comfortable, hotels and guesthouses in the adjacent crescents and squares.
There's also self-catering accommodation which is available for short breaks too.
Whatever you decide, you'll be suitably bowled over by the excellent quality however much you're paying.
To make booking easy, just phone the Brighton Accommodation Bureau or Hove Booking Service.
There's no charge for the service and they'll be pleased to make all the arrangements.
So start comparing what each hotel has to offer.
As with most things in Brighton & Hove, you'll find it's fun to shop around.
Something old?
After a fashion
WHERE TO STAY
HOTEL GUEST HOUSES AND SELF-CATERING 
While you can't actually sleep in Queen Victoria's bed at the Royal Pavilion, Brighton & Hove does have plenty of fourposter beds you can sleep in.
USEFUL FACTS
THE TOURIST CHARTER
Brighton and Hove lay great emphasis on the quality and value for money offered by their holiday accommodation.
All hotels and guest houses listed in this brochure comply with a Tourist Charter which sets standards which are amongst the highest of any resort in Britain.
Brighton and Hove's minimum standards are roughly equivalent to the ‘Two Crown’ classification adopted by the English Tourist Board (the ETB's national ‘Crown’Classification scheme has six categories: from the basic ‘Listed’through to ‘Five Crowns’).
And our hotels and guest houses are kept on their toes by an inspection visit to ensure that standards remain high.
CAR PARKING VOUCHER SCHEME
Brighton operates a voucher parking scheme replacing the traditional parking meters in the town centre.
The parking bays remains, but vouchers may be purchased individually or in books of 10 from various outlets in the town (such as the Tourist Information Centre, Brighton Centre, selected newsagents, post offices, shops, garages, hotels, etc.) which will clearly advertise themselves as a point of sale and the vouchers should then be displayed in the car windscreens.
Further details regarding this scheme or information concerning the points of sale is available from Peter Tolson in Brighton Borough Council's Technical Services Department, Bartholomew House, Bartholomew Square, Brighton BN1 1JP.
ACCOMMODATION DESCRIPTIONS
All description and information on hotels, guest houses, selfcatering and activity holidays in this brochure are supplied by the individual establishments and have not been verified by the Brighton Arts and Leisure Service or the Hove Leisure Service Departments.
The Departments cannot accept any liability for inaccuracies or omissions or for any loss or damage in any way connected with or arising out of the publication of this information.
SAFE TRANSPORT
Brighton Council is concerned to ensure that visitors to the town know how to identify a bona fide taxi.
All licensed taxis in Brighton carry a roof sign that uses the words ‘Brighton Taxi’, on the centre of the roof.
In addition, they display license plates with their license number.
Only these taxis should be hailed in the streets.
Private hire cars also carry roof signs showing their telephone numbers, but are only allowed to carry passengers in response to telephone requests.
Some companies can make available women drivers on request.
TOURIST INFORMATION CENTRES
Call in a TIC.
Friendly staff will help you get the most out of your stay in Brighton and Hove.
You'll find information on all aspects of the resorts — entertainment, restaurants, walks, history, events, attractions, places to visit, things to see and do.
TICs also provide advice on tours and visits you can make further afield — to London, for example, or the Sussex countryside, or even across the Channel on a day-trip to France.
Our TICs stock a wide range of publications, brochures, guide books, maps and free leaflets.
And they operate a speedy, efficient bed-booking service for those looking for holiday accommodation.
BRIGHTON AND HOVE MAP
This detailed map below of the complete resort area will help you get your bearings — and also indicate, through its grid system, the location of the holiday accommodation listed on the following pages.
Look out for the grid reference which appears in each accommodation entry.
In the case of self-catering establishments, please check with the owners regarding the exact location of the accommodation.
COMFORT IN STYLE
5-star hotels, more modest hotels and guest houses, self catering flats; whatever sort of accommodation you are looking for, you will find infinite variety at Brighton & Hove.
Wherever you choose, standards are all very high, and most accommodation is located near a seafront.
And to make it as simple as possible for you, Brighton's Accommodation Bureau provides an excellent free service.
Simply describe your requirements to them by calling (0273) 27560, or complete the booking form at the back of this insert, and they will do all the rest.
For your convenience, we have listed the following hotels and guest houses, wherever possible, in descending order of price.
The costs shown relate to minimum and maximum rates per person for bed and breakfast for two or more nights inclusive of service and VAT at 17.5% based on two people sharing a double/twin room.
The self-catering accommodation is similarly arranged by price.
These also include VAT at 17.5%.
You should verify the actual cost when you telephone.
HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION
THE COURTLANDS HOTEL
The Courtlands Hotel is situated in a wide tree-lined avenue leading down to the seafront approximately 500 yards away.
All rooms have en suite facilities, hairdryer, hospitality tray, remote control colour TV and direct dial telephone.
Free hotel car park, covered heated swimming pool free to guests.
Dolphin Restaurant is renowned for its cuisine.
MALVERN HOTEL
This RAC ‘Acclaimed’ Hotel is in a beautifully modernised Regency house overlooking Regency Square lawns and the sea in the centre of Brighton, three minutes walk to the Brighton Conference Centre and exhibition halls.
The hotel is owner operated and we offer a full English breakfast menu.
All bedrooms are en suite and have colour TV, hairdryer, telephone and hospitality tray.
There is a large underground car park opposite the hotel.
CHATSWORTH HOTEL
Long established, quiet, comfortable hotel, close to sea, shops, etc.
Tea-making facilities.
Easy free parking.
Good cuisine.
BANNINGS GUEST HOUSE
Excellent, small family run G.H. Central location for Conference Centre, close to Lanes, etc. *Own Key Open all year.
QUEENSBURY HOTEL
Family run B/B close to the beach, shopping, entertainment and conference centres yet far enough away from the main road to avoid traffic noise.
All bedrooms have colour TV and hospitality trays, several have full private facilities the remainder having showers.
All are spacious with some suitable for families.
Full central heating.
Underground NCCP in front of hotel.
Recently awarded ETC Two Crown classification and AA Approved Listing.
ADELAIDE HOTEL
Regency elegance in a beautifully restored period house in central seafront square, convenient for the Conference Centre, Exhibition Halls, shops, night clubs and beach.
Car parking available beneath the Square.
The twelve bedrooms are tastefully furnished and each equipped with private bath or shower/WC room, remote control colour TV, direct dial telephone, hospitality tray and many complimentary items.
Our premier Regency room with its magnificent gorgeously draped four poster bed and its attractive and spacious bedroom ensures a luxurious interlude.
AA & RAC ‘Selected’ and ‘Highly Acclaimed’.
Ashley Courtenay and Les Routiers Recommended.
Exechotels Good Hotel Award.
Mid week and weekend breaks offered throughout the year, excluding Bank Holidays an some conference periods, at a discount of 20% on daily room rates.
Enquiries direct to hotel for availability.
WELLINGTON HOTEL
The Wellington is a stylish licensed hotel whose satisfied guests continue to enjoy our fully inclusive terms for bed, breakfast and evening dinner throughout the year.
Ideally situated close to the town and conference centre, on the Brighton border and just off the seafront.
Partake in pre dinner drinks in our comfortable ‘Duke's Bar,’ read your morning papers or take after dinner coffees in our attractive, conservatory lounge.
The majority of the hotel decor has been attractively ‘rag rolled’.
There are eleven bedrooms, some ground floor, all en suite with essential facilities, two of our bedrooms have four poster beds ideal for honeymooners or romantic occasions!!
Close attention has been given by the Chief/proprietor to the cooking and service of all meals.
WHITE HOUSE HOTEL
Delightful Regency hotel (highly recommended) enjoying excellent position near promenade, Marina, Conference and town centre.
The White House Hotel is family run with all modern amenities, including all rooms en suite, central heating, colour TVs and hospitality trays.
On direct bookings only we offer 7 nights for the price of 6.
Full English, vegetarian or continental breakfast as required.
SACKVILLE HOTEL
The totally refurbished Sackville has a commanding seafront position, overlooking the Bowling Greens and the sea.
Independent ownership allows us to extend a personal, warm and friendly welcome, whilst maintaining traditional standards in elegant surroundings with up to date facilities and amenities.
Ample unrestricted parking, together with our garages.
GEORJAN GUEST HOUSE
A warm and friendly atmosphere at this small guest house.
Close to the sea, town centre, conference venues, tourist attractions and Marina.
All rooms have central heating, colour television, tea/coffee making facilities, en suite or private shower.
Full English or Vegetarian breakfast.
Children welcome (special rates).
Pets welcome on request.
Access at all times with your own key.
Open all year.
Highly recommended in ‘Time-Out’ review.
AMBLECLIFF HOTEL
AA/RAC acclaimed.
Highly recommended on two TV programmes and in a national newspaper for its comfort, hospitality and excellent food.
Located in a perfect position close to the seafront, entertainment, town centre and conference centre.
Rooms with 4 poster and king size beds.
This excellent run hotel, offering best value for money in its price range , also gives 7 nights for the price of 6 for direct bookings.
ANDORRA HOTEL
Two Regency period houses carefully restored to an excellent standard of comfort and decor.
The hotel is ideally situated just off the seafront, five minutes from Conference Centre and central to all entertainments.
20 full en suite bedrooms with either bath/shower and WC.
All rooms have central heating, direct dial telephone, television, tea making facilities, hairdryers, trouser press, etc.
Traditional four poster beds available for romantics!
The hotel boasts a tastefully furnished restaurant noted for its high standard of cuisine and wines.
Our regency Cocktail Bar offers a large selection of beers, champagnes and spirits.
We accept all major credit cards and are RAC acclaimed, ETB 3 crown rated and Les Routiers Recommended.
All food is bought fresh daily and the management respectfully request a minimum of 24 hours notice on evening meals if required.
RYFORD HOTEL
Situated in one of the finest positions, close to shopping, Palace Pier and Brighton Centre.
Open all year.
Brochure on request.
Number of bedrooms: 24.
MARINA WEST HOTEL
A listed building in Conservation Area.
Clean.
Comfortable.
Informal Adjacent Sea front by West Pier Near Metropole and Brighton Centre Shops — Restaurants — Nightlife There is a Residents lounge bar with ‘FREE American Pool Table’ GROUP BOOKINGS WELCOME All bedrooms have FOUR SATELLITE CHANNELS at no extra cost.
EARLY BREAKFASTS ON REQUEST 11 BEDROOMS 
WHITEHAVEN HOTEL
A hotel of quiet excellent, recommended by Egon Ronay, ETB 4 crowns, Ashley Courtney, R.A.C. Blue Ribbon Award.
Clean Food Award.
All bedrooms en suite, colour TVs, telephone, hospitality tray, hairdryers.
Secluded garden and solarium.
100 yards from Cricket Ground and close to all amenities — ample free street parking.
The Rolling Clock Restaurant also recommended by Egon Ronay — specialising in outstanding English and French cuisine.
LANGSFORDS HOTEL
Situated just off Hove's seafront with ample free on-street parking.
Children and pets welcome.
Excellent carvery restaurant, welcoming Tudor Bar and secluded gardens.
HOVEDENE HOTEL
Near Regency area and centre of Hove, close to seafront, shops and cricket ground.
Good food, warmth and home comforts.
Lift, licensed bar, entertainment weekly.
THE IMPERIAL HOTEL
Our hotel which dates to Queen Victoria's reign is ideally situated, being slightly set back from the busy and noisy seafront road (A259), but still able to offer a view over Hove Lawns and onto the sea.
WE are only a short distance from the many interesting attractions of both Brighton and Hove and are easy to find, being close to the main road arterials and stations of the two towns.
We have undergone in the last year a major refurbishment of all our guest and public rooms and now offer the comforts so necessary for a mini-break.
We have given a lot of attention and thought to our hotel and will take care of all your needs including laundry, diet, children, newspaper, as well as being on hand to answer your queries.
THE BRIGHTON HOTEL
Situated on Brighton Seafront close to the famous West Pier, the Brighton Hotel offers elegance, luxury and comfort, coupled with the friendly service so often lacking in the larger establishment.
Many bedrooms offer panoramic Sea Views, some offering Fourposter or Water beds with Jacuzzi baths, all furnished to a high standard, all are en suite and fully equipped with Colour TV** radio, direct-dial telephone, trouser press, hairdryer, mini-safe and hospitality tray.
The Brighton Hotel also boasts an attractive restaurant offering superb menus; spacious function rooms for conferences, meetings, weddings, parties and banquets; and comfortable relaxing bar and lounge areas.
Our well equipped health club, for the sole use of our guests, offers gymnasium, sauna, steamroom, solarium and whirlpool.
Small car park available.
PRINCESS MARINE HOTEL
Located on the seafront in peaceful Hove, yet only minutes from Brighton town centre.
This modern 4 crown privately owned hotel has 47 spacious bedrooms all en suite, colour TVs, direct dial telephones, radio alarm clock and hospitality tray.
Fabulous Rooftop Banqueting and Conference Suite.
The Channel View Restaurant is noted for its excellent cuisine and carefully chosen wines.
200 yds from Sports and Leisure Centre with pools and waterslides.
The hotel has its own large private car park.
BEACH HOTEL
Centrally located in one of Brighton's lovely squares within 3 minutes of Conference Centre and shops, opposite the sea.
We are a 26 bedroom hotel.
All rooms are en suite with colour TV, telephones and hospitality trays.
THE TERRACE HOTEL
Situated in Hove, at the more peaceful end of the Brighton Seafront, and overlooking the famous Hove Lawns, the Terrace Hotel forms part of an attractive and historical Regency terrace.
Recently refurbished but retaining all its original charm and warmth, the Terrace Hotel offers luxury and elegance together with a caring service and friendly atmosphere.
All 42 bedrooms offer en-suite facilities, are well furnished and equipped with colour TV, radio, direct-dial telephone, trouser press, hairdryer and hospitality tray.
Four poster and Water beds are available, all front rooms offer superb Sea Views.
Ground floor bedrooms available, lift to all floors.
Attractive carvery restaurant, relaxing bar areas, rear patio, and function rooms available for meetings, weddings, parties and banquets.
Ample free car parking all around the hotel.
THE BRIGHTON MOTEL
The Brighton Motel is situated 15 minutes from Brighton centre by car, offering conference delegates and tourists a relaxed atmosphere.
All bedrooms have en-suite facilities, telephone, CTV and tea/coffee making.
We welcome disabled visitors to whom we offer excellent purpose-built accommodation with parking adjacent to all rooms.
Restaurant is fully-licensed (a la carte menu) and our bar offers snack menu.
Open days a week.
1991 prices retained.
BEYNON HOUSE
Beynon House is a friendly run guest house close to the seafront, convenient for the Conference Centre, Marina, The Lanes, Palace Pier and shopping centre.
Free street parking opposite.
All our well furnished rooms have shower, colour TV/clock/radio, tea and coffee facilities, central heating.
Price includes full english, vegetarian or continental style breakfast.
Your own key provided for access at all times.
Open all year.
Please phone for brochure.
PORTLAND HOUSE HOTEL
Whether for business or leisure you can enjoy the relaxed informal atmosphere created by friendly staff in congenial comfortable surroundings here at the Portland House Hotel.
A grade 2 listed Regency building, situated in Brighton's Premier seafront square adjacent Conference halls and close to all main attractions and amenities such as the Brighton Pavilion, theatres, shopping centres, entertainments and the many antique and fashion shops of the famous Lines.
The hotel has a licensed bar and a lift to all floors.
All rooms have shower/wc or bathroom en-suite, colour television, radio/alarm clock, direct-dial telephone, tea/coffee making facilities and hairdryer.
Underground NCP car park opposite the hotel within the square.
ETB 4 Crown/RAC listed.
KENNEDY PALACE HOTEL
Seafront family run hotel facing the Sea Life Centre, Palace Pier and close to Royal Pavilion, the famous Lanes and conference centres.
All rooms are en suite with central heating and satellite TV.
A fully licensed bar and restaurant with magnificent sea views can ensure a relaxed atmosphere.
The hotel welcomes all age groups with special rates for children and OAPs.
ATLANTIC HOTEL
Attractive family run hotel, facing seafront, the Aquarium and Palace Pier, historic Royal Pavilion and famous Lanes are just down the road, Brighton Centre nearby.
Comfortable rooms, with private facilities including colour TV.
Licensed bar and restaurant.
Off season reductions, dinner £5.50 per person.
Special rates for family rooms.
Access at all times.
New Steine Hotels
The New Steine Hotels are privately owned and run by Resident proprietors.
The rooms are bright and comfortable with full central heating, T.V. and hospitality tray.
A delicious English breakfast is included.
Refer to symbols for full list of available facilities, then contact the Hotel of your choice.
Bookings for larger groups can be arranged on 0273–605310.
Ask for Mr Laurence King.
New Steine itself is one of Brighton's famous Garden Squares, for many years a favourite destination for visitors to the Town, situated as it is near to the town centre.
Built over 200 years ago, its elegant Regency houses look down quietly towards the sea, a matter of 200 yards away.
Allendale Hotel
Gulliver's
Ascott House Hotel
Ambassador Hotel
Fyfield House
Pier View Hotel
Cosmopolitan Hotel
Arlanda Hotel
Aegean Hotel
WESTBOURNE HOTEL
Family run hotel, located a few minutes from seafront, close to all amenities.
Colour TVs, tea/coffee facilities, residents' lounge, licensed bar.
BRYANDALE HOTEL
Comfortable family hotel close to seafront and shops.
Family rooms, TVs, fridge, tea and coffee facilities.
Private car park.
Excellent home cooked cuisine.
FREDELLEN HOTEL
Friendly hotel, run by resident proprietors.
Excellent choice of English breakfast, all rooms have coloured TVs, tea/coffee making facilities and central heating, toilet, bath or shower, en suite available.
Situated in the best part of Brighton 100 yards from seafront and main shopping centre, 500 yards to Metropole Exhibition Hall and Brighton Conference Centre.
Also comfortable walking distance of the Lanes, theatres, cinemas, and leisure centre.
Open all year.
AMALFI HOTEL
Friendly seafront hotel overlooking beach, close to Palace Pier and all amenities.
Magnificent sea views.
Free private car park.
Central heating.
Some rooms en suite, some private shower.
All rooms have colour TV and tea facilities.
Full English breakfast.
Evening meals by arrangement.
Residents' TV lounge.
Own keys for access.
Reductions for children sharing with two adults.
1991 prices held on most rooms.
DUDLEY HOUSE
For holiday or business, you can enjoy the relaxed and comfortable atmosphere at Dudley House.
Tastefully decorated, spacious bedrooms with private bathrooms, colour television, central heating and sea view.
Standard rooms available.
Excellent location close to sea front, Conference Centre and all amenities.
We maintain a very high standard complemented by excellent service and hospitality.
Lounge serving tea or coffee.
Generous discount bookings make direct for 5 nights or more.
THE PRINCE REGENT HOTEL
The hotel occupies the premier position at the head of Regency Square.
Seven of our twenty rooms have a wonderful sea view, each with purpose build en suite facilities, telephone, TV, hospitality tray.
Some with mini bars and one with jacuzzi type bath.
We can offer two ‘Antique 4 poster beds’ and the superb 1st floor large balcony room.
The hotel is ideally situated near the conference/exhibition centre etc. and shops.
A beautiful one bedroom balcony flat is available adjacent to the hotel.
COLSON HOUSE
Charming small regency hotel, sympathetically restored to keep the original features and character of its period.
Adjacent to seafront.
Central for Conference Centre, Lanes, Pavilion, Piers and all entertainments.
All rooms have bath/shower and wc en suite, colour TV, hospitality tray.
Breakfast menu.
Evening dinner by arrangement.
Friendly relaxed atmosphere.
Please telephone for further information.
KIMBERLEY HOTEL
A warm welcome awaits you with our personal attention, friendly atmosphere and tasty cooking to ensure a happy stay.
Family run.
15 comfortably furnished bedrooms, with colour TV, tea/coffee facilities and central heating.
12 with private shower, 1 with bathroom en suite and 1 standard room.
Residents bar, lounge.
Two minutes from seafront, centrally situated between Palace Pier and Marina.
15 minutes from Conference Centre.
2 Crown approved ETB and Les Routiers approved.
CHARLOTTE STREET THE PLACE TO STAY
Located in fashionable Kemptown, only 50 yards from the seafront, Charlotte St is within easy walking distance of the Town Centre, and Conference facilities.
Well place to explore the famous Lanes and Royal Pavilion.
The elegant Regency buildings provide comfortable hotel accommodation to suit every taste and pocket.
As all are run by the resident proprietors you can rely on a warm welcome and pleasant stay.
On street parking.
CHARLOTTE HOUSE
Friendly run guest house, twelve rooms, nine with shower and toilet en-suite.
All rooms with tea making facilities.
C/TV, hairdryers, four poster bed available.
Excellent English Breakfast.
THE LANGHAM
A small, cosy, period Guest House.
Run by ex-airline couple with 30 years experience of caring for people.
Hearty English Breakfast.
Eight lovely bedrooms.
All home comforts provided.
Residents lounge.
Excellent value.
PASKINS
Stylist Hotel with individually designed rooms, most en-suite.
Licensed.
Comfortable restaurant with an imaginative menu using organic produce.
Vegetarian and vegan options available.
CHESTER COURT
Highly recommended small period hotel.
Proprietors with many years service.
Welcomes new and old friends.
Refurbished and maintained to high standards.
THE TWENTY ONE
Five double bedrooms and one Garden Suite all elegantly furnished and decorated.
Well known for its fine cuisine.
A warm and personal welcome awaits you.
MARINA HOUSE
‘Guests who pass through our door are the most important people.’
Cosy, beautifully kept, hospitable and helpful.
Elegantly furnished, clean, comfortable rooms.
Best in price range.
St Catherines Lodge Hotel
The friendly atmosphere of St Catherines Lodge Hotel has been built up by the present owners over many years.
Fifty individual bedrooms (3 star) offer bathrooms en suite, colour TV's, direct dial phones and some Laura Ashley Four Posters.
The first class Regency Restaurant is one of the most elegant in Brighton and Hove.
Set lunches and dinners always include a roast from the Carvery Trolley.
The a la Carte offers a delightful selection, dishes flambé at your table, supported by many fine wines.
Light lunches and bar snacks available in the Cocktail Bar, Beer Garden or Dutch Lounge.
Opposite new King Alfred Leisure Centre with swimming pools and water slides.
Short walk to shops, beach, pitch and putt, ten pin bowling, windsurfing lagoon, tennis.
Free parking.
Ashley Courtney Recommended.
RAC (3 stars) ETB.
HARVEY'S
Quality accommodation.
Full English Breakfast.
Centrally located opposite Palace Pier.
Fresh, clean, spacious bedrooms.
Recommended by leading guides.
Generous discounts for direct bookings of 5 nights or more.
S.A.E. please.
BUDGIES GUEST HOUSE
Budgies is a pleasant and friendly guest house, providing a full English breakfast, close to the sea, near the Palace Pier and Royal Pavilion.
Access at all times.
ROWLAND HOUSE
Superb RAC listed and friendly run guest house within easy walking distance to Conference Centre, Palace Pier, Lanes and shopping centre.
All rooms provided with tea/coffee facilities, shower, colour TV, radio and own front door key.
Full English, Continental and Vegetarian breakfasts included in the price.
RUSSELL GUEST HOUSE
Friendly welcome, serving a full English breakfast.
Each bedroom has colour TV, central heating, tea and coffee facilities.
Situated close to Brighton Centre, sea and shops.
Access at all times.
CORNERWAYS HOTEL
AA/RAC
Comfortable family hotel on two floors.
Cocktail bar, TV lounge, spacious dining room, close to seafront, shops and station.
Unrestricted car parking.
ACROPOLIS HOTEL
1991 prices held.
Friendly seafront hotel in quiet street adjacent seafront.
300 yards from beach.
Free street parking.
All rooms have colour TV and tea facilities.
Some rooms en suite, some private showers.
Full English breakfast, evening meal by arrangement.
Own key for access.
Reductions for children sharing with two adults.
ALBANY HOTEL
RAC listed.
Across road from sea.
No parking restriction.
All rooms en suite, colour TV, tea making facilities.
DORSET HOUSE
Angela McCarthy welcomes you to her period guest house where she provides traditional English food.
Facing a park and shops and sea close.
Constant access.
ALVIA HOUSE
Recently refurbished to a high standard.
Adjacent to the seafront and centrally located for entertainment and all amenities.
All rooms have colour TV and hospitality tray.
Full en suite and standard rooms available.
Some enclosed hotel parking.
Unrestricted access to rooms.
DIANA HOUSE
Geoff and Marion look forward to welcoming you to Diana House.
Conveniently situated for the Conference Centre, Town Centre, Lanes, Seafront and Marina.
All the rooms in this large Victorian house are well furnished and offer colour TV, central heating, tea/coffee facilities.
Full English or vegetarian breakfast available.
Own key for access.
ABBACOURT HOTEL
Charming, friendly, Regency Hotel adjacent to the beach.
Three minutes walk Conference Centre, Metropole, entertainment centre and shops.
Comfortable spacious rooms all colour TV and hospitality trays.
Excellent value bed and breakfast.
Number of bedrooms 11.
SILLWOOD LODGE GUEST HOUSE
Family run hotel near seafront, shops, entertainment and Conference Centre.
Eleven comfortable rooms and a friendly atmosphere.
Free car parking.
GRIFFON GUEST HOUSE
Small, pleasant guest house near County Cricket Ground.
Bright, comfortable rooms all with showers.
Unrestricted access and ample street parking.
QUEEN'S PARK GUEST HOUSE
Homely, family run guest house.
Adjacent Queen's Park.
Unrestricted access.
DOVE HOTEL
The Dove is centrally located, close to the seafront, the Lanes, other attractions and the Conference Centre.
Our rooms are bright and comfortable, en suite and individually decorated.
We aim to ensure your stay with us is relaxed and enjoyable, offering a welcome drink, a generous and delicious breakfast from 7.30 until 10.30, with a complimentary newspaper, and a licensed bar.
Recommended in the Good Hotel Guide 1992.
The Dove is managed by owners Peter and Deborah Kalinke.
PEBBLES
Pebbles is a clean, friendly guest house offering an excellent English breakfast.
Ideally situated a few doors from the seafront and Palace Pier.
The Conference Centre and all local attractions and amenities are within a short walk.
Reductions for children under 12 sharing room with two adults.
Colour TV, coffee/tea making facilities and central heating in all bedrooms.
Unrestricted access.
KELVIN GUEST HOUSE
At the Kelvin we offer you a very warm welcome and will endeavour to make your stay an enjoyable one.
Each room has a colour TV and a clock/radio/alarm, and we show a video film each evening.
We are situated off the seafront, close to the Palace Pier.
A hot drinks machine available 24 hours a day.
We provide a full English breakfast.
There is access at all times.
Full central heating for cooler days.
Bath/showers (not en suite).
ALMARA GUEST HOUSE
Friendly family run guest house just a few doors from sea/Palace Pier and in excellent position for all attractions.
Including Conference Centre, Race Course, Sea Life and Brighton's famous Lanes.
We are close to coach station and walking distance from railway station.
We offer our guests an excellent full English Breakfast, Vegetarian Breakfast tea/coffee 24 hours (free), central heating, colour TV in all bedrooms and unrestricted access.
LICHFIELD HOUSE
Friendly, comfortable guest house with high standard of cleanliness, close to all amenities and seafront.
Colour TV, tea/coffee facilities and full central heating all rooms.
Own keys with access at all times.
Some rooms with showers.
Open all year round.
Full English breakfast.
FOUR SEASONS
200 year old Grade II Listed guest house.
Recently refurbished.
Offering a warm and comfortable stay.
Character rooms some with sea views, all with C/H.
Colour TVs, radio alarms, tea/coffee facilities, showers, some full en suite.
100 yards to sea, close to conference and exhibition centres, shops, Lanes and theatres.
Excellent full English breakfast, vegetarian or continental, as preferred.
Ideally situated for touring London and the South.
AQUARIUM GUEST HOUSE
A pleasant face in a nice place.
Ron and Ivy, friendly husband and wife offer you clean comfortable accommodation with a good English breakfast.
Heating and television all rooms free tea and coffee.
We are minutes away from the beach, Palace Pier, The Royal Pavilion, Conference Centre, Marina, coach and rail stations, town centre and the Lanes.
Access at all times with own key.
Open all year.
MONTPELLIER HALL
Mrs Moore welcomes you to her Regency villa where she provides traditional English food in grand surroundings.
Centrally heated Large rooms, own keys.
Spectacular garden.
CAVALAIRE HOUSE
AA/RAC Acclaimed; Relais Routier Recommended; Resident proprietors welcome guests back year after year.
Close to all amenities.
7 nights for 6 on direct bookings.
SHIRLEY GUEST HOUSE
Recommended by live letters of the Daily Mirror, comfortable family run guest house, away from the hustle of the town centre yet only twenty minutes walk to the conference centre, and two minutes walk to the seafront, situated in old worldy Kemptown, you will be welcomed by Hilda and Doug Beard, and be served a full English breakfast, tea making facilities are in all rooms also colour TV, keys are provided with access at all times, there is also free street parking.
MADEIRA HOUSE
We cannot promise you good weather but we can promise you a clean friendly house and a really good breakfast.
Adjacent to the sea, Palace Pier and all Brighton's attractions.
Fully centrally heated for those ‘cooler’ days.
For holidays or conferences, you won't find anywhere better.
Now celebrating 19 years.
Colour televisions, tea making facilities, ground floor bedrooms available, duvets.
Showers.
Lock up garage.
THE FUNCHAL GUEST HOUSE
Jane and Martyn Kelly welcome you to ‘The Funchal’, with a reputation for its excellent English breakfast, cleanliness and comfort.
We are a few yards away from the Palace Pier and in an ideal position for all attractions including the Marina; Conference Centre and ‘The Lanes’.
All rooms have colour TV, video and satellite channel.
Free tea/coffee facilities.
Access at all times.
Open all year.
GEORGE IV HOTEL
Our small friendly Hotel centrally located and overlooking the sea in Regency Square has recently been totally refurbished and offers superior accommodation with easy parking.
The Conference Centre, Pavilion and the Lanes all within walking distance.
Preston Street with its many varied restaurants is just around the corner.
All rooms have private bathrooms and hairdriers.
Direct dial telephone, tea and coffee making facilities, ironing and trouser press and colour TV.
Lift to all floors.
YORK LODGE PRIVATE HOTEL
Regency house personally run by resident proprietors.
In same family hands since 1946.
Centrally situated off Marine Parade, within easy reach of shopping, theatre, cinemas and conference halls.
The Marina, Aquarium and Pier are nearby.
Fully licensed with separate bar lounge and large lounge with colour TV.
Sauna room.
Conference delegates welcome.
Colour brochure on request.
HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION AND SELF-CATERING
KEMPTON HOUSE HOTEL
AA LISTED LES ROUTIER RECOMMENDED RAC HIGHLY ACCLAIMED
We are situated on Brighton's seafront and have been granted 3 Crowns rating by English Tourist Board.
We offer you a comfortable and relaxed holiday or short break for business or pleasure.
Rooms are available with magnificent sea views overlooking the beach and pier.
Refurbished in recent years.
Bedrooms with ensuite shower and toilet, central heating, colour television, tea/coffee tray, radio/clock/alarm, hairdryer and direct dial telephone.
For that special occasion try our four poster bedroom which overlooks the pier.
We are centrally located for all Brighton's attractions including Brighton's famous Lanes and Royal Pavilion.
The shops, Marina and Conference Centre are all just a stroll away.
Full English Breakfast is served, or try breakfast in bed the Continental way, you choose!
We have a Residents' bar for you use and a pretty sea facing patio garden for you to relax in.
Ask for our ‘Special Offer’ of six days pay for seven days stay.
We will do all we can to make sure you have a most pleasant and enjoyable stay.
Dinner is available by prior arrangement at £10.50 (four courses).
Special rates on request.
SELF-CATERING BEST OF BRIGHTON COTTAGES
The Sea Loft
Quality cottage accommodation Rottingdean/Roedean/Brighton.
Sleeping 2–9.
Close sea/town centre.
SEA ROKESLEY TOWERS
Luxury self-catering garden and maisonette apartments near sea front, shops and buses.
MELFORD HALL HOTEL
Seafront hotel, newly refurbished with most rooms enjoying panoramic views of sea and Palace Pier, all doubles en suite, tea and coffee trays, colour TV, movie channel, ground floor and four poster rooms available.
BODIAM COURT
Modern, spacious, well furnished self-contained holiday flats accommodating 1–6 persons.
Comfortable rooms.
Fully equipped kitchens.
Bathrooms with tub and shower.
Colour TV.
Weekly maid and household laundry service included.
All home essentials supplied.
Good residential area with amply free street parking and easy access to shopping centres, railway stations, language schools and all places of interest.
Centrally heated and open all year round.
Regretfully no small children or pets.
PALMEIRA HOLIDAY FLATLETS
Personally supervised holiday accommodation.
Situated in prime but quiet position adjacent to Floral Clock 300 yards from seafront through graceful Palmeira Square; easy walking distance to Conference centre.
Close to buses, taxis and shops and with ample free street parking.
All flats maintained to the highest standard of cleanliness for easy holiday living with fully equipped kitchens, colour TVs and close carpeted bed and sitting rooms.
Bed linen is supplied.
Every flat has its own bathroom and wc.
Regret no small children or pets.
Please telephone or write, including stamp, to Mrs. J E Butterfill, the Resident Proprietor, who will be pleased to send you a brochure.
SUN BUREAU MITRE HOUSE
No charge to applicants for our service.
Specialists in Self-catering holidays
We offer a good selection of houses, bungalows flats and hotel bookings.
Conference and Exhibitions Delegates catered for.
Family reservations made.
PORTLAND PLACE HOLIDAY FLATS
Free parking.
1st, 2nd and 3rd floors.
No lift.
One door seafront.
Near all amenities.
All modern facilities.
Baths, no showers.
No linen or towels supplied.
No animals.
Children from 7 years.
MARINA APARTMENT
Luxury quiet balcony apartment amidst the yachts with sea views all round.
Sleeps two or three people.
BRIGHTON MARINA HOLIDAY APARTMENTS
Elegant new apartments, sleeping 2–6, many with balconies or terraces overlooking picturesque inner harbour.
Beautifully furnished and luxuriously equipped.
Fully fitted kitchens include washer/dryer; fridge/freezer; microwave and conventional oven; waste disposal.
Two bed apartments additionally offer dishwasher and en suite shower facilities to master bedrooms.
These apartments situated right on the water have been awarded the highest possible classification by the English Tourist Board 2–5 Keys and Highly Commended.
BRIGHTON REGENCY STAR LETS
Several attractive Regency cottages situated in ultra convenient positions.
Only a few minutes walk off main shopping centre, sea front, Conference Centre, cinemas and theatre.
Full cooking facilities, refrigerators, cutlery, linen, colour televisions and central heating.
Close carpeted throughout.
Pleasant secluded patio gardens.
All our cottages are kept to a high standard to ensure an enjoyable stay.
Sleeps 3–7.
SEAFRONT FLATS
This beautifully appointed one bedroom and first floor balcony flat is on the west side of Regency Square.
Overlooking lawns and sea.
Ideally situated for Conference Centre, exhibitions halls and shops.
METROPOLE COURT & BRIGHTON MARINA
Luxury self-contained apartments above the famous Metropole Hotel 1, 2 or 3 bedroomed penthouses with panoramic sea and/or town views, most with balconies over the sea.
Free use of the luxury heated indoor swimming pool.
Facilities include porterage, restaurant, cocktail bars, health & beauty care, hairdressing salon and Metro night club.
Equipped to the highest standard with many furnishings by Laura Ashley.
Colour TVs, pay phones, fridge/freezers, most with dishwashers, washing machines, tumble dryers, all household linen.
Brighton Marina, luxury 2 bedroom, 2 bathroom apartments facing sea and boats.
METROPOLE COURT BRIGHTON SEAFRONT
Private luxury self-contained apartments located above the renowned 4 star Hotel Metropole, with panoramic sea and/or town views.
Direct access by lifts to all hotel facilities and free use of luxury heated indoor swimming pool.
CLIFF EDGE ROTTINGDEAN
Luxury self-contained single bedroom flat adjacent to sea front and central to picturesque village.
All units have fitted carpets and are generously equipped to an exceptionally high standard, including household linen, colour TVs, stereo music centres, fridge/freezers, automatic washing machines and payphones.
BRIGHTON POLYTECHNIC
We have budget accommodation to suit couples, families and groups in our modern student halls of residence.
Accommodation is available on a Saturday to Saturday basis, July through September.
BOOKING DETAILS
You can make your booking easily and quickly:
USE OUR FREE ROOM-FINDING SERVICE:
Brighton's Accommodation Marketing Bureau operates a free computer room-finding service.
Just complete the booking form opposite, listing up to five choices of accommodation in order of preference and indicating approximately what you wish to pay, and send the form to us.
If none of your choices are available, a comparable establishment will be booked on your behalf.
Please refer to the ‘Deposit’ information for additional booking details.
OR BOOK DIRECT
Simply send the completed booking form on page ixx direct to your chosen hotel, guest house or self-catering establishment.
Telephone reservations must be confirmed in writing within five days — the accommodation establishment may automatically cancel the reservation on the sixth day if a written booking is not received.
MAP REFERENCES
Each individual accommodation entry has a map reference.
The reference enables you to pinpoint the establishment's location on the Brighton and Hove Street Plan, pages ii and iii.
PRICES
All hotel and guest house prices quoted are per person and include VAT at 17.5%.
Establishments reserve the right to amend prices in the event of any variation in VAT.
Prices do not apply to Public Holiday periods unless otherwise stated, and are subject to availability of suitable accommodation.
Please note that prices quoted by hotels and guest houses may be based on double occupancy of a room.
If you are in any doubt about single occupancy rates, please contact the Brighton Accommodation Marketing Bureau or the establishment in question for clarification.
DISCOUNTS
Don't forget to ask about the discounts that are available to visitors.
Some hotels offer discounts on meals taken in local restaurants, for example.
Discount vouchers for local shops are sometimes available.
Enquire at the Brighton Tourist Information Centre for more details.
CHILDREN, SENIOR CITIZENS AND GROUPS
Some hotels offer special rates for children and senior citizens, and many offer special prices for groups of 20 persons or more.
Please enquire when making your booking.
HOLIDAY EXTRAS
Any extras — drinks, additional meals, etc. — and the cost of any extension of stay must be paid in full direct to the hotel before the end of your stay.
DEPOSIT
(Please note: the following arrangements only apply if you are making your reservations through the Brighton Accommodation Marketing Bureau's free room-finding service.)
When a booking is made, a reservation form will be sent to you advising you of your hotel.
A deposit of 10% (non-refundable) made payable to Brighton Borough Council and sent to the Accommodation Marketing Bureau must be sent within seven working days (21 for overseas bookings).
The balance should then be forwarded direct to the hotel, though if contacted some hotels do not require full payment in advance — this is entirely at the hotel's discretion.
CONDITIONS
Please note that individual hotels, guest houses and selfcatering establishments have the right to vary the conditions outlined here and/or impose additional conditions, provided them inform you of such conditions before they accept your booking.
ACCOMMODATION DESCRIPTIONS
All descriptions and information on hotels, guest houses, selfcatering and activity holidays in this brochure are supplied by the individual establishments and have not been verified by the Arts & Leisure Department of Brighton or the Hove Leisure Services.
The Departments cannot accept any liability for inaccuracies or omissions or for any loss or damage in any way connected with or arising out of the publication of this information.
ACCOMMODATION STANDARDS
This brochure, published by the Borough Councils of Brighton and Hove, contains only establishments that have been inspected to ensure that they meet strict minimum standards.
They do not only meet the minimum standards laid down by the English Tourist Board but the even higher standards set by the Brighton and Hove Accommodation Standards Joint Committee (see the Tourist Charter information on page ii).
Proprietors must ensure that, prior to any establishment being used for accommodation, the various statutory requirements in existence are fully complied with.
Establishments must also follow the Voluntary Code of Booking Practice for Tourist Accommodation.
The main object of the code is to ensure that guests shall be informed in writing, before taking up accommodation, what price they will be obliged to pay, particularly the total obligatory charge.
Such details should be supplied at the earliest possible opportunity when the booking is being made, and if arrangements have been made in advance (either by letter or by telephone), they should be confirmed in writing at the point of reception.
All hotels and guest houses in this brochure were registered at the time of going to press.
However, circumstances can change, and you are invited to contact the offices listed below to ascertain whether your chosen establishment is currently registered.
Copies of the minimum standards requirements and the booking code can be obtained from Brighton Arts & Leisure Dept, Marlborough House, 54 Old Steine, Brighton BN1 1EQ, and Hove Leisure Services, Town Hall, Church Road, Hove BN3 4AH.
INSURANCE
Some people feel that holiday insurance is unnecessary for travel within Great Britain.
In fact, it can offer very considerable protection — against cancellation and losses from the time you leave home to your return.
It costs very little, and you are strongly advised to make use of the insurance scheme offered in this brochure (details are included on booking form).
INFORMATION FOR DISABLED VISITORS
The Holiday Care Service is Britain's central source of holiday information for people with special needs.
The organisation has categorised hotels and guest houses on a scale of 1–4 according to the level of accessibility for guests with mobility difficulties, category 1 offering the best access.
Of the places to stay listed in this brochure, the following have been checked by Holiday Care:
CATEGORY 2
(establishments with considerable value in terms of accessibility for accompanied wheelchair users)
Princes Marine Hotel,
Brighton Metropole Hotel
CATEGORY 3
(establishments having limited access for accompanied wheelchair users; it may be necessary to walk short distances and negotiate single steps)
Brighton Motel,
Courtlands Hotel,
Fredellen Hotel,
Kempton House Hotel.
Full access details are available from:Holiday Care Service, 2 Old Bank Chambers, Station Road, Horley, Surrey RH6 9HW. tel. (0293) 774535, but in all cases you are strongly advised to contact the hotel in advance and explain your access requirements.
CANCELLATION
If you need to cancel your booking, you must advise your accommodation establishment in writing as soon as possible.
Or, if booked through the Accommodation Marketing Bureau, contact its office direct.
If the reason for your cancellation falls within the terms of any holiday insurance you may hold, you should make a claim direct to the insurance company, as it is possible that the proprietor of the hotel, guest house or self-catering property may charge a cancellation fee.
BRIGHTON & HOVE
HOTEL GUEST HOUSES AND SELF-CATERING  
MAKING THE BREAK GO FURTHER
You never know what's hiding round the next corner in Brighton & Hove.
Your richest find must be the Royal Pavilion.
Completed by Nash after the style of Mogul Palaces in India, its magnificent interior reflects the exotic vogue for chinoiserie.
You can wander at will through the Music Room, Banqueting Room, Great Kitchen — and even once-Royal bedrooms.
Head east along Marine Drive, turn sharp right and you'll discover one of Europe's largest mariners complete with waterside bars, shops and restaurants.
It's just along from Brighton's Naturist Beach where you can indulge in the luxury of an all-over tan.
Simply turn up and peel off.
A quiet turning in Hove is home to the British Engineerium: the South's own museum of steam power housed in the magnificent Victorian pumping station.
Here an impressive collection of vehicles from the Great Age of Steam awaits unsuspecting engineers from two to ninety-two.
You can also enjoy a highly unusual view of the area through the camera obscura at Foredown Tower and Countryside Centre.
If you've never seen one before it's not to be missed.
Britain's largest marina
Beautiful Preston Manor
Brighton & Hove's central position on the south-east makes it perfect for touring.
Within easy driving distance you'll find Arundel Castle with towering battlements and its ancient Keep, steeped in tales of treachery and stirring deeds.
You can follow in the footsteps of the legions at Fishbourne Roman Palace: one of the finest built outside Rome itself.
Leave Brighton & Hove in another direction and you can visit the Bluebell Railway.
An assortment of engines and carriages from yesteryear will transport you through unfolding countryside to the nostalgic accompaniment of escaping steam and whistles.
At one end of the line you'll find Sheffield park Gardens, an example of Capability Brown at his best.
A few miles away is the ancient town of Lewes with its imposing Norman Castle and Anne of Cleves House (the former home of one wife who didn't lose her head to Henry VIII).
The best small zoo in the south is Drusillas Zoo Park near Alfriston with 400 animals.
The brilliant flash of wing colours in the Butterfly House are alone worth a visit.
Bodiam has been called the most romantic castle ruin in the whole of England.
As you stare across the lily covered moat to its fairytale towers you instinctively know why.
The Augustinian Priory at Michelham is full of unexpected interest.
It contains not only a Rope Museum and Blacksmith's Shop but a working watermill too.
Try looking for the old Cinque Port of Rye along the coast and you'll be disappointed.
The receding sea has left the town some two miles inland.
As you explore its cobbled street lined with bow-fronted shops and Georgian-fronted houses you're sure to discover the old Mermaid Inn, once the haunt of smugglers.
If you find stately homes and country houses fascinating, you'll be spoilt for choice around Brighton & Hove.
Sussex offers the Elizabethan majesty of Parham House, the Edwardian beauty of Parham House, the Edwardian beauty of Preston Manor and the Classical lines of Petworth House.
In and around Brighton & Hove you'll find there simply aren't enough hours in the day.
BRIEF NOTES ON SHORT BREAKS
Brighton & Hove can quickly be reached from almost anywhere in Britain.
So you spend less time travelling and more time enjoying.
The M23/A23 runs direct from London to Brighton & Hove.
And it intersects the M25 orbital motorway that connects with major routes from all parts of the country.
The A27 coastal road also gives fast access to Brighton & Hove from east and west.
Alternatively, you could arrive on one of the regular coach services that operate from most large towns in Britain.
British Rail will whisk you down from London in less than an hour.
And there are also direct rail services from the North West, the Midlands and Scotland.
For those who don't want to waste a minute, there are even flights from all over the UK to nearby Gatwick Airport.
The more adventurous could even fly into Shoreham Airport in their own aircraft!
If you're driving to Brighton please note that a parking voucher scheme operates in the centre of the town.
The vouchers for use in parking bays are widely available for sale at newsagents, post offices, shops, garages, hotels and the Tourist Information Centre.
Simple look for the distinctive signs.
A word of warning: be careful not to park illegally as your vehicle is liable to be towed away.
The prices shown are per person based on two people sharing a twin/double room.
The price of single occupancy is frequently higher than for multiple occupancy of bedrooms and should be checked when booking.
The special 2-night break prices given are subject to available.
Brighton & Hove has developed a Tourist Charter that sets standards for hotels amongst the highest in Britain.
The minimum roughly equals the English Tourist Board's ‘Two Crown’ classification.
All hotels and guesthouses listed are regularly inspected to ensure they comply fully with the standards.
However, the descriptions and information on hotels, guesthouses and selfcatering holidays in this brochure are supplied by the establishments themselves.
Brighton Arts & Leisure Services and Hove Leisure Services cannot accept any liability for inaccuracies or omissions or for any loss or damage.
All licensed taxis in Brighton & Hove carry either the words ‘Brighton Taxi’ or ‘Hove Taxi’on the centre of the roof.
They also display their licence number on their plates.
Only these taxis should be hailed in the streets.
Private hire cars can only carry passengers in response to requests by phone.
Some companies can make women drivers available on request.
You can make the most of your stay in Brighton & Hove by contacting one of the Tourist Information Centres.
They provide details of places to visit, entertainment, events and other things to see and do throughout South East England.
If it seems too much to see on one visit, remember there's no law that says you can't come back to Brighton & Hove time and time again.
After all, that's exactly what the Prince Regent did.
It all begins at Brighton Station