

I
Women and Social Security
A. MOTHERHOOD
Introduction
Family Allowance, or Child Benefit as a modified version of it is now known, has not always had the unequivocal support of the entire women's movement.
This is despite the fact that it is the only universal non-contributory benefit payable to all mothers on behalf of their children, and thus guarantees mothers at least some income for which they do not have to ask their husbands or cohabitees.
Both before the adoption of the principle in the 1945 Family Allowance Act and for at least a decade after its implementation, some women's organisations were either positively hostile or dis-tinctly lukewarm in their attitudes.
As Hilary Land reminds us in another article (Land, 1980) Ada Nield Chew, a radical suffragist, wrote that women should eschew the role of the ‘domestic tabby cat’ and that ‘marriage and motherhood should not be for sale.
They should be disassociated from what is for sale — domestic drudgery.’
Similarly, after the implementation of the allowances, the Cooperative Women's Guild, an organisation of working-class women within the Cooperative Movement which had originally been among the strongest supporters of the campaign for family allowances (Lewis, 1980), defeated a resolution calling for an increase in the amount of the allowance at their annual Congress in 1951 (Gaffin and Thoms, 1983, p. 161).
Indeed, Frank Field claims that the Child Poverty Action Group, which since its foundation in 1965 has consistently and somewhat single-mindedly campaigned for the extension of and increases in family allowance, was positively hindered by the latent opposition of women to the scheme (Field, 1982).
It would be wrong, however, to exaggerate the extent of women's opposition to this benefit.
As on so many issues both now and in the past, the pre-war women's movement was neither homogeneous nor united.
On the whole socialist feminists were suspicious of allowances on the grounds that they would undermine male wage-bargaining and preferred to argue, like Ada Nield Chew, for services in kind to support mothers in the ‘drudgery’ of child care; Fabian women preferred direct payment to mothers in order to maintain their economic independence from their husbands and free them from the need to take on paid work which would distract them from their primary task of mothering (Alexander, 1979).
Middle-class feminists, particularly members of the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship, of which Eleanor Rathbone was the President, strongly supported family allowances largely on the grounds that it would undermine the concept of the family wage and thereby (a rather optimistic thought) pave the way for equal pay for equal work.
Working-class feminists put rather more of their ener-gies into campaigns for better maternity and child welfare services than for cash in hand.
However, as is generally the case with most benefits hard won from the state, once implemented the recipients unite in defence of it when it appears to be under threat.
In 1972 the then Conservative government proposed to reform and unite the entire tax and social security system into a scheme of combined benefits and tax reliefs to be known as ‘tax credits’.
It was therefore proposed that family allowances and child tax allowances should be folded up into one new benefit to be known as the ‘child tax credit’.
In the Green Paper that presaged the proposed reforms it was suggested that, logically, the new benefit should be payable to the father through his pay packet rather than, as had been the case with family allowances, to the mother through the post office.
There was no question of the principle of a universal state benefit to supplement the incomes of families with children being abandoned; what was at issue was consistency within the scheme, as opposed to the maintenance of mothers' rights and minimal independence.
There was an immediate outcry from the women's movement, particularly women prominent in the so-called ‘wages for housework’ campaign that was very active at the time (Malos, 1980).
The more active occupied some post offices and gave evidence to the House of Commons Select Committee, part of which is reproduced here (Fleming, 1973).
But the issue touched many more than just the activists in the women's movement: a petition demanding that the allowance ‘be given to every mother for every child’ was presented to Parliament with 300 000 signatures (Fleming, 1973; Castle, 1976).
Other powerful allies emerged, amongst them the Child Poverty Action Group and the Trade Union Congress (House of Commons (HOC), 1973, Vol.
II).
The support of the TUC for payment of the child tax credit to the mother rather than the father was something of a change of heart.
As Hilary Land points out in the first of her articles reproduced here, the TUC had been ambivalent and suspicious about the introduction of family allowances throughout the 1930s.
Moreover, the new credits entailed a transfer from husbands to wives or, as the issue came to be known, from ‘wallet to purse’, and hence one might have expected the male-dominated TUC to be opposed to them.
The reason the TUC gave for supporting payment to mothers was an interesting one: they argued that ‘in most cases mothers have the major responsibility for the family budget’, but little or no independent income (HOC, 1973, Vol.
II, p. 258)— in other words mothers should have the wherewithal to carry out a household chore.
In one sense the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG) was also a surprising ally: since its inception it had cap-tured the idea that family allowances were a bulwark, not so much against women's economic dependence on men, but rather against the exigencies of low pay.
The needs of children rather than the needs of mothers were, and to some extent remain, the chief focus of its attention.
However, by the time the CPAG came to give evidence to the Select Committee it had taken on board the idea of women's financial dependency in marriage and had carried out a survey to discover the extent of mothers' dependence on family allowance for their own and their children's survival, irrespective of the level of their husbands' earnings.
As they told MPs, they had found that 34 per cent of mothers interviewed in their survey had failed to receive any increase in their housekeeping allowance in the previous year, while prices had risen 7 per cent over the same period (HOC, 1973, Vol.
II, p. 318).
The campaign to get the new ‘child tax credit’ payable to mothers was eventually a successful one: while the tax credit-scheme as a whole was abandoned, the child benefit, combining family allowance and child tax allowance and payable to the mother for all her children including the first, rose like a Phoenix from the ashes, in the  form of the Child Benefit Act, 1975.
Nevertheless, at one point the Phoenix was very nearly shot down; the new Labour Prime Minister (Jim Callaghan) and the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Denis Healey) decided that a transfer ‘from wallet to purse’ was a certain vote loser, and they managed to play on old trade union antagon-isms and Cabinet confusion such that the benefit was seriously delayed and nearly abandoned (Land, 1977a; Field, 1982).
But a ‘mole’ leaked Cabinet minutes to CPAG (New Society , 17 June 1976) and the resulting furore meant that Child Benefit was re-scued.
It was introduced in embryonic form for all children in 1976, and child tax allowances disappeared altogether over the next two years.
(However, the Married Man's Tax Allowance has been increased to compensate — see p. 45.)
The three excerpts reproduced here demonstrate the complexity of the issue of family allowance or child benefit, and the mixture of motives and alliances that have in the past, and may in future, be generated by it.
At the root of many of the dilemmas and contradictions is that while mothers gain a great deal materially from these benefits, they run the risk, at an ideological level, of merely con-firming the link between being a woman and necessarily, therefore, becoming a mother.
Not only that: benefits for children tend to confirm the link between biological mothering and social mothering.
If mothers receive a benefit which they are expected and indeed do spend to service the needs of their families, then this re-confirms them as the day-to-day managers of household finances, which for millions of women is not only a chore but also a source of considerable anxiety (McClelland, 1982).
In contrast, of course, stand the words of mothers themselves.
As Mrs A. of Milton Keynes wrote to the Sun newspaper: ‘Although the benefit is only a pittance, it does enable the women of this country to struggle through until pay day with a little pride and dignity’(quoted in McClelland, 1982).
The eugenicist strand in the argument, which is based on an assumption of hereditary social characteristics, is brought out in the pieces by Land and Fairbairns.
But one does not have to go so far as to support child benefit for the qualitative demographic effect it may or may not have.
Many countries, including France in the capitalist West and almost all the more developed countries of the Eastern bloc, pay large child benefits on the assumption that this will have a quantitative demographic effect (see, for example, Scott, 1976).
In other words, women are being offered a considerable financial  inducement to turn themselves into ‘walking wombs’.
The eugenicist and pro-natalist arguments are in abeyance at the moment in this country although there is always a latent undercur-rent that ebbs and flows.
Of far greater importance is the argument in favour of child benefit as the most efficient way (so far) devised to maintain male work incentives.
The piece by Hilary Land shows how this argument was used in the 1920s and 1930s.
It has taken present-day governments some time to understand that a universal benefit is a bulwark against the disincentive effects of a largely means-tested system, and that, given that the benefit is paid irrespective of whether the household head is in or out of work but is nevertheless deducted from supplementary benefit, it helps maintain a difference between income in paid work and income on the dole.
Political leaders do now understand this (Lister, 1980), and as a result child benefit is generally increased every year.
This is no victory for women, even though it is of very important material benefit to them.
As soon as government discovers an alternative way of maintaining an incentive to work, such as reducing unemployment and supplementary benefits to below subsistence level, then child benefit will once more be at risk.
Present discussions about overhauling the entire social security and tax systems may well presage such changes (writing in April 1984).
The following excerpts may not clarify the best form of action should that occur, but they do at least point up some of the dilemmas.
Additional reading
Apart from the books and articles cited above, John Macnicol's book,The Movement for Family Allowances 1918–1945 (1980) is a full and useful treatment of the period covered in the article by Hilary Land.
The writings of Ada Nield Chew, a working-class feminist who, between 1894 and the First World War, wrote many newspaper articles on women's issues and was hostile to the idea of family allowances, have recently been collected together in Ada Nield Chew: The Life and Writings of a Working Woman (1982).
Among the works referred to in this introduction, the other important historical study is that by Jane Lewis in The Politics of Mother-hood (1980).
Elizabeth Wilson's now classic Women and the Welfare State (1977) remains an important and stimulating overview of  the historical relationship between perceptions of the needs of mothers and their children and the general development of social policy.
For further reading on present-day debates readers should refer to the works cited in this introduction, and there is also a very useful and stimulating article by Fran Bennett in Lynne Segal (ed.)
What is to be Done about the Family ?
(Bennett, 1983).
For really serious students, the reports of and evidence to the House of Commons Select Committee on Tax Credit is a very rich source indeed (HOC, 1973).
THE INTRODUCTION OF FAMILY ALLOWANCES: AN ACT OF HISTORIC JUSTICE?
HILARY LAND
The idea of paying family allowances in recognition of the need to adjust family income to family size is a very old one.
Evidence of such allowances comes to us from the time of Augustus Caesar.
In this country family allowances were paid in some areas in Tudor times, and at the end of the eighteenth century William Pitt made serious proposals for a national scheme of cash allowances for children.
Apart from the system of Speenhamland, which was judged a disastrous failure in Britain, little thought was given again to the idea until the turn of this century when proposals for family allowances were being seriously discussed by a variety of left-wing political and feminist groups.
From 1908 onwards successive governments made adjustments to the income of some groups of parents in the light of their responsibilities (for example, servicemen, the unemployed, widows and some income tax payers).
However, the Family Allowances Act 1945 marked the first scheme of allowances to benefit all families with two or more children irrespective of the employment status of either mother or father and without proof of need or evidence of contributions.
The acceptance of such a scheme meant that the government had accepted, albeit for economic and demographic reasons, the  principle that ‘society should include in its economic structure some form of direct financial provision for the maintenance of children, instead of proceeding on the assumption that, save in cases of exceptional misfortune, this is a matter which concerns only individual parents and should be left to them because normally men's wages or salaries are, or ought to be and can be made to be, sufficient for the support of their families’(Rathbone, 1940).
Few supported this principle as a means of reducing inequality between rich and poor, or between men, women and children; many did so as a means of achieving other objectives.
The story of how such a principle was accepted by a war-time coalition government and why it was implemented in the form that it was in advance of all the other social security changes, is a useful illustration of the ways in which particular problems gain the attention of governments and how one social policy can be seen and adopted as at least a partial solution to those problems.
THE EARLY CAMPAIGN FOR FAMILY ALLOWANCES
The variety of the sources of support for a national scheme of family allowances are an important feature of the story of how the scheme was accepted and implemented.
Initially, discussions about the state sharing with parents the cost of maintaining their children took place predominantly among socialists or left-wing groups who supported the principle as a worthy end in itself.
Others only backed the idea as a means to other ends.
During the 1930s, for example, family allowances were seen by increasing numbers of people as a method of combating the falling birth rate which had given rise to widespread fear of an ever declining population.
By 1942, when family allowances were debated for the first tune in Parliament, the principle had acquired supporters of most shades of political opinion.
The principle and practice of state maintenance of children 1900–20
During the decade prior to the First World War there was some discussion of proposals for the state maintenance of children.
These discussions took place in the context of widespread doubts about  Britain's ‘national efficiency’; doubts which had arisen largely from our military incompetence during the Boer War.
While such concern gained support for the provision of rate-financed school meals, proposals for full state maintenance had far less backing.
On 20 January 1905, for example, the Trades Union Congress, the London Trades Council and the Social Democratic Federation (a Marxist organisation) arranged a conference on the state maintenance of children.
The conference was chaired by the former Conservative MP Sir John Gorst and held at the Guildhall.
Will Thorne, leader of the Gas Workers' Union, moved a resolution: While the conference unanimously supported Treasury or rate-financed school meals, only a minority was prepared to let the state share parental responsibilities more fully.
Indeed, it was claimed that such ‘a wide and vague expression as ‘State maintenance’ would excite great prejudice and alarm’(Report, 1905, p. 7).
Ramsay MacDonald and Mrs Pankhurst, leading members of the Independent Labour Party, were among those who were opposed to the proposal on the grounds that it would seriously weaken the family as an institution.
School meals, however, were acceptable because ‘the common meal will be regarded as a ceremony of the greatest educational value’(MacDonald, 1909, p. 151).
The Fabians also discussed ‘motherhood endowment’ during this period.
They were concerned about the status of mothers and children and wanted to reduce women's economic dependence on their husbands.
However, they too were disturbed about the physical efficiency of the population and proposed that motherhood should be specially encouraged among the middle and upper classes in which the birth rate was declining.
The eugenists also argued, on the assumption that the working classes were made up of less intelligent and less healthy stock, that if their birth rate remained  higher than that of the middle and professional classes then the physical and intellectual standards of the British population must decline.
In 1907 Sidney Webb, in a tract entitled (significantly)The Decline in the Birth Rate , wrote: ‘In order that the population may be recruited from the self-controlled and foreseeing members of each class, rather than those who are feckless and improvident, we must alter the balance of remuneration in favour of the child-producing family’, and therefore he concluded that ‘we shall indeed have to face the problem of the systematic ‘endowment of motherhood’ and place this most indispensable of all professions upon an honourable economic basis’(Webb, 1907).
Other leading Fabians, including H. G. Wells, Beatrice Webb and George Bernard Shaw, made similar proposals during this period and after.
Meanwhile the government, in addition to allowing local authorities to provide school meals from 1906, had recognised the parental responsibilities of certain income tax payers and men in the armed forces.
In 1909 a direct graduation in the rates of tax had been established by imposing a super tax on large incomes in addition to ordinary income tax and by taxing small earned incomes at a lower rate than the larger earned incomes.
At the same time a tax allowance in respect of children of married taxpayers whose annual incomes were less than £500 was introduced.
At first the allowance was £10 for each child under sixteen years of age, but this and the income limit were raised during the First World War, and later, in 1919, the age limit for the child was abolished provided he or she was still in full-time education.
The following year, on the recommendation of the Royal Commission on Income Tax (1920), the child allowance was increased to £30 and the income limit removed altogether on the grounds that ‘in all ranges of income some regard should be had to the taxpayers marital and family responsibilities’…and that ‘rates of tax should be so adjusted that the taxation to be borne by each class should be redistributed among the individual taxpayers in that class with due recognition of family obligations’(Section VIII).
Only two members of the Royal Commission (William Knowles and J. Walter Clarke) were concerned with redistribution between income groups.
Their reservation stressed that ‘while a bounty should be given in aid of the maintenance of children it should be given to all parents for all children and the income tax is not the place in which to make a gift to one special minority of relatively  well-to-do persons while refusing the gift to the great mass of poor parents who need it most’.
Although their views appeared to carry little weight, they had raised a fundamental question about the relationship between tax allowances and cash allowances which remains a controversial issue.
In addition, the existence of tax allowances for children was seen by others, including Beatrice Webb (1919, p. 307) and Seebohm Rowntree (1918, p. 141), as an important precedent to be used in the argument for extending the state's recognition of parental responsibilities by the introduction of cash family allowances.
Another form of child allowance was introduced during the first World War.
This was incorporated in the separation allowance paid to the wives of men in the armed forces.
It was based on the number of dependent children in the family and was provided largely because it was found difficult to recruit men without ensuring some financial security for their families.
These allowances were increased during the war, and by 1918 were worth four shillings for the first child, decreasing to one shilling each for fourth and subsequent children.
Towards the end of the war separation allowances were extended to the families of commissioned officers.
The payment of these separation allowances, which Eleanor Rathbone called ‘the largest experiment in the State endowment of maternity the world has ever seen’(Rathbone, 1917; p. 55), was important in two respects.
First, it demonstrated that the adjustment of family income to family size had beneficial effects on the family's health and standard of living.
Advocates of family allowances later used this as evidence in support of their case (Rathbone, 1949; p. 48–51).
Second, and more crucial, the principle of paying dependants' allowances to the wives of men in the armed forces was carried over, albeit by a very reluctant government, into unemployment benefit.
When servicemen were demobilised in 1918 they were given a free unemployment insurance policy which entitled them to an ‘out-of-work-donation’ for a maximum of twenty-six weeks during the first twelve months following their demobilisation.
This was intended to help them return to civilian life until they round employment and, to conform with the allowances they had received in the services, this sum included additions for dependants.
The donation was similar to unemployment benefit and from November 1918 was available for periods up to a maximum of thirteen weeks  to all the unemployed covered by the 1911 insurance scheme, to ex-servicemen, civilians, insured and non-insured alike.
Because of continuing unemployment, the out-of-work donation was subsequently extended for further periods although the amounts paid were lower after November 1920, by which time only ex-servicemen were eligible.
The scheme for civilians ended in November 1919, but some unemployed ex-servicemen continued to receive the donation until March 1921.
After November 1919, therefore, all the unemployed except the ex-servicemen lost their dependants' benefits and this loss was not offset by the slight increase in the basic unemployment benefit rate made in December that year.
In 1920 the unemployment insurance scheme was extended to cover all workers except those on the land, in domestic service or in the civil service.
Ex-servicemen lost their dependants' allowances along with their donation the following year and in June 1921, when the number of registered unemployed stood at over two million, unemployment benefit rates were cut.
However, in November that year, the government was obliged to restore small dependants' allowances in unemployment benefit as a ‘temporary measure’ lasting six months.
They have never been withdrawn since.
While it was true that the experience of dependants' benefits demonstrated to the Ministry of Labour that ‘not in a few cases they enabled respectable and industrious men and women to avoid having recourse to the Poor Law’(Ministry of Labour, 1924, p. 10), the restoration and continuation of dependants' allowances and the establishment of uniform minimum scales of Poor Law outdoor relief in January 1922 owed much to the activities of the National Unemployed Workers' Movement, which organised protests na-tionally as well as against local Boards of Guardians.
In 1921 the government was clearly still fearful of social unrest.
Unemployment was proving to be an intractable problem; the successful Russian Revolution was not long passed, and although the police were controlling mass demonstrations of the unemployed, using violence on occasion, they too had gone on strike in August 1918.
For the next twenty years the number of unemployed never fell below a million.
As later discussion will show, the existence of a large group of men who received an income from the state which took account of their family size considerably strengthened the case for family allowances to be paid irrespective of the employment status of the parents.
In addition, the principle ‘that relief given under the Poor Law should be sufficient for the purpose of relieving distress, but that the amount of relief so given should of necessity be calculated on a lower scale than the earnings of the independent workman’(Ministry of Health, 1921, p. 47) still stood.
This made comparisons between the circumstances of the families of the unemployed and those in work unavoidable.
The Family Endowment Society
The campaign for a national scheme of cash family allowances began in earnest with the formation of the Nineteen Seventeen Committee which became the Family Endowment Society a year later in 1918.
Describing this first committee, Eleanor Rathbone wrote that they ‘had been brought to the idea [of family allowances]partly by the experience of the admirable effects of war-time separation allowances [and]partly by the difficulty of otherwise reconciling the claims of equal pay for equal work with the needs of mothers and children’(Rathbone, 1940, p. 68).
In the words of another founder member, Mary Stocks, the committee ‘had its roots  in the women's suffrage movement, but its personnel was definitely left-wing’(Stocks, 1949, p.98).
They were all agreed that the provision of family allowances would enhance the status of women not only as mothers but as workers because ‘it would strike at one of the main popular objections to ‘equal pay for equal work’, i.e. the plea that a man requires a family wage whereas a woman requires only an individual subsistence wage’(NUSEC, 1920, p. 3).
They also wished to achieve some redistribution of income in favour of families, particularly poor families.
But even at this early stage they were unable to agree on the primary objectives of a scheme of family allowances (NUSEC, 1918).
The majority were concerned only with the redistribution between income groups.
They were convinced that equal allowances, financed out of general taxation so that the rich contributed more than the poor, should be given in all income groups because the responsibility of motherhood and the value of the child were the same whatever the status of the parents.
The minority, including Eleanor Rathbone, while not opposed to the redistribution of income in favour of the poor (Rathbone, 1949, p. 29), argued that they should also be aiming at the redistribution of income in favour of those with family responsibilities within each income group.
Eleanor Rathbone firmly believed that the only way to remove a major barrier against equal pay in professions such as teaching would be to take account of the differences in standards of living reflected in the higher costs of bringing up children in the higher income groups.
‘The fact remains’, she wrote, ‘that differences in status exist, and as long as they exist it is practically impossible, since the lives of children cannot be separated from those of their parents, to secure to all children a uniform standard of living’(Rathbone, 1949, p. 233).
Acknowledging that it would appear unjust to pay higher allowances out of taxation to the middle classes, she argued that it would only be possible if the higher allowances were paid for by the income groups or occupations which benefitted from them.
She therefore concluded that ‘it may be necessary to make the State system a flat rate one and secure the necessary gradation by supplementary allowances from an occupational pool for all the higher grade occupations’(Rathbone, 1949, p. 236).
The Family Endowment Society widened the basis of its support in the 1920s because ‘family allowances could be approached from so many directions with such an infinite variety of emphasis and  application.
It could be handled as a problem of vital statistics, housing administration, minimum wage legislation, child nutrition, national insurance, teachers' salary scales, coal mining economics, feminism, social philosophy or pure finance’(Stocks, 1949, p. 102).
As a result the society became less specifically a group of the left.
It was ‘committed to the principle of direct provision for the family, but to no specific scheme — concerning which there was indeed much difference of opinion among the advocates of the principle’(Stocks, 1949, p.99).
Indeed, by the end of the 1920s there were many schemes under discussion.
Professor Fisher, who followed the family allowance debate closely, said: ‘It will be seen that the economic methods of establishing Family Allowances are very various.
According to your political colour you can arrange the scheme to cost the Treasury £100000000 a year, or, by a re-allocation of wage and salary payments to cost not a penny’(Fisher, 1932).
The status of mothers and children
In 1925 (the year in which Eleanor Rathbone became its president) the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (a suffragette organisation) passed a resolution in favour of a state-paid scheme of flat rate family allowances.
A year later the National Labour Women's Conference adopted a similar resolution.
It was clear that the supporters of the scheme were concerned with the status of mothers and children just as the early members of the Family Endowment Society had been.
The idea of endowment paid to a mother ‘on account of her motherhood and on behalf of each of her children…is’, it was asserted, ‘entirely opposed to the idea of relief of distress or poverty, because it implies a universal national provision and not a means of making up deficiencies in the incomes of particular families’.
(Labour Party/TUC, 1922, p. 4).
Opinion in both these movements, however, was as strongly divided as it had been among the trade union movement and the Independent Labour Party twenty years before.
Only two years earlier, in 1923, the National Labour Women's Conference had rejected a resolution supporting the idea of cash family allowances.
Some members believed the establishment of universal health and education services, together with improved housing provision, was  more important because these services would benefit everybody, not only those with children.
Linked with this idea was the belief that the economic structure of society must be changed first.
In addition, some were convinced that family allowances would result in lower wages, although the danger of that happening was thought to be considerably less if they were financed by the state and not by employers' contributions.
Others, including Dame Millicent Faw-cett, never supported the idea of family allowances because, like Ramsay MacDonald, she feared they would have a detrimental effect on parental responsibility.
The majority of women's organisations, even those representing employed women, have never (until very recently) made family allowances one of their major preoccupations, although equal pay has (and still is) an issue of vital concern.
Neither have women's organisations been particularly concerned with occupational schemes of family allowances.
This is perhaps a little surprising, for in the 1920s and 1930s one of the main arguments against giving women equal pay in the professions was that men have families to support whereas women do not and therefore it was only proper to pay men a higher salary.
The living wage policy
The Labour Party and the trade union movement considered family allowances again in 1926.
Unlike the discussions that had taken place twenty years earlier, the wide and vague principle of state maintenance of children was superseded by more precise details and exposition.
Nonetheless, varying degrees of commitment became evident but no unequivocal support for family allowances emerged.
The Independent Labour Party at its annual conference in 1926 adopted a ‘living wage’ policy.
This meant the provision of a wage large enough for the needs of a man and wife supplemented by a state-paid system of allowances for all children.
They had realised, as William Pitt had done, that minimum wage legislation, even if it were based on a family with three children, was not enough to meet the need of all families.
‘Provision would be made for over sixteen million phantom children in the families containing less than three children, while those in excess of that number, over 1¼ million in all  in families containing more than three children would still remain unprovided for.’
(Rathbone, 1949, p. 15).
One of the ostensible purposes of the ILP policy was the redistribution of income in favour of children, particularly children of the lower income groups.
As one of their members, Hugh Dalton (who was to be Chancellor of the Exchequer when family allowances were first paid in 1946) wrote in an article advocating family allowances: ‘We would raid the luxuries of the rich to give a chance of life to children of the poor’(New Leader 29 January 1926).
For just this reason the only scheme of family allowances acceptable to the Labour movement as a whole was one financed out of general taxation.
Contributory or employer-financed schemes, it was feared, might only help the worker with children at the expense of the childless worker.
This might also weaken solidarity between workers.
Even if the workers themselves made no contribution to the scheme it was argued that the cost of family allowance schemes to the employers would be used by them as an excuse to reduce wages or at least hold back wage increases or to put up prices.
The latter would handicap British exports and in either case the benefit to the workers would be illusory.
Therefore when, in 1926, the Royal Commission on the Coal Industry (largely at the instigation of William Beveridge, one of its members) recommended the introduction of a system of children's allowances financed by the mining industry itself but with a hint that it might be accompanied by a reduction in wage rates, the Miners' Federation was only prepared to accept the proposal if financed out of general taxation.
In the event the issue was largely forgotten in the upheaval following the General Strike in 1926, although the Miners' Federation was from that time on a strong supporter of a national non-contributory scheme of family allowances.
Family allowances have never enjoyed unanimous support in the Labour movement.
When, as a result of the Independent Labour Party's adoption of a ‘living wage’ policy, a joint committee of the Labour Party and Trades Union Congress examined the question in 1928 and again in 1929, two reports were issued.
The majority report recommended that cash allowances financed by the state should be paid in respect of children whose parents were not subject to income tax.
Those paying income tax were excluded on the grounds that their income was already adjusted to family size.
There was no suggestion that children's tax allowances should be  abolished.
‘In our view the principle of making an allowance for each child of the income tax payer is a sound one, in practice the middle class parent who pays income tax receives a family allowance from the state.
We do not see why the advantages should not be extended to working class people whose wages are too low to bring them within income tax limits’(my italics)(Labour Party/TUC, 1929, para. 4).
Any kind of contributory scheme was firmly opposed.
The minority report recommended that the social services should be developed first and accorded less priority to family allowances.
At the TUC annual conference in 1930 the General Council recommended that the minority report be accepted.
Their reasons for doing so were based on several fears: that family allowances would weaken the trade union movement by driving a wedge between the interests of single and married men and that they could interfere with wage negotiations to the detriment of wage rates.
Looking at foreign experience, as the Royal Commission on the Coal Industry had also done, it was argued that the trade unions were weak in countries with family allowances and strong in countries without them.
As well as these apprehensions it was also considered that the extension and development of the social services was more in keeping with collectivist principles and would not restrict benefit to families with children.
Moreover, it was impractical, they concluded, to advocate cash allowances faced with the prospect of reductions in public spending.
The conference adopted the minority report and family allowances were not discussed formally at an annual conference again until 1941.
The birth rate
Discussions about family allowance schemes have always involved some consideration of their impact on the size and structure of the population.
In the early stages of their campaign in the 1920s, supporters of family allowances were concerned lest fear of over-population militated against their proposals.
During this period there was a considerable body of opinion, particularly among economists, which held that the country was over-populated.
Partly in this belief the government was actively encouraging emigration.
The provision of family allowances, which could have been interpreted (at least indirectly) as encouraging people to have more children, hardly commended itself.
By the mid-1930s the Malthusian revival of the previous decade was over and opinion changed with the widely publicised discovery that the country faced the prospect of a declining population.
A leading article in The Times in September 1936 noted that: ‘last year the population of our country probably reached its peak.
It may increase slightly but if fertility continues to decline at the present rate that is unlikely.
From now on we can only look back’(The Times , 28 September 1936).
Calculations based on the assumption that the fertility and mortality rates of 1933 would remain unchanged showed that the population of this country would be halved in the course of a century.
On the assumption that they would continue to fall at the same rate as in the first half of the decade, it was estimated that the population would be only one tenth of its size in a hundred years time.
The international implications were clearly disturbing.
Yet another leading article in The Times drew attention to other countries, notably Germany and Italy, which were adopting pro-natalist policies with a small measure of success.
‘There will be problems of defence, of transport and building, adjustment of Imperial policy confronted with the growing population of Asia and the reluctant birth-rate of the Dominions.’
But, continued The Times , ‘it may be argued that if the same thing is happening everywhere there is no need to worry.
But that is not the case.
Apart from the fact that Asiatic birth rates flourish and will continue to flourish, that the population of Russia may double itself to over 320000000 before decline begins, there is evidence of resistance [to a declining birth rate]in Germany and Raly.’
(The Times , 29 September 1936).
The government reacted to the growing concern about population trends by establishing a Population Investigation Committee in the autumn of 1936 and included an examination of family allowances in its terms of reference.
At the Conservative Party conference in October 1936 there was much discussion about the need for greater physical fitness, but no mention of family allowances.
In his budget speech Neville Chamberlain had justified a £10 increase in the tax allowance for second and subsequent children by saying that he saw a time not too far distant ‘when countries of the British Empire will be crying out for more citizens of the right breed, and when we in this country shall not be able to supply the demand.
I think that if today we can give a little help to those who are carrying on the race the money will not be wasted,’(House of Commons Debate, Vol. 300, col. 1634).
family allowances did not figure in his  plans.
The government appeared to take little interest in the schemes of the Family Endowment Society.
There was another aspect of the population question which also caused concern.
The age structure of the population was changing.
By 1975 it was estimated that seven per cent of the population would be under fifteen and thirty per cent would be over sixty, compared with twenty-five per cent and twelve per cent respectively in 1938,(Charles, 1935).
The increasing number of old people had been noted by politicians during the 1920s, mainly because of the increased cost of pensions, but now, against the background of a declining population, this trend seemed more alarming.
Duncan Sandys summarised the situation in this way: ‘a declining population must inevitably involve a deterioration in the whole standard of life of our people.
With a population whose numbers are declining, and where average age is rising, we shall be faced with the situation of a smaller and smaller proportion of active workers having to support an ever increasing proportion of old people,’(Sandys, 1937).
There was a further feature of the birth rate problem which had concerned the eugenists in particular for many years.
This was an anxiety about the steady increase of fertility down the social scale.
During the 1920s this fact had been used against universal family allowances because, it was claimed, they would have the ‘dysgenic’ effect of encouraging the idle and the feckless to have more children (Gray; 1927; McDougall, 1921).
Although there were, of course, counter arguments, it was not until a rapidly declining population became an acknowledged fact that the case for exclud-ing certain groups from family allowances lost its force.
By the end of the 1930s, sociologists and demographers could forcefully press the need to increase the birth rate among the working classes as well(Glass, 1936).
Thus the existence of different birth rates between classes could be used against the idea of universal family allowances when prevailing opinion feared over-population.
When, during the 1930s and 1940s, the concern was with the quantity as much as with the quality of population this particular objection carried little weight, although being drawn upon as a reason for not restricting a national scheme of family allowances to the working classes alone.
Moreover, of course, the case for occupational family allowances and child tax allowances has always gained in strength from the existence of differential birth rates, the argument being that the  more prosperous parents warranted special encouragement (e.g. Fisher, 1932).
During the 1920s and 1930s interest in occupational family allowances grew but the impetus to introduce them came largely from individuals.
In 1924 William Beveridge established a scheme of family allowances for the staff of the London School of Economics, of which he was the Director.
Eleanor Rathbone also campaigned for their introduction whenever the opportunity arose and by 1936 Leo Amery, one of the first Conservative members of the front bench publicly to support family allowances, was recom-mending occupational schemes to leading industrialists.
He introduced a scheme in a firm which he was a director.
Poverty and malnutrition
During the 1930s the inadequacies of the wage system in meeting family needs were tellingly exposed by the growing knowledge of the extent of poverty and malnutrition in the population, particularly among children.
Seebohm Rowntree, in his second study of poverty in York in 1936, found that half the children in working-class families were born into poverty-stricken homes and lived below the level of ‘dietetic and health efficiency’ during the first five years of their lives.
Other surveys, including those carried out in relatively prosperous areas such as Bristol made similar estimates.
It was undeniable that low wages as well as unemployment were a major cause of poverty.
Although definitions of ‘poverty’ and adequate nutrition were (and are) debatable, the accumulation of these findings did make an impression and convinced more people of the need for family allowances, particularly when viewed against the background of a declining population at home and the pro-natalist policies of our competitors abroad.
As the 1930s drew to a close and the shadow of war fell across Europe, a concern about ‘the state of the nation’ was clearly detectable.
In 1938 Leo Amery expressed it in this way: ‘when we are faced with the competition of a people who lay stress on the healthy development of their young manhood and womanhood, how can we afford a situation in which something like twenty-five per cent of the children of our country are growing up under-nourished and likely to belong to the C3 rather than the A1 type when they grow up.
How can we, confronted by dangers not of  today and tomorrow, but of the generations which lie ahead, contemplate with equanimity the prospect of our population, already small compared with some of our competitors, steadily dwindling, above all in the younger spheres of life?’
(House of Commons Debates Vol. 341, Col. 574).
Amery was convinced of the need to introduce a scheme of family allowance even if, in the interest of economy, it was limited to third and subsequent children; and now he was finding more support for that view from the Conservative benches as well as from other parties.
However, his suggestions concerning family allowances were ‘duly ignored in Ministerial replies’(Amery, 1955, p. 206) and he did not succeed in persuading Neville Chamberlain to have the question studied by the party research department until after the war began.
Meanwhile, in spite of increasing requests in Parliament for at least an inquiry into family allowances schemes, the government did nothing, on the grounds that they ‘were not aware of the widespread desire among [employers and workers]for a system of this kind’(House of Commons Debates , Vol. 345, col. 40).
Outside Parliament, an all-party Children's Minimum Campaign Committee had been formed in 1934 ‘to ensure that no child shall by reason of the poverty of its parents be deprived of at least the minimum food and other requirements for full health’.
All organisations working for the welfare of children were invited to affiliate.
‘The Ministry of Health, the Milk Board, the Board of Education, the Statutory Committee on Unemployment Insurance and the Unemployment Assistance Board all felt the impact of its activities.
Memoranda issued from it; conferences were called by it; deputa-tions proceeded from it; researches into nutritional standards and the incidence of malnutrition were stimulated by it’(Stocks, 1949).
The Campaign Committee used the evidence of nutritional studies not only to show the inadequacies of the wages system but also to emphasize that provisions for children in the form of school meals and milk were not sufficient in themselves to eradicate malnutrition.
Nonetheless welfare provisions for school children had made progress during the 1930s although because of the frequent economic crises this progress had been rather erratic.
Local authorities, moreover, had encountered difficulties in selecting children for these various benefits.
School meals and milk as well as education maintenance allowances increasingly came to be  regarded as complements to a universal scheme of family allowances by its advocates rather than alternatives as had been argued, for example, at the Trades Union Congress in 1930.
Unemployment insurance and wage levels
The great depression of the 1930s during which unemployment never fell below nine per cent and at one point exceeded twenty-two per cent, meant that a large section of the population was dependent on insurance and assistance benefits.
It became increasingly difficult to pay insurance and assistance benefits and at the same time keep them below the level of wages.
Although the system of relief under the Poor Law had changed when the Boards of Guardians were disbanded in 1929 and changes had been made in the unemployment insurance scheme, the principle of not allowing unemployment benefit to exceed a man's wages was by no means abandoned.
By 1938 the Unemployment Insurance Statutory Committee ad-mitted that it could not increase dependants' benefits without pushing the level of unemployment benefit for the family man above the level of many workers earnings.
In its annual report of 1938 the Committee stated that ‘the existing scale of benefits cannot be regarded as so fully meeting needs as to make it undesirable to raise them further’ and continued, ‘if…the wage system made allowance for dependency, the main objection to further increase in the rates of benefit would be removed’(Quoted in Green, 1938).
William Beveridge, who was a member of the Committee from its inception in 1934 until 1944, was keenly aware of this problem of less eligibility and was convinced that a scheme of family allowances could help to overcome it.
This conclusion was obvious to others besides Beveridge.
An interesting change of ground was occurring.
The problem revealed by the Unemployment Insurance Statutory Committee led unquestionably to a view of family allowances as incentives to work rather than an encouragement to depend unduly on unemployment benefit.
If family allowances were available to the man in work, his advantageous economic position in relation to the unemployed would be better secured.
(see, for example, The Times, 4 March 1938).
Mary Stocks later wrote that ‘this was a solemn thought for opponents who had formerly visualized family  allowances as a threat to the wage earner's incentive…it was her [Eleanor Rathbone's]turn to talk of economic incentive now’.
(Stocks, 1949, p.182).
The Labour movement was not, however, convinced by these arguments: rather it continued to oppose family allowances.
For example, in a debate on Unemployment Assistance in July 1938, Clement Attlee described proposals for family allowances as attempts to keep down wages.
This ‘determined hostility of the Socialist Party generally and of the Trade Union movement in particular’ which Leo Amery later described as a ‘curious feature’(Amery, 1955, p. 206) of the movement for family allowances can perhaps be explained by two factors.
First, the Conservatives who were in favour of family allowances mostly advocated contributory or employer-financed schemes, and the grounds for the Labour movement's opposition to such schemes, which they had voiced in the 1920s, were still valid.
Indeed, the fact that Conservatives now supported such schemes heightened their suspicions.
As Ellen Wilkinson (who in the 1920s had been among the first women in the Labour Party to support family allowances) wrote in 1938: ‘what the Amery type want is to feed the existing and potential cannon-fodder with the greatest economy and lack of waste.
Pay the money for the upkeep of each child, don't give it to the individual workman who may have few or no children.
In short apply the means test to wages’(Tribune , 8 July 1938).
The second reason for the Labour movement's hostility was that the trade unions had still to be convinced that their strength had increased sufficiently to risk reconsidering the position as declared at their annual conference in 1930.
Achieving better wages had a much higher priority.
It was not until the war brought about radical changes in the strength and the economic position of the trade unions that the majority of the Labour movement felt able to accept a scheme of family allowances without fearing a serious loss of bargaining power.
The end of the first stage of the campaign for family allowances, 1920–39
By the end of the 1930s the idea of a national scheme of family allowances had gained support in many quarters, although opinion  was divided about the most appropriate kind of scheme.
‘This support’, wrote Eleanor Rathbone, ‘comes from sections of opinion otherwise widely divided, from employers and trade unionists, from economists, sociologists and experts on population, from parents and would-be parents of all classes, from organizations of women and leaders of religious thought’(Rathbone, 1940, p. xi).
These new converts to the cause of family allowances were different from the feminist and ‘living wage’ advocates of the previous decade because their primary concern was not to improve the status of women or redistribute income from rich to poor, though these aims might incidentally be attained.
The main objectives were now to abolish poverty among children and halt the decline in the birth rate.
Nevertheless, family allowances had yet to become an integral part of the programme of either major political party and the trade unions remained, in the words of Elanor Rathbone, ‘suspicious and aloof’.
It was only when the war created new economic and social needs and highlighted existing problems that a universal scheme of family allowances gained sufficient additional support to be accepted and implemented.
Most important of all, family allowances were seen to be relevant to the government's economic policy.
As Maynard Keynes explained when he proposed a national scheme of family allowances in 1940: ‘at first sight it is paradoxical to propose in time of war an expensive social reform which we have not thought ourselves able to afford in time of peace.
But in truth the need for this reform is so much greater in such times that it may provide the most appropriate occasion for it’(Keynes, 1940, p. 32).
FAMILY ALLOWANCE
The Family Allowance Campaign
Family Allowance as it stands at present is for many women the only money we have which belongs to us by right.
The importance of this cannot and must not be underestimated.
Family Allowance is universal, there are no special qualifying conditions, it is paid to every mother with two or more children.
It is not means-tested and is paid to women in all circumstances.
As soon as a child is born entitlement begins and is never questioned until the child itself attains economic independence.
There is little need for contact with the Department of Health and Social Security because payment is made through the Post Office; there is therefore no requirement to beg or argue one's case.
We don't have to ask our husbands for the money, we know it is paid to us because we have the day-to-day responsibility for our children.
We receive Family Allowance merely because we have children.
The actual method of payment, the book of orders cashable at the Post Office, is one of the most important factors.
The possession of the book establishes our entitlement.
We have the money for the  current week and for future weeks in our hands, we know come what may we can rely on our Family Allowance.
In many cases the man's pay packet is swallowed up at the weekend, when rent and other bills are paid and weekend food is bought, so the Family Allowance paid on Tuesdays provides some food for the family until the next pay day.
We always know we can get this money on Tuesday and this is especially important if in any week the paypacket is depleted or non-existent.
Many women use the Family Allowance book as a way in which to save for more expensive essential items.
We can delay cashing orders whenever the need arises and we have complete control over them and how much we save depending on the particular needs of the children at a particular time.
(An unofficial survey conducted in Cheltenham showed that 48 per cent of women receiving Family Allowance saved in this manner.)
The security of possession of the Family Allowance book is in some cases the final consideration which enables a woman, with the help of friends and relations, to end an intolerable marriage.
It is the financial life-line in times of marital crisis and breakdown.
Family Allowance is not related to the man's wage, it is paid when there is no wage, whatever the circumstances may be, it is paid when there is no man to support the children.
In this society where women hold the ultimate responsibility for the welfare of children, it is vital that money paid for the children is paid to the mother on that basis alone, in order to avoid real hardship particularly in times of crisis.
Even if‘tax credits’ were paid to the mother this would fall far short of the advantages of Family Allowance and would be completely unacceptable to women.
For women receiving Supplementary Benefit the thought of having their money ‘cut-off’(e.g. through the cohabitation ruling) or of Giro orders being delayed or stolen is a constant worry.
Tax credits would not be paid to women receiving Supplementary Benefit.
If Supplementary Benefit is the only source of income, dependence on Supplementary Benefit is increased.
We need some money we can be sure of, some money we do not have to ask for either from men or from the Department of Health and Social Security.
Some money we collect each week from the Post Office.
The emphasis of the ‘tax credit’ would be towards a form of tax relief rather than a payment of benefit.
The position of the mother  would be one of even greater dependence than exists at the moment.
The dangers of a system where those who have care of children are completely dependent on another person are obvious.
The man may or may not be earning a wage; he may not understand the particular needs of the children.
Women, in order to have any financial independence, are forced to work outside the home as well as in it, often to take unsuitable jobs, working in all up to sixteen hours per day.
The Green Paper mentions the need for married women to join the labour force and talks about ‘incentives’(paragraph 79).
When, however, a woman is doing the important and demanding work of child care, taking a further job must be a matter of choice and not of financial necessity.
A woman must not be made financially dependent because she is involved in child care, nor must this work be regarded as socially unimportant.
THE WRONG RATS
ZOË FAIRBAIRNS
And the dying welfare state brought its own newspeak as well: governments' failure to link child benefit, unemployment pay and so on to the cost of living was the fight against inflation ; putting children on half-time schooling was referred to as giving parents a free hand ; closing hospitals and dumping dying patients on the doorsteps of unwarned and distant relatives was community care ; and a new political movement that saw remedies to the whole predicament, if only the nation's women would buckle down to traditional role and biological destiny, was known quite simply as FAMILY.
FAMILY's enemies (and it had many, most notably among feminists) were fond of equating its origins with movements of the seventies such as the anti-abortion campaigns, the racialist right and the pro-censorship lobby, and certainly it had drawn members from all these.
But it was not the same as any of them, and could not seriously be dismissed as anti-black or anti-woman by anyone who took the trouble to find out the facts; after all, as FAMILY was fond of pointing out, one of its founders was a woman of Pakistani origin!
Rashida Patel was not its chief publicist, however.
That task fell to the strictly British Mrs Isabel Travers, who never needed any encouragement to explain how FAMILY was born.
‘We were chat-ting in Sainsbury's, Mrs Patel and I, rather more years ago than I care to remember.
I do remember saying that these Asian women had a lot to teach us about family life.
She replied that that might be  so, ‘but maybe in her community women didn't stand up for themselves quite as much as they should.’
Mrs Travers seemed to think that said it all.
Alan Travers had risen to prominence in his wife's organisation and was now one of the Family Party's two members of parliament.
The other MP, David Laing, was a younger man, around forty, with a passionate hatred of feminists.
He shared this with many other members of the party, but not Isabel Travers.
In fact, she was fond of saying that FAMILY and the women's liberation movement were both on the same side if they did but know it.
‘How can you say that, Mrs Travers?’ interviewers liked to ask.
Mrs Travers was a delight to interview.
Always blonde and cool and pretty and respectful.
Always informal and chatty but never waffly.
She tempered her approach to each medium like a professional: for newspaper journalists she spoke slowly in short, simple generalities; on television she smiled a lot and complimented her opponents on the intelligence of their remarks; on radio she allowed herself to be profound, even vulnerable.
Yet in essence what she said was always the same.
‘I say that because the true liberation of women will never come about until proper respect and value is placed upon their role as nurturers.’
Mrs Travers and Mrs Patel had shown flair for public relations from the beginning; and the beginning for them had been shortly after the famed conversation in Sainsbury's, when they organised a summer procession in honour of family values in a South London borough particularly hard hit by both government spending cuts and feminists insisting that ‘family values’ were a euphemism for women doing the housework.
When she wasn't explaining that she and the libbers were on the same side really, Mrs Travers took pains to point out that FAMILY had no quarrel with the poor or socially inadequate; it was just that she wanted to pay tribute to the unsung millions of women (and men) who lived normal lives, did not swap roles, get divorces or abortions, become homeless or batter their children (or their wives); people who faced misfortune with re-sourcefulness and courage and without recourse to public funds.
When a national newspaper first published Mrs Travers' views, the response was so great that a whole page had to be given over to readers' letters.
‘My fiancée and I have a simple answer for homeless families.
We  won't be getting married until we've saved enough for our deposit.
And we're old-fashioned enough to believe that children come after marriage, not before.’
‘So sickness benefit is going up again!
I have kept myself fit all my life, avoiding infections, abstaining from drink, tobacco and hazard-ous pursuits.
Now, it seems, I am to be out of pocket…’
‘Very nice to be an unmarried mother and live on social security.
As a mere wife, I live on what my husband chooses to give me…’
The newspaper became embarrassed; so much so that they ran a follow-up feature called ‘Lest We Forget’.
Amid all the tales of scroungers, it said, let us not forget the deserving poor; and its journalists located hardship cases with impeccable credentials.
The single mother who was a rape victim (you have no excuse whatever , the judge had told the culprit); the family whose home was struck by lightning the day after their insurers went broke; the legless man who packed cosmetics at home because he liked to feel he was paying his way.
‘These are difficult times for all of us,’ thundered the editorial, ‘and will continue to be so until we are reaping the full benefits of North Sea oil.
But let us not forget the reputation for compassion in which Britain still leads the world…’
Mrs Travers made one of her television appearances.
‘Is it not remarkable,’ she said, her pretty brows arched in bewilderment, ‘that an organisation set up in support of the family is thereby assumed to be against the welfare state?
Are the two incompatible?
I hope not.’
Even the weather collaborated on the day of that first FAMILY procession.
Sun shone through a gentle breeze.
Crowds waited outside the town hall for three o'clock.
A clash of cymbals struck the hour, trumpets and trombones burst into ‘The British Grenadiers’, the gates opened and the procession began.
Musical families from all over the borough formed the brass band.
Their instruments gleamed with polish and sunshine, the players — men, women, children — were spotless in their white shirts and jeans.
They sweated and marched, played and smiled.
Their banner proclaimed, ‘Families in Harmony’.
Cars followed.
The mayor, the mayoress and an obscure royal rode in the first sleek open limousine.
It was not an official visit by royalty.
But it was rumoured that the Palace was enchanted by what it had heard of the planned event and wished to make a non-committal  gesture of support while not embroiling itself in politics.
The mayor, who had a reputation for trendiness, wore a pale yellow suit under his chain of office; his lady was in pink flowers and a wide-brimmed white straw hat; the royal relative was orange from head to foot.
The three dignitaries waved stiffly.
The second car carried Mrs Travers and Mrs Patel, respectively clothed in pale and deep green.
There was no awkwardness in their greeting to the crowd; Mrs Travers' arm, pale and silk-gloved to the elbow, waved like the sail of a windmill, while Mrs Patel, shyly confident, gave little intimate grins and shook her wrist in short bursts.
Watchers assumed they were film-stars or monarchs, but looked in their programmes and found each woman self-labelled as an ordinary housewife.
After the cars came representatives of the caring professions and local charities.
There were few official delegations, but small con-tingents were present from most groups.
‘Family Doctors for Family Life’ handed out information on how mothers could treat colds at home without medical supervision.
A few middle-aged social workers walked together with prim pride, while younger colleagues had leaflets: ‘Lack of proper funding is making our job more difficult.
But we're here to help families, and we'll help you all we can.’
Nuns and priests had organised a float whose theme was the Holy Family.
Then came the families themselves.
The Tynes, perched in their multitudes on the hand-carved cart that had lain cherished and unused in their garage.
The cart, the programme explained, had been in the Tyne family for generations.
Carpenters since the sixteenth century, the Tyne males now sat benignly sawing wood while the women and children did intricate carvings and played with sawdust.
Then a family of writers: father published thick texts on the future of man, mother contributed to magazines, and the tall, serious children persistently took prizes in essay contests.
Mr Meat the butcher (it actually was his name) with a pig's head on a tray, garlanded with strings of sausages carried by his wife and two sons.
An income tax inspector (anonymous) on a rather flippant float, looking grimly into the crowd and singling out strangers.
‘I want your money’, he roared, while his wife brought him piles of paper and the children sat at his feet counting money into a piggy bank.
Fairytale characters mingled with the children in the crowd, giving them toys and bits of fruit: Mary Poppins, Mother Hubbard, the Old Woman Who Lived in a Shoe.
Then came the International Section: an Indian family on the back of a lorry with a stove, the mother cooking real curry that you could smell in the air; an Irish group, parents with bagpipes and children dressed as leprechauns; a steel band from Trinidad.
Suddenly the section of the audience that was laughing at Italian children flinging spaghetti realised that everyone else had fallen silent.
Their shouts died in mid-air; the procession had changed.
Discussing it afterwards, many people said it was too abrupt, but Mrs Travers and Mrs Patel defended it.
These were just as much a part of family life as the healthy, celebrating adults and children earlier in the procession.
The afflicted families.
Fathers pushing wheelchairs containing smart, vacant-eyed teenagers.
Mothers with odd, floppy babies.
Senile old folk in the passenger seats of cars, their younger relatives smiling bravely.
The spectators lowered their eyes and consulted their programmes.
‘Mr and Mrs J's son Alex was born with spina bifida.
‘We were offered a special school’ says Mrs J, ‘but it was so far away, we just couldn't.’
At thirteen Alex is very intelligent; he reads avidly (the Famous Five are a special favourite!) and is always cheerful.
COPING AWARD: a local laundry has offered Mrs J vouchers to cover fifty per cent of the cost of washing bed-linen over the next six months.’
The spectators swallowed hard and stood very still.
‘The W family have just welcomed their son home from Borstal.
He is determined to make good and they are determined to help him.
COPING AWARD: A local supermarket will give him a month's trial as a shelf-filler.
After the month, he will be paid.
The supermarket prefers to remain anonymous.’
‘Miss Joanna G is one of hundreds of single women in the borough who have sacrificed career and marriage to care for elderly parents at home.
Says Miss G: ‘Mother and I get on very well.
I don't regard it as a sacrifice.’
COPING AWARD: Twelve double tickets for matinees at any local cinema.’
The sun beat down on the discomfort of the watchers, wondering if they were meant to clap or what.
The procession wound through the town, heralded by music and laughter, leaving perplexity and sadness in its wake.
Only from the  windows of a derelict tower block squatted by women was there any deliberately hostile response.
Each of the wide windows facing the road had been blocked with a sheet of paper.
And each of these placards bore a stark message, white on black or black on white.
‘Stop the cuts’
‘More hospitals’
‘More home helps’
‘More nurseries’
‘Better schools’
‘Women can't do it all’
‘Women won't do it all’
And so the lines had been drawn for the battle that still raged, feminists and FAMILY glaring balefully at each other over the dying body of the welfare state.
Each held its demonstrations, its counter-demonstrations; each established its model communities.
It was a new dichotomy, to confuse and criss-cross the older ones of class and party.
‘The state is responsible’, asserted the feminists from their squatted communes, their women-only states-within-a-state, when truant children ran wild and delinquent, and old folk died neglected; ‘No, we women are responsible’, crooned the green-uniformed women stewards of FAMILY, running courses in domestic skills and home nursing, and publishing books called Play His Game in the Marriage Bed and You Promised to Obey .
The feminists had marched in thousands when David Laing MP, in his maiden speech, urged married women to give up their jobs because ‘there is so much to do at home’; they sabotaged a cricket pitch (cricket being ‘male idleness elevated into a religion’) etching into the grass with acid their crudest symbol: a round-cornered diamond to represent a vulva, with a large clitoris and no opening.
They ran health centres (offering a mixture of self-help, herbal-ism, old wives' tales and orthodox medicine) for women finding to their cost that FAMILY had a stronghold in the dwindling official health services; they dug up neglected laws on sex equality and fought hopelessly to get them obeyed.
Women on the way to FAMILY'S housework classes would be stopped by feminists and asked if they would like to do karate or woodwork instead; new fiancées would receive congratulatory cards in the post, enclosing leaflets outlining the legal rights of wives, while their startled boyfriends got anonymous warnings to behave.
And at mid-day on  Sundays, when streets in which FAMILY had worked to re-establish the day of domestic togetherness were fragrant with the smell of cheap meat roasting, shrill voices would be heard through letter-boxes: ‘When's Mum's day off, then?’
(And it was not unknown, FAMILY learned to its regret, for the woman in the kitchen, hearing this, to respond: ‘Good question’, and abandon her pans.)
Unemployment was at a record high, particularly among men.
Heavy industry was quailing before foreign competition, but the decline in traditional female areas of work was less steep.
Women were cheaper, some firms preferred them.
North European businesses found it satisfactory to farm out big clerical jobs to London agencies, and international corporations making domestic appliances found the nimble-fingered women of the North and Midlands surprisingly to their taste.
FAMILY knew of whole streets where women went out to work and men stayed at home and neglected the children.
FAMILY'S anxiety was shared by industry.
Today's children were tomorrow's workers.
Besides, women workers might be cheaper, but too many depressed breadwinners could damage national morale, and morale needed to be high for what was coming.
The country had been the sick man of Europe for too long, and Europe suspected hypochondria.
What was needed was nothing less than a new industrial revolution.
The suspension of all social security payments was only to be temporary, part of a national effort to restore confidence in the pound.
The fact was, the beleaguered prime minister explained to a restive House of Commons, that when it came to income maintenance, history had turned the welfare state on its head.
He made moving reference to its founding philosophy.
It was, he recalled, that people should first and foremost fend for themselves.
Merciful provision must be made for those who failed to do so, but the failures must never be better off than the successes.
Unfortunately, years of inflation, pay curbs and good intentions had taken their toll; and social security payments were outgrowing wages.
‘In our mad pursuit of fairness, we have forgotten equity.
Our British sense of fair play has recoiled from the prospect of anyone starving or suffering, even through his own fault — but where is the fair play when hospitals must close to put money in the pockets of the workshy?
Where is equity when the idle are better off than the  diligent?
There have to be further cuts — on that we have no choice.
But this we can choose: either to break faith with millions of decent, proud, hardworking citizens, or to look with more realism on the others: the tramps, the ne'er-do-wells, the offenders, the improvident —‘
The Commons ceased to be merely restive, and erupted.
House procedures used once to be compared by class-conscious critics to a public school debating chamber; these days it was more like break-time in a comprehensive.
No longer did MPs defer to the Speaker, grant courtesy titles or bow when they left; these days it was the loudest voice that got a hearing.
A socialist youth was on his feet, roaring with all the force and outrage of his years.
The working class were not going to fall for this one, and neither were their wives.
It was quite obvious what was going on.
Foreign industry saw unemployment pay — meagre as it was — as the last obstacle before this country became a handy offshore pool of cheap labour.
It wasn't a question of social security payments being too high, it was a question of wages being lower than even government estimates of subsistence!
Offer jobs to the unemployed; then the prime minister would see who was workshy and who was not.
If people lived mean, dirty, anti-social lives it was their mean environments, made by dirty, anti-social government policies, that made them so.
There had to be cuts, did there?
Then cut profits, cut arms spending, abolish the monarchy.
He was howled down by monarchists of right and left, and the house switched its attention to another speaker.
David Laing did not have a loud voice; but newness was on his side, the novelty value of the Family Party.
His appearance compelled the kind of attention a mouse gives a snake: in his late thirties, he looked shrivelled and ageless, anxious and ill.
He was unmarried, lived alone, and, it was said, ate rarely and eccentrically, needing much of his salary to feed his addiction to coffee.
The world shortage and price rises had made it a rare delicacy for ordinary citizens, but David Laing liked to sip and swig constantly.
A beaker and a flask steamed on the bench beside him as he spoke.
All around, honourable members lounged on benches in shirts, slacks and occasional frocks of Olex, the new, cheap, crepey material being manufactured in the Far East out of North Sea oil by-products.
It came in two colours, medium brown or medium grey; it shone with a slightly oily sheen.
Laing made it clear that he despised  his fellow MPs for affecting the common touch and wearing Olex; he himself never appeared in the house without a worsted suit and a carnation.
His hair was very short, the back of his neck shaven and stubbly.
He wore thin-rimmed spectacles.
His narrow tongue flicked once across each dry lip.
He glared at the prime minister.
‘May I remind you that one of the largest groups receiving social security are receiving it not because they are neglecting their duty, but because they are doing it?
I refer, of course, to unsupported mothers, women who have neither shirked their obligation to have children, nor left them to seek jobs, nor abandoned them to the tender mercies of the social services —,
The house sighed, wishing it had not let him start.
The trouble with pressure-group MPs was that they were bores.
Fanatics.
They brought their favourite subject into every damn debate, relevant or not.
With Laing it was mothers.
Single mothers, married mothers, he didn't care.
Just women who had babies and looked after them properly.
Funny bloke.
Unmarried, but didn't look queer.
A Sunday newspaper had once revealed that he'd wanted to marry a feminist and she'd run off with a lesbian, which was why he had it in for both.
That was before he became an MP.
He'd been a social worker, then a deputy director of social services — he'd been fired after the famous ‘babyswap’ scandal, but that was how he came to be taken up by FAMILY.
Some woman journalist friend of his had a handicapped daughter and found she was entitled to virtually no help looking after her, whereas if she fostered someone else's kid she got any number of handouts.
Laing had worked some fiddle and hadn't minded being caught; he said he'd proved that the state only acknowledged the work of mothers when they didn't do it…
The prime minister was smiling indulgently.
‘As I have said, the suspension of payments will be only temporary, and when the social security system has been overhauled, special consideration will be given to deserving groups.
But in any case…’
The prime minister's smile spread even further in the slightly crooked way it had when he thought he had an opponent hoist with his own petard.
‘There are ways, are there not, of avoiding becoming an unsupported mother, just as there are ways of avoiding becoming unemployed?
The Family Party above all would not wish us to place a premium on unorthodox styles of living…’
Alan Travers, the other FP member, took over from David.
He  was past fifty, tall and straight, lean-faced, with large handsome features.
He dressed more casually, in a green suit; he liked to play the calm paternal figure to D avid's impetuous youth.
‘Isn't this the point we're always making?
We fail so utterly to reward responsible married women that if we give anything at all to single mothers we appear to be placing a premium —‘
Something seemed to explode behind Alan Travers.
David Laing had leapt to his feet again, spraying his neighbours with cold coffee.
He seemed to be having some kind of fit.
His eyes stared, his mouth spat.
‘Yes!’ he cried, ‘Yes!
Exactly!
The prime minister dares —dares — to talk about unorthodox styles of living in a society that actually penalises motherhood, so much so that virtually the only women who'll take it up are those capable of nothing else!
Who's having all the big families today?
Social classes four and five, the filth, the dregs, the dross of society.
The better females are too busy working, or seeking work, or fighting for their rights — and who in honesty can blame them?
Who can blame a liberated woman for not settling for slavery?
So they leave it to the ones who don't recognise degradation when they see it — I've been a social worker, I know about these people — women too stupid and disorganised to —‘
Alan Travers grabbed his arm.
‘Sit down, Laing.’
David wrenched free and went on furiously: ‘Those women whose homes are sties, whose habits are bestial, who couldn't raise a guinea-pig never mind a child —’ he drew a deep, shuddering breath to steady himself, then continued more slowly.
‘Do you remember — it seems a century ago — we used to worry about being overrun by blacks?
Send 'em home, some of us said, stop 'em breeding.
Who but the lunatic fringe thinks colour is the issue now — as we look at the decaying bones of our great compassionate nation, gnawed by whining, idle, dirty, anti-social rats of all colours…’
His voice had sunk to a piercing whisper.
‘The wrong rats are breeding.
Maybe we can't stop that,’ he hissed, ‘but we'd better make maternity a better deal for the others, or we're going to be overrun.’
The house dissolved in uproar.
Police had to be brought in to protect Laing from the outraged violence of some of his hearers.
But when he made his appearance in the members’ bar a few hours later, there were others happy to shake him by the hand and talk with him far into the night.
The debate was resumed.
The house would not approve the  prime minister's plans for scrapping the social security system.
The pound fell and fell on the foreign exchange markets.
The government lost a vote of confidence.
A general election was called.
It was late summer.
B. MARRIAGE
Introduction
For the last ten years or so, feminist commentators on social policy have remarked upon two particular features of the British social security system: first, that it is based on clear and consistent views about the nature of marriage and the economic and social relationship between husbands and wives (Land and Parker, 1978; O'Donovan, 1979); and secondly, despite considerable changes in the position of women in society since the principles of the modern social security system were laid out in the Beveridge Report (Beveridge, 1942) and consolidated in post-war legislation, the system itself and its principles have remained obstinately impervious to change (Land, 1975).
The article by Hilary Land reproduced here indicates that some changes in the social security system are now taking place.
The rigid view of the sexual division of labour previously contained within the system is being diluted, to be replaced by a scheme which assumes that women will both want and need to switch from home to paid work and back again, particularly as the special demands of dependants such as children and the elderly — for whom the system still assumes women are primarily responsible — come and go.
There nevertheless remain some aspects of the scheme which demonstrate how difficult it seems to be for government to jettison the original ideas of the Beveridge Report; for example, the Invalid Care Allowance (ICA), which was introduced as recently as 1976, is not payable to married women on the grounds that they are likely to be  at home anyway and hence not in need of compensation for giving up paid work in order to care for a chronically sick person in their household (Groves and Finch, 1983); the tax system (which is not under detailed discussion here) still assumes that all men need an additional allowance to help pay for the cost of ‘keeping’ a wife.
Indeed, the Married Man's Tax Allowance has recently been re-confirmed despite strong criticism of it (for example, Equal Opportunities Commission, 1982b): in the March 1984 budget the allowance went up so that in real terms it is now higher than at any time since the war (Financial Times , 14 March 1984).
The women's movement and the Equal Opportunities Commission have assiduously pointed out unequal treatment of men and women in the marriage relationship when and where it occurs.
But as Fairbairns points out, there has been some disagreement as to where the solutions to the subordinate position of women lie.
There are basically two kinds of argument and constellations of opinion.
First, one of the most important conceptual changes brought about by the most recent wave of feminism is the general recognition that housework is work in all the conventional senses, except that it is unpaid.
Indeed, as Fairbairns points out, both in this article and in her novel Benefits , when a houseworker fails to carry out her domestic duties ‘properly’ someone else (usually another woman) is brought in by the state and paid to do the identical job.
If the conceptual boundaries between unpaid housework in the home and paid work in the labour market have been broken down, then it seems demonstrably unfair that housewives are not paid for the work they currently carry out for nothing.
Thus some feminists have argued that there should be wages for housework.
However, if the husband were forced to pay, this would create havoc in the labour market, and would introduce an employer/employee relationship into marriage, thus exacerbating existing dependencies and ine-qualities of status between husbands and wives.
Thus they argue that the state should pay these wages out of public expenditure.
This would be asking rather more of the social security system than exists under the present arrangements, for this payment would be made, not on the grounds of ‘need’ as with existing Supplementary Benefits (SB), nor on grounds of compensation, as with ICA, nor on the grounds of purchased ‘rights’as in the case of insurance benefits, but on grounds of work carried out.
Housewives would have the  same relationship to the state as public employees, except that the services they render would be allocated to an unchanging unit in an unchanging place — namely, their own families in their own homes.
Thus this set of arguments takes the four roles of women — wives, mothers, daughters and paid workers — and elevates the first two for special treatment and recognition.
It problematises housework, and suggests a form of positive discrimination in favour of housewives and mothers.
(For a critique of the ‘wages for housework’ campaign, see Freeman, 1980, and McIntosh, 1981).
The second constellation of arguments is not an argument for positive discrimination: instead, it is an argument for the equal treatment of women and men irrespective of their relationship to each other.
In other words, it is based on what Land calls ‘economic individualism’ and its point of reference is not the home and unpaid housework, but the labour market and paid work.
It problematises inequality of treatment.
Within this set of solutions women would be treated as workers rather than as housewives and mothers.
They would be able to claim benefit in their own right and for their husbands as their dependants.
They would become subject to the same conditions of claiming benefit as men: for example, it would be a matter of discretionary decision on the part of the allocators of SB as to whether the existence of children or other dependants at home would relieve them of the need to register for work (DHSS, 1978a, p.95).
If they fail to find work and the Department of Employment considers it to be available, then their benefit would be cut in exactly the same way that men's benefit is presently reduced or taken away altogether (DHSS, 1978a, p. 92).
In short, women claimants would find themselves in a system that assumes they are alienated workers rather than — as the present system assumes — scrounging mistresses or ‘walking wombs’.
Mary McIntosh would support such changes; writing about the process of achieving socialist social policy, she argues that economic individualism would lead to a unity of working-class men and women:
the wage system is fundamental to capitalist society, so that despite all the disadvantages of wage work, the way forward must be through furthering the process of proletarianisation of women and rescuing women from preproletarian dependence.
The struggle to end capitalist wage labour cannot be helped by women opting out and can only be undertaken by a working class that is  less divided by male domination than the present one.
(McIntosh, 1981, p.40).
The difficulty with both these kinds of argument is that they emphasise only one or, at the most, two aspects of women's lives.
However various kinds of feminists might wish it otherwise, women play a mix of roles in present-day British society: they are wives, mothers, daughters and paid workers, and they somehow juggle all these roles together, largely by taking on part-time work which, as Land points out, is seriously marginalised when it comes to occupational benefits.
Arguments around the issue of housework fail to take account of the fact that large numbers of married women with children spend large amounts of their working days outside the home in paid work.
In their study of Women and Employment: a lifetime perspective , Martin and Roberts found that, in 1980, 65 per cent of married women and 56 per cent of women with dependent children under the age of 16 were, in Great Britain, ‘economically active’(Martin and Roberts, 1984).
If their roles as housewives in general and mothers in particular are emphasised in social policy to the exclusion of consideration of their other roles, then this would reinforce their marginality in the labour market both ideologically and materially.
Similarly, if women's role as workers is emphasised to the detriment of consideration of their role as housewives and — more particularly — their role as mothers, then the ‘proletarianisation’ of women could confine them and their children to dependence on means-tested state benefits and/or low pay from part-time ‘women's work’.
In short, they and their children would be condemned to grinding poverty and, if their income comes from the state, to permanent state surveillance, not in this case for cohabitation but for ‘scrounging’.
Both Fairbairns and Donnison, for their different reasons and from very different political perspectives (the former a radical feminist largely concerned with relations between men and women, the latter a left-of-centre policy-maker and academic, largely concerned with social inequality and the alleviation of poverty), understand and accept that, at least in the short run, women are going to continue their multiple roles.
Both of them take the present sexual division of labour as given and understand that this has important implications for women in their search for an income.
They identify the central issue as that of dependency: given the sexual division of  labour, women, unlike men, have dependants who need them for their very survival.
As Donnison says, ‘The crucial needs arise from an unavoidable responsibility for caring for someone who depends on you’; as Fairbairn says, ‘Dependency is the key to women's oppression.
And child care is the key to dependency, for the very simple reason that it takes a lot of time and is unpaid’.
As a result of women's ‘unavoidable’ domestic responsibilities, women are extremely disadvantaged in the labour market.
(For a fuller discussion of this point, see Land, 1981).
Neither of them, though, want to see women given an income simply because they are wives: for Donnison, this would be massively expensive, degrading to women as a whole, and unreasonably generous to the rich man's wife; for Fairbairns, payment for ‘skivvying for a demanding but fit husband’ would be payment for work that is ‘unnecessary and demeaning’.
But if wives, as wives, are unable to generate a reasonable income for themselves and their children either from the state or from the labour market, then it has to be assumed that their husbands will ‘keep’ them.
If that is the case, then the cohabitation rule is unavoidable.
The answer to this dreadful conundrum, for both Donnison and Fairbairns, is to elevate the central issue of women's dependants and to increase benefits for them such that, where women do have dependants — be they very young or very old — women also have a considerable income.
For Fairbairns this would be payment for hard work; for Donnison this would be protection for both the woman carer and her dependants — in other words, maintenance of, and provision for, family relationships.
But whatever the reasoning behind these considerably increased benefits for women carers, the result would be that a woman with ‘dependants’ would have a reasonable income,whether she is married or not .
There would be two effects: the dependent financial relationships between husbands and wives would be considerably loosened, and unmarried women with dependants would have a substantial non-means-tested income as of right.
Thus simultaneously the justification for and effect of the cohabitation rule would be radically undermined.
But we have come full circle: by sliding from discussion of women as wives to a discussion of women as mothers and carers, we are once more caught up in the dilemmas about benefits for children outlined in the previous section.
The tentacles of the labour market (capitalism) and of the sexual division of labour (patriarchy) are long, clinging, and extremely hard to untangle!
Additional reading
Fran Bennett's article on ‘The State, Welfare and Women's Dependence’(Bennett, 1983) gives an excellent account of the different strands within the contemporary women's movement and their views about the appropriate source of an income for women.
There is an increasing amount of empirical work being done on the allocation of resources within marriage; in this country Jan Pahl (1980, 1983) and Anne Gray (1979) have concentrated particularly on the distribution of household income between marriage partners.
For more theoretical work on the marriage relationship and how far marriage is at the root of the oppression of women, readers should refer to the work of Christine Delphy — a French radical feminist — whose work has recently been collected together in Close to Home: a materialist analysis of women's oppression (Delphy, 1984); her work has been directly criticised from a socialist perspective by Michele Barrett and Mary McIntosh (Barrett and McIntosh, 1979).
WHO STILL CARES FOR THE FAMILY?
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INCOME MAINTENANCE
HILARY LAND
So wrote Virginia Woolf nearly fifty years ago in her brilliant and witty, feminist polemic Three Guineas .
Then women, especially married women, were less visible in the public world and were discriminated against in it in many more explicit ways than is currently the case.
However, although women are no longer as exclusively confined to the private world of the family, it does not mean that their work within the family is valued any more highly or indeed that there is less of it.
The rhetoric of the Right in recent years, is that women have acquired rights and opportunities in the public world, especially in the labour market, but this, it is alleged has been at the expense of their families.
This is an undesirable state of affairs so women must once again be taught, persuaded and encouraged to give priority to their families, and in future social  policies should be developed, or indeed not developed, with this aim in mind.
Individualism is not a creed to be adopted by women.
Such a view assumes that as wives, mothers and daughters, women care less for their families because they are more active outside the home.
It also presupposes that the assumptions upon which social policies have been based in the past have changed in recent years in order to facilitate women's participation in activities outside the home.
Neither supposition is correct.
Not only do women still provide nearly all the care for the old, the sick and the young (and most of it still unpaid), but also social policies are still framed, allocated and delivered on the assumption that they do so.
In this paper I want to examine recent developments in three areas of social policy: income maintenance, taxation and family law, exposing the assumptions made about the division of responsibilities within the family on which debates and changes have been based.
Although these three key areas of state activity were excluded from the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, as we shall see, the rhetoric surrounding the changes proposed, and already made, included greater concern than in the past to treat women as individuals rather than as dependants on men.
However, this has been done in ways which least disturb the traditional division of labour between men and women within the family.
I shall therefore examine the assumptions about the economic relationship between men and women within the family, together with assumptions about the division of labour within it.
These are intimately bound up together, not least because of the way in which the marriage contract is defined.
The marriage contract still has different meanings for men and women and, although unwritten in Britain, it cannot be altered.
Men take on an obligation to maintain their children and their wives, and refusal to take paid employment in order to do so can in the last resort lead to imprisonment.
(It is an obligation therefore concerned as much with male work incentives as with the welfare of their families.)
Women, however, take on an obligation to care for children, sick and elderly relatives and their able-bodied husbands.
This is expected to take precedence over their paid employment and their leisure.
Failure to provide this care will not lead to imprisonment unless there is evidence of criminal  neglect, but may well reduce or remove their claim to maintenance on their husbands.
This is very important, because married women still have fewer claims than men to maintenance from the state.
Moreover, they have a much weaker foothold in the formal labour market than men, not least because there is a conflict between their family responsibilities and their paid employment, whereas for men there is no conflict.
Attempts to improve women's opportunities and pay within the labour market can therefore only have a limited success as long as women within the family continue to undertake most of the work of caring.
The processes of production and reproduction have to be analysed and understood in relation to each other.
This has exciting theoretical consequences, for in trying to do this, feminist analyses are attempting to fill huge lacunae left by most economists and sociologists, including Marx.
On the practical level, changes in social policies which reduce women's claims to maintenance on men but do not recognise that changes in the division of responsibilities for caring between men and women within the family and between the family and the wider community are also required, may in the end be counter-productive as far as women are concerned.
The history of the development of state systems of income maintenance for men is bound up with the development of wage-labour and the separation of men and women from direct and independent access to the means of subsistence.
Formal labour markets in capitalist economies have never been able to provide paid employment for everyone who needed it, and short of allowing wage-labourers and their families of future wage-labourers to starve, either individual capitalists or the state on their behalf had to provide alternative means of support.
Paradoxically, this provided for the possibility of voluntary unemployment, an anathema to the capitalist class, and so the conditions under which men's claims to maintenance from the state were met were such as to weaken male work incentives as little as possible, and ideally to discourage men from making a claim at all, except in the direst circumstances.
The subsequent development of state contributory systems of income maintenance, although to some extent building on the systems of mutual support developed by some trade unions and friendly societies, which were informed by a collective ideology and em-bodied the concept of the right to support, has also been constrained by the desire to maintain male work incentives.
Women's claims to maintenance from the state have been subject to different constraints.
Although the old and the young have been gradually denied access to the formal labour market and hence to wages, they have acquired increased rights to sources of income independent of their families.
Since 1948, for example, the elderly have no longer been deemed to be the financial responsibility of their adult children or grandchildren.
Women's claims to maintenance, however, are still derived less from their labour-market activities or the state and more from the men to whom they are married (or with whom they cohabit).
The growth of individualism has weakened the economic relationships between the generations to a far greater extent than that between the sexes within the family.
The conditions under which women, particularly married women, acquire maintenance from the state are determined not by a desire to maintain their incentives to take waged work, but by a concern that they will continue their unwaged work for caring for their families.
This is still evident in the latest policy developments and debates.
Income maintenance
The British social insurance system was reformed in certain important respects in the legislation passed in 1975.
Under the Social Security Pensions Act there was an attempt to change what Barbara Castle, then Secretary of State to the Department of Health and Social Security, described as a situation in which women were ‘Second class citizens entitled to third class benefits’(House of Commons Debates , 1974).
However, the changes were not a complete break with the past.
The Beveridge Report, which formed the basis of much of the post-war social security legislation, contained certain features which in part led to the need to reform the pension system.
These features profoundly affected the shape and priorities of the new scheme, although not all were carried over into it.
They included different retirement ages for men and women; the choice offered to married women, including those in paid employment, of opting out of paying full contributions and relying instead on their husbands' contributions (this is known as ‘the married woman's option’); and flat-rate benefits in return for flat-rate contributions.
The first — unequal retirement ages — has been incorporated into the new scheme.
Since 1940, the retirement age for women has been 60 years, five years earlier than for men.
Prior to that time retirement ages for men and women were the same, and this meant that a man retiring at 65 often had to support himself and his wife on a single-rate pension, because on average women were younger than their husbands.
This could cause considerable hardship.
The 1946 legislation introduced dependency benefits for wives, irrespective of age, provided they were not earning.
This removed one of the major justifications for different retirement ages; nevertheless they have remained.
As a result the effects of differential mortality rates for men and women are exacerbated.
Women currently outlive men by about six years, so that as they retire five years earlier they can expect on average to spend twice as long as men in retirement.
The capital value of a flat-rate pension for a woman, paid from the age of 60, is about twice as much as that of the same pension for a man paid from age 65.
When paid from the same age the difference in capital value is 10 per cent.
Mortality rates are still expected to improve and, if anything, the gap between men and women is likely to widen rather than narrow.
The life expectancy of a baby born in 1975 is estimated to be 71.9 years if male and 78.6 if female.
This compares with an average life expectancy in 1975 of 69.1 years for males and 75.2 years for females.
A higher proportion of men and women are marrying than among the generation who are currently retired, and married men and women have lower mortality rates than single men and women.
Marital status has a greater impact on the mortality rates for men than those for women (see Table 1).
In particular, widowhood has a more dramatic effect on men than on women.
Thus survivors' pensions are of greater concern to women than to men.
If equal treatment is defined to mean that the same level of contribution must earn the same level of weekly or monthly pension, and if the notion of survivors' pensions is re-tained, then in these circumstances women are likely to get more in total from their own contributions than men and more out of their husband's contributions as their survivors.
But because they retire earlier and live longer they need more.
There has been a considerable debate about equalising retirement ages for men and women in the state scheme.
The Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party support a common pension age of 60 years.
However, they give priority to providing an adequate state contributory pension which does not require a means-tested supplement.
The Occupational Pensions Board, which was set up under the 1973 Social Security Act to monitor and establish minimum standards for private occupational pension schemes, was asked to consider the question of equal status for men and women in occupational pension schemes in 1975.
(The Social Security Pensions Act 1975 requires that men and women have equal access to membership of such schemes.)
They reported in 1976 and concluded that ‘equal status must mean equal pension ages.
Any other arrangement can be based only on the assumed requirements of each sex, an approach which we consider to be incompatible with equal status’.
They recognised that ‘as long as the State Scheme has different ages, we do not see how occupational schemes can be obliged to have the same ages for men and women’(Occupational Pensions Board, 1976, p. 52).
In 1975, one-third of the total number of members covered by occupational pension schemes were in schemes which had equal pension ages and they hoped that even without legislation this number would be increased by negotiation and voluntary agreement.
However, they stressed that the problem of different pension ages must ultimately be tackled, and this means changes in the state scheme.
Successive governments, however, have made it clear that any alteration of the state pension ages is unlikely.
As the Minister for Social Security said in 1976:
a reduction in men's pensionable age is ruled out for the foreseeable future on grounds of cost…on the other hand, the government believes that raising the pensionable age for women would  be unfair to women who have contributed over the years in the expectation of a pension at 60.
(DHSS, 1976c, p. 18)
In 1976 the Department of Health and Social Security estimated that the total cost to central and local government funds of an equal pension age of 60 would exceed £2,000 million a year, or about £100 a worker.
(This compares with expenditure on retirement pensions of £4,800 million pounds in 1975/6.)
The labour supply would have been reduced by about 5 per cent and the reduction in potential output was estimated to be some 3–4 per cent of the gross national product.
At the time unemployment was only half what it is today, six years later.
Thus, assuming two-thirds of those retiring were replaced in work by unemployment beneficiaries, the financial costs could have been halved.
However, the prevailing view seems to be that it is preferable for women to withdraw from the labour market rather than for men to have to retire five years earlier.
As a result, what The Times called ‘the main stumbling block’(The Times, 19 September 1976) against full equal rights for men and women in the state and occupational pension schemes remains for the foreseeable future.
The second characteristic of the post-war national insurance scheme, which will perpetuate the treatment of women as dependants on their husbands for some time to come, is the married woman's option.
Until May 1978, all married women and widows had the right to rely on their husbands' contributions and forgo claims to short-term benefits (sickness, unemployment and maternity) as well as claims to pensions in their own right.
Only when their husbands retire can they receive pensions as dependants (Dependants' benefits equal 60 per cent of a single person's basic pension.)
In the early 1970s, three-quarters of married women chose to opt out of the national insurance scheme.
This is not surprising as there was much to encourage them to do so.
For example, married women who contributed fully in order to claim a retirement pension had to satisfy additional tests (Land, 1976).
This inequality was removed under the 1975 legislation.
Under the Social Security Pensions Act 1975, only married women and widows already exercising their option to rely on their husbands' contribution could continue to do so, provided they did not leave the labour market for two or more years.
The Government Actuary in 1975 estimated that only 15 per cent of those who  would have exercised the contribution option would choose to be full contributors when the new scheme took effect.
He therefore concluded that:
It will be well beyond 30 years before the majority of married women and widowed retirement pensioners come to consist of persons who have paid full contributions throughout their periods of employment.
(DHSS, 1975, p.18)
The effect of Beveridge's view of marriage being a relationship which created economic dependency in the wife is therefore one which will remain in practice until well after the end of the century.
The gradual phasing out of the married woman's option has been accompanied by the introduction of credits towards the basic state pension for those who are out of the labour market because of home responsibilities.
Home responsibilities include the care of children until the age of 16 as well as the care of the sick or disabled.
Married women who were not full contributors prior to leaving the labour market are not credited.
Being ‘out of the labour market’ is defined as earning less than a quarter of the average male industrial earnings — £29.50 per week in 1982.
Recently, home responsibility was extended to include the care of elderly relatives not living in the same household.
This was important, because a national study in 1965 showed that one-fifth of women who were working part-time did so because they were caring for a sick or elderly person.
In addition, it was shown that women living in the same household as the person for whom they were caring were more likely to be either working full-time or not at all ; part-time employment was taken when the sick or elderly person lived elsewhere.
In order to qualify for the basic pension, men and women must either be full contributors or be credited with contributions for all of their working lives subject to a minimum of full contributions paid for twenty years.
The additional earnings-related components of the state pension is based on the best twenty years' earnings, so those who are out of the labour market for substantial periods (mainly women) have little choice of which periods of earnings to take.
In addition, women's earnings on average are far lower than men's so almost certainly women will earn a lower earnings-related component than men.
Under the Act the principle of earnings-related pensions  in return for earnings-related benefits was firmly established.
It is important to note, however, that contributions are not levied over the entire earnings range.
This means that nearly all female workers and male manual workers pay a completely earnings-related contribution.
However, about 25 per cent of male non-manual workers have earnings above the contribution ceiling: they therefore pay proportionately less than anyone else.
Moreover, they are more likely to be members of an occupational pension scheme and those contributions attract tax relief, whereas contributions to the state scheme do not.
(Under the scheme, those who belong to an occupational scheme which provides a pension at least as good as the state can partially contract out of the state scheme and pay a lower contribution.)
Survivors' pensions, too, will be based on the earnings-related component of both spouses.
Moreover, a married woman can use her husband's contribution record to make up her basic pension to the level she would have got as his dependant.
Only a widower who was retired or chronically sick or disabled when his wife died can use his former wife's contribution record.
There are no age or health conditions for widows, for by definition a woman must have been dependent on her husband.
This is the closest the British pension system has got to earnings sharing between spouses, and it does not apply to men and women whose marriages end in divorce.
A divorced woman can only use her former husband's contribution record to establish her right to the basic pension and only provided she contributes in her own right as soon as the marriage ends and she does not remarry (unless she is divorced over the age of 60).
Her claims are not affected by his remarriage.
The same holds for divorced men.
Widows also loose rights to pensions based on their former husbands' contribution records, if they cohabit or remarry.
Instead of taking account of and sharing variations in earnings and living standards between spouses, whatever the number of marriages, and then treating them as individuals, the British system as described above has preferred to recognise the work of caring for the young, the sick and the old by giving credits which maintain the care-taker's entitlement to the basic state pension.
This is a more selective version of Beveridge's married woman's option, which in effect entitled every woman by virtue of being a wife to a pension (worth 60 per cent of the basic pension) on the basis of her  husband's contributions record.
Because of this all men paid a higher contribution than women.
Now women pay contributions on the same basis as men.
Broadly speaking, the introduction of the home-responsibilities credit is a subsidy to those (mainly, but not exclusively, women) who care for the young, the sick or the old on a nearly full-time basis.
Women who combine their responsibilities in the home with a greater degree of participation in the labour market, together with men and women without those responsibilities will be subsidising them.
In other words, the traditional division of unpaid labour in the home is being upheld rather than changed by the new scheme.
One of the more radical features of the Social Security Pensions Act was, for the first time in the history of the British social security system, the recognition of voluntary role reversal.
It was always intended that single men would have their pension rights protected while at home looking after children or dependent relatives, but it was not until the regulations were published in January 1978 that it was clear that married men would be included.
The tentative nature of this small recognition of husbands as carers (rather than recognition of wives as breadwinners) is under-lined by the limited changes in the Social Security Act 1975.
Under this legislation, for the first time a married woman who paid full contributions became entitled to unemployment and sickness benefits at the same rate as her single sister.
However, currently, unlike her husband she has no automatic rights to additional dependency benefits for her children and, unless her husband is incapable of paid employment, she gets no extra benefit for him either.
As a result of the EEC directive requiring equal treatment for men and women in member countries' social security schemes, the British system has had to be further modified.
Dependants' benefits will disappear as they are being held down until the universal child benefit catches up with them.
From January 1983, married women will have the right to apply for Family Income Supplement (a means-tested supplement for low wage-earners with children which currently specifies that only the husband in a married couple may apply) and, provided the couple agree that she has been and is the main breadwinner, a married woman may then apply for means-tested supplementary benefit.
Under the EEC directive further changes will eventually have to  be made in two new non-contributory benefits introduced in legislation passed in 1975.
One, the non-contributory invalidity pension, is paid for those who are incapable of work and do not qualify for a contributory pension.
Work is taken to be paid employment if the claimant is a man or single woman, but if she is a married or cohabiting woman then eligibility is based on her capacity to perform ‘normal household duties’.
The other change is the invalid-care allowance which is paid to men and women who give up paid employment in order to care for a sick or elderly person, not necessarily a relative.
However, married or cohabiting women are not eligible in any circumstances, although all the evidence shows that they provide substantial care for the sick and elderly and that their opportunities for paid employment are thereby reduced or removed altogether.
These benefits, which were introduced in legislation passed in the year of the British Sex Discrimination Act, are perhaps two of the most blatant examples of the way in which married women are seen first and foremost as housewives and thus responsible for all the domestic work within the home.
Altogether none of these changes really recognise that the majority of families depend on the earnings of both husband and wife, even if the wife's contribution in most instances is smaller.
(In 1980 it averaged 28 per cent of family income.)
Families are still per-ceived as consisting of one breadwinner who only exceptionally is a woman, and one dependent spouse whose primary responsibilities lie in the home.
These families are, in f act, a minority.
The General Household Survey in 1979 found that only 20 per cent of economically active married men supported a dependent wife and children.
There is even less recognition of the needs of women who combine paid employment and care for their families, especially if their employment is part-time.
There are other processes which are undermining women's access to the social insurance system.
Although married women have won rights to benefit which are not affected by their marital status as directly as in the recent past, more women are being pushed beyond the reaches of the scheme altogether.
In 1977, 22 per cent of female part-time employees were earning less than £15 a week, which at the time defined the boundary of non-employed for social insurance purposes (that is, neither they nor their employers have to pay national insurance contributions).
By 1979 this had more than doubled (Social Survey Division, OPCS, 1981).
National insurance  contributions now constitute 9 per cent of labour costs compared with 6 per cent in the mid-1970s, so these workers are very attractive to employers.
If their hours of work can also be limited to less than 16 hours a week, then these workers will also fall outside the employment protection legislation, which means they can be used even more flexibly and cheaply as they then forgo rights to certain occupational benefits (which now comprise a further 9 per cent of labour costs).
In other words, the boundaries of the formal labour market are being more tightly drawn, a process associated now as in the past with high rates of male unemployment, and it is largely women, with responsibilities for caring, who are being pushed out.
The lack of provision of income maintenance for those with part-time earnings stems from a failure to recognise that most women work part-time not from choice, nor because their earnings are inessential, but because their employment opportunities are severely constrained by their family commitments.
Even those within the scheme are finding their rights to benefit in practice are limited not by the fact of marriage per se (as in the 1930s), but by their caring responsibilities.
For example, part-time workers who earn enough to pay contributions may not qualify for unemployment benefit unless they can produce evidence that they have a ‘reasonable chance’ of getting part-time employment in the locality.
In addition, as the responsibility for the registration of unemployment benefit is changing from job centres to unemployment benefit offices, pilot studies are being conducted in twenty of the latter to test new administrative procedures for establishing ‘availability for work’.
Women are being asked detailed questions about their child-care arrangements, and failure to produce satisfactory answers may disqualify them from benefit.
In other words, women's caring responsibilities are being used as a ground for excluding them from benefits.
Barbara Castle's attempts to make women full citizens of the social insurance scheme, irrespective of their marital status, have had only limited success.
Moreover, even full citizenship is being devalued as the earnings-related supplements to short-term benefits disappeared in January 1982, and the present administration is attempting, in the face of considerable opposition, to dismantle the sickness benefit scheme and pass responsibility for short periods of sickness on to employers.
(Perhaps there are analogies here with occupations which open up membership to women and  subsequently decline in status and pay.)
Certainly greater reliance on occupational benefits will disadvantage women until they have better pay and opportunities within the labour market.
THE COHABITATION RULE — WHY IT MAKES SENSE
ZOËFAIRBAIRNS
This is the official language of the ‘cohabitation rule’.
What it means in practice is that just as a wife has no entitlement to supplementary benefit (SB) in her own right — her husband must claim for her as his ‘dependant’— so a single woman living with a male lover may be denied SB and required to look to him for support.
Sexism rarely manifests itself so grotesquely as in the cohabitation rule, and hostility to it among feminists is virtually unanimous.
Arguments against it are many and convincing: it is wrong to require a woman to depend on a man, particularly when he has no legal or moral obligation to maintain her.
It makes a prostitute of any woman SB claimant who wants a male lover.
It singles out one form of non-marital living arrangement and penalises it (if the woman sets up house with her sister, her father, her adult children or her lesbian lover she would still have some entitlement to SB).
It invades privacy, with investigators spying on claimants' homes and questioning their children (Lister, 1973).
It perpetuates the  loneliness of the single mother, since both she and a male friend will be cautions of continuing a relationship that can be turned into a financial arrangement on the whim of a civil servant.
It carries the smack of moral judgement, penalising ‘fallen women’(single mothers) for wanting sex outside marriage.
And so on.
It would be hard to find any feminist with anything good to say about the cohabitation rule.
It is thus with some trepidation that I say the cohabitation rule makes sense.
But it does make perfect sense in context.
It is an entirely logical, equitable and indeed unavoidable consequence of British social policy with regard to women, marriage and mother-hood; and its abolition, demanded by many feminists, would be utterly subversive of that policy.
Needless to say, this is no reason why feminists should cease their demands (quite the reverse), but it is a reason why the demand for abolition will never be met in isolation; and even if it were it would be pointless overall, since further anomalies would be created and the burden of injustice simply shifted to other women.
‘Living together as husband and wife’
In 1976, following several years of lobbying by feminists, poverty pressure groups, etc., the Supplementary Benefits Commission of the Department of Health and Social Security produced its defence of the cohabitation rule, a paper entitled Living Together as Husband and Wife .
The argument of this paper is roughly this: there is room for improvement in the way this rather delicate rule is administered, but as a matter of principle it must stand.
And the logic is convincing.
It goes in stages, as follows:
It cannot be right to treat unmarried women who have the support of a partner both as if they had no such support and better than if they were married.
(DHSS/SBC, 1976a, p. 6)
Fair enough, you may think, particularly remembering that SB is only for people whose ‘resources are insufficient to meet their requirements’.
Unfortunately it does not follow that just because a woman is living with a man she necessarily has (or wants) his ‘support’.
The Supplementary Benefits Commission recognises the dilemma:
The suggestion is often made that a couple should not be treated as if they were living as husband and wife unless the man is actually giving the woman financial support.
We cannot accept this as a reasonable test.
Apart from the very great difficulty of establishing how a couple manage their finances (in effect one would have to take their word for it) and the strong incentive they would have to arrange their affairs so as to safeguard the woman's claim to benefit, the fact that she is receiving benefit may itself make it unnecessary for the man to give her more than is required for his own keep.
The suggestion that he is not supporting her while she is receiving benefit cannot therefore be taken as positive evidence that their relationship is not comparable to that of husband and wife.
(DHSS/SBC, 1976a, p. 16)
They admit that to withdraw benefit from the woman when the man is not giving her money may cause ‘distress and hardship’ but ‘to continue to pay it would be unfair to the majority’(DHSS/SBC, 1976a, p. 7)—‘the majority’meaning in this case married couples and those cohabiting males who do accept their ‘responsibility’to give money to the women they sleep with.
This theme — the need to be fair to ‘the majority’— emerges again and again in this document's defence of the rule, and bolsters up the most tenuous arguments.
For example, even if one accepts that a man ought to pay his mistress, to require him to support her children, even if he is not their father, seems outrageous.
The SBC again acknowledges a dilemma, but
we do not think that this is a question which can be left to the Commission to solve, solely within the Supplementary Benefits scheme.
Any question of providing long-term support for children in the family of a man who is not their father should be considered in the wider context of financial provision for families generally.
Our own powers certainly do not extend to making permanent allowances for children in families not otherwise entitled to supplementary benefit.
(DHSS/SBC, 1976a, p. 20)
In other words, fairness to ‘the majority’ requires that no payment be made in these circumstances.
Again, the suggestion has been made that in cases where a woman's SB is withdrawn because she is found/thought to be cohabiting, a ‘tiding over’ allowance should be made to ease the  adjustment.
Although such a payment is made in a very limited number of cases, this booklet's authors are dead against it being made automatic; after all
No such allowance is paid to a claimant who marries, whatever the circumstances.
(DHSS/SBC, 1976a, p. 20).
All this is very convincing.
There is no good reason — feminist or other — why cohabiting couples should be treated better than married ones.
(The f act that some people move from this argument to suggesting that they ought to be treated worse does not obscure the fairness of the principle.)
Why, though, is it necessary to treat a couple (married or not) as a unit?
Why can't the woman be assessed as an individual, and benefit paid in so far as her resources are insufficient to meet her requirements?
They've thought of this:
Some people would even question whether it is any longer right for a married woman to be expected to depend on her husband and to be unable to claim SB in her own right.
The trend towards equality between the sexes and the sharing and even exchange of roles in the marriage partnership have already, to some extent, changed the traditional role of husband as sole breadwinner.
But if the resources of husband and wife were not to be aggregated, and each had a right to claim benefit independently, the Commission would be paying allowances to almost all wives who are unable to work or have the care of children regardless of the husband's income .
(DHSS/SBC, 1976a, pp. 5–6, my emphasis)
There, then, is the nub of the matter.
Abolish the cohabitation rule and you establish the right of a mistress to draw SB in her own right.
Establish that, and you cannot in fairness deny the same right to wives at home with children, be their husbands company directors or on the dole themselves.
It is social policy's version of the domino theory: the cohabitation rule is logic's last bulwark against the spectre of wages for housework.
Wages for housework and the woman's liberation movement
The reason that such a sequence of events might horrify a patriarchal-capitalist state are obvious — but the women's liberation  movement is also ambivalent about paying housewives.
On the one hand the Wages for Housework campaign declares:
Our housework goes on behind the scenes, unnoticed, un-counted, uncharted as long as it is unpaid.
But if we demand to be paid for it, if we demand Wages for Housework from the State, we are saying first of all that housework is work…we are saying that we women need money of our own — if we weren't forced to depend on men for money, we wouldn't have to put their needs before ours, to service them sexually, physically, emotionally…we say TO BRING UP CHILDREN IS WORK and we want a WAGE for all the work we do — whether cleaning offices OR homes, producing electrical parts OR babies.
(Edmonds and Fleming, 1975, pp. 7 and 94)
On the other hand, Angela Phillips and Ruth Wallsgrove (writing as individuals but expressing views many feminists share) reply:
(wages for housework) would take us further away from a society in which childcare was integrated with the rest of life, and in which women are not automatically banished from all decision making about how our lives are run…
The answer…is not to resign ourselves to our women's role — in a woman's place — and demand payment for staying put, but to collectivise childcare, to share the responsibility for bringing up children within the community.
(Phillips and Wallsgrove, 1978, p. 34)
There are also areas of confusion: it is not uncommon to meet feminists who disagree with Wages for Housework (on grounds similar to those quoted above) yet would support increases in child benefit or the right of wives and cohabiting women to claim SB for themselves.
On the other hand, some feminists' objections to the principle of Wages for Housework lead them to oppose any proposal that might, in their view, ‘look like’ or ‘lead to’it.
Spare Rib , May 1977, reported that at the national Women's Liberation conference, the Fifth Demand group (for Financial and Legal Independence) opposed the demand that ‘every individual person, whether in or out of employment, should receive a Guaranteed Minimum Income as of right’ on the grounds that ‘it would amount to implicit support for the Wages for Housework Campaign’(p. 11).
I have also had it explained to me by other feminists campaigning for  equality of treatment of wives under social security laws, that their concern was only with the wives of claimants , not of company directors — thus accepting the DHSS principle that wives should be means tested on their husbands' resources, regardless of the extent of their access to them.
Some, at least, of this confusion and inconsistency arise out of misunderstanding as to what is meant by Wages for Housework, so before proceeding any further I propose to change the term in order to indicate (a) that I am not spokeswoman for, nor even in complete agreement with, the campaign of that name;(b) that I do not propose to be sidetracked into an interesting discussion of the precise scientific definition of ‘wage’; what I am talking about is cash, money, pound notes, that to which a housewife is not entitled, that to which she should be; and (c) that there is housework and housework.
Let's call it Pay for Childcare.
Even this is inadequate, but I want to forestall the objections (because I agree with them) of those who say that Wages for Housework simply means providing married men with state-paid servants…an argument which the Wages for
Housework campaign does little to dispel, since their line makes no distinction between the ‘housework’ of skivvying for a demanding but fit husband, and the ‘housework’of caring for a dependent baby.
I think there is a very important distinction to be drawn between the first, which is unnecessary and demeaning, and the second, which is necessary and useful.
Thus when I favour pay for ‘childcare’ I mean the day-to-day domestic care of people who need it (obviously I would include adults too infirm to care for themselves).
Social policy and the housewife
But even thus narrowly defining ‘housework’, the women's movement is ambivalent (to say the least) about the notion of paying women to do it.
And it is not just the movement that is confused; the financial status of the housewife is as much of a poser for those who would confirm women's traditional role as for those who would change it.
Social policy planners in particular are perplexed and tie themselves in appalling knots trying to work out equitable ways of dealing with this anomalous creature.
The housewife, who:
is an adult but must for bureaucratic reasons be treated as a child;
works full-time but is ‘not economically active’;
ought really to be one parent in a two-parent family but must not actually be permitted to starve if she falls short of this ideal;
makes a vital contribution to the nation's economy, but must remain an exception to the general principle that the way to keep key workers at their posts is by reward and incentive.
The problems thus posed are seen clearly in the early history of the British welfare state.
The Beveridge Report was revealing on this.
It made clear that married women were expected to be housewives first and foremost; and that since this did not involve any independent income, wives were to be covered by, and dependent on, their husbands' insurance:
This was entirely logical, given that married women would spend most of their lives in unpaid domestic work, and Beveridge was nothing if not logical.
Confusingly for him he saw where his logic was taking him.
Of the two ‘new risks’ which Beveridge saw women taking on at marriage, only one — widowhood — was beyond the control of the insured couple.
Widowhood was thus duly recognised as an insurable risk — like unemployment or sickness — and widows' benefit was introduced.
Separation, though, was different.
Separation might be the ‘fault’ of husband, wife or both.
It is bad actuarial practice to insure against something that can only happen with the consent of the insured person — you cannot, for example, ‘insure’ yourself against committing suicide.
By the same token, Beveridge realised that if the man was paying the insurance contributions, cover could not be provided against the possibility of him leaving his wife.
Yet on Beveridge's own admission, loss of support due to marriage breakdown was a serious risk to a dependent wife, equivalent to an  employed person's loss of income due to unemployment.
Beveridge made proposals for a separation benefit, to be paid only in cases of formal separation not caused by the wife.
This proposal was widely criticised.
Women's organisations pointed out that it was impractical (who was to say who ‘caused’ a separation?) and urged that there should be independent insurance for married women.
The Cabinet also felt it was impractical, expensive and open to abuse, and the proposal was dropped.
Separated women — like single mothers and other persons unable to take paid work but uncovered by insurance — were to rely on National Assistance, the meagre ‘safety net’ that was the precursor of today's Supplementary Benefit.
So much for Beveridge's ‘new risks’.
This controversy, usefully outlined in the Report of the Committee on One-Parent Families (Finer, 1974, Vol. 2, pp. 136–47) crystal-lises the state's dilemma of how to deal with women who, by ‘failing’ to play the part expected of them (i.e. by ending their marriages or by having a child without ever having been married) find themselves without the support of a man.
On the one hand the state is reluctant to make them better off than the ‘good’ housewife, married and ‘supported’by her husband (the exact amount of ‘support’decided by him alone); on the other hand, of course, the status of the married housewife is so low that virtually anything going to the single mother makes her better off.
Living Together as Husband and Wife is very concerned about being ‘fair’ to the married couple, but the only way they could truly be ‘fair’to the married housewife would be to entitle the single housewife to less SB than she gets…and you cannot entitle even a single housewife to less than nothing.
And the point is that all this is good, fair and equitable if you start from the conventional wisdom that: housewives don't need money of their own because they are supported by their husbands; they are supported by their husbands because they are dependants; and they are dependants because they ‘don't work’.
Dependency is the key to women's oppression.
And childcare is the key to dependency, for the very simple reason that it takes a lot of time and is unpaid.
In a money-based society, the unpaid worker is doubly oppressed.
Feminists and housewives
Many feminists will come this far with me but still shy away from the idea of pay for childcare, even when we've clarified that it's not the  same demand as Wages for Housework.
It is suggested that pay would in some way ‘institutionalise’ the oppression of the housewife, yet many people who point out this danger are happy to accept pay for their work, even though this also presumably ‘institutional-ises’whatever forms of oppression they suffer in their jobs.
Are they saying that housewives are less able to understand and resist the dangers than other workers, or that all oppressed workers should renounce pay as the way to liberation?
Of course paying for childcare could be used against women — the most obvious danger being that it could be made selective (on class or race lines) or conditional upon certain standards of maternal behaviour — but there are risks in any advance.
We do not demand a ban on all sterilisation just because some women are forced to be sterilised, we do not even attack the whole concept of a well are state just because of abuses like the cohabitation rule, so why oppose pay for childcare solely because it might be abused?
(Incidentally, I suspect the risks of abuse would be considerably less if the ‘pay’ were fought for and won by a united feminist campaign on the grounds that housewives work and deserve money for that reason , than if it were graciously granted by government in a mood of pronatalist, pro-family, antifeminist zeal to cut the costs of the social services.)
Demanding pay for childcare does not necessarily imply that only women at home would receive it.
It could work in the same way as the present ‘attendance allowance’, a payment made to severely disabled people which they can then choose how to spend on their care.
There is no reason why a similar notional sum should not attach to any dependent person, including children, enabling payments to be made to whoever looks after them, whether at home or in some privately or publicly organised communal arrangement.
As to the question of where the resources should come from, avoiding the easy (albeit probably correct) let-out of ‘abolish capitalism’, I would say simply that the transfer of money to unpaid workers ought to be the next stage in the redistribution of wealth, taking precedence over ‘breadwinners’ pay claims, tax-cuts or ‘family’benefit increases.
After all, if it is true that husbands and wives invariably pool their money and share it fairly, it doesn't matter who earns what, does it?
Whereas if it isn't true…
The demands of the women's movement in Britain seem overwhelmingly concerned with women who want to avoid having or caring for children, either full-time or at all(e.g. abortion and contraception, day-care centres, rights in paid employment).
Such  women (I include myself) are probably a majority in the movement (it was the sort of feeling that brought us into it in the first place, and anyway we have more time than mothers) but not among women as a whole, most of whom appear to want to spend at least part of their lives having and raising children.
To argue that this is always and necessarily a result of ‘conditioning’ sounds like a feminist version of ‘I don't know what you housewives do all day’.
Besides, even those who argue that the answer to women's dependency/op-pression in the home is for them to take outside jobs (as if the sort of jobs open to most women were in any way more congenial and less exploitative than housework, except in so far as they are paid) and put their children into publicly funded day-care centres, must surely allow that some women (as well as men, of course) would choose freely to look after children, otherwise how are the centres to be staffed?
Conscription?
To argue as some opponents of Wages for Housework do (Phillips and Wallsgrove, 1978) that there should be ‘adequate payment for everyone who wants to work in these collective childcare facilities’ while opposing any payment for mothers looking after their own children at home is astonishing.
I accept the need to counter the myth that only a biological mother can adequately care for a child, but to say that in the interests of women's liberation we will pay anyone except the child's mother to look after it seems to be going a little far in the opposite direction!
I don't know what you do all day, dear
It is a view that has its reflection (though doubtless for different reasons) in social policy and the social security system.
The state's version of ‘I don't know what you do all day, dear’ is to ignore what women do all day until they don't; then the state puts up some money.
As we have seen, the securely married mother playing the role and staying at home has no social security entitlement; let her ‘break the rules’ and leave her husband and she can draw £14 a week for herself , besides allowances for rent and for the children.
(The fact that this pittance is a step up says more about the depressed position of the housewife than about the wonderful privileges of the separated.)
It costs £700 a year to keep a child in a council day-nursery, and only children in real need — i.e. those whose mothers cannot or will not care for them adequately at home — will get a place.
Where is that £700 a year when the mother is coping?
Foster parents can often claim fostering allowances of 2–3 times the Supplementary Benefit that the natural parent would have received for looking after the same child…which is peculiarly ironic when one considers that some children might not be in foster-care at all if their parents had adequate incomes in the first place ( Fairbairns , 1976).
It does seem that the only way a housewife can get any recognition of the value of her work is to refuse or fail to do it.
Thus, for example, the disabled wife (or cohabitee) can only draw the Non-contributory Invalidity Pension if she is unable to perform normal (as defined by the DHSS) household duties, regardless of whether housework is her normal profession, regardless of the fact that men and single women only have to prove inability to do paid work to qualify for the pension; and conversely, the Invalid Care Allowance, for people who lose their incomes because they must stay at home and care for a sick relative, is not payable to wives (or cohabitees) because it is assumed that they would be at home in any case!
The normal principle — that people get paid for doing their jobs and not for not doing them — is reversed in the case of housewives.
The point of all this is not that the entire women's liberation movement should support the Wages for Housework demand (as at present formulated)— a pretty remote possibility — but that it should recognise — as WfH does — the importance of feminism's attitude to housewives.
Remembering that I am not defining housewife as a woman dancing attendance on a healthy but indolent male but as a person looking after babies and others who need looking after,what do feminists think the housewife should live on ?
Should she depend on her husband?
Then we must accept all the DHSS's arguments in favour of the cohabitation rule, along with all forms of discrimination and oppression rooted in the assumption that women are men's dependants, for the simple reason that the assumption is correct.
Is she to give up being a housewife, put the children in a day-care centre and take paid work?
Well, of course this option must be open, but the needs of the women who choose to stay at home, if only for a short time, cannot be ignored.
To present the issue as either pay for mothers or better state facilities is an unnecessary conflict.
The one implies the other.
If mothers had money of their own earmarked for childcare, they could choose whether to use it to ‘pay’ themselves or pay someone else — workers in day-care centres, for instance.
The point is choice.
The point is also that the raising of children is  work.
It is worth money and it costs money.
If society as a whole does not pay, women pay — by being penniless dependants while working full time.
But if it's all right for wives to have this status, then it's all right for cohabitees too.
On the other hand if we demand the right of cohabitees to an income regardless of their man's resources (i.e. abolition of the cohabitation rule), how can we deny the same right to wives?
Living Together as Husband and Wife shows that the state clearly recognises the importance of maintaining housewives as dependants since the alternative — redistributing wealth not just within the state but within the family — is too expensive and subversive to contemplate.
It is time that feminists did too.
Meanwhile, the cohabitation rule is fair, equitable and makes perfect sense.
THE COHABITATION RULE
DAVID DONNISON
We also had to deal with the old issues too.
‘Cohabitation’ was one of them.
Even to explain exactly what it meant was difficult.
In a working-class suburb of Birmingham a woman, separated long ago from her husband, lived with her mentally handicapped son.
They had nothing but the meagre income provided by supplementary benefit.
Down the road a man in his fifties — a window cleaner — lost his wife who died after a long and harrowing illness.
Stricken by grief, he was unable to look AFTER himself properly.
So the woman took him in and cared for him.
He managed to keep working, paid for his board and lodging, helped her to look after the handicapped boy and did a few jobs around the house.
But a neighbour wrote an anonymous letter about them to the DHSS and before long an official was knocking at their door.
He asked a lot of questions.
What rent did the man pay?
Who did the shopping?
How much help did he give in the house?
Where did they sleep?
What did they call each other?
Did he take the boy fishing with him?
Later the woman's benefit was cut off on the grounds that she and her lodger were living together as husband and wife, and he must therefore maintain her.
Since he could not afford to keep her and the boy out of his meagre earnings he drifted away, leaving her to claim supplementary benefit again a few weeks later.
Both insisted that they had never thought of themselves as husband and wife, and there was no reason why anyone else should do so.
A graduate student in Oxford claimed supplementary benefit.
His grant had run out before his thesis was completed.
The visiting officer found him living in one room which was almost entirely filled by a double bed.
The garments and cosmetics scattered about made it clear that the room was shared — by a girl working as a secretary, he explained.
But they were not living as husband and wife.
They were only together for this term: after that — who knows?
The DHSS did not cut off his benefit, deciding that this was not what most people meant by a husband-and-wife relationship.
Not in Oxford, anyway.
‘And besides’, said the visiting officer, ‘how do you argue with a man who's studying to be a doctor of philosophy?’
When I first came to the Commission, cases like these caused more anxiety and provoked more anger and complaint than any others we dealt with.
Benefit was refused or withdrawn on grounds of ‘cohabitation’(as it was then called) in about 8000 cases a year.
The claimants were nearly always women, and three out of four of them had dependent children.
These cases brought the state into the most private areas of people's lives.
They compelled officials to investigate matters they would much prefer to keep out of: all for the administration of a basically unworkable rule.
Decisions about people's claims for benefits should be based on clearly defined principles and ascertainable facts.
But what does ‘living together as husband and wife’ mean?
Could any definition of this relationship be devised which would fit equally well the circumstances of middle-aged working-class mothers and young male students, remote Highland villages and the anonymous, teeming metropolis?
Parliament, which compelled us to apply the rule, had never tried to define it.
And when in 1973 the Lord Chief Justice was asked to ‘give some guidance upon the phrase ‘cohabiting as man and wife’ he swiftly handed back the poisoned cup, saying that the phrase was ‘so well known that nothing I could say about it could possibly assist in its interpretation hereafter’.
How on earth did the state get into all this?
In most countries people compelled by poverty to ask for social assistance have to show that their families, wherever they may be living, cannot support them.
In Germany they have to pass a three-generation means test, calling for information about the incomes of the claimant, his parents and his children.
But in Britain, even in the days of the local poor law, questions were only asked about relatives of the claimant who were living with him.
It was a  household means test, not a family means test.
And it was hated.
That's why it was abolished at the insistence of Labour Ministers who served in the coalition government during the war.
Henceforth the ‘unit of assessment’ became the individual or a married couple, and any dependent children living with them.
No special arrangements were made in the law for people ‘cohabiting’, but the Assistance Board and their successors were expected to use their discretionary powers to ensure that such people were treated just the same as married couples.
That meant that a man living with a woman could claim money for her and her children whether they were married or not.
But it also prevented her from claiming in her own right.
And if he had a full-time job he was expected to support her and her children.
There were very few lone parents on the books at that time: so few that no separate statistics were kept of their numbers.
Since then the numbers of divorced, separated and unmarried parents have grown steadily all across Europe.
And in Britain the proportions of them who depend on social assistance seem to be higher than anywhere else.
That is due partly to quite creditable reasons: mothers on their own have more assured rights to benefits and to housing than they have in many other countries;, they are not compelled to go to work; and their benefits are more generous in comparison with wages.
But it is also due partly to less creditable reasons: women's wages and the benefits they can draw for their children when they are at work are generally lower here; and day care for children is scarcer and poorer than in many other countries.
Whatever the reasons, constantly growing numbers of lone parents live on supplementary benefit.
There were 320000 of them in 1979–11 per cent of all our claimants, caring for nearly 600000 children between them.
A count made in 1971 showed that one-parent families on supplementary benefit amounted to two-thirds of all the unmarried mothers, more than half the separated mothers, one-third of the divorced and one-fifth of the widows in this country.
Meanwhile sexual relationships and other patterns of behaviour have been changing.
In the early 1970s more and more allegations of cohabitation were being investigated, and more women were being deprived of benefit on these grounds.
But they were less inclined to tolerate this kind of thing than they used to be.
More and more of them were appealing to the tribunals and to their MPS.
What should be done?
There are similar cohabitation rules all over the place.
They are supposed to apply to widows' pensions, war pensions, civil service pensions, family income supplement, child benefit — indeed, to every scheme which makes any special provision for widows and other people left on their own, or for people caring for children single-handed.
But other schemes are less contentious: partly because the extra money gained from child benefits and other payments which favour lone parents is less than the extra money lone parents gain when the whole household is living on supplementary benefit; and partly because the public tolerates laxer or more generous administration in other schemes than it is prepared to tolerate when it comes to means-tested benefits for the poor.
They are less likely to write anonymous letters to the DHSS about widows and war pensioners: ‘After all’ they say, ‘how she lives is her own business: she (or her husband)earned her benefit’.
Over the years the SBC, perturbed about this part of their work, made successive studies of the question.
The latest and most thorough had been completed just before I took over the chairman-ship.
We found that although most cases were well handled, things went wrong much too often.
A lot of the women whose benefit was cut off were back on our books again a few weeks later — which suggested either that their relationships had not really been like that of husband and wife, or that our intrusion had broken up what might have become a more lasting union.
So we went back to the basics to see whether we could ask the Government to abolish the ‘cohab rule’ altogether.
But nothing we could do would reverse fundamental social trends which were producing more and more lone parents.
Like other fair-minded people, we wanted to see more help given to these parents and their children; and it was plain that over the next ten years or so Parliament would be doing that, and our scheme would be one of the instruments used for that purpose.
But you cannot expect the taxpayers to provide extra help for one-parent families unless someone tries to ensure that the money only goes to families which really do have only one parent in them.
Whatever the pressure groups might say, Parliament was not interested in abolish-ing the rule and neither was the electorate.
Since we could not get rid of the rule, there was nothing we could do but try to operate it more sensibly.
So we resolved to lay out much more clearly what we meant by ‘living together’, and to give every claimant involved in the procedure a printed explanation of  the rule and our principles for administering it.
Henceforth no questions should be asked about sleeping arrangements or sexual behaviour.
We resolved to give claimants more time, if they seemed to need it, before deciding whether or not they were ‘living together’.
And when benefit had to be cut off we resolved to be more generous in tapering off payments in cases where hardship would otherwise result.
Indeed, we would go on paying indefinitely if low wages and the presence of children from an earlier partnership would otherwise have driven the family's income below the supplementary benefit level.
We called for better-trained staff who would specialise in dealing with these cases.
They should consult their supervisors more carefully before taking drastic decisions, and collaborate more closely with other services whose help might be needed.
Finally we asked for a change in the wording of supplementary benefit law which would abolish the term ‘cohabitation’, with its sexual connotations, and substitute what seemed the more decent and objective phrase, ‘living together as husband and wife’.
We published our report Living Together as Husband and Wife , on 4 March 1976.
The press conference was a shambles.
The BMA called a press conference on the emigration of doctors an hour beforehand, half the journalists went off to that, and the fierce women sent along by the pressure groups whom I had invited to liven up the occasion terrorised the few press men who remained into almost complete silence.
But of all the leader writers, only one — in The Morning Star — failed to approve our main conclusions.
An MP wrote to me, saying it was high time the Commission dropped all this ‘Victorian nonsense’ and abandoned such rules.
An emollient reply was drafted for me to send back.
But I threw it away and wrote instead to tell him that the Victorian nonsense was his, not ours, since the rule was imposed on us by Parliament.
Any time he could get a majority of his colleagues in the House to repeal it I would be delighted.
Till then, we had to administer the present law.
(He saw the joke and wrote a friendly reply.)
Our proposals were the best choice of evils.
But the whole experience left me ruefully feeling that it had perhaps been a mistake to publish a report about them.
(An unavoidable mistake, for the public were entitled to know where we stood.)
I tried repeatedly to explain at public meetings that we were not sex police and not in the least concerned with people's morals.
‘You don't  have to do a lot of snooping to find out who my wife is.
We use the same name.
We live together in the same house and have no other home.
We have children, eat together, go shopping together, go on holiday together, share the same overdraft, quarrel about who uses the car….
Unless some of these things are to be found in it, the relationship is unlikely to be that of husband and wife.’
But it was no good.
Whatever I said, any public discussion left people (including, I feared, our own staff) with a confused idea that it was really all a matter of who slept with whom.
Meanwhile, we still had to get something done about our new procedures.
This would call for fresh instructions to staff, training, and endless negotiations with the civil service trade unions who opposed the creation of new specialists.
These, they argued, tended to make other people's work less interesting and responsible (which also weakened their case for higher pay).
What, in the longer run, should be done about this rule, in a world where there are going to be more separated and divorced couples, and more lone parents?
(A world, too, in which the Finer Commit-tee's expensive proposal for a guaranteed maintenance allowance, paid by the state to all lone parents, is dead.)
For lone parents who want to earn their own living there should be more opportunities to work, full time or part time; better wages for women; and better child care arrangements.
Until we can organise our economy properly and bring the general level of unemployment down, progress in those directions is bound to be slow.
Mothers or fathers on their own who cannot earn their own living, or who decide (as they are fully entitled to) that they would prefer to care for their children instead, must get paid for the important work they do.
If the Social Services had to do the job instead it would cost far more.
The payment can be based on any one of three different principles.
1.
We can treat lone parents as poor people, needing means-tested social assistance of some sort — as we do now.
That is the cheapest solution.
It gets help to those who need it most.
But it fastens some sort of cohabitation rule upon them.
2.
Or we can treat them as victims of an insurable risk.
We already do that for widows, most of whom get enough in benefits — paid regardless of their incomes — to lift them well above supplementary benefit levels.
They are popular group, and the fiercest lobby in the business: no one asks of widows — as they do of unmarried mothers or the divorced — whether they were responsible for their  own plight.
In future we could extend their kind of insurance benefit to people who are divorced, separated or unmarried and looking after children.
Insurance benefits, being linked through contributions to the level of wages, have until recently kept pace with inflation better than other benefits.
A new contributory scheme of this kind would be expensive because it must be generous enough to lift people off means-tested supplementary benefit; and it would still leave them entangled in a cohabitation rule of some sort.
If the extension of such benefits to new groups of lone parents took shape piecemeal, it might divide the ‘family lobby’ rather than unite them.
Moreover this device would not really be aimed at the crucial needs involved.
3.
The crucial needs arise from an unavoidable responsibility for caring for someone who depends on you.
That could be recognised in a scheme for supporting lone parents, along with many others who care single-handed for particularly frail or handicapped people.
The scheme for parents would have to start with a really adequate level of child benefits.
Likewise, for those caring for an adult the scheme would have to be built on an adequate system of disability benefits.
Then, as with child benefits today, a premium could be added to both schemes for those who have to do the job single-handed.
That premium should not grow too large lest it bring increasingly intolerable cohabitation rules with it — which is why the basic level of child benefit should be raised first.
Being addressed to family responsibilities, this proposal should help to unify rather than divide the pressure groups which together constitute the family lobby.
But such benefits have not in the past kept pace with inflation.
And, even if in future they were taxed, they would be expensive.
Yet they would be a much better way of spending money than the present married man's tax allowance which reduces income tax for all married men, rich or poor, whether or not they have dependants in their households.
None of these solutions would altogether solve the problem.
But the third would be best because it deals with the essential needs involved.
These arise from a household's obligation to devote many unpaid hours of work to caring for its dependent members, and from the fact that some households have only one fit person of working age who has to choose between doing this, or going out to earn a living, or driving themselves to exhaustion trying to do both.
II
WOMEN AND HOUSING POLICY
INTRODUCTION
In 1980, over three-quarters of all British households lived in houses with gardens (Social Survey Division, OPCS, 1982).
Moreover, despite popular views to the contrary, the majority (65 per cent) of households in publicly owned council housing also lived in houses with gardens.
Indeed, British council housing, compared to public housing in other developed nations of the world, is unusual in just this respect (Stretton, 1975) and, as a result, often singled out for special praise.
Rather than develop a peculiarly urban form of housing, housing authorities in this country have preferred on the whole to continue a century-long tradition of suburban housing form.
Only during a relatively brief period in the 1950s and 1960s did another form — the high-rise block of flats — become almost as dominant in new local authority construction as the house with the garden, and then generally in the more densely populated urban areas (Dunleavy, 1981).
(Enough was built, though, to ensure that outside Scotland, most high-rise dwellings in this country are publicly owned.)
However, as Austerberry and Watson point out,both high-rise living and suburban living have severe disadvantages for women.
In the former, women who are housewives and mothers often have to struggle with inadequate and unsupervisable playspace for their children, bleak and frequently vandalised communal facilities, and the unlit terrors of urban pathways at night.
(For a further and graphic description of the lives women lead in this kind of environment, see Campbell, 1984.)
In the suburbs, in houses with gardens, women like Myra, the fictional heroine of The Women's Room , lead lonely and often depressed lives, and discover that the additional space that goes with ‘higher’ housing standards  daily threatens to whirl out of control unless they invent — as Myra does — controls which themselves threaten to take over their entire lives.
Moreover, at an ideological level, despite being so different in housing form, both these dwelling types have one other thing in common: they embody a view of appropriate domestic behaviour and the place of women within domestic life.
Suburban style housing is intended to do so; high-rise housing does this in spite of some original radical intentions and has now become, in practice, an important part of the apparatus of reinforcement of traditional domestic norms.
In the case of suburban-type housing, the view of domestic life it ultimately reflects is a strongly traditional one that has its origins in the early development of industrial capitalism and the ensuing ideological split between ‘public’ and ‘private’life developed by the Victorian bourgeoisie.
In this view, women's place is firmly in the home, providing a ‘haven in a heartless world’, servicing the needs of their men — who spend most of their time in the ‘public’ world of work — and socialising their daughters and unmarried female servants into the ways of domesticity and sexual chastity (Davidoff et al .,
1976).
While many of these ideas have lost some of their tenacity, the length of life of the housing stock and the sluggishness of change in urban structure means that it is particularly difficult to change house design to conform to changes in the position of women in society in general and the family in particular.
While it is true that many large Victorian family houses have been successfully converted into small flats, the smaller suburban-style houses built in the 1920s and 1930s and copied in the ‘garden cities’ and new towns of the 1940s are less amenable to conversion and are often located in such a way within the city that they will have an effect on the life-style and employment opportunities of men and women for generations to come (McDowell, 1983).
In contrast, high-rise housing was originally intended in part to undermine this definition of the domestic ideal; by using a quite different urban built form and providing communal facilities such as creches and canteens, it was thought that women would be liberated both from the ideology of domesticity and its actuality.
Examples of such housing were built in Europe in the 1940s, but when it came to the public sector imitations in this country, narrowness of concep-tion and meanness in execution translated the idea into the publicly owned slabs and boxes that have become a feature of the landscape  in our major cities (McDowell, 1983).
Mothers with small children particularly hated them and longed for a house with a garden (Gittus, 1976).
Those that could moved away, and those that were confident that the local authority would offer them something better refused to accept them.
Increasingly such flats have come to be part of a system of ‘less eligibility’ for those households whose actual behaviour is judged not to conform to the domestic ideal: women single parents dependent on state benefits, families with housewives who are defined as ‘poor’housekeepers by other women employed by the local authority to make such judgements (Ungerson, 1971), families headed by men who have been unemployed for years, and single women (Austerberry and Watson, 1983).
The fact that flat-dwelling in the public sector has become a relatively stigmatised form of housing in this country means that women dependent on public sector housing are caught in a design ‘Catch 22’: deviance is punished with badly designed and poorly maintained housing; conformity is rewarded with better standard living conditions that nevertheless tend to reproduce patriarchal power relations.
Despite these dilemmas and contradictions, there have been feminist movements in the past that have had clear views about the kind of housing that women want.
These movements have occurred chiefly in the United States and have generally been anti-suburban in tenor.
Dolores Hayden has brilliantly documented these campaigns (amongst other things, for kitchenless houses) and described the seemingly bizarre utopias that an earlier group of American feminists — less blinded than we are by shiny domestic technology-designed at the turn of this century (Hayden, 1981).
Anti-suburbanism continues to be a strand in American feminist thinking; in Women and the American City , Susan Saegert suggests that suburbs are bad for women and good for men (Saegert, 1981) while Betty Friedan's classic of the second wave of feminism The Feminine Mystique (Friedan, 1963) and its fictionalised version in Marilyn French's The Women's Room (French, 1978) have popularised the American feminist revolt against suburban life.
In this country and in others with a British-type tradition, anti-urbanism still holds relative sway although, perhaps significantly, the chief advocates of suburban design are men.
In particular, an Australian, Hugh Stretton, has put together popular revulsion against high-rise living with feminist ideas about the productivity of  housework, and come to the conclusion that, if housework had a place in national accounting systems, then governments would be easily persuaded on economic grounds alone to invest more in housing with generous space standards and of a suburban style (Stretton, 1974).
Moreover, far from generating isolation and introversion, he suggests that suburban living generates neighbour-liness, co-operation and collective action:
People who work urban land of their own take more knowledge-able interest in public gardens and parks, and they go (more often than people without land of their own) to enjoy any accessible wilderness.
Community workshops and trades and crafts get used where people have space to practise the crafts at home; people practise the crafts at home, where there are community workshops to attract them to meet, learn, use common equipment, and compare work.
(Stretton, 1975, p. 789)
Such an analysis suggests that house design is the fundamental determinant of social life; while this, in itself, is a very difficult position to maintain, the argument is also fundamentally flawed on its own grounds since it fails to take account of who in the household actually does the work generated by the ‘hobbies’.
As Lee Davidoff reminds us:
When the rosy spectacles are laid aside, it is clear that what to the husband and children can be a refreshing hobby — after all they are more often than not the consumers, not the producers, of the home-made jam — to the wife can be another variant of the natural mother image and in everyday terms can mean longer than ever hours at the chopping board.
(Davidoff et al .,
1976, p.173)
At the root of these problems of selecting dwelling designs and planning goals that optimise the interests of women is the truism that housing generates housework.
Whether it is the kind of high quality housing that Myra lives in, or the rotten housing that the people studied by Coates and Silburn in the Nottingham slum of St Ann's once lived in, and which people in leaking tower blocks continue to live in (Campbell, 1984), the end product is work .
That work can be modified by raising the standards of damp insulation, changing the size of the garden or abandoning it altogether, and introducing running hot water and central heating, but it will remain repetitive, and almost always compulsory rather than voluntary.
Someone has to do it, and given the sexual division of labour which itself is reinforced by urban planning (Harman, 1983), it will usually be left to the women.
The problem for social policy-makers and for feminist commentators on social policy is whether to take that sexual division of labour for granted and plan neighbourhood services and housing design such that it is taken into account.
However, and perhaps more importantly, it must be remembered that housing is more than simply a place to live in.
It is also an extremely important form of property, and rights of access to it are governed by legislation and custom.
Over the past hundred years, various pieces of legislation, from the 1882 Married Woman's Property Act, which gave married women the right to hold their own property, to the 1980 Housing Act, which makes it mandatory for local authorities to give married couples joint tenancies, the property rights of women both in the public and private housing sectors have been gradually extended (Brion and Tinker, 1980).
But social legislation that directly relates to women's property rights is not the only way in which social policy regulates women's lives.
The fact that the housing market is divided into different tenure categories which are governed by different laws and customs means that, when changes in the structure of the housing market occur, and particular tenure categories expand and contract, so the number of people affected by the rules and regulations governing access to and maintenance of rights in particular tenure categories will also expand and contract.
Thus, as Austerberry and Watson point out, government's efforts to increase the proportion of owner occupied housing in this country has the unintended consequence of profoundly affecting the property rights of women, particularly when marriage ends.
As part of this policy of expanding owner occupation, council tenants now have the right to buy the council housing they occupy.
As a result the local authority sector will increasingly contain the least popular form of council dwelling: the council flat on the ‘sink’ estate.
For women on their own, with and without children, disadvantaged as they are in the labour market, such council housing will increasingly be their only source of shelter.
However, given the previous discussion of the patriarchal roots of the ideology of  suburbia, does it matter that poor women without husbands and with children will find themselves increasingly dependent on flats in decaying inner-city areas rather than houses in the leafy suburbs?
If it does matter, as I think it does, then what is to be done?
Additional reading
Apart from the works cited in this introduction, some of which refer to the American and Australian literature, there are now two books specifically directed to the analysis of many of these issues within a British context.
The first is Geography and Gender: an introduction to feminist geography (Women and Geography Study Group, 1984).
Readers interested in social policy should not be put off by the disciplinary context of geography: in many respects present-day geography is the next-door neighbour of social policy studies.
The second is Making Space: Women and the man-made environment (Matrix, 1984), a collection of essays by feminist architects who live and work in Britain.
A WOMAN'S PLACE: A FEMINIST APPROACH TO HOUSING IN BRITAIN
HELEN AUSTERBERRY and SOPHIE WATSON
An exciting development in the women's movement over the last few years has been an attempt by feminists to organise together around housing issues and to develop a feminist analysis of how the organisation of housing in Britain specifically affects women.
This is not to say that women have not played an important and active role in numerous tenant struggles.
In the famous rent strike on the Clyde in 1915, which resulted in legislation to control the level of rents, women demonstrated in their thousands, filled the court-rooms when tenants faced eviction and were the organisers of the struggle.
More recently accounts of women confronting the rent collectors in Northern Ireland with the din of beating pots and pans are typical of women's involvement in housing campaigns before and since (Cow-ley, 1980).
However, it is only comparatively recently that feminists have begun to raise the issue more generally within the women's liberation movement.
The exception to this has been the work of Women's Aid groups and the National Women's Aid Federation, who have consistently and successfully f ought for battered women's rights to housing in cases of domestic violence.
But in the last few years feminists have begun to organise together as architects, housing workers, builders, designers etc, to question seriously assumptions around housing policy and structure; assumptions held not only by politicians, housing officials and housing workers, but  also by socialist housing activists.
A national conference in March 1980, organised by the Women and Housing Group, attracted 200 women, and a women-only housing co-operative has started in the last couple of years to house its members.
Inevitably, political differences in priorities and analyses exist, some women emphasis-ing the need to work for changes within the present housing system, while the priority of others is to construct alternative housing situations for women.
Through their involvement in housing work as employees of statutory and voluntary housing organisations and as activists, women have become increasingly aware of the need for a feminist perspective on housing.
Housing is located within the domestic sphere, the traditionally privatised area of life, but its role in moulding and reinforcing the patriarchal and capitalist structure of the family has been largely ignored.
We believe that this weakness is one of the reasons which explains the failure of left parties and the trade unions to develop coherent socialist housing policies.
They have concentrated almost exclusively on public housing and have never really challenged owner-occupation as a form of tenure, or the quality of housing and its organisation and control.
Although socialists are now beginning to take up these questions, a feminist perspective highlights these as central issues.
We are still, however, a long way from a socialist feminist policy on housing, and much more work needs to be done at the theoretical and political level.
This article only sets out what we consider to be some of the major problems which any socialist feminist analysis of housing must confront, and raises more questions than answers.
Why has housing never been a central issue for the women's liberation movement in Britain, despite the crucial place that it occupies in all our lives?
And why is it that not one of the seven demands of the women's movement specifically addresses questions of housing?
A tentative reply to these questions we think would be that an attempt to construct a purely feminist demand around housing presents major problems, in the way that demands around financial independence, sexuality, childcare and so on, do not.
As socialists we would demand decent and secure housing for everyone at a reasonable cost, but the difficulty arises when we consider what we can demand specifically as women without simply constructing an alternative women's culture or further reinforcing women's place in the home.
For example, recognising women's present housing needs as wife and mother, we might fight for such  things as a roomy efficient kitchen to make women's work at home less burdensome.
Yet such a demand must be clearly formulated so that it challenges the stereotypes of women's role.
There are many contradictions therefore in the relationship of women to housing, and in the demands that we might want to make.
We begin by looking at some of the fundamental assumptions on which housing policy is based, present government housing policy, the various forms of housing tenure in Britain, and the particular problems for women that these forms of tenure raise.
We then consider the way in which housing structure and design affect women's lives.
The household
All present housing policy is based on the notion of the household.
Despite the fact that single-parent families, people on their own, or unrelated people living together constitute 32 per cent of all households (Central Statistical Office, 1979, p. 44), the household is generally assumed to be the nuclear family.
All other housing, apart from nuclear family accommodation, is defined as ‘special need’ housing.
There has been scanty analysis of either the individual members of the household's different structural relationship to housing, or of households that do not comply with the nuclear family model.
In addition to this, the head of the household is almost always assumed to be the man in the household, even if the wife is working.
A classic example of this can be found in the Interviewers Manual (Social and Community Planning Research, 1977) in the section defining the head of the household as the man who owns or rents the property, or is in tied accommodation because of his job:
there is only one exception: if a wife owns the property or has her name on the rent book or has the property because of her job,her husband is regarded as the head of household , provided that he is resident (our italics).
(SCPR, 1977, p. 54).
Financial dependence
A prevailing assumption of this society, which has profound consequences for women's access to housing, is that a woman and her  children will be supported financially by her husband.
A major part of this support will be the cost of the family's housing, be it in the form of mortgage repayments or rent.
According to the Family Expenditure Survey, average personal expenditure on housing rose from 9 per cent of total consumer spending in 1953 to 14 per cent in 1973.
Moreover, lower income groups tend to spend more propor-tionally on their housing than higher income groups (Ginsburg, 1979, p. 5).
Of course, not everyone lives in a nuclear family, and there are families where the costs are shared equally or nearly so, or where the housing tenure is held jointly by both partners, but they are not the norm.
As a rule the man's salary or wage is the primary source of income within the family, while the woman's income, if she has one, is seen as a supplement to this.
Division of labour
The corollary of this is that it is women who are expected to undertake the reproduction of labour-power within the family, whether they also have waged jobs or not.
Despite some changing patterns in this respect, woman's role is still seen to be primarily in the home.
She is the housewife, bearing, raising and socialising children, and succouring her husband's and children's emotional and physical needs (Oakley, 1974).
The women's movement has presented a major challenge to these assumptions, but the law, the media, the social services, education and many other facets of the state continue to reinforce this pervasive ideology.
As we shall argue below, society's expectation and acceptance of the male head of the household as the chief breadwinner, with the woman as an economically dependent housewife and mother, has important and specific repercussions in relation to housing policy and tenure.
Government housing policy
A brief examination of government housing policy is necessary before the relative importance of different forms of tenure can be fully understood.
The Housing Act 1980 contains three major sections which affect access to housing in the public and private sectors.
The first and major thrust of the Act is the clause enabling council tenants to purchase their dwelling at a huge discount — not a  new trend of either Labour or Conservative housing policy, but certainly it represent a greater encouragement to owner-occupation than ever before.
Secondly, under the new Act, tenants in council property are granted security of tenure, whereas previously they did not have this protection.
Socialists have long fought for security of tenure for council tenants, so this represents a major gain in the housing struggle.
But feminists saw the serious implications for women in this clause, since problems in the rehousing of the other partner in cases of marital breakdown were bound to result, and campaigned, unfortunately with no success, against this clause.
Thirdly, the Act has created a system of ‘shorthold’ tenancies — an attempt to open up the ailing private rented sector.
Socialists and feminists oppose this move, not only because it enables landlords to evict tenants easily and raise rents, but because they recognise that the demise of this sector is, broadly speaking, a result of the decreasing profitability of investment in this sector (Merrett, 1979, p.281), not of legislation concerning rent control and tenants' rights.
Finally, the major overall result of the government's monetarist economic policy has been a severe reduction in public expenditure, particularly in housing expenditure, which will inevitably lead to poorer quality public housing, with less possibility for transfers within this sector.
Housing tenure
The two major forms of housing tenure in Britain are owner-occupation, which accounts for 51.5 per cent of the population, and local authority (or council) housing, which accounts for 33.4 per cent of the population, with housing associations, co-operatives and the private rented sector making up the remaining 15 per cent(CSO, 1979, p. 146).
As can be seen in Table 1, throughout this century there has been a large decline in private renting, and a corresponding increase in owner-occupation and council housing, which began to get under way after the First World War.
Predictably, the middle classes have tended to move into owner-occupation, while council tenants tend to be the lower-paid and lower-status workers (Ginsburg, 1979, p. 138).
Private renting tends to be a residual tenure for all the social classes.
We shall therefore concentrate predominantly on the two major forms of tenure, and go on to look at their significance for women.
The owner-occupied sector
As was stated above, 51.5 per cent of the population at the present time have purchased their own housing, 28.5 per cent with mortgages (CSO, 1979).
It is in this sector that women's inferior economic position is of particular relevance, although it has specific repercussions in relation to council housing, too, as we discuss below.
Women tend to earn less than their male counterparts (women's wages were 73.5 per cent of men's in 1979), and to be in less stable areas of employment and more frequently in part-time work than men (Bruegel, 1980).
Consequently, women have far less purchasing power than men, a situation which inevitably will be exacerbated in the current economic crisis.
Traditionally, therefore, building societies have been extremely reluctant to grant women mortgages on their own, since they are generally regarded as a bad risk on the grounds of their present or future income.
Secondly, the attitude that women are on their own only until they find a man to support them is a prevalent one.
A study of building societies in Huddersfield found:
there was not only a preference for apparently conformist middle  class couples, but also the dislike of deviators from this norm, such as is represented by marital breakdown or career oriented women.
(Duncan, 1976, p. 6)
Even in the case of married applicants for joint mortgages, the Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) found that 36 per cent of building societies in their study discriminated in some way against a couple with a higher earning wife (EOC, 1978).
Women's freedom to purchase their own housing, should this be their desire, is thus severely limited.
Surveys of ownership of property provide further evidence of this.
A survey of married owner-occupier couples in 1971 found that 42 per cent had the home in the husband's name, and only 5 per cent in the wife's name, the remainder being joint mortgages (Todd and Jones, 1972).
Clearly, then, women's access to home ownership is often through association with a male breadwinner, a fact which further reinforces women's economic dependence on a male partner.
However, it is on marital breakdown that the crucial implications of this situation are particularly illuminated.
On divorce a married woman may now apply for a property transfer order, and this can be made even if she has made no direct financial contribution to the purchase or improvement of the matrimonial home.
However, numerous problems still arise.
The starting point the courts use in making financial orders is the one-third rule: that a woman is entitled to one-third of her husband's joint income and capital.
In practice this means that if an order is made transferring the home, the wife's maintenance will be consequently reduced.
Where there is an order for sale the division of the proceeds of sale rarely gives the woman enough capital to purchase a new home.
Orders which allow a wife to remain in occupation of the marital home until her youngest child leaves, in effect, put off her housing problems until middle age, when she is often without an income or sufficient capital to make continued owner-occupation a realistic alternative.
Even when an outright transfer is made, problems can also arise, as women on their own find it difficult to meet the mortgage repayments.
In this situation a woman has two options.
One is to depend on supplementary benefit, which will generally include money for the payment of the interest on an existing mortgage.
The other is to find well-paid employment which will provide her with an adequate income to afford the repayments.
In the first case, therefore, the woman has had to shift her economic dependence from her  husband to the state.
In the second, we are talking about the likelihood of a woman finding adequate childcare facilities for her children and entering the labour market, at a fairly high income level, possibly after many years' absence from paid employment.
In the current situation of economic recession, and cuts in the few nursery facilities that do exist, this option does not appear to be a very feasible one.
An additional financial burden for a woman in situations such as these may be that of arrears which have accrued, of which she may have been previously unaware (Ginsburg, 1979, p. 128).
There is also the problem of repairs and maintenance of the property, which a woman may well not be able to afford, or be able to do herself through lack of experience or time.
Why, then, have socialists, and the major parties on the left, tended to maintain an equivocal attitude towards owner-occupation, and why has the whole question of land and property nationalisation never been confronted head-on?
In part it would appear that this has arisen from a tendency to see questions of housing and home life as matters of individual and privatised choice, to be set aside from the mainstream of political life where employment is the crucial issue.
Also, there is the recognition by these parties that many members of the working class, and many of their voters, do want to own their own property.
Indeed a similar equivocal attitude exists towards the issue of council-house sales, some women (like some socialists) even appearing to endorse the ‘right to buy’ clause in the new Act, presumably on the basis that it represents an avenue for women to enter into the private market (Brion and Tinker, 1980, p. 43).
We would argue that as socialist feminists it is important to challenge owner-occupation as a form of tenure.
Bearing in mind women's income levels, it is too expensive not only in terms of the initial and ongoing payments, but also in terms of the ongoing costs of upkeep.
The common argument that owner-occupation offers greater mobility does not generally hold true for women, as was clear in our discussion of what happens on marital breakdown.
Likewise, the myth that owner-occupation offers greater control over one's housing is one that feminists must challenge, for which member of the household is frequently the one to exercise this control?
To conclude, then, women's economic dependence on men within the family, and their primary role as wife and mother, is ultimately reinforced in the private housing market.
Furthermore, because of the importance of women's unpaid domestic labour, particularly as a child rearer, the state, albeit reluctantly, provides some financial support, with social security payments for example, once the marital relationship breaks down.
So women have to challenge owner-occupation and, in particular, council-house sales and cuts in public expenditure in housing, since it is they as housewives, mothers and single parents who inevitably bear the brunt of reduced decent public housing, and the increased push towards owner-occupation.
Council housing
It is often said that women have greater access to housing in the public sector than men, or that housing officials tend to be more sympathetic to women.
Under the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977 housing departments have a duty to provide housing to anyone ‘unintentionally homeless’ and in ‘priority need’of housing.
This category includes: those with dependent children normally living with them, pregnant women, and those vulnerable as a result of old age, mental illness or handicap or physical disability or other special reason.
In fact the wording of the Act makes it clear that it is only as mothers that women are given priority in the public sector.
The state provides housing for children, and hence for whoever is caring for them.
The only other specific category where women outnumber men in council accommodation is the elderly, simply by virtue of the fact that they live longer.
Single women with children
An examination of the treatment of single women with children in council housing demonstrates that, far from being favourably regarded by local authorities, they are often penalised.
Principally, single-parent families are allocated council housing under the 1977 Housing (Homeless Persons) Act, or from the housing waiting-list.
Typically women become eligible for housing under the Act in situations of marital breakdown, but rehousing is not automatic, and neither is being homeless an open door to decent housing.
Women often have to prove to housing officials that they have not made themselves ‘intentionally’ homeless.
In these circumstances, they tend to be in desperate need and thus have little power, so are  frequently offered the worst properties with little possibility of being offered a better property on refusal.
The other basis of housing allocation to single-parent families is the housing waiting-lists.
Formerly the largest group of people to be housed by local authorities (64 per cent in 1975) came from these lists; some of these people were council tenants hoping to move to better property.
With the current cuts in housing expenditure, however, very few tenants are likely to be rehoused from the lists at the present time.
Local authorities house people from the waiting-list on the basis of a points system, which varies between different local authorities, points being gained according to such criteria as length of time on the waiting-list, current housing situation, numbers of children, and so on.
The Finer Report (1974) on one-parent families found that the system discriminated against such families because they gained points for only one adult, not two.
Moreover, the report found that single parents were often expected to share a bedroom with a child, where two parents were not, and were seldom offered houses with gardens because it was thought that they could not look after them.
Overall, these families frequently tend to be placed in the worst housing or on the worst estates, partly perhaps because of their inability to pay higher rents, and partly because local authorities have always been inclined to allocate poor people and slum dwellers to particular estates (Gray, 1979).
Likewise, there has been a policy for people who are seen as ‘problem families’(which often includes single-parent families) and ‘unsatis-factory’ tenants to be selected for these estates (Gray, 1979).
The estates then come to be seen as ‘ghetto’, ‘sink’ or ‘residual’estates, where no one wants to live, where the repairs are not done, and only people who have no chance of being offered anywhere better are forced to live.
However, some councils have had to modify their policies in this respect in view of the management problems on these estates.
Families who are desperate for housing are forced to accept bad housing offers simply because they have no other choice.
Once someone has accepted an offer and become a council tenant, local authority management policies come to be an important aspect of their lives.
Housing management
Fundamentally, the system of local authority housing management has its roots in the early work of Octavia Hill.
She was a pioneer in  the development of working-class housing in the second half of the nineteenth century.
Her attitude were extremely paternalistic and authoritarian, and based on the idea that poor people needed to be trained in household management, so that they would be able to pay their rent more regularly.
In many ways these attitudes remain today.
A study of several local authorities in the 1960s revealed:
Despite the tenant being referred to as ‘him’, it is generally the woman of the household who bears the brunt of housing management principles.
An extreme example of this was discovered by community workers in Paisley:
where a special area in one housing estate has been set aside for problem families, where they are given daily supervision combined with training and instruction designed to teach them the elements of home craft and mothercraft so that in due course, when they have proved they can manage their affairs, domestic, financial or otherwise, they can return to a better house in a more desirable neighbourhood.
(Community Development Project, 1976, p. 82)
The connection between these attitudes of housing management and allocations policy is raised by this example.
As F. Gray points out, ‘selection and allocation may reflect, in part at least, the desire of the local authority to minimise management tasks’(Merrett, 1979, p. 207).
New tenants, particularly from non-conforming households such as single parents, tend to be given the poorer standard housing and are expected to prove their ability to look after and improve their home before being transferred to a better property.
Likewise, ‘moral rectitude, social conformity, clean living, and a clean rent book on occasion seem to be essential for eligibility for at least a new house’(Central Housing Advisory  Committee, 1969, p. 32)— qualifications that a woman left on her own with dependants on a low income or social security benefit may well find hard to fulfil.
What conclusions should we draw as feminists concerning housing policy in the public sector, and what demands should we make?
Clearly, then, housing policy operates at present to reinforce the nuclear family.
The majority of housing is provided for this group-housing schemes for single people being rare, and the few that exist being blatantly restricted and cut at the present time.
So public housing fails to provide for personal mobility in changing relationships, or for different needs that people may have.
As the better council housing is sold off, those that are dependent on the public sector for their housing will be increasingly relegated to the worst estates.
It is important, therefore, that feminists challenge the current definitions of housing need, and campaign against the public sector becoming a residual category for those who cannot afford their own housing.
Secondly, we need to demand tenants' control over their housing in order that decisions can be made democratically by the people who occupy the council property and not others.
Finally, it is important to keep abreast with housing legislation, and analyse its implications, campaigning for changes where they are needed.
Private renting, housing associations and housing co-operatives
Some mention of other forms of housing tenure is necessary.
The private rented sector has declined considerably throughout the century.
It is now so scarce and expensive that luck and money are needed to find a half-way decent flat to rent, particularly in big cities.
Women's inferior economic position must affect their access to the better places, but no work has been done to substantiate this point.
However, with their habitual thrust towards the private market, the Tory Housing Act, by incorporating provision for shorthold tenure, and permission to council tenants to sublet and take lodgers, is designed to open up the private rented sector.
It is difficult to assess at this stage what the repercussions of these provisions on this sector will be, but it is important to oppose yet another Tory move to minimise statutory responsibility to provide housing for people without homes.
These new provisions legitimate  in particular the common claim that single people's housing needs can be met by the private rented sector.
Housing associations are non-statutory organisations set up by groups of individuals.
Since the 1974 Housing Act many have been publicly funded.
They are essentially of two kinds: ‘fair rent’, a system by which tenants pay a rent determined by a rent officer, and ‘co-ownership’, where part of the tenant's rent goes towards partial ownership of the dwelling.
Co-operatives are broadly speaking self-run, as opposed to management committee-run, housing as-sociations; hence their attractiveness to autonomous groups.
Until very recently housing associations have been able to have their own policies as to whom they can house, as well as housing a certain proportion of people from the housing waiting-list as part of their financial agreement with the local authority.
Likewise, co-ops decide who their own members can be.
For this reason housing associations, as well as housing families, have tended to house people who are considered to have ‘special needs’, in particular those who cannot be housed in the traditional nuclear family unit.
Inevitably single women with children and elderly women form an important part of this group, and indeed, housing associations and co-ops have been important in providing groups with an opportunity to live collectively as a positive alternative to the nuclear family.
Now, in 1980, having largely escaped the first round of cuts by the Tory government, the Housing Corporation, which is a major source of funding to housing associations and co-ops, has been cut too, leading to an ever worsening situation for those ineligible for council housing or unable to buy into the private market.
Housing structure and design
The weak position of women in the labour market, and their responsibilities within the home as domestic workers and child rearers, affect not only women's access to housing, but its structure and design.
This is an area which has received considerable attention from feminists in recent years, particularly feminist architects and builders in groups such as Matrix, The Women and Built Environment Group and the Feminist Design Co-op, who have begun to challenge traditional attitudes and assumptions held within the architecture profession.
Working conditions in the home
Because the home is a workplace for women, they tend to spend more time there than men or children.
Clearly there are vast differences in this respect between married and unmarried women, mothers and non-mothers and those who do paid work as well as housework.
However, it is generally the case that women do more housework than men.
We would therefore argue that housing conditions are more important to them and their needs broader.
Yet the home is regarded as a private sanctuary and conditions in the home are largely outside the law.
Housewives are isolated, without the protection of their rights corresponding to those won by waged workers through trade union organisation and solidarity.
There is no counterpart to the health and safety legislation of waged employment.
Pre-school child care, for example, when socialised and undertaken by registered childminders or in nurseries and creches, is subject to stringent regulations.
It is hardly surprising that the highest number of accidents occur in the home.
Design
Despite this relationship of women to the home, they have little control over the nature of their housing.
Architects and planners are usually men and, in the case of local authority housing estates, not of the class of those who actually spend most of their time in the flats and houses they design.
It is women who bear the brunt of high-rise flats, estates with no open play spaces, inadequate laundry facilities, noise, vandalism and bad access to shops and transport.
Cramped kitchens, damp, thin walls, broken lifts, dark and dangerous stair-ways and the numerous other consequences of low cost building, make taking care of the home and rearing young children doubly difficult and time-consuming.
The current cuts in public expenditure will inevitably exacerbate this situation.
The government also intends to reduce the Parker Morris standards.
These are the recommended minimum space and heating standards proposed by the Parker Morris Committee in 1961, which were required to be incorporated in public housing design from January 1969 — yet another gain made in the early 1960s to be whittled away under the current government.
Repairs and redecoration will be relegated by councils to the unforseeable future, leading to further deterioration of the housing stock.
Moreover, as is well known, bad housing can lead to illness and injuries, which women have to deal with.
A recent study of women living in Camberwell, South London, found that living in the isolation of the family with small children, in poor and overcrowded housing conditions, was a major cause of depression (Brown and Harris, 1970).
It is the poor who fare worst in relation to housing facilities, heating and indoor playspace for their children, and it is often single-parent families that are particularly hard hit in this respect (Townsend, 1979, Chapter 13).
For these reasons, it is often women who provide the impetus for, and who are extremely active in, campaigns against dampness, for central heating, for improved playspaces and other necessary facilities.
The isolated nature of housing structure and its links with domestic labour and consumption
However, to demand better working conditions in the home is in a sense contradictory in that this reinforces the social and spatial oppression of women within their domestic roles.
For the more ideal and self-contained the housing conditions, the more self-sufficient the housewife becomes and the more pressure there is on her to maintain a perfect home.
The present nature of housing cannot be fully understood without relating it to the nature of domestic labour.
Thus demands for change in the two spheres must interlink.
Housework and childcare have remained largely privatised, neither integrated into socialised commodity production, nor taken over by the state, unlike education and the health service.
Individual tasks are repeated by each separate woman in the home in a way that, with the possible exception of pre-school child care and socialisation which is highly labour-intensive work, would be more efficient if socialised.
Housing mirrors the isolated and privatised nature of domestic labour and reinforces each self-contained family unit.
As we said earlier, family housing is regarded as normal, and other housing is defined as ‘special’.
Hence sharing facilities, such as for cooking or washing, between families is regarded as a sign of poverty and housing stress (Townsend, 1979, p.480).
Instead, similar facilities are duplicated in row upon row of separate homes.
However, a large proportion of married women do work outside the home, particularly in part-time work.
But the addition of paid work to the housewife's activities does not mean that she is no longer a  housewife.
The definition of housewifery is cast in terms of responsibility for the running of the home (Oakley, 1974, p. 38).
According to the findings of a national survey described by Audrey Hunt about 85 per cent of all adult British women are housewives (Oakley, 1974, p. 29).
So, for women in waged jobs, the reduced time available in which to perform domestic labour acts as a pressure to heighten labour productivity in the home, and contributes to the successful penetration of capitalism into this still privatised sector, by the creation of a market for domestic mechanisation.
The purchase and use of washing-machines, dishwashers, vacuum-cleaners, cookers, micro-wave ovens, freezers and other such goods, is an act which, while not changing the relations of production and the mode of production, does alter the productive forces in this sector of the economy.
Furthermore, it is probable that more labour-saving commodities do not necessarily replace domestic labour, but simply serve to make more domestic labour possible (Molyneux, 1979).
However, as feminists have consistently argued, potentially housework could be organised in a different way.
For example, washing-machines enable individual households to have their washing done more quickly, but they are used inefficiently.
At present domestic labour is organisationally inefficient because it is not socialised like the industrial sphere, which counterbalances increased productivity through mechanisation.
These factors appear contradictory, but in fact both individualist and mechanised life-styles serve capitalism by increasing demand and facilitating the circulation of commodities produced.
The more efficient and mechanised housework becomes, the more the housewife's standards can rise.
Therefore she tends to become more competitive and her commodity consumption tends to increase.
For to compensate for any increased leisure time which the acquisition of machinery could bring, women are encouraged to be generally more house-proud.
It could be argued that the increase in home ownership facilitates this tendency.
Women are under more ideological pressure to maintain a perfect home in owner-occupied property, where standards are seen to be the individual responsibility of the owners, rather than being outside a tenant's control as in rented property, although of course women in all forms of accommodation are subjected to these pressures.
However, those in the worst housing experience the greatest difficulty in meeting the norms of good housekeeping.
Individual nuclear family units not only provide the maximum number of outlets for commodity production, but also facilitate social control.
The growth of new housing estates, with their anonymous corridors and large barren spaces, and the destruction of the old terraced house communities with their adjoining gardens, have inevitably led to more isolation of family life.
Inevitably it is women, as housewives particularly, who bear the strain of this.
Formulating demands around housing design and quality are particularly problematic for feminists.
We have already discussed the contradictions involved in demanding more roomy kitchens and better working conditions in the home.
However, the structure and design of houses are very important, and if feminists do not argue for better standards, women will be subjected to working in rotten conditions, bearing the brunt of the cuts in housing expenditure, greater costs of heating, more accidents in the home and endless other problems.
As feminists we must demand control over the planning process, in order to overcome the isolation of domestic activity and individualised childcare, and to achieve better conditions in the home.
Conclusions
What does all this imply for the feminist struggle around housing?
First we must begin to recognise that a very real division is incorporated into the existing structure of housing between the public and private sectors, where the public sector is increasingly just a residual back-up for single-parent families, minority and ethnic groups.
Demands around housing therefore must be seen to be as politically central as demands around the wage and employment, and not simply be seen as a matter of individual choice, which for women in particular it is not.
Both access to housing, and the quality of housing available, structure not only the material divisions between the rich and the poor, but also sexual divisions between men and women.
Indeed, housing crucially determines the parameters of our social relationships, as well as our physical well-being.
In formulating any alternative housing policy, feminists need to consider both the availability and provision of low-cost adequate housing, and the form in which they are provided.
For instance, housing units should not only be available for the planners' notion of the traditional nuclear family, but for a range of different  relationships.
It must also be recognised that ‘housing need’ will vary at different periods of women's and men's lives.
Equally, it is important that far more thought should be given to creating communal conditions and facilities for those who want them.
For any real change to take place, therefore, there has to be a massive increase in government expenditure on public housing, so that this sector can be greatly extended.
This demand has to be made in conjunction with demands for greater control over public housing, by those who inhabit it.
Finally then, as feminists, it is vital that we raise these issues in our trade unions, our work, our political parties and at local grass-roots level, insisting that feminist demands are incorporated into the general political strategy and so broadening the socialist perspective.
Only then can there be a truly integrated socialist feminist strategy and analysis of housing which demands decent and secure housing for everyone, and allows us a choice in the way we live.
THE WOMEN'S ROOM
MARILYN FRENCH
Mira's experience was so different.
She had completely settled into her new, easier life.
The mornings were bad.
She hated to get up.
Norm had to call her, then shake her, and she would stagger downstairs and hang like an exhausted alcoholic over a clutched mug of coffee.
The children were unhappy in the morning, like her.
They would argue and complain about the breakfast.
They refused to eat an egg that was cooked too long or not long enough.
They no longer liked this cereal.
They wanted English muffins, or they wanted toast.
She left the kitchen to dress while they lamented their miserable exis-tences, and more often than not, she came back from driving them to the bus stop to throw their breakfasts in the garbage.
After her return, after that heart-sinking moment of coming back to the greasy frying pan and the littered table, there was cleaning.
The afternoons, though, were better.
Money was plentiful despite all the loans, and one thing Norm was willing to spend it on was the house.
So Mira's afternoons were spent in an orgy of planning decor and buying furniture, rugs, draperies, lamps, pictures.
Slowly the house filled up.
It got to be hard to handle, so she bought herself a small file box and some packages of 2 × 3 cards.
On each card she wrote one task that had to be performed, and filed them in sections.
The section headed WINDOW WASHING would contain cards for each room in the house.
Whenever she washed the windows in one room, she would mark the date down on the card, and place it at the end of the section.
The same was true for FURNITURE POLISHING, RUG SHAMPOOING, and CHINA.
Regularly she removed all the dishes from the dining-room china closet, washed them by hand — they were good china, not to be entrusted to the dishwasher — and returned them to their freshly washed shelves.
She did the same in the kitchen; she did the same thing with the books, removing them, dusting them carefully, and returning them to clean, wiped, and waxed shelves.
She did not make cards for ordinary, daily cleaning, only for the large, special tasks.
So each day, after the small chores of cleaning kitchen, making beds and cleaning the two main bathrooms, she would also perform a thorough cleaning of one room, washing mirrors and windows, waxing any visible wooden floors, cleaning the small ornaments, dusting ceilings and walls and furniture surfaces, and vacuuming.
She would then mark on the appropriate card the large task accomplished.
That way, she reasoned, she would always keep up.
It took her two weeks to go through the whole house — ten working days.
She did not clean on weekends.
And extraordinary tasks, like cleaning every dish in the kitchen and pantry, she did only twice a year.
The same was true of the curtains.
It was good housewifery, performed in the old way.
Mira's mother cleaned this way, although without the cards.
And had scrubbed sheets and shirts on a scrub board, and walked two miles each way to the market.
The Wards' house was always shining and smelled fresh, of lemon oil and soap.
Mira would feel tremendously satisfied when she finished her morning's work.
She would bathe then, using expensive bath oil, and smooth an expensive lotion all over her body when she was through.
She felt luxurious.
She would stand in the door of her enormous closet in a thick velour robe and choose her outfit for the afternoon.
She chose her perfume and make-up to complement the outfit.
She would walk through the house, dressed to go out, relishing the silence, the order, the shine of polished wood in the sun.
Her mother-in-law had given her a clock similar to one she owned, an old-fashioned clock with a great glass dome over it, that struck the hour with chimes, the quarter hours with little bells.
It ticked loudly: you could hear it in most of the downstairs rooms.
She walked listening to its ticking, feeling the order and the peace, the cleanliness, the comfort.
She would walk to the kitchen; the morning light had slid away, and the paler light shone on the old hutch, making the clean china pieces, old pitchers and cups, charming unmatched plates standing on end on the shelves, gleam and reflect.
The beauty was her doing.
The clock ticked.
She would go out then on a shopping expedition, or to do errands, or on an infrequent visit to one of her friends.
The boys were older now; she could tarry a bit, and not get home until four.
But she was usually annoyed when she did get home.
There was always something, it seemed: muddy footprints, finger marks on a clean wall, a blackened towel.
She would rage at the boys; they largely ignored her.
They did not understand, she knew that.
The cleanliness and order were her life, they had cost her everything.
When she came home, it was usually to go out again: the boys had appointments with the dentist, the orthodontist, games with Little League, Scout meetings, Clark had violin lessons, Normie, trumpet lessons.
On Saturday mornings she took them for riding lessons, waited and took them back, while Norm went out to play golf.
Her nights were calmer than they had been.
Norm was very busy these days, and often did not come home for dinner.
She fell into the habit of feeding the boys early, and continued it even on nights when he did come home.
It was better: they could eat and go off and do homework and then watch TV, or on summer evenings, go out and play ball for a while before baths and bed.
Norm was more pleasant at the dinner table when the boys were not there.
After about nine o'clock, she was free.
Norm would sit watching TV, she would glance up at it and back at her book, but he tired early and went to bed.
She liked sitting there alone, listening to the silence of the sleeping house, the night noises outdoors — a barking dog, a car starting up — all measured by the ticking clock.
In nice weather, she worked in the garden.
She would drive to the nursery in the spring and pick up boxes of spring flowers, pansies, violets, crocuses, iris, lilies of the valley, daffodils, and jonquil, and set them lovingly in the damp sweet-sour earth.
The air was soft and a little wet, and she enjoyed feeling the cool, damp dungy earth in her hands.
She stood, looking around, planning the garden.
She would buy white wrought-iron pieces with delicate tracery, and set them there, by the rock garden.
She bought lounges for the patio, and glass-topped tables.
She hung a bird feeder.
When Norm did not come home for dinner, or when he ate and went out again to a meeting, Mira would spend the evening reading.
Then, at about eleven, she would pour herself a drink and turn out the lights and sit and think.
He never came in very late, always by twelve, and he always tripped on the doorstep from garage to kitchen hall, and he always yelled out complaining, ‘Why the hell don't you keep a light on?’
Still, she never left it on.
HOUSEWORK IN A SLUM
KEN COATES and RICHARD SILBURN
Certainly, in St Ann's, the condition of the houses bears immediately on the lives of the people.
Englishmen widely believe in a thing they are pleased to call a ‘private life’.
You can live something like it in a commuter suburb, where if you have a blazing row with your wife, neighbours will only get to know about it if she tells them.
Private lives require a sturdy minimum of investment in bricks and mortar: there are, for sure, numerous disadvantages in such private lives, but these are disadvantages which many people in St Ann's might well like to taste.
In some of the streets of St Ann's nothing is personal unless it is whispered.
The shape and structure of the houses project even the most individual activities into the social domain.
If you go to the lavatory, you meet your neighbours in the yard.
If you want to make love you may well feel it discreet to listen for your neighbour's snores before you start the bed-springs rattl-ing.
Even when the houses were brand new, they were suitable only for people who lived very similar lives, and whose conduct varied very little from a fairly restrictive norm.
Eccentricities of behaviour are immediately noticeable in such places.
Badly insulated, they transmit noise, smells, heat, cold, and personal secrets with complete impartiality.
This is true of well-maintained houses in St Ann's as well as decrepit ones, but openness to the wind and rain do not mitigate the difficulties of life under such conditions.
All these deprivations add up.
Their sum is back-breaking toil and hardship.
And these pains are suffered in houses that are too  small, too densely concentrated together; houses that are in various stages of dilapidation and decay; houses that lack the basic amenities taken for granted by most people.
You get dirty in St Ann's quite easily, but it is hard to get clean.
It is often damp.
It is often cold.
It is never easy to make it dry and warm.
Any one of these drawbacks would, on its own, constitute at least a serious irritation, but a combination of all of them, compounded in so many cases by material poverty, becomes well-nigh intolerable.
The heaviest burden falls upon the housewives, whose task it is to raise their families in these circumstances.
The one thing that makes decent family life possible in these unpromising environments is stark drudgery; the role of the wife and mother involves an endless round of unremitting, indeed, heart-breaking, but thankless, labour.
Such toil could easily be made unnecessary if a little social effort and investment could be applied.
The household linen hang-ing on the clothes-line stretched across the backyard is certainly clean and white when it is first put on the line to dry.
The children's clothes are clean before they go to play in the street.
The municipal wash-house, with its heavy ranks of steel basins, its fantastic sculp-ture of steaming pipes, and its forbidding scales of drying racks, is, seen from St Ann's, a vital addition to the local amenities.
Seen from outside, it is a symbol of the housewives' enslavement.
But this dichotomy is, itself, a great deal of the trouble in St Ann's.
Things can appear to have a different significance if you view them from a different vantage-point.
Human beings are almost infinitely adaptable, and provided that they are ill-treated consistently, they are apt to regard ill-treatment as ‘natural’.
If the lavatory leaks a little, and always has leaked a little , one comes to regard the leak as ‘normal’.
If the roof blows off such a lavatory, of course one will expect to be annoyed.
But all the myriad petty discomforts can too easily be borne with remarkably little complaint.
Damp, cold, rot, decrepitude are as ‘natural’ in St Ann's as is the smoky atmosphere: for all most people know, they have been sent by Providence and must be endured.
Indeed, since Providence has never sent anything else, what other response would be possible?
Only exceptional damp,unusual cold,excessive rot, and decrepitude to the point of collapse are felt to be legitimate subjects of discussion.
If you hang your washing out in the yard to dry, normally it will be attacked by numerous little black smuts: you will not normally complain.
But when a particularly sulphurous bath of  smuts burns holes in all your clothes while they are on the line, then you will complain.
In the same way people mute their criticisms of what others would regard as intolerable housing amenities.
This, and not a fear of exaggeration, is the hazard we have to be aware of when interpreting the remarks of the people of St Ann's about these housing conditions.
While this complex of overcrowding and decay colours the lives of all who live in St Ann's, it has a special significance for those who are in poverty as well.
Everyone finds necessary household maintenance and repairs an unwelcome financial burden, but for the poorer such expenses may be quite nightmarish.
Indeed, here one can detect a good example of how rich one has to be to be poor: precisely because a poor family cannot afford expensive but once-and-for-all repairs (assuming such repairs to be feasible), household maintenance must either be neglected, or undertaken in a cheap but piecemeal fashion, where any improvement is partial and temporary in its effect.
In the long run, of course, not only is this inefficient, but it costs more than the single, substantial investment.
To neglect maintenance, however, is only to shift the burden from one part of the household budget to another.
An ill-fitting window-frame which lets in draughts and damp will, during the passage of a season, considerably inflate the heating bill.
To fight dirt costs more it you have only a gas stove on which to heat water.
The cost of hot water is reduced in relation to the capital expenditure which can be undertaken, so that an efficient boiler system is more costly to install than a simple immersion heater, but cheaper to run.
To lack even the rudiments of a hot-water system is to pay more per pint of hot water than anyone else has to pay.
To fight damp when it is constantly present means laying out vast sums of money on coal or coke, which become more expensive because small quantities have to be purchased for want of ready money to meet large bills.
To air clothes when there is no airing cupboard is not only a chore, but an expensive one, while to fail to air all the unworn clothes is frequently to write them off to mildew.
This was vividly illustrated in one household we visited where the bedroom was so damp that clothes stored in the cupboard had to be removed daily and spread on a clothes-horse in front of the fire to dry out.
The man who lived there showed us why this was necessary; he produced a pair of trousers mouldered beyond recall, obviously now only suitable for the dirtiest of tasks.
These trousers had fallen from their hanger, and  had laid unnoticed in the wardrobe bottom for a damp week.
To buy food for a day at a time because there is no pantry in which to store it is to meet higher bills at corner stores than would be involved in larger purchases from supermarkets.
It would be valuable, if people had the spare cash, to line damp rooms with some form of insulating material before wallpapering them: for want of that small capital outlay, they may spend more on frequent re-decoration than they otherwise might have saved: but since the outlay in papering a room three times a year is piecemeal, it is possible, while root-and-branch solutions to the problem are not.
The less you have, the more you need to spend.
Low wages are conjoined, in this picture, with atrociously bad houses in which money is eaten away far more voraciously than would ever be thought conceivable in suburbia.
The expense of necessary heating and drying is not only considerable, but is ultimately hopeless — it is not a tax which in any way augments a person's living standards, but, like protection money, merely staves off for a little longer an absolute loss.
Yet the poorest and neediest must spend substantial proportions of their scant resources in these negative, and, it should surely be added, de-moralizing, ways.
To be poor is to pay more, and to pay more often.
And there is no slum problem which is not at the same time a poverty problem.
The conventional image, still current in some quarters, of the rehoused poor ‘putting coal in the bath’ is very sour in St Ann's, because for all too many people it might be nice to have the option of putting the coal they can't afford in the baths they haven't got.
III
WOMEN AND EDUCATION POLICY
INTRODUCTION
It is almost at the level of cliché to make the point that education at school is, outside the family, the most important means by which children are socialised.
At the same time, in a society based, in theory at least, on ideas of social mobility and achievement, education is also a means whereby individual children are given the intellectual resources to travel upwards in class terms and outwards in environmental terms.Thus education, like health care and social security, is both an important means of transmitting ideology and, at the same time, constitutes an important resource for individual children.
Within all the social services, but especially within education, it is often necessary to argue for increased access to the material resource of the service while simultaneously suggesting that there are aspects of the service, particularly the ideology transmitted by it, which one deplores (see Sections I and IV).
Much of the literature on women and education tends to make this kind of distinction, arguing both for greater equality of access for girls and for changes in what are claimed to be inherently sexist curricula and values put over in school.
However, unlike social security and, to a lesser extent, health care, education comes differently packaged for different kinds of children.
In other words, individual children have very different educational experiences, both at an ideological and at a resource level.
In this country much of that experience is differentiated along class lines: crudely, the very well-off use the predominantly single-sex public and boarding school system to accustom their children to an elite future, and the middle class ensure that their neighbourhood state school reinforces the values of their children's  socialisation at home and that, in a streamed system, their children are all in the higher streams; meanwhile, working-class children are largely concentrated in the less well-resourced state schools, are often in the lower streams, and are frequently regarded by their teachers and even encouraged to think of themselves as ‘no-hopers’.
But class is not the only basis on which education is differentially packaged.
As Rosemary Deem makes clear in the article reproduced here, deliberate and formal distinctions between the education of boys and girls have been made until very recently and only brought formally to a halt through the 1975 Sex Discrimination Act.
Until that legislation came into force, boys and girls were often deliberately taught different curricula such that boys more often took ‘academic’ subjects while girls took ‘vocational’subjects, and girls were sometimes formally limited in their access to further and higher education by the operation of quotas (e.g. at medical schools).
The result of both explicit and covert discrimination was that boys were far more likely to succeed at public examinations and to enter higher and further education (Wilkin, 1982).
Sex discrimination legislation in itself probably does little to alter the balance between boys' and girls' achievement, or bring their curricula nearer together.
The legislation was introduced as part of a more general swing in the climate of opinion which has almost certainly contributed to changes that have taken place in the recent past: girls' achievement, while still below that of boys', has nevertheless begun to catch up.
For example, in the mid-1960s less than a third of the students at university were girls; that figure has now risen to over 40 per cent and is probably still rising (Blackstone, 1983).
Nevertheless, the class factor remains important: according to Wilkin, women undergraduates are more likely to be from the middle class than men (Wilkin, 1982).
There are, however, broad brush constraints, many of them policy-determined, which tend to counteract these other progres-sive changes.
Deem gives the example of cuts in teacher training, which had the effect of reducing the opportunities that had previously been available to large numbers of girls who had been considered by their teachers to be, as they put it to Michelle Stanworth, ‘not university material’.
Women are much less likely to read science subjects than men (Wilkin, 1982), and this is a severe disadvantage at a time when government is determined to push teaching and research resources into sciences while simultaneously  cutting back severely in the social sciences and the humanities.
The reductions in university places, just at the time when girls are beginning to gain something like equal access, may have the effect of decreasing the absolute numbers of girls in universities even if they manage to catch up with boys proportionally.
Deem's concern is to explain these policy changes and to place them within their economic and political context.
Not only does economic change ultimately determine social policy change, but also, she suggests, there are particular features of capitalism and the labour market within it that are dependent on the promotion of a particular ideology about women.
The education system is an important tool in the promotion of that ideology, and as ideological needs alter so, she argues, do the values taught in school.
(For a critique of Deem's emphasis on the relations of capital rather than those of patriarchy, see Nava, 1980).
But can policy change be translated quite so well and quickly into the schools?
Deem herself acknowledges that the match between policy decisions made at one level of government and what actually happens in the classroom may be less than perfect.
In an earlier part of the article, which is not reproduced here, she says:
just as policy has to be interpreted by local authorities and individual schools, so ideologies have to be translated into specific policies and practices, and this may lead to inconsisten-cies.
Hence, for example, in the case of the educational system, we should not assume that dominant ideologies about women necessarily give rise to uniform practices in schools and amongst teachers.
As with all the social services, it would be foolish to assume that executors of policy on the ground are always the obedient poodles of those who think up grand designs.
Be they housing visitors, social workers, doctors, or, as in this case, teachers, all these personnel will have ideas which do not necessarily conform to the views prevailing within higher echelons of power.
Often the executors of policy will be resistant to change and conservative in their outlook, stoutly defending views that went ‘out of fashion’ some considerable time ago.
The piece extracted from Michelle Stanworth's study of class-room interaction partly demonstrates this inherent conservatism.
The teachers appear to operate a very rigid model of the dual labour  market and seem to make no effort to encourage their girl pupils to struggle against it; on the contrary, they take positive steps to encourage passivity in the face of obstacles.
Nevertheless, the converse may also be true: where increasingly conservative views prevail at the more central locations of political power, it is still possible for individual teachers to take a more liberal and even radical stance.
The development of women's studies courses in higher and further education, despite a context of severe cutbacks, is an important example of how highly motivated teachers can act with some considerable independence (Thompson, 1983).
Perhaps the most important lesson to be learnt from Stanworth's study is the way in which teachers, often quite unconsciously, impose sex-role stereotypes on their pupils in such a way that girls, again quite unconsciously, absorb a sense of their own inferiority and are rendered, literally, anonymous and invisible.
This so-called ‘hidden curriculum’ is claimed by many feminists to be at least as important in child development as the formal curriculum (see, for example, Byrne, 1978), and has been subject to intensive study (e.g. Spender and Sarah, 1980).
Overcoming such discrimination is difficult, particularly if many teachers — women as well as men — are unaware of what they do.
A start might be made by women teachers coming to recognise how they themselves are subjected to sex-role stereotyping in the educational hierarchy, and by making links between their own position and that of their girl pupils.
But a handful of feminist teachers are hardly likely to have a radical effect on the entire educational milieu.
Indeed, Valerie Hannon suggests that there is little point in trying to tackle the ‘hidden curriculum’ since ‘our potential to change [it]…is very slight’(Hannon, 1976, p. 113).
Instead she suggests that the content of the formal curriculum should be entirely overhauled: ‘for girls to become a more powerful group, they must be given some understanding of females' past powerlessness…in other subject areas, like English literature, social studies, art, biology and — where it is taught — psychology, there is a similar need to examine what girls are learning about women's abilities and potential, and therefore what they should (realistically) expect for themselves’(Hannon, 1979, p. 115).
It (almost) goes without saying that all curricula, whether at primary school level or at universities, should be similarly scrutinised and overhauled.
This book, along with all the other recent publications that have attempted to insert women into the knowledge  taught within educational institutions (e.g. Spender, 1981), is part of that effort.
But all these books will almost exclusively be read within the context of the largely middle-class institutions of further and higher education.
For women of all social classes to be further liberated,both access to those institutions and the content of what is taught there should be increasingly woman-centred in order to gain the ground that until now has been very largely occupied by men.
Additional reading
Two important books not mentioned in this introduction are Miriam David's The State, the Family and Education (1980), and Rosemary Deem,Women and Schooling (1978), both written within a Marxist perspective.
Gender, Class and Education , a collection edited by Stephen Walker and Len Barton (1983), contains a number of useful articles on the interaction between class and gender in education and, in particular, has an interesting discussion by Madeleine Arnot of the feminist issues surrounding co-education and single sex schooling — an issue which, for reasons of space, I have not been able to refer to in this section.
STATE POLICY AND IDEOLOGY IN THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN 1944–1980
ROSEMARY DEEM
The 1944 Education Act and after
The 1944 Education Act, in theory, was supposed to widen the educational chances of the working classes through the provision of free secondary education for all.
In practice, as Halsey, Heath and Ridge (1980) have recently shown, this has not been the case even for working-class boys.
For working- and middle-class girls, the benefits have been even smaller.
This is not surprising, as the Norwood Report in 1943 stressed the importance of relating boys' education to the labour market, but emphasised that girls' schooling must relate to their eventual place in the family.
Despite the demonstration, for instance, by conservative researchers like Douglas (1967) that after 1944 girls in primary schools consistently demonstrated their academic superiority over boys, there is little evidence that this superiority followed girls into their secondary school.
There are a number of possible explanations for girls' superior primary school performance.
First, the kinds of academic skills important in primary schools — especially reading and writing-are those for which girls' earlier family socialisation may have prepared them better.
As the Newsons' researches on child-reading demonstrate (Newson and Newson, 1968, 1976) young female children are more likely to be encouraged by their parents to remain indoors, to talk to adults (especially their mothers), to be unadventurous.
Secondly, primary schools have a much more ‘familial’ atmosphere than secondary schools; there is a predominance of female teachers, an emphasis on pastoral care, ‘family-group’learning, and less emphasis on cognitive development and formal academic skills.
Thirdly, primary schools tend to have little formal curricular differentiation between the sexes, except in physical education (Plowden Report, 1967).
Furthermore, in the period after 1944 when selection for secondary schools through the 11 + examination predominated, girls' 11 + performances were weighted differently to boys' performances so that girls achieved fewer places than their examination results indicated, and boys achieved more places than their results merited.
So girls in many areas had less chance of a grammar or technical school place than boys.
And even where girls were successful in obtaining grammar school places, they were much more likely, as the 1959 Report on Early Leaving showed, to leave at age 15, before any public examinations had been taken, thus losing one of the ‘benefits’ of a grammar school education.
Further, as Byrne (1975) has shown, the allocation of resources in secondary schools quickly took on a pattern which favoured boys rather than girls, with limited provision of science and technical subject facilities in mixed schools, and minimal provision of these in girls schools.
Although there was a great deal of debate about education after 1944, much of it up to 1951 focused on the eradication of class differences, not gender differences, in an endeavour to build a more buoyant economy and develop a substantial welfare state.
Similarly, social policy continued to emphasise the importance of motherhood and the family, even though women had begun to enter production industry in large numbers during the war, and despite a post-war increase in the numbers of married women doing paid work.
So, for example, many of the nurseries opened during the Second World War were closed down after the war.
Hence women's domestic role continued to be stressed both ideologically and in state policies, so that where women did engage in waged labour, they did so primarily in low-paid, unskilled jobs.
Upskilling and dual roles for women 1951–1963
By the early 1950s, the period of post-war reconstruction was coming to an end, rationing had ceased, wages were beginning to rise, and people were being encouraged to spend more money.
Increased numbers of women were already working in manufactur-ing industry, and by the mid-1950s the process of ‘upskilling’ had begun in other sectors of the labour market.
This process meant that more and more of available jobs were said to require higher technical skills or educational qualifications, and it also altered the context in which debates about education were taking place, because the economy increasingly demanded labour power in the secondary and tertiary sectors.
Other debates and ideologies, originating both from state apparatuses and from capital, talked of affluence and a consumer spending boom, and more education was seen as part of the route to yet greater affluence.
Hence the participation of women in the labour market was both ‘allowed’ by the concerns with economic growth and made more possible by the improved educational opportunities offered to women.
Changes in family size with the increased availability of contraception also enabled greater number of married women to enter or re-enter paid work.
At the same time, the welfare state and associated social services continued to grow, and relieved women of some of their former domestic responsibilities.
But despite greater participation by women in the workforce, ideological emphases on women's place in the home remained strong, albeit tinged with some acceptance of women's secondary place in the labour market.
The Birmingham Feminist History Group (1979) have argued that although notions of women's equality were important in the 1950s, nevertheless: ‘Ideologies about women in the fifties are underpinned by the notion of equal but different — men and women have their special spheres; and women bring different qualities’(p. 150).
And the notion of women's dual roles (paid work and the family) was overwhelmingly applied only to middle-class women.
So, for instance, the Crowther Report of 1959 on the education of 15-18-year-olds talked about the likelihood that middle-class girls would combine a career with motherhood and marriage and the necessity for them to receive an education which prepared them for this future dual role.
A similar argument was presented in the 1963 Robbins Report on higher education, although it was couched in terms which spoke of untap-ped pools of ability (women and the working class) who could be drawn into higher education if more places were available.
Robbins also related to the upskilling debate — the expansion of education and the high birth rate of the immediate post-war period, for example, had given rise to a shortage of qualified teachers especially in primary schools, and changes in the numbers of white-collar jobs available to women had also given rise to a demand for better qualified and certificated female labour.
However, for working-class girls the emphasis within education remained largely on the preparation for marriage and a family, with little account being taken of their equally likely long-term participation in the labour market.
Certainly a slight shift of emphasis was taking place during this time — so that, for instance , it was recognised scientific and technological developments, but, it was assumed, in different ways and for different reasons from boys.
The 1963 Newsom Report on ‘average’ and ‘below average’child says this in a most emphatic way:
A boy is usually excited by the prospect of a science course…he experiences a sense of wonder and power.
The growth of wheat, the birth of a lamb, the movement of clouds, put him in awe of nature: the locomotive he sees as man's response: the switch and throttle are his magic wands…the girl may come to the science lesson with a less eager curiosity than the boy, but she too will need to feel at home with machinery.
(Newsom Report, p. 142)
Social democracy and the comprehensive school 1964–1970
This period, under the banner of a social democratic ideology, having its roots in the increased economic growth and general affluence of Harold Macmillan's ‘never had it so good’ ethos in the previous period, but also in the contradictions this brought about, saw a massive extension of the social services, intended to attack the structural roots of inequality and poverty, which had interestingly been ‘rediscovered’despite the country's apparent wealth.
However, this extension of the welfare state was double-edged, because as well as offering services it also involved a measure of control over those who were the recipients of those services.
The state reforms of the 1960s arose both from working-class and union pressures but also from capital itself, anxious to restructure Britain's economy in the face of greater overseas competition, industrial disputes and falling profits (Gough, 1980).
Partly because of the pressures from  capital, there were, as Jessop (1980) notes, no moves to redistribute income, which might have effectively attacked class inequalities; instead welfare services were used as palliatives.
Consequently, Jessop argues, the extension of the welfare state had no effects on deprivation but rather encouraged the politicisation of various groups in urban areas, for example squatters, tenants' rights and welfare rights groups.
It should also be recognised that the emerging women's movement of the late 1960s was part of this politicisation process.
In education there was during the 1960s a gradual shift towards comprehensive secondary schooling partly prompted by a (false) belief that such schooling would help eradicate the worst ine-qualities (class, not gender) of the tripartite system, as shown by researchers in the sociology of education (see Finn, Grant and Johnson, 1978).
But this shift was also brought about by an apparent consensus about education in the country as a whole.
The growth of the comprehensives brought with it a significant expansion in the curriculum content of secondary schooling, which should have been helpful to girls, except that in many schools expansion meant typing or shorthand or child-care for girls, and quite different subjects for boys.
For working-class girls (unlike middle-class girls, for whom comprehensives potentially offered them the academic education denied to many under the systems of 11 + weighting) comprehensives probably made little difference.
The Labour government's priority from 1964 onwards was the servicing of the economy in response to demands made on them by capital; in so far as working-class girls could have contributed to this, it would have been only in those unskilled jobs for which greater or better education was not required.
Hence, one of the potentially most damaging consequences of the shift to comprehensives — the closing or amalgamating of many single-sex schools — passed almost unnoticed.
Yet as Shaw (1980) has argued the assumption that mixed schooling is preferable on academic grounds is not well supported by educational research.
R. R. Dale's (1969, 1971, 1974) three-volume study focuses mainly on the social advantages, and it is possible in any case to challenge the nature of the superior social development of girls which is argued to accompany mixed rather than single-sex schooling, since one of the things it may involve is breaking down girls' resistance to the imposition of various stereotypes of femininity to a greater extent than is found in single-sex schools.