

INTRODUCTION
1.1.
Deregulation and Reregulation: The Processes of Change
The processes of deregulation and reregulation are assuming greater importance in financial markets world-wide.
When formulating policy, governments are being put under increasing pressure to ensure that their financial sectors do not lag behind either the needs of the economy as a whole, or the rigours of a fast changing international financial environment.
The policy goals which governments seek to secure include: investor confidence, consumer protection, safety, and soundness among financial institutions, efficiency, competition, and the need to ensure that economic power does not become concentrated in the hands of any one sector of the financial services industry.
Invariably these goals conflict.
For example, regulation may bring benefits in terms of consumer protection but add costs by making firms less competitive.
As a consequence, some form of ‘trade-off’ needs to be achieved.
The concepts of deregulation and reregulation play an important part in this process.
The terms deregulation and reregulation do not lend themselves to easy definition.
They can rarely, if ever, be considered as two opposing forces, for more often than not both processes run hand in hand.
The trend in financial markets today is, however, towards a process of deregulation in the form of financial diversification.
This is being achieved by giving market forces a freer reign in the shaping of market operations.
Financial deregulation can mean any or all of the following.
First, the removal of price restrictions eg the deregulation of fixed commissions in favour of a more competitive commission scheme.
This took place in the US in May 1975 and on the UK Stock Exchange in October 1986.
Secondly, the removal of geographic limitations or cross-border barriers through developments in technology and the development of a 24 hour global market.
Thirdly, the removal of legal constraints and other self-imposed restrictive barriers separating banks from other financial institutions.
And finally, product diversification and development, brought about by technological change or competitive pressures.
It is not entirely clear why financial deregulation is taking place.
In recent years especially, it would appear that there has been a greater confidence among policy makers and market participants concerning the ability of market forces to secure many of the aforementioned policy objectives and to challenge the appropriateness of certain forms of pre-existing financial sector regulatory measures.
Similarly, pressures from certain sectors within the financial services industry itself have pushed towards deregulation.
For example, in the UK the formation of financial conglomerates offering a full range of financial services was a response by market participants to embrace market forces rather than the product of a specific government policy.
The same is true in the US, where the banking sector has been eager for some time now to find loopholes in the Glass-Steagall Act 1933 (which segregates to a large extent the banking and securities business) and expand into other, more profitable, areas of financial service activity.
The desire to diversify has been prompted by a need to boost dwindling profit margins in an increasingly competitive traditional banking sector.
Equally, the impact of technology, innovation, and the internationalisation of the securities markets, has created an environment where new products and financial packages are forcing highly regulated centres to lessen restrictions inhibiting competition in order to attract more business.
These factors have led to a situation where in the UK, for example, the division between commercial and investment banking has largely been eroded.
The tendency then, has been towards greater reliance upon market forces and competitive freedom; a shift of emphasis in the way governments aim to trade-off financial sector policy goals and in the regulatory means by which these goals are to be secured.
1.2.
The Regulatory Paradox: The Trend Towards New Regulatory Measures
But despite the undeniable tendency in financial markets towards a more laissez-faire environment, the term deregulation does not give us the full flavour of events.
Rather, the position is best characterised by what might be called a ‘regulatory paradox’.
While deregulation refers to the breaking down of barriers that inhibit competition, impede efficiency, and restrict consumer choice, governments nonetheless acknowledge that some policy goals are too important to be left to heavily market orientated deregulatory processes.
New regulatory measures are therefore necessary.
Essentially this new regulation, or reregulation as it has become known, is the supervision of conflicts of interest and other risks that arise out of the process of deregulation.
In this way, it becomes evident that policies of deregulation and reregulation are neither incompatible nor mutually exclusive.
A deregulated market does not mean an unregulated market.
In Britain, for example, the evolving structure of the financial markets has been characterised by both processes of deregulation and reregulation: the former, in that barriers which impede competition and choice have been discarded; and the latter, in the sense that new regulatory measures have been adopted to cater for problems arising from structural changes.
The effect of this is that while financial intermediaries have been given greater freedom to broaden the range of financial services they may offer, this relaxation has been compensated for by regulating each individual sector more thoroughly.
We can see then, that deregulation is allowed, but that limits are placed upon it.
Although the market-place might exhibit the characteristics of one which has undergone a process of deregulation, there is, as it were, a counter trend towards new regulatory measures aimed at protecting investors and securing the safety and soundness of financial institutions.
The need for reregulation superimposed upon any underlying tendency towards competitive freedom is clearly evident.
The reason for this new wave of regulation is due to the fear that unchecked deregulation could be conducive to systemic risk and market abuse.
This regulation is aimed at securing some of the policy goals sought by governments, even if at the expense of others.
The main forms of regulation are:
(i)
Prudential Rules: prudential regulation is essential to help ensure the safety and soundness of financial institutions.
A prime example would be the imposition of capital adequacy requirements.
(ii)
Competitive Regulation: here, the aim is to ensure that competition is not eliminated or seriously hampered by the formation of cartels.
Anti-trust laws in the US are perhaps the best, or most typical, example of this particular form of regulation.
(iii)
Regulation aimed at preventing the Concentration of Economic Power: the concern here is to prevent certain sectors of the financial markets from being ‘dominated’ by other sectors of the industry.
Again, the US, where concern over the concentration of economic power is most strong, provides a good example of this sort of regulatory measure.
There, controls have been imposed on Inter-State banking.
(iv)
Consumer Protection Rules: an example of this type of regulation is the Securities and Investments Board's (SIB) compensation scheme.
Under this scheme investors who are the victims of an abuse receive compensation provided the infringement falls within the SIB's jurisdictional powers.
(v)
Conflict of Interest Rules: financial institutions are in a unique position of trust when handling funds belonging to the public.
It is a prerequisite for the smooth running of the financial markets that this trust is not abused so that the public's confidence in the financial markets is maintained.
The close proximity within which these financial institutions operate, coupled with the very special nature of financial services themselves, makes the industry notorious for the prevalence of what are commonly known as conflict of interest situations.
Regulation is therefore imposed to ensure that conflict situations are not abused.
Disclosure requirements are a key example of this type of regulation.
It would appear, then, that despite the shift in emphasis from regulation to deregulation, there still remains an entrenched reliance upon regulatory measures.
This ‘counter trend’, or, reregulation, is largely an attempt by governments to maintain the confidence of the investing public in the financial markets.
In this way, it becomes obvious that even deregulated financial markets do not operate in a regulatory void, for caught up in the reshaping process is the need to tighten loopholes through new regulatory activity.
The global movement away from reregulation towards deregulation is then a switch from one type of regulation to another.
In essence, it is the moving away from‘barrier’ or ‘prohibitive’types of solutions to those based on competitive freedom.
The outcome may well be, on balance, a more tightly regulated environment, but the emphasis of this regulation will be different.
1.3.
Deregulation and Reregulation: the Effects
Though deregulation is a difficult concept to define, the reshaping process which has developed as a result of it is readily apparent.
Perhaps the most important outcome of deregulation in the UK has been the emergence of a new corporate creature — the financial conglomerate.
It is now possible for the one financial house to undertake a range of financial services which includes stock-broking, market making, banking, corporate finance, and investment management.
The merging together of different financial institutions in this way to form ‘one-stop multi-service financial supermarkets’ would not have been possible but for the relaxation of certain types of regulatory barriers.
Most significant of all has been the fact that it is now possible for banks to engage in a full range of securities related business along the same lines as the German universal banks, a practice which had hitherto been avoided in the UK through the imposition of self-imposed constraints.
In the US, by contrast, the mixing of banking and securities related business has largely been held in check by the Glass-Steagall Act 1933.
One commentator traces the history of the UK's so-called financial conglomerates, arguing that they initially formed around the deposit banks, later branching out to include hire purchase and finance houses.
The termination of Selective Credit Control in favour of Competition and Credit Control and the removal of the ‘corset’ in 1980, enabled clearing banks to move into areas previously denied them, while relaxations in a range of regulatory constraints in the run up to‘Big Bang’paved the way for further expansion.
The rationale underlying the formation of such conglomerates has never been soundly established.
It would appear that they formed in order to capitalise on certain perceived economic benefits.
First, the benefits to be derived from economies of scope and scale; and secondly, the spreading of risk, achieved through diversification.
As Goodhart explains:
the breaking down of compartmentalisation [has allowed]financial intermediaries to take advantage of economies of scale and scope to move towards being ‘one stop financial supermarkets’ with a fuller range of financial services provided in-house.
Exactly how extensive such economies may be is uncertain, especially in the early days of mergers between commercial banks, investment banks and securities dealers…
Increased competition and the added complexity of financial activities have added to perceived risk.
Where risk has increased there is an increasing need for capital to provide a buffer against loss…the removal of the old protective barriers led to a rush by the smaller players to merge with new, bigger partners both to benefit from economies of scale and scope and to augment their capital base sufficiently to meet the requirements of the new, more demanding market context…
Whereas once the Stock Exchange was dominated by relatively small, lightly capitalised partnerships, the likely future is that trading will become much more concentrated in the hands of a limited number of massive financial conglomerates.
While the institutions rushing for the exit have been the small British firms, the institutions entering these markets — in addition to a number of major British banks — have been the comparatively enormous foreign houses.
Bevan suggests that the growth of conglomerates was further facilitated by a number of other factors: the perceived need by Banks to offer a full range of financial services to customers for fear of losing out to competitors; established international connections; and pre-existing strong links with the securities business.
These factors, he argues, created a situation where many clearing banks were well placed to expand.
Whatever the reasons, it is certain that the development of financial conglomerates could not have been fully completed without the radical changes brought about by what in Britain is known as the ‘Big Bang’— the deregulation of the Stock Exchange in October 1986.
It was only when the restrictive regulatory apparatus, with its traditional segregation of financial functions, was finally dismantled that conglomerates could firmly establish themselves.
Such developments, however, have not been without problems.
The fusion of many diverse financial services (and in particular banking and securities business) within the one conglomerate has given rise to two inter-related problems.
First, the safety and soundness of a financial institution (and the financial system generally) may be put in jeopardy; and secondly, those who are consumers of financial services risk being treated unfairly because of the increased likelihood that conflict of interest situations will be abused.
It is this second problem which forms the context of this work.
Conflicts of interest are endemic to the financial services industry.
With the onset of Big Bang, deregulation, and the formation of financial conglomerates, the problems posed by conflicts of interest have become accentuated: there is now an increased opportunity for information located within one ‘arm’ of a conglomerate to be misused either for the direct benefit of the conglomerate or for favoured customers.
This issue has not been overlooked by the Government, who, in its White Paper on ‘Financial Services in the United Kingdom’, recognised that:
The rapid increase in the number of firms engaging in more than one type of investment business and the blurring of demarcation lines (for example, between brokers and jobbers) have made it more important than ever that investors are adequately protected against abuses arising from conflicts of interest within investment businesses.
In effect various interests are at stake: investors, corporate clients, the conglomerates themselves, and, indeed, the general public.
These interests need to be accommodated in a realistic and practical way; and while the solution is not easy, an appropriate well-reasoned regulatory response is required.
Most importantly, this response ought sensibly to be in line with current market trends: financial diversification, the breaking down of barriers, and the consequent growth of integrated financial houses.
The current pattern of regulation is complex.
Deregulation has been accompanied by new regulatory activity (reregulation), the consequences of which are far from clear.
In relation to conflicts of interest in financial conglomerates, it is important that any new regulation adopted is driven by recognition of the fact that the process of deregulation has altered the structure and operation of the UK financial markets.
The search for an appropriate response to the problems of conflicts abuse in financial conglomerates, central to which is the increased need to protect investors, must be set within this context.
In other words, the means by which these conflicts of interest and duty are to be managed in conglomerates must sit comfortably with the rationale of conglomeration: the pursuit of economic benefits.
To do otherwise, would be to sit back and watch the raison d'etre of conglomeration being reversed by a misplaced process of reregulation; that would be to give with one hand, and take with the other.
How then is one to decide what is, and what is not an acceptable regulatory response to the problems created by conglomeration?
Well, help may be at hand from two fronts.
First, with talk of deregulation, laissez-faire, greater competition etc, it seems appropriate that we should focus on the role of economic analysis, in particular, the way in which economics can be used to shape law and public policy.
Secondly, it would seem sensible to suggest that lessons can be learned from the experience of other jurisdictions, by adopting a comparative approach.
Both approaches are now considered.
1.4.
Law and Economic
There already exists a long-established academic tradition of mixing economics and law.
While recently the ‘economic approach to law’ has gained much ground, there remains much confusion as to exactly what this mode of analysis is and where it can be validly and usefully applied.
Attempts have been made to classify the various ‘schools’ of economics and law; but convenient though these are, it must be borne in mind that the effective use of any interdisciplinary approach varies significantly according to how, where, and why it is being applied.
The aim in this book is to consider the legal and economic dimensions of the regulatory technique known as the Chinese Wall, and to a lesser extent the regulatory context within which the device operates.
The Chinese Wall is a self styled regulatory mechanism aimed at stemming the flow of material information from one department in a conglomerate to another and resolving the legal problems associated with conflicts of interest generally.
The device has been identified by regulators world-wide as a key mechanism for regulating conflicts of interest and duty in multi-functional financial firms.
What sort of economic approach to law is to be adopted in our attempt to establish the merits, or otherwise, of the Chinese Wall?
It is the author's view that, when referring to the interdisciplinary use of law and economics, there is no particular ‘brand’ or ‘mix’of economics and law in mind, except that which might be called the ‘tentative application of economics to law’.
This approach, though somewhat vague, is nonetheless important.
It is based on the assumption that the use of economics as an explanatory tool in the field of legal analysis has its limitations, but, that, notwithstanding these limitations, there exists a value in the application of basic economic concepts to regulatory problems in the financial markets.
By implication, therefore, the analysis is sceptical of the use of economics when applied to those problems with no obvious economic origin and suggests a ‘tentative’ application of economic analyses to those areas which do.
Thus, the writer does not adhere to any particular school of economics and law, neither does he claim that the use of economics is the only, or even the best, way of analyzing the issue under study.
Instead what is being propounded here is this.
Even if‘non market’ legal topics, where no economic root is discernable, cannot be analyzed by applying law and economics (there being heated debate among distinguished scholars as to whether such analysis is ultimately valid), the interdisciplinary use of economics and law to analyze a legal problem with an economic foundation is a more soundly based proposition.
As has already been stated, the tentative approach endorsed above is not without its problems; problems of methodology as well as terminology.
Let us deal first, with what might be called methodological problems.
Although economics is perhaps the most developed of the social sciences, there remains much disagreement amongst economists about many key economic concepts and about the predictive power of economics.
It is argued here, that economics cannot show us the correct policy choice (as some economists would appear to claim); yet it may help us to avoid a wrong, or overly costly, policy choice.
While the whole reason for an interdisciplinary approach, combining law and economics, ‘hinges on the expectation…that the disciplines are complementary and that collaboration is potentially fruitful’, care still needs to be taken, even where the topic under review is economic in origin.
The methodological limitations on a law/economics approach are essentially twofold.
First, divergences in the nature of the two subjects cause a great many problems.
What may initially appear as ‘fruitful collaboration’ could, on closer inspection of the principal tenets of law and economics as self-contained disciplines, seem incongruous.
Hirsch illustrates this point well.
For him, law embodies ideas of justice, entitlements, and obligations; that is —‘how a given size of pie is divided.’
Economics on the other hand, is more concerned with ‘the efficient use of resources to produce the largest pie.’
Following this analysis through, Hirsch outlines the lawyer's concept of the ‘reasonable man’ and the economist's idea of the ‘rational man’and points out that they are very different.
Although it may be unfair to draw hard and fast conclusions based upon such divergences, it is true that the reasonable man and rational man paradigms play an important role in each discipline.
The reasonable man is distinguished by three fundamental characteristics: he behaves in a reasonably prudent manner, he acts with fair regard to others, and conduct which does not match up to his behaviour is subnormal or deviant.
By contrast, rational man is an egotist, who maximises his own self interest and has ‘only limited concern’ for the welfare of others.
For some, it may seem somewhat morally repugnant to make policy choices based on the decisions of a rational man who is overly concerned with his own welfare, perhaps to the exclusion of others.
Secondly, lawyers and economists approach problems from different perspectives.
The lawyer advocates formal legal propositions which he supports with reasoned arguments.
He will appeal to fairness or justice.
He will look back at precedent, for he is bound to do so.
If there is a rule he does not like, he will form a exception.
And so he continues.
Little wonder then that he is criticized by the economist for adopting an ‘ad hoc’ approach which is, when applied, ‘pragmatic’and ‘anecdotal’.
According to the economist, he lacks the tools of a statistical training or the will to use them.
The economist, on the other hand, likes to set definite goals.
He asks questions such as: have the objectives of law been attained? if not, what are the likely effects of the law going to be? and have these effects actually occurred?
The economist is, by and large, concerned with the overall picture, preferring to analyze the inter-relationship between the main actors in his area of study.
In essence, therefore, he attempts to reveal the trade-offs between various competing goals.
In so doing, he aims to establish a ‘framework in which the assumptions are clearly stated and used to derive a consistent, even if somewhat simplistic, analysis of the issue under examination.’
Not surprisingly, the lawyer focuses criticism on the economists essentially theoretical approach where assumptions are unrealistic, and where, as a consequence, they lead ‘to conclusions that are subject to overwhelming qualifications.’
Similarly, lawyers dislike the economic theorists' overt ‘calculatedness’ whereby human conduct is subjected to, and subsequently given, quantification and rational explanation.
He especially dislikes the economists' commitment to efficiency.
The lawyer may wish to eschew the elevation of efficiency if he thinks it is being pursued at the expense of other desirable goals such as fairness and equality of opportunity, goals which he may feel are more important than efficiency.
The lawyers' attacks may, to some extent, be countered.
The economist is, after all, actively engaged in probably the best developed of all the social sciences.
As a result, the economist derives essentially two comparative advantages over the lawyer.
The first, is that the economist is able to use what Coase calls the ‘measuring rod of money’.
The second, is the economists' statistical training in answering questions which are capable of quantification.
Indeed, empirical studies are not only interesting, but valuable: ‘the law must ultimately be evaluated in terms of its success in achieving its goals, and not purely in terms of its formal legalistic structure.’
Another more principled objection may also be levelled at lawyers reluctance to take on board economic thinking.
Lawyers' appeals to fairness and justice do not necessarily mean that economic indicators such as efficiency are banished from the debate altogether; rather, economic and noneconomic factors must both be taken into account.
These counter-attacks aside, there remain fundamental methodological differences in the two disciplines themselves.
It is inevitable, therefore, that problems in this respect will carry through to a tentative application of economics to law.
This is not to reject the approach out of hand; but merely to acknowledge that it has weaknesses.
The approach can still be used with much profit when it attempts to emphasize ‘those aspects of law that it has [a]comparative advantage in dealing with.’
It is the aim of this study, in order to maximize this advantage, to focus on one area of financial regulation — the Chinese Wall — where law and economics do interface and where their intersection is one of clear economic dimensions.
At a more general level too, an interdisciplinary approach should be welcomed.
Scholars have expressed grave reservations concerning the fact that the field of regulation in general has been ‘shamefully neglected’, not only in terms of interdisciplinary analysis, but also in terms of traditional legal scholarship.
It is hoped that this work may play some small part in redressing this imbalance.
Along with methodological differences over the use of a law economics approach come problems of terminology and definition.
Inherent in the use of economic analysis as a complement to traditional legal scholarship is the fact that there must be an investment in a new vocabulary: opportunity cost, synergies, externality etc.
For many lawyers this vocabulary seems unnecessarily technical.
Not only are the meanings of terms often in dispute, but there exist more profound questions as to what economics is all about.
There is, however, little justification, and quite often a degree of hypocrisy, in such criticisms.
Legal language is itself technical and often disputed; while legal philosophers have, and continue to debate, the nature of law itself.
The question ‘what is economics about?’ is, however, not unimportant.
One view central to the lawyer/economist is that, in a world where, on the one hand, resources (all of which have alternative uses) are limited through scarcity and where on the other hand, there exists the insatiable human desire to consume those resources, then inevitably, trade-offs and choices must somehow be made.
Seen in this light, economics is the science or study of human choice.
Perhaps more important for our purposes is the economists' view of law which is something quite different from that of the lawyers' traditional idea of a command backed up by a sanction.
As Hirsch writes:
[L]aws [are]authoritative directives that impose costs and benefits on participants in a transaction and in the process alter incentives…[essentially therefore the making of laws is not costless]…their drafting and enforcement require [the use of]real resources and involve the trading-off of certain costs and benefits to determine given policy objectives.
The assumption in this mode of analysis is, says Posner, that man's actions can be explained as if he were:
…a rational maximizer of his ends in life, his satisfactions — what we shall call his self interest…
[P]eople respond to incentives…if a person's surroundings change in such a way that he will increase his satisfactions by altering his behaviour, he will do so.
An application of this analysis is, for example, where the temptation for a conglomerate (ultimately controlled by individuals) to trade on inside information arises from the financial incentives accruing to it (and ultimately the controllers).
However, the rational wealth maximizing company may refrain from such conduct even if there are strong incentives to use the information.
This will occur where the corporate controllers perceive that the long-run loss to the company's wealth (and to a greater or lesser extent their own — it may depend on a number of variables) is likely to be greater than the short-term profits.
There are, of course, many factors which would operate to make insider dealing and other conflict abuse less attractive to a company and its directors.
These range from, market forces eg. the desire to maintain an unblemished reputation, to formal sanctions eg prosecution at law.
As regards the latter, it is essential that anti-insider dealing law and other self regulatory rules prohibiting abuses are analyzed from the perspective of how they alter the incentives to engage in the illegal conduct, and, more importantly, how they alter the incentives to enforce/breach the Chinese Wall.
It is worth mentioning that Professor Gower, in his study of investor protection in the financial markets — the so-called Gower Report — did not employ any significant law/economics analysis.
In fact, he doubted the feasibility of such an approach.
Such neglect has been criticized by authorities such as Goodhart and Veljanovski.
Goodhart writes:
There was little enough discussion of the rationale for the proposed panoply of regulation in the Gower Report…
There was none at all in the subsequent Financial Services Bill and the accompanying paper from the SIB, Regulation of Investment Business, which simply set out the proposed clauses to be enacted and the regulatory framework to be adopted without any attempt at justification.
Equally Veljanovski claims that:
…
Gower…failed to consider the costs and benefits of [his]proposals for reform, nor did [he]systematically consider the economic ramifications of the problems put to [him].
In Gower's case at least, these failings may have more to do with the way the government sought to conduct its review of investor protection: ostensibly on the basis of the talents of one man.
In other jurisdictions, it is common for multi-disciplinary teams to be established.
To sum up this section, it is argued that a purely economic approach cannot provide a comprehensive treatment of financial market regulation, or any part thereof.
This is so, because economics is at best a technique that is both partial and complementary to other disciplines.
The tentative application of economics to law overcomes the problems associated with pure legal scholarship by taking elements of both approaches in order to provide alternative perspectives from which to view the one problem.
The assessment of various regulatory alternatives to solve financial market regulatory problems requires governments and regulators to make appropriate policy choices not only in a reasoned and cost-effective way, but with regard to issues of fairness.
One particular regulatory structure, namely the Chinese Wall, will be analyzed to see whether it provides the most attractive regulatory solution for governments and regulatory authorities reviewing this area.
1.5.
Comparative Legal Analysis
We have seen that economic analysis may be of help in making difficult policy choices.
But lessons can also be learned by comparing the experience of other jurisdictions with our own.
Indeed, comparative legal analysis forms a well-recognised feature of traditional legal scholarship and is increasingly becoming a focus of legal study in its own right.
It is proposed in the course of this work to use the USA as a main comparison, though other jurisdictions are also considered, even if to a lesser extent.
The analysis will focus on the policy debates, common law rules, and statutory and regulatory provisions regarding the use and legal sufficiency of the Chinese Wall in resolving problems associated with conflicts of interest and duty in corporate entities.
The comparative approach, like economic analysis, has both strengths and weaknesses.
The technique's most overt strength centres on the alternative insight that it affords into similar, if not identical, problem areas.
This alternative viewpoint is useful in itself from three perspectives.
First, relevant case law provides a testing ground where the government and regulatory authorities can tailor regulatory reform in the light of judicial assessment of regulatory developments.
Secondly, it may be useful to review the operation of a different regulatory regime, that is, one which to a greater or lesser degree relies on market forces and self-regulation to police it.
Issues which may have looked problematical in theory can be compared to see whether they are of consequence in practice.
Some means of weighing up the costs and benefits of such an approach is therefore capable of being employed.
Lastly, a comparative approach may be useful, not only from the legal norms that embody policy, but also from the policy debate which underpins law.
For example, informed discussion on proposed new regulatory structures tends to highlight crucial policy questions which require answers.
The means by which competing public policy goals are to be traded off against one another and yet, at the same time, housed within a satisfactory regulatory framework is a task which all regulatory authorities, whatever the jurisdiction, face.
Despite the above advantages, the comparative approach may be said to have three main failings.
The first, which provides a backdrop against which any further criticism may be set, is probably the most important.
It relates to the difference in the two jurisdictions being compared.
This ‘difference’ refers not to the difference in the law of the actual topic under study (for that is to confuse the weakness in the technique with the whole rational for undertaking a comparative approach — if the law is not different why compare?).
Instead the problem arises when there is a difference in the law that surrounds the topic under review.
For example, UK insider dealing law may be X because of A; meanwhile, US insider dealing law may be Y because of B: it is pointless to compare X and Y without also acknowledging the significance of A and B. The fact that the surrounding law in the other jurisdiction is different is apt to weaken, sometimes substantially, the whole comparative law approach.
Consequently, large-scale transposing of one set of legal rules from one jurisdiction to another cannot be done without considering the implications of the relevant surrounding law.
As for the second weakness, there is a direct link with the first.
Here, the difficulty revolves around the different constitutional arrangements operative in the two jurisdictions being compared.
On the one hand, there is the precedential weight of a case cited; in other words, can it be overruled and by whom?
On the other hand, it is necessary to appreciate in the US, for example, those instances where State law has been applied and those where Federal law has exerted a formative influence.
The third weakness is a fundamental one: various institutional differences in the operation and segregation of the many sectors that go to make up the financial services industry.
This is often a legacy of historic inception, piecemeal development, and political expediency.
The Glass-Steagall Act in the US, separating to a large extent the banking and securities business, is a good example of the difficulties inherent in transposing one set of regulatory values to another jurisdiction, in particular the UK, where no such prohibitions exist.
Despite these weaknesses, it seems that a comparative analysis of the US with the UK regarding the regulation of the corporate misuse of inside information via Chinese Walls and the whole validity of the segregation approach in general, is of interest, if not benefit.
1.6.
Summary
Though deregulation, in the sense that barriers are being broken down, is undeniably an increasing characteristic of events in financial markets world-wide, it is not the whole picture of what is happening.
In Britain at least, and to a greater or lesser extent in other financial centres also, this deregulatory trend has been accompanied by a wave of new regulatory developments to ensure that deregulation does not go too far.
Chapter One considers aspects of this paradoxical deregulatory/reregulation phenomenon: on the one hand, the transformation of formerly compartmentalized financial institutions into virtually open-ended financial conglomerates offering a range of financial services to an extent not known before; on the other hand, the search for an appropriate regulatory solution to the now accentuated problem of both conflicts of duty and interest and the possible misuse of inside information within financial conglomerates.
The ‘Chinese Wall’ mechanism is singled out as a possible regulatory solution to this problem.
The study uses a methodology which combines elements of traditional legal scholarship with a tentative import of economic analysis.
In this way, it is hoped that a more coherent and fruitful picture will emerge on the appropriateness of the Wall technique and its use within financial conglomerates.
2
BIG BANG AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND DUTY
2.1.
Big Bang: the breaking down of barriers
In the UK, what initially began as a restructuring of the London Stock Exchange became a much wider cause, embracing every sector of the financial community.
‘Big Bang’, as it became known, was characterised by three main factors: first, the termination of the single capacity system of trading in favour of a new dual capacity regime; secondly, the movement away from fixed commissions towards a more competitive commission scheme; and lastly, the removal of outside ownership restrictions of member firms of the Stock Exchange Association.
These events paved the way for the formation of financial conglomerates and made inevitable concern over the increased potential for conflict abuse.
Fears revolved more around the fact that potential conflict situations were being compounded rather than being created by conglomerates, and that these conflicts would be increasingly and more easily abused.
It was clear, therefore, that a new regulatory framework governing conglomerates would be necessary.
The UK's sensitivity towards conflicts of interest and duty was reflected in part by the division of functions on the Stock Exchange.
Up until 26 October 1986 the London Stock Exchange was characterised by the system of trading known as ‘single capacity’.
Very broadly, members fell into two groups of partnership: on the one hand there were ‘jobbers’, who specialised in buying and selling shares, and on the other there were ‘brokers’, who specialised in performing share deals on the behalf of the public.
As part of the ‘Big Bang’, this system was discarded in favour of a dual capacity regime in which the two jobs were fused together.
The old system had certain advantages for members, investors, and policy makers.
Members benefited from both the restricted entry and competition controls, allowing many of them to earn oligopolistic profits.
At the same time, the integrity of the profession was maintained by offering membership only to those who were willing to abide by prescribed standards.
Investors also benefited from the segregated system.
Specialised compartmentalization ensured that management was expert in the narrow range of financial services offered.
The incentive to abuse conflicts of interest was significantly reduced, and limited membership guaranteed a self-perpetuating standard of good behaviour.
The policy makers were equally aware of the benefits of self-imposed structural divisions.
By virtue of the single capacity system, there was an established and sufficiently flexible regulatory framework, with participating members generally similar in terms of capital adequacy and profitability.
Moreover, provision had been made for any firm that might become financially insolvent; in this way, systemic risk was largely averted.
2.1.1.
The Pressures For Structural Change
Notwithstanding these advantages, there were all the while pressures for structural change.
The compartmentalization of the financial system into self-regulatory clubs suffered from many of the general drawbacks which characterize most oligopolistic arrangements.
In particular, it was very costly in terms of how resources where employed and inefficient in the sense that there was a failure to develop new products and technologies.
At the very heart of single capacity was the Stock Exchange's rule-book which effectively blocked significant structural reform.
In particular, it prevented the UK regime from developing along the same lines as the other major financial markets.
In these overseas centres, market players had become grouped into well capitalised corporate entities, quite distinct from their UK counterparts.
For example, by the late 1950s and early 1960s the Japanese and the Americans had begun to develop their own sophisticated global markets.
By the late seventies and early eighties British players were finding it increasingly difficult to compete on the international scene.
When the newly elected Conservative Government abolished exchange controls in 1979 it became readily apparent that some form of restructuring of the Stock Exchange and the financial sector in general was necessary if the UK was to maintain its reputation as one of the world's leading financial centres.
The catalyst for change was the so-called ‘Agreement’ signed between the Government and the Stock Exchange in 1983.
The restrictive nature of the Stock Exchange's rulebook had been drawn to the attention of the Director General of Fair Trading as early as 1976; three years later proceedings commenced.
In short, the allegation was that the Stock Exchange's rules were restrictive of competition, and the onus was on the Exchange to prove otherwise.
The matter was not quickly resolved.
In the interim, the Stock Exchange implemented piecemeal reform.
It had been Exchange policy to allow only partnerships to come into membership, but in 1982 a a new rule was introduced which permitted members to become limited companies and to have an outside share ownership of up to 29.9%.
These measures were welcomed, but many felt they did not go far enough.
Under the 1982 rule change member firms could not be owned by a single non-member and could not therefore become part of wider groupings — a fact which meant that the London exchange had, in some senses, closed its doors to the rest of the international community.
In 1983 a Government initiative broke the deadlock and a compromise of sorts was reached, with the Stock Exchange agreeing to amend its rule-book on the condition that the case against it was dropped.
Contained within this ‘Agreement’, as it became known, existed a commitment on the part of the Stock Exchange to abolish fixed commissions in favour of a more competitive regime.
The policy of fixed commissions had remained a major bone of contention throughout the Government's dispute with the Stock Exchange.
Ever since 1911 fixed commissions had been the lynch-pin of the separation between brokers and jobbers — the system known as single capacity.
The commencement of negotiated commissions, however, meant that the conduct of business between brokers and jobbers would alter radically.
It was believed that under the proposed arrangements brokers would accept deals that they had not ‘matched’ through a jobber, with the result that jobbers would probably receive less business and find it more difficult to compete.
These pressures made inevitable the dismantling of single capacity.
In its place there emerged a dual capacity regime, whereby financial intermediaries could undertake the functions of both broker and jobber simultaneously.
In addition to the above reforms, the Stock Exchange adopted other measures in an attempt to maintain its international competitiveness.
The first step was to help broaden the capital base of many of its members.
On 1 March, 1986, the 29.9% ceiling on the outside ownership of Stock Exchange firms was abolished altogether, thereby allowing a single non-member to own 100% of a member firm.
Yet notwithstanding even this manoeuvre, membership was still only open to individuals on a partnership basis.
Ultimately, however, the fear of a rival market developing outside the Exchange, the need for outside capital, and the desire to attract the American and Japanese securities houses (whose participation was crucial in the Stock Exchange's fight to become a world leader), made inevitable further rule changes.
Before long, new rules were hurriedly made to allow corporate houses not only to own firms but also to become full members themselves.
The aggregation of these moves had more profound effects than, arguably, anyone at the time fully envisaged.
They marked a momentous turning point in the market structure, operation, and management of the whole UK financial sector.
Quite remarkably, within the space of a few months, the industry reshaped and refashioned itself in advance of 27 October 1986, the day on which the deregulation of commissions was to take place.
Massive well-capitalized and incorporated financial conglomerates, bringing under one roof a multiplicity of financial services including stock-broking, market-making, insurance and insurance broking, banking, investment management, corporate finance, began to appear.
The leading players were both English and overseas.
Barclays (UK), Nat West (UK), Morgan Grenfell (US) and Citicorp (US) all bought member firms.
The UK clearing banks found themselves in a brave new world.
Now they could at act as: merchant banks (advising companies on issues of securities); brokers (placing newly issued shares with customers); market makers (making a continuous succession of prices in shares).
In this way, the traditionally self-enforced, and for some, archaic separation between the commercial banking and securities business was finally broken down, discarded in favour of a more open and competitive regime.
2.2.
The New Regulatory Framework: The Financial Services Act 1986
The structural changes which were at the heart of Big Bang necessitated a radical overhaul of the existing regulatory framework.
Indeed, as Goodhart observed:
The breakdown of the old, oligopolistic, single capacity, club-like…system and its transformation into the new multi-function, intensely competitive system,…[required]an equivalent transformation of the regulatory system.
The new regulation which followed was a response not only to Big Bang, financial conglomerates and conflicts of interest, but was initially meant as a thorough overhaul of the regulation of the UK financial markets.
The need for regulatory change had been mooted for some time.
2.2.1.
The Need For Regulatory Change
In pre-Big Bang times there existed a widespread belief that the then existing regulatory framework was not only propping up an inefficient system but that it was also outmoded and fast becoming inadequate for the protection of investors.
Until the advent of the Financial Services Act 1986, regulation had been decidedly piecemeal ‘combining a variety of Government measures with a large degree of self-regulation’.
The most important piece of legislation was the Prevention of Fraud (Investments) Act 1958 (PF(I) Act).
Other legislation included several Companies Acts, the Banking Act 1979, and more general statute law such as the law of theft and fraud, insolvency law, and the limited use of civil sanctions.
The statutory intention of the PF(I) Act was to protect investors against fraud in investments dealings.
This was attempted in two main ways.
First, it was an offence under the Act to deal in securities without a licence from the Department of Trade and Industry’(DTI).
Licences would be refused if the applicants were not considered ‘fit and proper’ persons.
Secondly, s.13 of the PF(I) Act made it an offence to knowingly make a misstatement in an investments deal.
Welcome though these provisions were, they did not cater for activities such as investment management or investment advice in areas other than in securities dealings.
As well as this, no provision was made for transactions in the expanding futures and options markets.
These and other failings meant that the PF(I) Act provided both ‘outdated’ and ‘incomplete’protection for investors.
Among the Governmental non-self-regulatory bodies designed to exert an influence in the financial sector were the Bank of England, the Director of Public Prosecutions Office, the Metropolitan Police Fraud department, and the DTI.
Of these, the latter two were especially criticized for their poor records of arrest and/or inactivity; records perhaps best viewed in the light of the legislation they sought to enforce, the complexity of the offences they where obliged to detect, and last, but by no means least, the limited resources, in terms of finance, manpower, and expertise, made available to them.
All the while, the self-regulatory framework, dominated largely by the extra legal rules of the City Panel on Take-overs and Mergers and the Council of the Securities Industry (CSI), was generally in not much better shape and made reform unlikely.
In 1981, the Conservative Government, influenced by the collapse of four licenced dealers, commissioned Professor LCB Gower to undertake an inquiry into the degree of protection afforded to investors in all areas of the financial services industry and to make recommendations for legislation.
Gower's efforts, more than anyone else's, were instrumental in laying the foundations for the City's new regulatory framework.
Yet even his findings were not well received by the financial community.
In January 1982 he published his Discussion Document, while his report,Review of Investor Protection , which came out in two parts, Part I and Part II, was published in January 1984 and March 1985 respectively.
All the while, the political climate was continuing to change, favouring a radical overhaul of the regulatory system rather than further piecemeal reform.
This shift in political opinion was partly due to a succession of further scandals involving the insurance and commodities markets.
The resultant backlash of unwelcome public attention forced the Government, who were already in a legislative frame of mind, to act swiftly.
The structural changes made inevitable by the Stock Exchange's commitment to the reform of its rulebook had equally profound implications for investor protection which strengthened even further the government's resolve to do something.
Two practitioner-based advisory bodies were also assembled.
Both groups proposed a modified version of Gower's initial findings and in January 1985 the Government published its long awaited White Paper.
This duly formed the blueprint for the Financial Service Bill, which later, after amendment, emerged as the Financial Service Act 1986.
2.2.2.
The Financial Service Act 1986 and the SIB Rulebook
Following the government's overhaul of the financial sector, traditional self-regulation has been replaced by ‘practitioner based’, ‘statute-backed’ regulation.
The legislative machinery chosen for the regulation of investment businesses is the Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA).
Essentially, the aim of the FSA 1986 is to prevent fraud by the City and fraud on the City and effect overall efficiency in the financial markets.
In pursuit of this, wide powers are given to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, some of which may, and indeed have been, transferred to a ‘designated agency’, known as the Securities and Investments Board (SIB).
This ‘agency’ operates through a number of Self-Regulatory Organizations (SRO's) recognised by it, is subject to the jurisdiction of the courts, and is exempt from liability for damages for acts and omissions in the discharge of its functions.
The members of the governing committee of the SIB are appointed by the Secretary of State and the Governor of the Bank of England acting jointly.
(i)
The Broad Effect of the Act
Who is covered by the FSA 1986?
According to s.3, anyone who carries on an investment business will need to be authorized to do so unless that person is an exempt person.
It is important to note that the term ‘investment’, as used in the FSA, does not cover all conceivable investments.
The general principle underlying the definition of the term is that it excludes physical property which a potential purchaser can inspect.
Instead, ‘investment’ means any asset, right, or interest falling within any paragraph in Schedule I, Part 1 (as amended by SI 1988 No 496) and covers items like stocks or shares in a company, debentures, futures, options, collective investments and life insurance.
(ii)
The meaning of ‘investment business’
An ‘investment business’ is the business of engaging in one or more of the activities constituting investment business which are not excluded activities.
Activities constituting investment business are defined in Schedule I, Part II (as amended by SI 1988 No 318 and SI 1988 No 803).
They include, for example, dealing in investments as principal or agent; arranging deals in investments; managing investments; giving investment advice; operating collective investment schemes, including unit trusts (ie. acting either as a manager or as trustee of a unit trust scheme is regarded as an activity constituting investment business).
These definitions can also be extended or restricted by the Secretary of State.
(iii)
What Activities are Excluded?
Since, by virtue of s.1(2), investment business is the business of engaging in one or more of the activities constituting investment business which are not excluded activities, it is clear that the FSA removes from its grasp those activities which it classifies as ‘excluded activities’.
In other words, there are some activities, which although similar to investment business, are not deemed for the purposes of the Act to be investment business and therefore do not require authorization.
These excluded activities are listed in Part III and IV of Schedule I (as amended by SI 1988 No 318, SI 1988 No 496 and SI 1988 No 803).
They are numerous and complex and include, dealing as a principal, unless as a dealer who regularly buys or sells or solicits members of the public to do so; dealing between companies in a group or participators in a joint enterprise or entered into by one member of a group or joint enterprise on behalf of another; transactions entered into in connection with a sale or goods or services, eg. financial packages offered by exporters including some element of investment; activities in connection with employees' share schemes.
(iv)
Who is an Authorized Person?
The general rule is then, that those who want to carry out investment business must first seek authorization.
This may be had through two main channels, either by applying directly to the SIB or by applying indirectly through Self Regulatory Organization's (SRO's).
The effect of non-authorization is that the market operator commits a criminal offence with the result that the transaction(s) becomes unenforceable.
Some categories, however, are exempt from authorization, for example the Bank of England.
The most important route by which authorization may be had is through membership of an SRO.
Before the SIB will recognize an SRO as capable of bestowing authorization upon a firm, the organization must apply for a recognition order.
The application must be accompanied by a copy of the organization's rules and any other information that the SIB might reasonably require.
Before making an order the SIB must ensure,inter alia , that the members of the SRO are ‘fit and proper persons’ to carry on an investment business, in particular, that they meet the standards of ‘honesty, competence and solvency’, and that they operate fair and reasonable admission, expulsion, and disciplinary procedures.
Equally, the rules and practices of the SRO should not restrict competition to an extent which is greater than necessary for the protection of investors.
A recognition order may be revoked.
(v)
Method of Control
But while the above represent the central players, how does it all work?
What is the method of control?
It is important to stress that the method of control has in fact changed quite substantially over the last few years.
Formerly, the system of sub-sub-delegation of authorization (from Parliament to the Secretary of State to SIB to SRO's and RPB's) hinged on what was known as the principle of equivalence ie. the principle that the rules and codes of an SRO or RPB should afford investors protection at least equivalent to that provided by the SIB's rules (see Schedule 2 para 3 FSA 1986 before the new changes were introduced).
In this way, the SIB rule-book became the blue print for the SRO and RPB rule-books.
Since the rule-books were initially actionable by any person who suffered harm as a result of a contravention, they tended to be very legalistic and complex.
As a result of this, it was suggested that amendments should be made to the FSA.
The changes were carried into the Companies Act 1989 and are now known as the ‘New Settlement’.
There are three tiers to this new settlement.
First, the SIB has been given power, by virtue of ns.47A(1), to issue Statements of Principle with respect to the conduct and financial standing expected of persons authorized to carry on investment business.
Breach of these principles is relevant for disciplinary purposes.
The SIB have issued 10 general principles (the so-called Ten Commandments):
Principle 1 Integrity
Principle 2 Skill, Care and Diligence
Principle 3 Market Practice
Principle 4 Information about Customers
Principle 5 Information for Customers
Principle 6 Conflicts of Interest
Principle 7 Customer Assets
Principle 8 Financial Resources
Principle 9 Internal Organisation
Principle 10 Relations with Regulators
Secondly, the SIB has been given the power to designate rules and regulations issued by it in relation to conduct of business, financial resources, client money or unsolicited calls, so that they apply to all authorized persons.
These are the so-called Core Rules , of which there are currently 40 in relation to conduct of business.
The Core Rules cover the bare essential, as it were, leaving the SRO's to tailor the SIB's core rules to their members.
At the third level, are the SRO rules which emerge from this tailoring process (or in the case of persons directly authorized by the SIB, the SIB rules).
In addition to all this, the SIB is given the power to issue Codes of Practice which would define the general principle referred to earlier.
Schedule 2 paragraph 3 FSA 1986, which formerly enshrined the old principle of equivalence, has now been amended to allow these changes to take their desired effect.
Now an SRO, when fulfilling its obligations under the Act, need only provide investors with an adequate level of protection.
The purpose of this change is to permit SRO's (and RPB's) greater flexibility in tailoring detailed rules to the requirements of the areas of business which relate to their members.
Moreover, it is important to note that an SRO may modify or waive the core rules (on a case by case basis) in order to adapt them to the circumstances of a particular firm.
But before doing so, the SRO must be satisfied that:
(a)
compliance with the core rule would be ‘unduly burdensome’ having regard to the benefit which compliance would confer on investors; and
(b)
that relaxation of the provision would not result in ‘any undue risk’ to investors.
The same criteria apply in respect of modification and waiver as to similar powers conferred in respect of Statements of Principle .
In summary then, the method of control over businesses offering investment advice is one whereby Parliament through the Financial Services Act has delegated power to the Secretary of State who has in turn delegated most of his rule-making responsibilities to the SIB.
The SIB has conferred recognition to SRO's, and to these the vast bulk of investment businesses have sought authorization.
Formerly, this sub-sub-delegation of supervisory powers to SRO's did not effectively establish a system of self-regulation, since the principle of equivalence operated to ensure that the SIB retained significant control.
The changes brought about by the Companies Act 1989, requiring only adequacy of treatment have, however, given the SRO's more scope to map out what they consider suitable regulation within their own particular regulatory domain.
2.3.
Conflicts of Interest and Duty
With the growth of financial conglomerates, in particular the merging together of banking and securities business, problems have inevitably arisen.
As stated in chapter one, these problems revolve around the safety and soundness of the financial system and, more importantly for our purposes, conflicts of interest and duty.
Conflicts of both interest and duty are not new to the City of London; indeed, they have traditionally been of great concern to financial market regulators.
What has happened, however, is this that the advent of Big Bang, and the consequent emergence of one stop financial conglomerates, has exacerbated the problem of conflicts of interest and duty and placed added burdens on the ability of legislation (albeit newly designed) to cope with potential abuses.
A conflict of interest occurs where, for example, a market operator's interest potentially conflicts with that of a client (conflict of interest), or where a market operator owes obligations to two or more clients who's interests might well pull in different directions (conflict of duty).
‘The underlying principle of equity’, says Pennington:
is that a person who acts as a representative of another is in a conflict of interest situation if, either at the time when he accepts appointment or subsequently while he acts as a representative, there is a material interest of his own or of a third person for whom he also acts, and the pursuit or protection of that interest would create a substantial risk that he may not act in the best way to pursue or protect the interest of the person he represents.
This actual or potential favouring of one's own interests over and above those of another is a common facet of modern-day life.
It is important to note, however, that there is nothing inherently wrong with a conflict of interest situation in itself; the issue is whether such a situation is handled properly.
If the conflict situation is treated impartially or fairly then there is no cause for concern; if, however, it is abused, a problem arises.
It is undisputed that, notwithstanding single capacity, there existed within the financial service industry a high incidence of conflict of interest situations.
The recent changes in the structure of the UK's market operations have added to this, with concern being expressed at all levels about the ability of market operators to deal with abuse.
In financial conglomerates a potential conflict may be said to exist where, for example, the conglomerate, when managing a client's affairs, has to choose between two solutions for a deal where one choice is preferable from its own point of view while the other represents a better bargain for the client.
This might be the case where a firm recommends a customer to purchase an investment, the issue of which is being underwritten by the firm.
The same problem also arises if the conglomerate owes obligations to two separate groups of customers whose interests are capable of coming into conflict.
An example of this is where the transaction relates to shares in a company and the firm is a financial adviser to the company, or the firm is advising someone who is contemplating a substantial acquisition of shares in the company.
The crux of the matter is this: the wider the range of financial services on offer the greater the likelihood that these conflict situations will occur, with the consequent danger that they will be abused.
Conflicts abound because it is efficient, notwithstanding the undoubted economic benefits of specialization, to have one entity, either individual or corporate, undertake a number of potentially conflicting functions.
However, if conflicts of interest are unavoidable, and often go unregulated in other business spheres, why is the ‘mixing’ together of different financial services, and in particular banking and securities business, of such concern?
Governments regard conflicts of interest in the financial sector with more concern than those in the non-financial sectors of the economy for two main reasons.
The first is that financial institutions, and banks in particular, are ‘special institutions’ holding a special position within both the economy (this might be called the ‘efficiency principle’) and society (this might be called the ‘equity principle’).
With regard to the efficiency principle the argument runs as follows: the financial services industry is regarded as being fundamentally different from all other industries.
At an economic level, when a conflict of interest situation is abused the tendency is for that abuse to distort the efficient allocation of (scarce) resources within the economy.
No longer are impartial market forces brought to bear on business activity, but instead, transactions are concluded at an extra cost to society.
The end result, is reduced efficiency and, for those institutions involved in the underhanded activity, a false level of profitability which is not sustainable in the long term under true market conditions.
The equity principle, on the other hand, is based on the proposition that financial markets rely, overwhelmingly, on the confidence of those who invest in them.
Investors must trust the financial institutions who constitute the market.
If this trust is abused, confidence will be shaken.
In an area where there is already a perceived notion that the trust reposed in financial intermediaries is readily abused, no Government can afford to ignore those situations where abuse is likely to occur.
As we shall see, conflicts of interest left unregulated do not inspire confidence upon which the financial markets depend.
The second reason why conflicts of interest are particularly important in the financial services sector is because the nature of financial services themselves are inherently special.
The need for confidentiality between intermediary and client means that an investor is generally unable to assess the worth of the variety of services made available to him.
Such a state of affairs provides the seller with a unique opportunity to exploit the relatively weak bargaining position of the investor.
In short, because financial services are themselves special, there is, as a consequence, a special need for fairness.
The potential problems posed by increased conflicts of interest in the wake of Big Bang and the consequent formation of financial conglomerates have not gone unnoticed.
But are these problems real or illusory?
What approach should regulators and policy makers adopt, and on what basis should they decide?
In principle, conflicts of interest and their attendant problems can be viewed from essentially two different perspectives: those who favour minimal regulation, and those who favour more stringent regulatory controls.
The arguments propounded by the former group vary.
Some argue that conflict of interest situations are, by and large, handled properly, and that abuse is rare.
Abuses that do occasionally come to light are wrongly sensationalized as being common place rather than being merely one off incidents.
This approach emphasises that abuse is rare simply because the idea of a fiduciary relationship (a relationship where there is a special duty of trust and care), and the consequent fiduciary law that has developed to protect this sort of relationship, would neither have evolved nor survived until today.
This view would appear to contain much sense; but it must not be taken to the extreme.
As Schotland argues, even if abuses are one off, or ‘episodic’, it does not necessarily follow that they should not receive regulatory attention.
A more refined version of the laissez-faire approach outlined above, and one which seems to command the attention of some economists and policy makers, is premised on the idea that it is unhelpful to consider all conflict of interest situations in the same way.
Here, the emphasis is on the need to isolate and treat differently each conflict of interest situation according to its particular facts.
The question then becomes whether there is a real likelihood that a given conflict situation, though capable of abuse in theory, will be abused in practice?
When questions such as these are asked, it becomes apparent that not all conflicts of interest are of equal importance or concern.
By and large, those conflicts which in practice have no tendency to be abused do not merit the deployment of scarce resources in order to eliminate them.
The reason for this is that the long run incentive to exploit a conflict of interest may not exist.
Invariably a financial institution will not risk the long term profits bound up in honest work and good reputation for the short term gains to be had from abusing conflict of interest situations such as dealing on the basis of inside information obtained from a client.
The ‘invisible hand’ of market forces will mean that when faced with such a conflict, a financial intermediary will handle that situation in a scrupulously fair way; for the market will impose such a discipline.
The problem with this argument is, of course, that market forces may sometimes fail, owing to the fact that the customer may not be in a position from which to tell whether he is being treated fairly by the financial conglomerate.
An even more radical view, advocated by those who favour less rather than more regulation of conflicts of interest, is one which is often attributed to the Chicago school.
Here, the fact that a conflict of interest is abused is not in itself a sound basis for regulation.
There may be instances when the systematic abuse of conflict of interest situations will be tolerated on the basis that it is more efficient to permit the abuse than to have it eradicated.
The decision on whether or not to intervene is determined by a cost benefit calculus which focuses on efficiency rather than some vague notion of fairness.
What is the total cost of the abuse?
Who bears that cost — individuals or society, and in what proportions?
If the cost of abuse is less than the cost of implementing and enforcing regulatory structures in preventing the abuse, there seems to be,prima facie , a case for doing nothing, at least on a preventive level.
Instead, resources could be used to limit known abuses or even to facilitate redress when abuses take place.
It is accepted that such a perspective affords interesting and novel insights into conflicts of interest.
But the approach eschews vague yet important notions of fairness and integrity, and makes them subservient to what can be criticized as a very narrow view of cost.
Indeed, those who favour greater regulatory controls on conflicts of interest would argue that the position adopted by the Chicage School is economically, socially, and politically unacceptable.
If market forces fail, serious economic consequences could result; it would be difficult to assess the economic costs of these abuses.
While market forces may undoubtedly bring many positive benefits, both socially and politically, there are many occasions when it is legitimate to subject them to regulation in order to secure confidence and fairness in the operation of the financial markets.
In attempting to establish this confidence, perceived rather than actual abuses may need to be taken into account.
Since such an approach could lead to over-regulation, stultifying both efficiency and innovation, a delicate balance needs to be struck.
It is clear then, that not all groups see conflicts of interest in the same light nor with the same concern.
To greater or lesser extent the debate hinges on the faith participants have in the ability of market forces to work effectively.
We have already seen that there is an argument which says that market controls deter abuse and that even when abuse does occur it might not be efficient to stamp it out.
Ultimately, however, market forces should not be allowed to dictate the extent of regulation.
The law should not be concerned with solely economic factors.
Although considerations of cost should be considered, they should not dominate the debate.
Regulation which might be more costly in the short term than the actual abuses it seeks to regulate, may be justifiable in the long run.
This is not only because law and morality are related, but also because some costs (eg. the loss of confidence in the markets) are incapable of being quantified.
Having established that there is a sound basis for regulating conflicts of interest in the financial markets, and bearing in mind the very real contribution which economic analysis can make, let us move on and isolate some of the pressing conflict of interest situations which can be found in financial conglomerates post-Big Bang.
In a sense, the concerns of today echo those which preceded the enactment of the Glass-Steagall Act in the US in 1933 which established a formal separation between banking and securities activities.
In Britain the merging together of the banking and securities business in the guise of financial conglomerates has rekindled this debate.
Nine types of conflict of interest may be identified.
Essentially the nine conflicts are related by the fact that they involve situations where either one party has more information than another, a state of affairs described by economists as information asymetry; or where one party has a monopoly power; indeed the conflict may occur where both these two factors are simultaneously present.
It is proposed to explain the nine conflict situations with the aid of hypothetical examples within which the conflict is shown to be abused.
1.
Imprudent Bank Loans to Third Parties to Support the Price of a Security 
Facts: A commercial bank becomes affiliated with a securities firm.
The securities firm acts as an underwriter for a number of various companies (an underwriter buys all residue shares not taken up in the share issue they have promoted).
Conflict: Because the bank is affiliated with the securities firm it has an interest in the success of the underwriting activity.
The bank could then make loans to third party investors contingent upon all or part of the loan being used to purchase shares in those companies underwritten by the securities affiliate.
This could not only distort the free interplay of market forces but also jeopardise bank assets.
2.
Imprudent Loans to Issuers of Shares Underwritten by the Banks Securities affiliate 
Facts: Company X gets a bank's securities affiliate to underwrite its new issue of shares.
The affiliate advises investors to buy some of the issue.
The issue fails.
Conflict: The bank could then make imprudent loans to Company X to keep it from failing.
It may do this to prevent the securities affiliate from being sued by those who invested in Company X on the basis of its negligent advice.
3.
The Bank Might Make Direct Loans to its Securities Division 
Facts: Limits are placed on how much the bank can lend to its securities division.
Conflict: The bank may be able to circumvent these ceilings by lending to a third party who subsequently re-lends to the securities division.
4.
The Promotional Role of The Investment Banker-V-The Commercial Banker's Obligation to Provide Disinterested Advice 
Facts: The role of an investment banker is primarily promotional while the commercial banker is under an obligation to provide disinterested advice.
Conflict: Once bankers have a direct/indirect stake in the activities of a securities affiliate, investment advice to customers will no longer be impartial.
The fear is that a bank might promote shares in companies underwritten by its own securities affiliate, even when more profitable investments are available elsewhere.
5.
Using Bank Securities Affiliates to Make New Share Issues to Repay Unprofitable Loans 
This is a form of debt restructuring.
Facts: A bank makes an unsound loan to a customer.
Conflict: To avoid suffering a loss the bank induces the customer to use its securities affiliate to make a new share issue.
As a result the bank is able to recoup the loan and the securities affiliate earns an underwriting fee.
6.
The Likelihood of Economic Tie-ins From the Different Divisions Within the Conglomerate 
Facts: A conglomerate, offering a wide variety of financial services, develops around a bank.
Conflict: It could then ‘force’ its various customers, through economic tie-ins, to use the services of other divisions of the conglomerate when needing advice for other financial matters.
Usually the bank would threaten to ration credit to those customers who refused.
7.
Where the Securities Division Places its Unsold Securities in the Bank's Trust Accounts 
Facts: The securities division of a conglomerate holds a number of poor quality securities on its books.
These can only be sold off at a loss.
Conflict: To avoid such losses the securities firm may seek to place these at a suitable price in other parts of the conglomerate structure — perhaps in the trust accounts of the commercial bank.
However, this conflict is unlikely to occur because a number of legal and regulatory constraints usually operate to neutralise this sort of activity.
8.
Director Interlocks Between the Banking Division of a Conglomerate and Other Non-financial Firms 
Facts: A Bank director is on the board of another firm.
Conflict: As a consequence decisions made in the boardroom — what bank to approach for loans or which underwriter to use — might be influenced by the presence and voting powers of bank directors.
9.
Informational Advantages Regarding Customers 
Facts: Under the new ‘Big Bang’ arrangements, a banking and securities house become affiliated.
The securities ‘arm’ underwrite a share issue for Company X in the course of which ‘unpublished price sensitive information’concerning the company is obtained.
Conflict: there is ample opportunity for this information to be acquired and used by other divisions within the conglomerate.
For example, it may be used by the banking ‘arm’ to the advantage of favoured customers or indeed for the banks own account.
The result is an unfair competitive advantage.
Though conflict of interest situations are diverse in form, they can, however, be distinguished from other types of market place misconduct such as bribery, embezzlement, fraud etc.
Schotland describes these are ‘blatant abuses’, which invoke criminal sanctions.
Conflicts of interest on the other hand ‘are almost entirely left for civil sanctions’.
There are two reasons why this is so.
First, encapsulated in the very nature of a conflict is the whole idea of two competing and conflicting interests that are legitimately present.
Secondly, conflict of interest abuse, being shrouded in secrecy, is not easy to detect still less proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
There is, however, one notable exception to the general rule that conflicts of interest are regulated solely by civil law: where the abuse involves the misuse of inside information, known as insider trading or insider dealing.
It is proposed to focus on insider dealing within financial conglomerates because of the probable extent of such trading, that is, the degree to which insider dealing probably occurs; the damage it causes, both economically (through the disruption of the efficient allocation of scarce economic resources), and socially (through losses in public confidence in the operation of the financial markets); and finally, the problem of detection (self-evident from the low levels of prosecutions over recent years).
At the centre of the discussion is the question of whether the Chinese Wall is an appropriate, valid, and effective regulatory mechanism for neutralizing the increased potential for conflict abuse in conglomerates and one in which these corporate entities may generally place reliance upon.
The credibility of the mechanism from a policy and legal point of view is therefore placed under scrutiny.
The misuse of inside information has not been limited to misuse within financial conglomerates, but has been the centre of debate long before Big Bang.
In this general context the abuse is ostensibly governed, in Britain, by the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 (as amended).
Similar provisions have been in force since 1980.
The growth of financial conglomerates, however, has caused insider dealing to be a more urgent and immediate problem.
The mixing together of financial services has increased the scope for trading on the basis of inside information.
New regulatory measures specifically geared towards conglomerates may therefore be needed to deal with what is now a more urgent and pressing problem.
Interestingly, some jurisdictions, for example, Germany, impose no formal legal sanctions either criminal or civil on those who indulge in insider dealing.
This is so despite the fact that the universal banking model, which is probably even more integrated than the conglomerate groupings which have developed in the UK, is widespread.
While concerns have, from time to time, been expressed over the feasibility of a model which mixes commercial banking with the traditionally riskier investment banking, German fears have been allayed without recourse to anti-insider dealing legislation or the development of a sophisticated statute-backed Chinese Wall network.
All this is in marked contrast to the US, where, ironically, anti-insider dealing legislation was first put onto the statute books at a time when the universal banking model was being abandoned there because it was considered too risky.
Today almost every country with a developed securities market has some form of controls outlawing insider dealing and with the introduction of the EC Directive on Insider Dealing every country in the EEC will be required to adopt minimum legislative prohibitions.
How this will affect the German approach to regulating conflicts of interest is uncertain.
There, the emphasis to date has not been on regulation per se , but on building a culture sensitive to the management of conflicts of interest.
The absence of detailed case law has meant that there are no established rules to resolve conflicts.
Sometimes Chinese Walls are used; at other times firewalls, whereby a certain type of business is conducted separate from ordinary business, within a specialized subsidiary set up specifically for this purpose.
It has been suggested by Kohler, that there are three reasons why German universal banks, with the potential for conflict abuses, have avoided actual abuses.
These are:
competition, public opinion and…law and regulation, all supplemented by moral and ethical aspects.
The more banking is based on the confidence of the customer in the individual bank and the closer, therefore, the bank-customer relationship is, the more severely any misuse of confidential information by a bank or its employees would jeopardize the confidence of present and…future customers of that bank and thereby damage the bank through the loss of business and clients to its competitors.
Therefore, it is in the vital and vested interests of the universal bank, which relies mainly on relationship banking, to take the necessary internal precautions (including Chinese [Walls]and possibly firewalls) and carefully weigh the interest involved when deciding how to solve a conflict of interest resulting from inside information.’
The wisdom of such a policy hinges on the likelihood of whether conglomerates will systematically misuse inside information by breaching their Chinese Walls to make a profit or avoid a loss?
Although exact answers are not available, some means of predicting outcomes is required.
Becker, in his classic economic study of crime and punishment, puts forward the view that man, as rational calculator, weighs up the ‘expected rate of return’ likely to be derived from committing a criminal offence.
If the costs of an activity exceed the benefits, he will maximize his total satisfactions by choosing not to engage in it.
Analyzed within Becker's framework, insider dealing and, indeed, other conflict abuse, yields sizeable profits, especially when set against the low risk of detection.
This, coupled with the minimal outlay in terms of resources, time, and indeed effort, results in enticing rewards.
Where such factors are present one would expect the crime to attract not only profit-maximising individuals but also profit-maximising firms.
In Britain, the balance of the equation favouring the exploitation of inside information is changing.
While the lure of profits are as appealing as ever, the perceived, if not actual, risks of being caught have increased.
The sophistication and determination of the Securities and Investments Board, DTI, Serious Fraud Office (SFO), and the Stock Exchange, have alerted insider's fears of being prosecuted.
The greater use of computers has brought more ‘transparency’ to the market place, transactors being readily discovered.
Yet despite all of this, there are those, whether in a corporate or individual capacity, who will decide that conflict abuse, and insider dealing in particular, is worth the risk.
The formation of financial conglomerates, embodying commercial banking, stock-broking, market making, fund management etc, raise concerns not only over a clash of interests between conglomerate and client but also over a clash of obligations owed by the conglomerate to two or more clients.
In trying to regulate insider dealing within conglomerates by means of a Chinese Wall, obligations owed by conglomerates to customers may need to be modified.
Since a conglomerate is often acting in a fiduciary capacity, or as an agent owing special duties of care and skill to its client, certain equitable obligations are imposed.
At the same time, statutory duties are also owed.
More often than not, these duties overlap, and, as we shall see later, this has led to problems for both conglomerates and the regulatory authorities.
The amalgam of these equitable and statutory duties include the following:
(a)
the no conflict rule — a conglomerate owes a duty as fiduciary to avoid putting itself in a position where its own interests conflict with that of its clients;
(b)
the no profit rule — a conglomerate, when acting as a fiduciary must not make a secret profit from his position without first obtaining the consent of the principal and disclosing the profit;
(c)
a duty of undivided loyalty — although the exact extent of this duty is uncertain, it may be argued that a conglomerate, when acting as a fiduciary, must not place itself in a position where its duty to one client conflicts with that of another client.
In owing a duty of undivided loyalty, it could again be argued that the conglomerate is under a duty to take advantage of sources of information reasonably available which would be relevant to the client.
In the US, this duty is embodied in the ‘shingle theory’ whereby a financial intermediary in a fiduciary position has a duty to have an adequately informed basis for its recommendations.
In effect the duty is merely an amalgam of fiduciary duties at common law requiring an agent to act in the best interests of his principal.
One of the clearest statements of the duty was made in the US case,Hanley v.
SEC :
A securities dealer occupies a special relationship to a buyer of securities in that by his position he implicitly represents he has an adequate basis for the opinions he renders…
He cannot recommend a security unless there is an adequate and reasonable basis for such recommendation…
By his recommendation he implies that a reasonable investigation has been made and that his recommendation rests on the conclusions based on that investigation.
(footnote omitted).
(d)
a duty of confidentiality — each particular arm of a conglomerate is under a duty to retain confidential information obtained from a corporate client, known as the beneficiary, and to use that information for the benefit of the client and not for its own or some other person's benefit.
This obligation is governed by the law of breach of confidence;
(e)
a duty to the investing public not to trade on the basis of unpublished price sensitive information (commonly referred to as inside information) for its own account or to ‘tip’(pass on inside information) clients in its advisory capacity.
Insider dealing is governed by the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 (as amended) and other quasi-statutory measures, such as the SIB and SRO rulebooks.
It is clear then, that a multi-service firm can easily find itself in a position where the duties it owes come into conflict.
For example, a conglomerate in receipt of inside information from an issuer of publicly traded securities may find itself in a position where actual compliance with its disclosure obligations to its retail customers (ie., those who wish to buy shares) in accordance with the equitable principle of undivided loyalty causes it to be liable in an action for breach of confidence to its corporate clients, and guilty of tipping in violation of anti-insider dealing laws.
Equally, a failure to tip could cause any recommendation the conglomerate makes to be without an adequate basis in view of all information known at law by the firm about the issuer.
Similarly the very bedrock of fiduciary law — the no conflict and no profit rule — are compromised by multi-service financial conglomerates, which, by very nature, function on the basis of conflicting duties.
The question of conflicts of interest and duty within financial conglomerates and the regulation thereof is not entirely academic.
As we shall see later, legislative backed codes of conduct have been adopted to deal with the problem.
The crucial question is to what extent these codes reflect the position at common law.
One aspect of this question is the effectiveness and legal sufficiency of the Chinese Wall in resolving conflict problems within conglomerates.
Pressure for clarification of the intermingling of common law and the statutory backed rules has led the Minister for Corporate Affairs in the Department of Trade and Industry, to consider the relationship between the fiduciary and analogous duties owed by financial intermediaries and duties imposed by statute and self-regulatory rules.
2.4.
Summary
Chapter Two draws attention to three areas.
First, to the structural changes and pressures which caused ‘Big Bang’; secondly, to the need for, and the broad principles of, the new regulatory framework; and lastly, to the increased potential for abuse with regard to both conflicts of duty and interest resulting from the merging together of financial intermediaries, especially banks and securities houses, under the one corporate roof, or conglomerate grouping.
Not all groups view these conflicts with the same concern.
Some advocate a liberal regime based on market forces; others argue strongly for regulation — either self-regulation, or statutory regulation, or both.
The misuse of inside information within the new conglomerate structure is singled out for specific analysis.
This conflict abuse, as will be made clear later, is to be considered not only with a view to regulation by formal law but also by the regulatory technique known as the ‘Chinese Wall’.
In subsequent chapters the Wall mechanism will be questioned as to its suitability in preventing the passage of inside information within conglomerates and in resolving the more general problems associated with both conflicts of duty and interest as they arise within multi-functional financial intermediaries.
3
INSIDER DEALING: THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
Insider dealing has been the focus of regulatory attention on both sides of the Atlantic for some time now.
Ivan Boesky, Dennis Levine, and Geoffrey Collier have been publicly vilified for engaging in what has sometimes been described as the ‘unacceptable face of capitalism’.
But what is so bad about insider dealing?
Why does it invariably attract such condemnation?
Is regulation really defensible, or should the practice be left unfettered from regulatory controls?
The answer to these questions (particularly the last) has important ramifications for the raison d'etre of the Chinese Wall mechanism.
The argument developed in this chapter is that insider dealing is undesirable and ought to be regulated at all levels ; that the prohibition of the practice has a rational basis; and that many of the arguments advanced by those who favour unfettered insider dealing are seriously flawed.
Before entering into detailed debate on these contentious issues it is important to emphasise two general points.
First, we are principally concerned with insider dealing on impersonal stock exchange markets and not with face-to-face transactions.
Secondly, in so far as we are concerned with insider dealing, the practice is analysed within the context of financial conglomerates.
We adopt, therefore, an approach which might appropriately be termed the unorthodox view as opposed to what could be called the traditional view .
The topic is approached in this way because scant academic attention has been paid to insider dealing in the corporate context; furthermore, it is within this context that the Chinese Wall mechanism operates; and finally, new rules have recently been promulgated by the SIB covering the misuse of inside information in the financial conglomerate context.
The traditional view of insider dealing is succinctly outlined by Hannigan.
She defines the practice as’…the use by an insider of price sensitive information (known to him but not generally and which he has acquired by virtue of his position) to trade to his advantage in the shares of a company.’
The traditional view of insider dealing typically assumes that the company director is the insider, dealing on his own behalf in the shares of the company of which he is an employee.
Most of the legal literature of the topic adopts this approach.
By contrast, the essence of the unorthodox view of insider dealing is that the financial conglomerate itself, through its directors, or other corporate personnel, is the ‘insider’, or ‘quasi insider’.
By and large, these directors do not deal on information generated by the financial conglomerate but rather on information acquired by the financial conglomerate.
Of course, a situation might arise where, for example , the market-making arm makes it known throughout the conglomerate that it is ‘long’ or ‘short’of a particular security.
This is highly price sensitive information from which a conglomerate could make a profit or avoid a loss, but it would rarely constitute a breach of the the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985.
The more typical example in the unorthodox context is, however, where one arm of the conglomerate deals on inside information about another company (for example, a client of another division of the conglomerate) to whom there is owed a duty of confidence.
In the context of financial conglomerates, this might concern information, say, in the corporate finance arm which could be used by the investment arm for its own account dealing.
This scenario has been much neglected.
To sum up then, according to the so-called unorthodox view, the company, or rather individuals on the conglomerate's behalf, deals on either inside information acquired in the course of business about another company, for example, an investment banking client on the verge of announcing an increase in expected profits;or on information ‘leaked’ by one arm of the conglomerate about a long or short position it has taken as market maker on specific shares and which it would like to off-load into the accounts of customers in the conglomerate's fund management arm.
Alternatively, it might involve the leaking of information to the effect that one arm of the conglomerate is acting for an offeror in a take-over negotiation.
The conglomerate, acting through its ‘directing mind and will’, does not deal in its own shares; instead it uses information generated by its clients (or, on occasion, information generated from within the conglomerate itself) to make profits, or to cut losses, by trading with the public, or even by giving advice to clients, at a time when it (the conglomerate) has access to unpublished price sensitive information pertaining to publicly traded securities.
As mentioned earlier, the acceptability of the Chinese Wall is closely linked with the prohibition of insider dealing.
The Chinese Wall is a mechanism which aims to prevent the misuse of inside information by blocking its dissemination.
It is one weapon in the anti-insider dealer's regulatory arsenal.
Any argument concerning the merits or otherwise of the device must to a great extent be guided by a discussion on the merits/demerits of insider dealing.
If it were proved that insider dealing was a desirable activity, then the issue of the Chinese Wall would be of marginal significance, since adopting the mechanism would hinder what would otherwise be a worthy activity.
If, on the other hand, insider dealing were considered undesirable, thus requiring regulatory attention, then the use of the Chinese Wall from a legal, economic, and policy viewpoint would become an issue of some importance.
It is proposed, despite the fact that it is the unorthodox view of insider dealing which is singled out for special attention, to review the policy arguments for and against the use of inside information, even where at times the debate seems more applicable to the traditional view of insider dealing.
In other words, for the purposes of the policy discussion which occupies this chapter, no significance is made of the distinction between the traditional and unorthodox views of insider dealing.
In this way, a more complete picture of why the practice should be prohibited can be gained.
3.1.
On What Basis Should Insider Dealing be Prohibited?
The debate on whether insider dealing should or should not be regulated would appear to revolve around difference in moral values and differences as to the factual consequences of insider dealing.
Regarding differences in moral values, X may feel that insider dealing is quite simply immoral or unfair and ought therefore to be prohibited.
Alternatively, he may believe that the inefficient use of scarce resources brought about by regulating insider dealing is immoral.
Regarding differences as to the factual consequences of insider dealing, X may want to prohibit insider dealing because it harms Y; or, because he believes that it is an inefficient means of allocating scarce resources.
Alternatively, X may favour unfettered insider dealing because he believes it brings inestimable benefits, or because regulation is impracticable.
How conclusions are reached on these issues is of obvious importance.
Perhaps somewhat simplistically, those who favour prohibitions on insider dealing tend to take a lawyer's perspective, emphasising issues of fairness and justice; while those who advocate a removal of regulatory controls tend to adopt an economist's approach, which focuses on efficiency gains and the creation of desirable incentives.
Of course, this rather over-simplified picture overlooks the fact that economics can be used to defend anti-insider dealing laws, and that some lawyers are very much in favour of unrestricted insider dealing.
Yet at the broadest level the battle-lines could be said to have fallen into this basic pattern.
These battlelines of conflict are now mapped out.
We focus first on the moral issues, and then move on to consider the debate over the factual consequences of insider dealing.
3.2.
Moral Arguments
The Pecora hearings in the US Congress in 1933–34 produced the first real condemnation of insider dealing.
There, the conduct of those who admitted using inside information was described as ‘immoral’, ‘unscrupulous’, ‘unfair’, and a ‘betrayal of fiduciary duties’.
Manne, an ardent proponent of insider dealing argues that ‘the debate has remained essentially moralistic’, in that ‘[j]udges and lawyers have failed to probe beyond a sense of moral outrage’.
He suggests that such an analysis is for the ‘intellectually bankrupt’, and that the predictive power of economics offers a more intellectually credible basis upon which to decide whether insider dealing is desirable or not.
Despite a great deal of recent literature on the subject, Henry Manne's 1966 book remains the most thorough, and most widely quoted statement of the case against prohibiting insider dealing.
His work is explained, defended, and substantiated in numerous journals and other publications dating from 1966 until the present day.
But is Manne correct?
Do moral arguments provide an unsatisfactory basis upon which to prohibit insider dealing?
Why is insider dealing morally wrong?
The moral arguments vary.
Sometimes we accept that morality changes; that, what was immoral once is not immoral now.
At other times, the morality of a situation is considered unchanging and inveterate.
The assertion that some particular type of conduct is morally wrong because it is may appear unsatisfactory but it is unchallengeable.
It is often on this basis that some say theft, fraud, or dishonesty are morally wrong; that they are moral wrongs in themselves, moral imperatives given from above.
Insider dealing may likewise be justified on this basis.
Others seek refuge in the argument that theft, fraud, dishonesty, and insider dealing are moral wrongs because they cause harm to others.
Whether society has the right to determine its own morality is a debate which has raged for some time.
According to Devlin, society may wish to lay down moral standards for its citizens, and it may wish to use the criminal law to enforce those standards.
In this way, the criminal law is used to ensure that the society is a fair and just one, according to the prevailing view of those terms at the time.
Society has an interest in protecting itself from activities which threaten to undermine the harmony within it.
The test is whether there is a ‘real feeling of reprobation’ amongst members of society with regard to the conduct in question.
There is no requirement that harm be sustained before the law may intervene to lay down moral standards.
In a western liberal democracy heavily dependent on the stock market as its allocator of scare resources, society surely has the right to decide which legitimate interests are in need of protection.
Those who attack these interests commit moral wrongs on that society, and may indeed gain an advantage at the expense of members within that society.
It is on this basis that many see insider dealing as morally wrong.
Of course, often when moral arguments such as the above favouring the regulation of insider dealing are advocated, those who support unfettered dealing shift the emphasis to questions of economic efficiency, proof, and enforcement.
Admittedly, these are all important areas of concern, but moral reasoning should not be made subservient to what are themselves value laden economic arguments which do not always take into account the totality of the costs they purport to assess.
In the same way that law cannot be divorced from morality neither can economics.
Insider dealing is unfair; insiders take advantage of outsiders; it is ‘theft from the unsuspecting’.
Values such as fairness, honesty, and integrity are values worth pursuing in themselves, and should not be shrugged off by reverting to some contervailing argument such as costs.
It is not true that ‘man is a single-faceted individual, engaged solely in maximizing personal financial gain [with no thought for]fairness, honesty, respect for law, self-respect, consideration for others, and so on.’
As Schotland argues: ‘[w]hen we engage in economic analysis, we do not banish permanently the legal and moral aspects of the problem analyzed.
It is precisely in order to make sounder legal and moral judgments, and to evaluate their cost, that we bring economic analysis to a problem like insider trading.’
Manne fails to take into account ‘what our restraints on insider trading actually gain for us, both economically and in terms of the quality of our society and our human relationships.’
The idea that insider dealing is unfair commands widespread support.
The unfairness argument operates on two levels.
First, there is the unfairness which insider dealing brings to the market, and secondly, there is the unfairness caused by breaches of duty or loyalty.
These are now considered.
Most developed capitalist economies which operate anti-insider dealing laws have outlawed insider dealing on the basis that it jeopardises the development of fair, and orderly markets.
It is interesting to note that in the US, Congress has expressed an overriding concern for fairness in the securities markets.
The Securities Exchange Act 1934 calls for ‘fair dealing’ in no less than six sections, twice calls for ‘fair and orderly market[s]’and cites the ‘protection of investors’as one of its dominant goals.
Fairness, rather than efficiency is the guiding principle.
‘[T]he loss of efficiency that comes from insider trading laws is a price worth paying in order to have a fairer market.’
A fair market is also crucial for market confidence.
Insider dealing threatens to destroy confidence by undermining the general public's belief that they have an equal chance of profiting from securities trades.
Investors who believe that the market is rigged are likely to withhold their investment.
A less liquid market could have unfavourable effects on the cost of raising capital.
One recent report on insider dealing states that:
A market in which abnormal profits accrue to insiders on a perceptible scale is unattractive to outsiders…
It seems to us that a market economy depends upon the confidence investors have in the perceived fairness of the market process.
Policies directed to widespread public shareholding in companies are therefore likely to be subverted by condoning insider trading.
This argument is particularly relevant to Britain where the government has tried to foster wider share ownership by selling off formerly nationalised industries.
The same theme is echoed by Sir Robert Alexander, former Chairman of the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers.
He argues that: ‘[t]o the small investor the idea that someone working in the City is using inside information to deal in what ought to be a uniformly informed market is quite repugnant.
The integrity of the City of London as a financial centre is a crucial element to its success and reputation.’
The problem with this, however, is that, there is no evidence to show that investors are avoiding the market.
As Prentice points out, ‘public confidence in the market is a product of complex psychological and economic factors and the fact that insider trading is taking place will only have a tangential, if any, bearing on it.’
Furthermore, in the UK the bulk of investment is institutional rather than private.
While these arguments are forceful, they are not compelling.
The explanation for the high level of institutional investment may lie partly in the fact that UK investors accept that some other investors operate with superior knowledge, and that rather than be forced out of the market altogether they tend to make use of institutional intermediaries such as Pensions Funds.
Alternatively, arguments concerning lack of evidence that investors are overly concerned about insider dealing may be challenged on the basis that there is no way of telling what impact insider dealing has on the markets.
Yet the idea that we should promote fair markets can be taken to extremes.
What is meant by ‘fair’?
The ‘market egalitarianism’ argument embodies the idea that all individuals in the market should be placed on an equal footing, in so far as that is possible.
The belief here is that anyone making a trade based on superior information is in effect ‘stealing’ from other market participants by acting before the information is made available to all traders.
A version of this argument was offered as the underlying policy rationale by the Second Circuit in the celebrated case of SEC v.
Texas Gulf Sulphur Co .
There it was said:
All investors should have equal access to the rewards of participation in the securities transactions.
It was the intent of Congress that all members of the investing public should be subject to identical risks…
[I]niquities based upon unequal access to knowledge should not be shrugged off as inevitable in our way of life, or, in view of the Congressional concern in the area, remain in force.
(at p.848)
Carried to its logical extreme, this doctrine would eliminate the use of all ‘informational advantages’.
Such a policy should not be endorsed.
In a society where responsible profit-making is praised, it would be inconsistent to require parties to forgo legitimately earned informational advantages.
The market egalitarianism argument fails to draw a distinction between the legitimate and illegitimate use of non public price sensitive information.
Such a distinction is important; if not essential.
The widely held view is that traders should not deal on the basis of an information advantage which is unerodable.
Superior information,legally obtained , is, however, considered fundamental to stock market trading.
The SEC has acknowledged the need to encourage legitimate information gathering and dissemination so as to promote the efficient operation of the nation's securities markets.
Information advantages are legitimately obtained by conduct which amounts to ‘skill’, ‘foresight’, and ‘industry’; rather than by conduct constituting ‘secreting’, ‘stealing’, and ‘purloining’.
Another strand of the moralist argument, this time concerning fairness and breach of duty, is also important.
In its report in the early seventies, Justice concluded that insider dealing was contrary to‘good business ethics’, and that anyone holding a position of trust in a company should not use confidential information.
This idea of trust and fidelity is important from society's point of view.
Values such as trust, honesty, and integrity should be encouraged, not eroded.
Insiders are in a privileged position; they are under a moral duty to act responsibly, and not to profit from information which they receive but do not own.
This moral duty should be backed up with the force of law.
3.3.
Arguments in Relation to the Factual Consequences of Insider Dealing
The debate concerning the factual consequences of insider dealing has centred mainly, though not solely, on the predictive power of economics.
The arguments run both ways.
This ability to manipulate economic analysis to suit one's argument is undoubtedly a weakness.
But while economics can distort, obscure, and confuse, it can also describe, explain, and inform.
It may therefore have something of value to offer.
Kay, in a fashion uncharacteristic of UK lawyers, quite sensibly argues that:
…it would be unwise to introduce a prohibition on insider trading before some attempt to prognosticate the economic repercussions of such a prohibition has been made.
A cost-benefit approach may well yield a different result form a purely moral one.
(footnote omitted).
But while many of the economic arguments favouring unrestricted insider dealing make interesting reading, they cannot prove that insider dealing is desirable.
Equally, economics cannot prove that insider dealing is undesirable.
Economics cannot quantify the unquantifiable.
At an academic and policy level the debate over the pros and cons of insider dealing has run its course; those in favour of regulation have won.
Insider dealing has been roundly trounced, widely discredited, and often outlawed.
The true cost of allowing unfettered insider dealing has become less important than what people think the true costs to be.
Notwithstanding this, any regulatory policy should have a rational basis.
As we shall see, such a basis exists for regulating insider dealing.
3.3.1.
Is Insider Dealing Inefficient?
The issue of whether insider dealing is efficient or inefficient is problematic.
How does one decide whether the overall economic costs of regulation outweigh the overall economic benefits of regulation?
The economist will point to econometric analysis.
But while this may well provide some help, it will not produce answers.
Appropriate data is impossible to acquire; the task is too complex and the findings most probably unreliable.
The view expressed here is that it is impossible to quantify either the costs or benefits of insider dealing in any meaningful sense.
Economic analysis has, therefore, only a limited role to play.
As the writer of one recent report states:
We have examined the question whether it is feasible to test the efficiency arguments by econometric means.
Cost/benefit analysis requires data about both.
The requisite data is not available, and it is never likely to become available…
Overall, do the economic benefits of insider trading exceed the costs?…
There is no empirical research that we can accept as reliable.
Our opinion, therefore, reflects our judgement of an untested, and we believe, untestable, problem.
Our own view is that the costs to the economy of insider trading exceed the benefits, but it seems to be impossible to quantify either costs or benefits over any period of time…
[Alternatively]do the economic benefits of attempting to prevent insider trading exceed the costs?
In our view, yes, but we cannot quantify them and we believe that no-one can.
Our conclusion is that economic efficiency theories, carefully examined, support the prohibition of insider trading.
(footnote omitted)
The economic arguments regarding the efficiency or otherwise of insider dealing revolve around three areas:(i) insider dealing as a means of compensation;(ii) insider dealing as a means of improving allocative efficiency (both in terms of market speed and smoothness); and (iii) insider dealing and enforcement.
(i) Is Insider Dealing an Appropriate Means of Rewarding Entrepreneurs?
Manne's main argument in favour of the use of inside information is that insider dealing provides ‘the only effective compensation scheme for entrepreneurial services in large corporations.’
He rejects the suggestion that salary is a satisfactory reward to entrepreneurs, and argues that the opportunity to trade on the basis of inside information should be viewed as part of a compensation package to encourage innovation.
Innovation is seen as desirable because it invariably increases efficiency, and makes for higher profits.
Individuals have little incentive to innovate unless they have some way of sharing in the value which they have created.
Insider dealing provides a route by which they may do so.
Carlton and Fischel advance a similar argument.
They suggest that, insider dealing by managers , and other employees in the securities of their own firms based on superior knowledge is an adequate way of compensating corporate personnel.
They contend that the allocation of valuable property rights in information would be better left to private contractual negotiations rather than formal law.
Two advantages follow from permitting insider dealing on this basis.
First, the cost of re-negotiating working conditions is neatly avoided; and secondly, superior managers can be differentiated from inferior ones.
Managers who are permitted to trade on inside information have an incentive to acquire and develop valuable information, which involves risk.
It is difficult for firms to identify those who are good managers, and those who are not overly risk averse.
Basing a manager's compensation package on the use of inside information helps identify the better managers.
It is clear that Manne and his supporters see the use of inside information as a reward to entrepreneurs and other corporate employees for their initiative and ingenuity; a perk, as it were, for the role they play within the economic system.
Manne finds it hard to understand why it is unfair, or unjust, or immoral to allow a voluntary arrangement in which individuals are given additional incentives to produce more of a valuable commodity by being allowed to share in the new value of the commodity they produce.
His conclusion, therefore, is that insider dealing should be allowed, indeed encouraged.
Leaving aside for one moment the arguments advanced earlier about the morality of insider dealing, the use of inside information to compensate managers and entrepreneurs is not without its practical difficulties.
First, insider dealing is an unpredictable form of reward; in fact the opportunity to exploit inside information may come only ‘once every ten years for each listed company.’
Secondly, there is a very high risk factor attached to insider dealing as a form of compensation.
An information leak, for example, would have a bearing on the extent to which others who possess the information have already been buying or selling.
Thirdly, the time period within which the information is to be captured may be too short, in that the entrepreneur may lack the credit and capital facilities to capitalise on the opportunity.
In addition to these practical difficulties, there are more principled objections.
Reward should be commensurate with effort.
Insider dealing may over-compensate some entrepreneurs and managers.
Indeed it may encourage some insiders to create shock news.
For example, a manager who generates ‘bad’ news may make profits by trading on the basis of that bad news.
This creates a problem in that there is no justification why a manager's compensation package should be supplemented at the expense of the corporation or its shareholders.
Ideally, an incentive should operate to deter a manager from creating any form of shock news.
Equally, legitimizing insider dealing could encourage managers to invest in risky projects.
This would in turn impede correct decision-making.
For all the above reasons, it is contended that insider dealing is an inappropriate form of reward.
(ii) Does Insider Dealing make the Stock Market More Efficient?
In western capitalist economies scarce resources are, in the main, allocated via the price mechanism; this is the interaction of the forces of demand and supply to form a market.
The stock market represents the market for publicly traded stocks and shares.
It is widely assumed that the more efficiently a stock market functions the better off everyone is.
Efficiency in this sense is gauged in terms of allocative efficiency.
This is achieved when scarce resources are channelled to their highest return uses.
The aim is to have prices reflect all available information and so provide reliable signals upon which investment decisions can be based.
Investors should be able to identify those companies where their capital is most needed, and will be most profitably used.
This enables resources to be efficiently allocated and not ‘wasted’ in companies which are going into decline.
An efficient stock market is therefore necessary to ensure an efficient use of capital.
It has a direct effect not only on investment decisions, but also on the market for corporate control and the market for managers.
While this much is agreed, there remains considerable debate over how efficiency is to be achieved, and at what cost.
The traditional means of making sure that stock market prices reflect available information is to require firms to disclose relevant information publicly via the imposition of disclosure requirements.
Good news drives the price of the stock upwards, and bad news downwards.
Manne argues, however, that that regulation via increased disclosure decreases efficiency.
Moreover he doubts whether full disclosure is in any way feasible.
In his opinion, insider dealing provides a better and more efficient mechanism for channelling information into the market.
The benefits from insider dealing are supposedly two-fold: first, insider dealing benefits the firm; and secondly, insider dealing benefits society.
As for the first, disclosure is costly, and at some point the costs begin to outweigh the benefits of increased disclosure.
The costs are borne not only by society, but also by the firm.
Carlton and Fischel argue that insider dealing may be a more cost effective way for the firm to release news to the markets.
They maintain that through insider dealing the firm can convey information it could not feasibly announce publicly because an announcement would:(1) destroy the value of the information,(2) be too expensive,(3) not be believable, and (4)(owing to uncertainty of information) expose the firm to liability because it was found after the fact to be incorrect.
Insider dealing in this respect is controlled by restricting the number of traders who have access to information, a technique which they believe is easier than trying to control how much information is announced over a given period of time.
Insider dealing, however, not only provides firms with a cost effective way of releasing news to the market, it also provides a speedy and efficient means by which the markets can integrate new information into the price of a security (the ‘market speed argument’) and helps smooth out fluctuations in stock market prices (the ‘market smoothness argument’).
The speed with which markets incorporate new information into the market price of a security has been well discussed in the academic literature.
Manne suggests that ‘insider trading will always push stock prices in the correct direction.
That is, the effect of insider dealing will always be to move a share's price towards the level correctly reflecting all the real facts about the company.’
Thus, if insider dealing enables ‘everything known about the company whether public or not to be reflected in the price of that company's shares’ then investors (outsiders) are unlikely to undertake investments ‘blind-sided’by developments not yet reflected in the current prices of the shares.
Insiders therefore reduce the luck factor and outsiders, as a consequence, get a fairer deal.
This is a view which is endorsed by Moran:
How rapidly mispricing is corrected when insiders trade depends on the reaction of the market price to the insider's trades and the timeliness of disclosure once the insider has traded.
Insider trading on undisclosed information causes a more gradual adjustment in share prices than if the information is made public (Manne, 1966, p.87).
The timing of the disclosure is often prescribed by convention, however, and disclosure laws are not fully enforced, so insiders can usually trade in advance of an announcement (Manne, 1966, pp.103–104).
Thus, prices begin adjusting earlier when insiders trade on their information.
Once their trades are completed, insiders' incentives are to disclose the information.
Therefore the interval required for stock prices to adjust to new information is reduced when insiders trade (Demsetz, 1969a, p.14)(emphasis added).
But far from increasing the speed with which information is assimilated into the market and reflected in the price of the share in question, insider dealing may provide incentives for insiders to actually delay the public disclosure of valuable information.
Insiders may decide to defer public disclosure so that they may first build up a position in the relevant shares.
Insiders can ‘accumulate quite a substantial position in stock without running up the price or otherwise attracting notice.’
The effect of trading on the basis of information which has not been made public is to distort the market in the shares to which the information relates.
In other words, the price at which those shares are being traded is an artificial one.
When the information becomes publicly available the share price will adjust to reflect the true underlying value of the shares.
A distortion of the market in this way not only impedes the allocative efficiency of the market but may have a bearing on public confidence in the stock market; this may in turn adversely affect market liquidity.
Market liquidity is important.
Insider dealing arguably increases the cost for a firm needing to raise capital.
Simply stated, the argument is that the cost of capital of a corporation with management that trades on inside information will be higher than a corporation with management that does not engage in such trading.
The explanation is based on the perceived harmful effects of insider dealing: investors will pay less for shares in companies which permit insider dealing.
This explanation, it has to be admitted, is not wholly convincing, and would appear to be contradicted by the actions of investors and the fortunes of firms.
It has been pointed out that investors are primarily motivated to invest in a company's shares on the basis of the company's likely profitability; not whether the management engage in insider dealing.
While there is undoubtedly a good deal of truth in this it would be wrong from the anti-regulators to assume that investors are unconcerned about the presence of insiders.
Investors do not always sell their shares for exogenous reasons irrespective of whether or not they perceive insiders to be operating in the market.
Surely, investors will be less willing to buy and sell shares if they think that they may soon become the ‘victims’ of insider dealing.
If indeed the public refrain from investing, the result is ‘that the market becomes less liquid, and thus less able to fuel the expanding demands of free enterprise’.
The above argument is endorsed by Brudney.
He suggests that if outside investors are unaware of which corporations have managers who trade on inside information, some members of the public will refrain from investment altogether, while others will incur costs to avoid dealing with executives with non-public information.
The result could mean an increase in the cost of capital for public corporations generally.
Manne also argues that insider dealing helps smooth out fluctuations in stock market prices.
He suggests that gradual movements in share prices caused by insider dealing are preferable to the erratic jumps in prices brought about by enforced disclosure.
This is due to the fact that if there is no insider dealing ‘those who transact only a few moments apart may get very different prices and will view the market as performing unfairly’.
The example that Manne uses is as follows:
Let us assume that a stock is selling at $50, with undisclosed good news which will ultimately cause the stock to sell for $60, and that no factors other than the good news will affect the price.
Suppose, further, that with insider trading the price of the shares rises gradually to $60.
The average price at which shares sell during this period is somewhere in the neighbourhood of $55 (more or less depending on the shape of the time-price curve).
At $60, anyone who has held his shares will have received the full benefit of the new information whether it is disclosed to him or not.
This advantage to the ultimate holder remains even if we effectively prevent insider trading.
Without insider trading, however, the position of those who sell during the time required for the price to rise from $50 to $60 is radically altered.
No longer do they receive an average price of $55.
Assuming that the ultimate disclosure is made at the same time under either rule, they receive only $50 for their share without insider trading.
In short, they get less than they would with insider trading.
(emphasis in the original).
Manne now acknowledges that this argument may be less persuasive than he initially thought: ‘[t]hat kind of trading may have some impact, but we cannot be sure a priori how much impact it will actually have, if it will have any at all.’
He refines his argument in the light of evidence that nowadays the demand curve for a company's stock is extremely elastic: ‘[t]hus even large purchases of stock will not necessarily have an immediate and noticeable effect on its price since other stocks are seen as perfect substitutes.’
Similarly, in a widely quoted study conducted by Wu, the findings were that a ‘substantial impact of insider trading on stock prices could not be expected.’
Of course, even if insider trading had some tendency to make the market smoother the benefit from that smoothness (and it is not entirely clear why smooth gradual movements are preferable to sudden jumps) might not be worth its cost.
As Schotland argues: ‘[b]oth economists and the ‘fairness-minded’ will prefer…a market characterised by informed transactions with sharp price shifts when the information changes, rather than one characterised by many uninformed transactions.’
(iii) Can a Rule Against Insider Dealing be Enforced?
The trouble with enforcement, says Manne, is that it can never be perfect, since perfect enforcement would require unacceptable policing levels.
The SEC has given evidence of its own inability to police its anti-insider dealing regulations, especially where foreign funding of such trading is involved.
In these circumstances, the benefits to the individual (or firm) outweigh the costs of detection, thus providing incentives for the use of inside information.
The argument is clear: anti-insider dealing law is unenforceable; an unenforceable law is a bad law; bad law should not be on the statute books.
However, if an activity is deemed unacceptable, it would seem that even partial enforcement would be preferable to no enforcement at all.
It is important therefore to build into the existing legal disincentives a heavy penalty to compensate for the difficulty of detection.
Manne develops his critique of enforcement further.
He not only attacks the SEC for being politically grounded, suggesting that the SEC's limited resources are being focused on those least in favour with the enforcement agency, but by adopting the Stigler ‘interest theory’ of regulation, he argues that if one were to look for the supporters of anti-insider dealing provisions, one would find that it is neither society nor the markets, but the SEC itself.
The suggestion here is that the SEC favours regulatory restrictions on insider dealing because via these restrictions, it receives a larger budget, a greater sphere of influence, and more political control.
In adopting this approach, Manne ignores the fact that much financial regulation including insider dealing has been sponsored by liberal groups, and not necessarily by the regulatory bodies.
For example, in the UK, Justice, published an influential report in the early seventies calling for prohibitions on insider dealing.
Equally, much financial services regulation prior to the eighties was self-regulatory.
The insular nature of such regulation was much removed from larger budgets and increased political control.
Furthermore, in the UK the regulation is not in practice in the hands of one regulatory body.
The DTI, SIB, Stock Exchange, Takeover Panel, and SRO's all have some input.
Many of the individuals in these entities are on secondment, or are fixed term appointments.
They stand to benefit little from the insider dealing prohibition.
Secondly, Manne suggests that there is a more fundamental reason why there can never be a rule against the profitable use of inside information in the stock market.
The reason is this: a large proportion of people who exploit new information do not buy additional stock; instead, they simply do not sell .
A failure to sell based on inside information is neither illegal in the US nor in the UK because there has been no securities transaction.
Manne claims that ‘not selling [may]…be the dominant method of using inside information.’
It is, however, questionable whether Manne's ‘negative’ insider dealing conception (that is, not selling on the basis of inside information) is a dominant or even significant means of insider dealing.
Individuals and corporate entities who use inside information do so to make money.
The most effective way of doing this is to actively trade on the information acquired even though they run the risk of being prosecuted.
The best that can be said for Manne's argument is that as the risks of insider dealing increase, ‘not trading’ trading may become more popular.
Thirdly, argues Manne, the costs of enforcement must also be viewed in the light of the high compliance and escape costs relating to rules against insider dealing.
Costs are borne in employing lawyers and other specialists to ensure that trades are within the law.
He argues therefore, that, given the potential rewards, inefficient devices will be used to exploit the information; inefficient devices are used because straightforward methods are apt to be detected.
While the above argument takes into account costs which the lawyer would normally ignore in reaching a policy choice, Manne nonetheless constructs a cost/benefit calculus which neglects to take into account the totality of costs involved in unfettered insider dealing.
3.3.2.
Does Insider Dealing Cause Harm?
The idea that harm is a basis upon which to regulate conduct is often attributed to John Stuart Mill.
Mill's ‘harm-to-others’ principle seems simple, but in practice it has many problems.
What, for example, is meant by ‘harm’?
Who counts as ‘others’?
How serious must the harm be?
These problems are equally prevalent when the harm principle is applied to insider dealing.
There is no way of telling whether those ‘hurt’ by insider dealing are more numerous than those ‘hurt’by trading before inside facts have impacted the market via ‘legitimate’disclosure rules, so that investors are price-takers taking a faulty price.
The evidence will never become available.
It is often said that unfettered insider dealing does not hurt shareholders; that insiders' profits are not outsiders' losses, but rather evidence of a more efficient allocation of resources; Just because an investor does not make as much money on the sale of his shares as he would otherwise have done, does not make him a victim in the true sense, as nothing has been stolen from him.
The argument here is that insider dealing is a victimless crime.
In a sense this argument is correct: it is extremely difficult, without resorting to artificial devices, to show a causal connection between the insider's trades and the loss allegedly sustained.
After all the outsider chose to engage in the share transaction and accepted the price offered.
However such an argument is a distortion of the true picture.
Ultimately the net benefits from insider dealing must equal the net losses.
Someone must lose, even if the losses are spread thinly.
For insider dealing does not lack victims but rather, credible plaintiffs.
In other words, it is difficult to identify the victim for legal purposes.
Who then might this victim be?
Is it the person who sells his shares to the insider?
Such an investor would have already have decided to sell in any case.
Indeed, as we shall see later, there is an argument that he benefits from any upward pressure exerted by insider dealing.
In practice the most likely victim of insider dealing is the market maker with whom the insider trades.
Goodhart takes this argument one step further:
The operations of insider traders effectively cause losses to market-makers with whom they deal.
In order to recoup such losses, market makers have to widen their spreads that they charge all other investors, including those wishing to speculate but not privy to inside information.
The ultimate victims, therefore, are the ordinary investors who have to pay indirectly higher transactions charges for the gains of the insiders.
So there are real benefits to be obtained in preventing [insider dealing]…
If, indeed, it is the market maker who initially sustains the loss, how is this loss to be calculated?
In truth, the loss is difficult to determine.
To do so requires a comparison of the market-makers actual portfolio of investments at the time of the disclosure of the inside information, with the portfolio he could have had in the absence of the inside trade.
Such a comparison is, however, impossible to achieve.
A market maker does not have complete control over his portfolio because he is always required to make a market.
We are therefore left with the unsatisfactory position that the market maker may well be harmed but be the very person who is unable to prove that this was caused by the inside trade.
While difficulties in calculating harm may impede the application of the ‘harm-to-others’ principle, the regulation of insider dealing should not stand or fall on the fact that proof of harm is difficult to acquire.
It is not necessary to establish loss or injury to an individual or a group; it is enough that losses are sustained.
On this basis, insider dealing should be prohibited unless there is some compelling justification for relaxing the prohibition.
Of course, those who advocate unfettered insider dealing emphasise not only the lack of victims.
They also emphasise the fact that the so-called victim, or outsider, may actually benefit from the insider's trades in the form of higher prices.
He may benefit simply because the insider has entered the market.
This argument is, however, conditional on a number of factors.
First, the long term investor (the one, Manne suggests, we should be most keen to protect) must actually be selling for reasons other than to make a quick profit.
In other words, it is assumed that the investor trades on a time basis; he would be selling in any event, irrespective of the insider trader and without being influenced by the price of the security in question.
Such an assumption will not always be correct.
In any case, the argument misses the point.
It is easy to give examples where individual outsiders benefit from the activity of insiders; the fact remains that the expected rate of return to outsiders on stock market investments (even to the large institutional investors such as pensions funds and mutual funds) is lowered by insider dealing.
In other words the profits are ‘creamed off’ by insiders.
If this view is correct then the victims are all those constituting the market, other than the insiders.
3.4.
Summary
The law does not seek to prohibit all asymmetric trades (trades where one party has more information than another); nor should it.
Instead it is important to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate share trading.
In western capitalist economies the vast majority of governments have sought to reflect this distinction by adopting anti-insider dealing laws.
Often the justification for regulating insider dealing has revolved around issues of fairness and market confidence, but economic arguments have also been advocated.
Determining the costs and benefits of regulating insider dealing is by no means a straightforward task.
It is made none the easier by the differences in approach used to analyze the nature of the problem.
Often the perspective initially taken, whether economic or legal, colours the ultimate conclusions.
The debate concerning the factual consequences of insider dealing has centred mainly on the predictive power of economics.
Manne has argued that insider dealing brings many advantages and few, if any, disadvantages.
He uses economics to show how this is so.
In this way, he identifies costs which anti-insider dealers have often ignored.
However economics can prove nothing: it is not a science, but a social science.
Economics should only be used to indicate potential costs and not, of itself, to determine policy choices; for more often than not economic arguments neglect to take into account the totality of the costs involved.
The argument outlined in Chapter 3 is that the long term interests of society are best served by a set of regulatory arrangements designed to deter at all levels the misuse of inside information.
As we shall see, this not only involves detailed statutory measures prohibiting insider dealing (these are outlined in the following chapter), but also the effective implementation of other institutional arrangements such as Chinese Walls (discussed in Chapter Five and thereafter) to block the flow of price sensitive information within financial conglomerates.
It is difficult to provide an outright basis for this antipathy towards insider dealing, owing not only to the speculative nature of the inquiry but also because conclusive data does not exist and indeed is not likely ever to exist.
However, it would seem fair to say that in a western liberal democracy with a market based economy, society has a legitimate interest in protecting the market from conduct which is perceived to be an abuse of normal practice in that market.
In the final analysis, the true cost of allowing insider dealing is less important than what people think the true cost to be.
4
LEGISLATIVE APPROACH TO INSIDER DEALING IN BOTH THE UK AND THE US
4.1.
INTRODUCTION
As shown in Chapter Three, assessing the costs and benefits of insider dealing is by no means a straightforward task.
The conclusion was that the practice ought to be regulated.
But what form should regulation take?
Should criminal or civil sanctions be employed, or should regulation fall to the professional bodies, to be dealt with in the time-honoured fashion of self-regulation?
The regulation of insider dealing necessarily involves a complex assessment of the available regulatory options.
In principle these include: formal regulation by law, involving criminal and/or civil sanctions; self-regulation by the relevant professional bodies; or an amalgam of both formal law and self-regulation.
Self-regulation is, prima facie, an attractive mechanism for regulating insider dealing.
The Government has acknowledged this in its White Paper on Financial Services:
Self-regulation has a continuing and crucial contribution to make.
It means commitment by practitioners to the maintenance of high standards as a matter of integrity and principle, not because they are imposed from outside.
There is no doubt that self-regulation offers many advantages.
It is, for example, extremely flexible.
Informality means that new loopholes can be speedily and efficiently closed, thereby avoiding both needless expense and the unwieldiness of formal legal processes.
Practitioners can bring their own specialist skills to bear in outlining practices to be avoided, and in unravelling complex questions of fact when sitting in judgment.
Equally, there exists a self-interest among the regulating profession to keep the reputations of their businesses untarnished by actively seeking out abuse rather than punishing offenders after the event.
Probably the most attractive feature of self-regulation, however, is the fact that the regulated must obey not only the letter of the self-regulatory codes but also the spirit.
While the above advantages are undeniable, and would all have a positive bearing on the regulation of insider dealing, self-regulation is better seen as a complement to, rather than as a replacement of, formal regulatory measures.
Statute-backed regulation is necessary in order to lay down minimum standards in the public domain.
The nature of this formal regulation has been the subject of much debate.
One approach could be to adopt legislation promoting the increased disclosure of inside information to the public.
This would eliminate the insiders' opportunity to profit from insider news, which would have already made its impact on the market.
There are, however, problems associated with increased disclosure, some of which have already been outlined, namely: disclosure is costly; inappropriate disclosure could destroy the value of the information to the company; increased disclosure requirements could lead to incorrect or misleading information being released; in the case of a financial conglomerate, employees who legitimately acquire confidential information from corporate clients, are unable, by virtue of the duty of confidence they owe to their client, to release the confidential news.
Another option would be to allow a shareholder of the company in whose shares insider dealing has taken place, or an outsider (ie the person who buys those shares from someone with inside information), to apply for rescission of the contract.
Here again there are problems.
When trading takes place on anonymous markets it may be difficult to match up the buyer and the seller, thus making rescission virtually impossible.
In any case, even if it were possible, the shares may have been passed on to a bona fide purchaser for value.
Yet another possibility would be for the law to make the insider account for his profits.
But to whom should the remedy be given?
If the company is given the remedy, it may choose not to exercise it.
If it does, there is no way in which the outsider can directly benefit; indeed, the insider may indirectly benefit, depending on whether or not he is a member of the company.
If the remedy is given to the outsider, he will find it difficult, in view of the anonymous nature of the stock market, to show that he has suffered a loss as a result of the insider's trades.
Again, it could be argued that many of the above deficiencies are remedied by the use of self-regulation.
However, solely practitioner based remedies, notwithstanding their merits, would not only be politically indefensible, but would represent a serious miscalculation in regulating the abuse.
What then are the other alternatives?
The argument advanced here is that insider dealing is the sort of conduct which ought to be criminal.
Western liberal democracies may legitimately use the symbolic and stigmatic function of the criminal law to outlaw conduct which is incompatible with the ideals upon which those democracies depend, here, fair and orderly stock markets.
Insider dealing is an economic crime in much the same way as theft is a crime of property.
Once it is established that insider dealing ought to be a criminal offence, the question becomes: how much do we punish and why?
The view expressed here is that the punishment of those found guilty of insider dealing ought to be sufficient to act as a general deterrent for others who have access to inside information, so as to further reduce the incentive to indulge in the practice of insider dealing.
General deterrence, though by no means the sole purpose of the criminal law either here or in other areas, is very important in the insider dealing context.
Given that insiders are difficult to catch, exemplary sentences are required, pour encourager les autres.
Formal regulation finds expression through technically prohibitive statements of law, backed up by the threat of some sanction consequent upon breach.
But while this formal approach may clarify legitimate and illegitimate conduct in relation to stock market trading, it suffers from many of the drawbacks which characterise the use of formal law generally.
Formal legal regulation is often cumbersome and time consuming.
Given the huge amount of resources expended in detecting and penalising abuse, it is more widely criticised for being inefficient.
Indeed, it is often ineffective, due to the difficulty of detecting abuse and, in criminal cases at least, the high standard of proof required for a successful prosecution.
It is clear then, that there are flaws in relying upon solely statutory regulation or self-regulation to regulate insider abuse.
A more sophisticated approach is required.
The solution offered in the Financial Services Act 1986 is a practitioner based statute backed system of supervision; one characterised by an over-arching statutory framework with much of the fine detail being fleshed out by practitioners.
Statutory provisions, backed up by the general law, provide a form of ‘blanket regulation’ of the insider dealing, while special self-regulatory and quasi-statutory controls, aimed specifically at insider dealing within financial conglomerates and other contexts, focus on special areas of concern.
In this way, formal anti-insider dealing law dovetails neatly with practitioner based regulation aimed at preventing and penalising the misuse of inside information.
The range of measures consists of both criminal and civil penalties, as well as other disciplinary sanctions.
The important point to note about the current approach is that the existence of the substantive law, and the penalties imposed in the event of breach and detection, provide an important incentive for players to abide by the self-regulatory and quasi-statutory controls, which generally carry lighter penalties.
It follows therefore that a discussion of the effectiveness of the Chinese Wall (a self regulatory/quasi-statutory mechanism designed,inter alia , to prevent insider dealing) ought sensibly to be preceded by an initial outline of the substantive law regulating the practice, the likelihood of detection, and the penalties capable of being imposed.
To sharpen the focus of the discussion, the substantive law in both the UK and the US is considered.
4.2.
THE REGULATION OF INSIDER DEALING IN THE UK
Notwithstanding the recent flurry of statutory and quasi-statutory regulatory activity in relation to insider dealing in the UK, there has operated for a number of years a range of sanctions aimed at deterring insider abuse in both the corporate/ unorthodox context and the individual/traditional context.
The prohibitions on insider dealing in the UK vary widely.
At one extreme there are the formal legal rules of the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985, as amended.
These are complemented by the quasi-statutory rules of the SIB, the SRO's, and the RPB's (which,inter alia , cover the misuse of inside information).
The pervasive and largely underdeveloped common law rules underpin the statutory and quasi-statutory framework.
Then finally, there are the self-regulatory rules of the Stock Exchange (the Model Code of Conduct for Securities Transactions by Directors of Listed Companies) and the Panel on Take-over's and Mergers (the City Code on Take-overs and Mergers).
The Model Code covers, inter alia, the trading activities of directors of listed Plc's, while the Take-over Code governs all securities transactions by those connected with takeovers and mergers.
Despite the fact that neither the Model Code nor the Take-over Code have the force of law, they do represent important statements of commercial morality and at times breach of them may have legal consequences.
It is important to note that amendments to the UK's insider dealing laws are in the pipeline.
These amendments are a response not only to the recent EEC Directive on Coordinating the Regulation of Insider Dealing in Member States, but also represent an attempt to remedy certain perceived defects in the current legislation.
In the DTI's December 1989 consultative document entitled The Law of Insider Dealing five areas were outlined for reform: the definition of inside information, the definition of primary insiders, the definition of off market and on market, the definition of securities, and finally, the scope of the defences.
In short, the recent EEC directive has prompted proposed changes which aim to simplify and expand the law.
It also requires greater regulatory co-operation.
The substantive law on insider dealing can be found in both the common law and more recently in statute.
The Companies Act 1985, requires a general policy of disclosure of insiders' interests.
The CSA 1985, which is by far the most important piece of legislation, in that it lies at the heart of anti-insider dealing regulation in the UK, outlines the substantive elements of insider dealing offences.
However it only makes provision for criminal penalties, and not civil remedies.
This defect is, in part, made good by the Financial Services Act 1986, which provides a statutory civil remedy in the event of a breach of the rules and regulations of the SIB, a Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO), or a recognised professional body (RPB), all of which operate rules that, inter alia , include the misuse of inside information.
The FSA 1986 (Chapter X) also significantly enhances the investigative powers of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and has spawned the quasi-statutory anti-insider dealing rules made by the SIB and other rule-making bodies who fall under the jurisdiction of the SIB in accordance with the provisions of the FSA.
4.2.1.
DISCLOSURE: Companies Act 1985
It is important to note, before going on to look at the main body of legislation in detail, that prior to 1980, when insider dealing first became a statutory offence (by virtue of Part V of the 1980 Companies Act), the legislative means of curtailing the practice was limited to disclosure provisions contained in general companies legislation.
These provisions, which are now to be found in the Companies Act 1985, Part X, require directors and other primary insiders to disclose their holdings and dealings in the company with whom they are connected by way of employment.
Section 323, for example, prohibits a director from dealing in options of the securities of his company and in other companies within the same group.
Section 324 specifies that directors must disclose their shareholdings in the company in question and its related companies, while s.325 makes it obligatory for the company to keep a record of all of its directors' interests.
These provisions are extended by s. 327 and 328 to include the disclosure of interests held by spouses and children, definitions of which are given in s.327.
Furthermore s.329 obliges the company to inform the Stock Exchange of the interests specified in ss.324–328.
This information may be made available to the public.
4.2.2.
PROHIBITION: Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985
While the Companies Act 1985 adopts a policy of disclosure to guard against insider dealing, the CSA 1985 contains the substantive body of legislation prohibiting the practice.
The CSA 1985 is a complex piece of statutory craftsmanship, and all of its provisions do not directly concern us.
We will, therefore, focus on only a few aspects, namely: primary insider trading, secondary insider trading (tippee trading), tipping, and counselling and procuring others to commit an offence under the Act.
A concise statutory definition of insider dealing is not offered in the CSA 1985, but conduct constituting insider dealing may be said to exist where: an insider deliberately deals as principal or agent on a recognised exchange in securities of the company in question on the basis of unpublished price sensitive information with a view to making a profit or avoiding a loss.
The point at the very heart of anti-insider dealing legislation is the prohibition on the use of valuable information.
The law is called upon to distinguish between information which may be legitimately used to make a stock market trade, and that which may not.
This distinction is crucial, especially for entities such as financial conglomerates, which continually deal in information.
Some of it is valuable in itself, and some becomes valuable when it is pieced together with other information.
It goes without saying that financial conglomerates must not use information prohibited by law.
But since the nature of their business is so inexorably linked with valuable information legitimately acquired, it is difficult to ensure that this information is not illegitimately used.
The Chinese Wall is a device employed by conglomerates to ensure that they operate within the law.
The Wall is designed to block the flow of information legitimately acquired by one department, to other departments.
The definition of what constitutes insider information is therefore crucial, for it determines the information a conglomerate may pass through the Wall and that which it must conceal.
What sort of information advantage is prohibited by the CSA 1985?
Unpublished Price Sensitive Information
It is important to emphasise that there are two types of ‘inside information’ of which the law must take cognizance.
On the one hand, there is information which is intrinsic to the company, known as corporate information.
An example of corporate information might be where the company itself is about to announce an increase in profits, or, a take-over bid.
On the other hand, there is information which may be said to be external to the company, commonly referred to as market information.
An example of market information could be where there is advance knowledge that a brokerage firm is about to publish a favourable research report about a company.
How has the CSA 1985 attempted to embrace this distinction?
Under the CSA 1985, an insider must deal and know that he is dealing when in possession of a particular type of information, referred to as ‘unpublished price sensitive information’.
Section 10 defines ‘unpublished price sensitive’ information as information which:
(a)
relates to specific matters relating or of concern (directly or indirectly) to that company, that is to say, is not of a general nature relating or of concern to that company; and
(b)
is not generally known to those persons who are accustomed or would be likely to deal in those securities but which would if it were generally known to them be likely to materially affect the price of those securities.
It would appear that the section covers only information which is specific, not generally known, and likely to materially affect the price of the securities in question.
Other than that, there is no guidance in the legislation as to what these terms actually mean.
The reference to specific information only, can be best explained by the need to ensure that the definition of inside information is not so wide as to include legitimate research undertaken by investment analysts.
In an attempt to offer practical guidance on the meaning of the distinction, the Minister of Trade in the Committee stage, suggested that what the government had in mind was the difference between ‘day-to-day knowledge’ and ‘knowledge of important factors which, when revealed to the market,[would]shift the price [of the shares]’.
Thus, knowledge that a company is facing a financial crisis, or a take-over or contemplated take-over, or company losses, or of major diversification plans, would all appear to constitute sufficient specificity.
Even if the information is specific, the insider may deal on the basis of it if the information is generally known to those persons who are accustomed or would be likely to deal in the securities in question.
This test is ambiguous.
Does it mean that once the information becomes known by market professionals the requirement is fulfilled?
Or must the information be known by both market professionals and the general public?
The latter would appear to be the better view, since those who are ‘likely to deal’ would be the general public.
This being established, the question becomes: at what stage is the information said to be known by the groups in question?
Is an announcement sufficient, or must the insider await the dissemination of the information?
Again, the better view would appear to be that an announcement is sufficient.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the information must ‘be likely materially to affect the price of’ the relevant securities.
Again, uncertainty surrounds this requirement.
Some commentators have suggested that a movement of less than 5% in the price of the shares in question would most probably be regarded as not material.
In the US, information is material if it is the sort of information where there is a ‘substantial likelihood that a reasonable shareholder would consider it important’ in making an investment decision about the company's stock.
Notwithstanding the difficulty in determining the exact meaning of the information defined in s.10, it must be borne in mind that whether information comes within the scope of the section is a question of fact for the jury or the magistrates to decide.
In this respect it is important to note that a common sense view will be taken, requiring something akin to: ‘knowledge of dramatic events, major happenings and things that which will transform the company's prospects.’
Insiders
Now that we have considered the type of information which the law deems as illegitimate for stock market trading, let us move on and look at some of the circumstances when trading on the basis of such information is illegal.
Earlier, it was noted that the law prohibits a particular category of person, called an insider, from dealing on the basis of unpublished price sensitive information if he does so with a view to making a profit or avoiding a loss.
Let us consider the position of these insiders in more detail.
Only individuals can be insiders, companies cannot.
However, since the company itself can only act through human agents, a transaction carried out for the benefit of the company, will mean that those acting for it will be liable under the CSA 1985.
As Mehigan argues: ‘[t]his is not a loop-hole but a sensible realisation that even if[a]company is the beneficiary of a deal then there must exist individuals who caused it to be so.’
However, it is, in theory, possible for a company to be made liable in relation to insider dealing offences.
Thus, if an individual deals on behalf of his company, it is possible that a company could be charged with aiding and abetting an offence under the legislation, or with conspiracy to commit an offence under the legislation.
For our purposes there are three main types of insider:
(i)
individuals connected with a company;
(ii)
individuals contemplating making a take-over offer for a company;
(iii)
tippees
We will consider each group in turn
(i) individuals connected with a company (sometimes called primary insiders)
An insider is an individual who is knowingly connected with a company in the six months prior to the securities trades in question.
An individual is connected with a company if he is:
(a)
director of that company or a related company; or
(b)
he is an officer or employee of that company or a related company who has access to unpublished price sensitive information which ought not reasonably to be disclosed except for the proper performance of his duties; or
(c)
he is in a professional or business relationship with that company or a related company and has access to unpublished price sensitive information which ought not reasonably to be disclosed except for the proper performance of his duties
The most important point to note about the above summary is the mens rea requirement: the individual/insider must know that he is a connected person.
The test is a subjective one.
Thus, a director must know that he is connected with his company or a related company; an officer or employee must know that he is connected with his company or a related company, and so on.
Knowledge in this context means either actual knowledge, which may be inferred from the conduct of the accused, or wilful blindness, which exists where the accused is aware that certain circumstances might exist but closes his mind to them.
Constructive knowledge, which is said to exist were the accused ought to have realised that certain circumstances prevail and has failed to make the enquires a reasonable person would have made, is not applicable since ‘knowingly’ connotes either intention or a subjective awareness of the relevant facts.
The insider must also know that the information he holds at the time of the trades in question is unpublished price sensitive information.
Again the test is subjective: did the defendant know that the information was of the type proscribed by the Act?
It matters not that a reasonable man would have known the information to be so.
As well as this, the insider must hold that information by virtue of his being connected with the company or the related company.
Then finally, in the case of officers, employees, and others in a professional or business relationship, they must be in a position which affords them access to information which they ought not reasonably to disclose, save for the proper performance of their duties.
Another important point to note is that it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove that the defendant actually made use of the information at the time of the trades in question.
Instead there operates a rebuttable presumption that the defendant did base his trades on the information in his possession.
The prohibition in s.1(1) is supplemented by s.1(2), which prevents an individual from dealing in securities on a recognised exchange, if that individual is an insider who is knowingly connected with a company or its related company who has information which:
(a)
he knows to be unpublished price sensitive information;
(b)
he holds by virtue of being connected with the first company;
(c)
it would be reasonable to expect a person so connected and in the position by virtue of which he is so connected, not to disclose save for the proper performance of the functions attached to that position;
(d)
relates to transactions (actual or contemplated) between the first company (or a related company) and any other company or involves one of them and the securities of the other, or to the fact that any such transaction is no longer contemplated;
It is clear from s.1(2) that once deemed an insider, the individual can be held liable for dealings in the securities of companies with which he has no direct relationship.
Thus A, a director of XYZ & Co (Plc), being aware of the placing of a major order for machinery from QPR & Co (Plc), which will entail a significant expansion in the latter's current output, will be precluded from buying shares in QPR & Co (Plc).
This is so despite the subsequent shelving of the deal.
(ii) individuals contemplating making a take-over offer for a company (a species of primary insider)
Trading in the shares of a target company on the basis of inside information is perhaps the best known form of insider dealing.
Not surprisingly, the CSA 1985 contains special provisions governing this area.
These are found in s.1(5).
It is interesting to note that s.1(2) (above) would also appear to cover much of the same territory.
Section 1(5) prohibits an individual who has contemplated or who is contemplating making a take-over offer for a company in one capacity from dealing in the shares of the offeree in another capacity if he knows that the information relating to the fact that the offer is contemplated or is no longer contemplated is unpublished price sensitive information.
(iii) tippee trading (sometimes called secondary insider dealing)
The provisions dealing with secondary insider trading are outlined in s.1(3) and (4) of the CSA 1985.
They aim to prevent any person taking advantage of a tip (insider knowledge) provided by someone who is a primary insider, for example, a connected person, discussed above.
The person who relays the information is called the tipper while the recipient of the information is called the tippee; thus secondary insider dealing is sometimes called tippee trading.
According to s.1(3) and (4) the tippee may not deal in the securities of a company if:
(a)
he holds information which he knows is unpublished price sensitive information in relation to that company; and
(b)
he has knowingly obtained (whether directly or indirectly) that information from another individual who is connected with that company, or was at any time in the six months preceding the obtaining of that information, so connected, and who the tippee knows or has reasonable cause to believe, held the information by virtue of being so connected; and he
(c)
knows or has reasonable cause to believe that, because of the individual's connection and position, it would be reasonable to expect him not to disclose that information save for the proper performance of his duties.
Equally, the tippee is prohibited from dealing in the shares of any other company if he knows:
(a)
that the information is unpublished price sensitive information in relation to those securities; and
(b)
it relates to any transaction (actual or contemplated) involving the company with which the insider is connected and the other company, or involving one of them and the securities of the other, or to the fact that any such transaction is no longer contemplated.
The meaning of ‘obtained’ in s.1(3) has been the subject of prolonged debate in the courts recently.
In Attorney General's Reference (No 1 of 1988), the question before the House of Lords was whether ‘obtained’ within the context of s.1(3) could include the passive receipt of information, or whether that information had to be procured by endeavour.
In that case, the defendant (D) made an offer to acquire the bulk of a company's shares.
He approached the company's financial advisers, Kleinwort Benson.
However, unknown to either D or the financial advisers, the company had reached an agreement with a rival bidder, Diamond Ltd.
In due course, the company informed their financial advisers of the new arrangement and agreed that in the circumstances, proper practice dictated that D be told of the new development.
X, an officer at Kleinwort Benson, telephoned D and told him that the target company had accepted a new offer.
She did not tell him the price or the amount of shares involved, but did say that an announcement would soon be made.
X went on to tell D that the information she was imparting was sensitive and highly confidential and that as a result of the conversation he would be an ‘insider.’
D then telephoned his brokers and bought 6000 shares in Thompson T-Line Plc, which, after Diamond's announcement of the takeover, he sold at profit of £3,000.
D was subsequently charged with dealing as a prohibited person in the securities of a company contrary to: s. 1(3) and s.1(4) (a) and s.8(1) of the CSA 1985, as amended.
He pleaded not guilty.
The issue was whether he had ‘obtained’ the information within the meaning of the CSA 1985.
At first instance Judge Butler ruled that the word ‘obtained’ in s.1(3) of the CSA 1985 had to be given a strict construction.
By that he meant an individual could only commit an offence under the sub-section if, inter alia, he had actively sought the information proscribed; receipt of unsolicited information was not sufficient.
Under this interpretation any unsolicited receipt of inside information could be used to make market trades.
Since D had not sought the inside information, he was duly acquitted.
The decision provoked controversy.
In effect it meant that an individual who came into possession of inside information (by way of a ‘tip off’) which had not been actively sought or requested, would be immune from the UK's secondary insider dealing provisions.
This was so, despite the fact that not only could large profits be made from such trading, but that the whole rationale of the legislation (ie. to protect the fairness and integrity of the market) was seriously undermined.
The decision also represented a serious blow to the morale of the regulatory authorities.
As a result of all this, and in an attempt to lay down clear guidelines for Crown Court rulings in future cases the Attorney-General, under s.36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1972, referred the decision to the Court of Appeal and ultimately to the House of Lords.
The House of Lords, agreeing with the Court of Appeal, held that the judge at first instance had been wrong in his interpretation.
The word ‘obtained’ had to be given its broader meaning ie. one could obtain not only as a result of purpose or effort, but also through passive receipt or acceptance.
In keeping with the rationale of the legislation, the effect of the House of Lords ruling was to make guilty a tippee who knowingly traded in shares on the basis of unpublished price sensitive information, regardless of how the information was obtained.
Although the decision represents a much needed victory for the regulatory authorities, it is unfortunate that the appellate courts had to intervene in the first place.
The reluctance of the judge at first instance to adopt a policy approach at a time when the obvious intention of the Act, not to mention the thrust of securities regulation in general, was to clamp down on market abuse, can only be described as an anomalous, not to mention unwelcome, development.
It is clear then that passive receipt of unpublished price sensitive information will suffice for liability for tippee trading.
The tippee need not only knowingly obtain the information from an individual connected with a company (as defined above) who he knows or has reasonable cause to believe holds the information by being so connected, he must also know or have reasonable cause to expect that individual not to disclose that information save for the proper performance of that individuals duties.
In other words the tippee must, first, obtain from an individual, information which he knows to be unpublished price sensitive information; secondly, he must know that the individual is a ‘connected individual’ within the meaning of the legislation; thirdly, he must know or have reasonable cause to believe that that individual holds the information by virtue of being so connected; and finally, he must know or have reasonable cause to expect that that individual should not have disclosed the information save for the proper performance of that individual's duties.
With regard to points three and four above, the prosecution has the choice of proving that the tippee either knew or had reasonable cause to believe the stipulated circumstances.
Again, proof of knowledge in this respect may be difficult to acquire; reasonable cause should be somewhat more easy, but is still not without its problems.
The difficulties with the above requirements are exacerbated where a tippee knowingly obtains information in the above context indirectly ie. from another tippee.
Such sub-tippees, are virtually impossible to convict, especially the further one moves from source.
It is interesting to note, that while the connected individual may, once the stipulated six month period has expired, deal in the relevant shares (notwithstanding the fact that the information still retains its unpublished price sensitive character), the tippee is prevented from dealing in those shares on the basis of the same information until the proscribed information has lost its unpublished price sensitive quality.
It is also worth noting, that a tippee is free to deal where the communication is merely in the form of: ‘buy (or sell) X Company shares’.
Here, no unpublished price sensitive information has been communicated, thus evading the s.1(2) and (3) prohibitions.
However, the person who has relayed the information, the tipper, will fall foul of the provisions against counselling or procuring any other person to deal (s.1(7))(below).
Counselling or Procuring
The above mentioned insiders, that is, individuals connected with a company, individuals contemplating making a take-over, and tippee traders, are not only prevented from dealing in the relevant securities, but are also subject to two further constraints: first, counselling or procuring any other person to deal; and secondly, communicating inside information to any other person.
The counselling and procuring provisions are contained in s.1(7) and stipulate that it is an offence for,inter alios , any of the above mentioned insiders to counsel or procure any other person (ie not only individuals) to deal in the relevant securities, if they know or have reasonable cause to believe that person would deal in them on a recognized exchange.
Thus the subsection therefore covers the situation where the communication is merely in the form of: ‘buy,(or sell) X Company shares’(ie. where there has been no communication of unpublished price sensitive information).
Thus, while the tippee or sub-tippee is free to deal in such a situation, the tipper is not.
It is also worth noting that dealing need not actually take place; the minimum requirement is merely that the insider had reasonable cause to believe that dealing in the relevant shares would take place.
Communicating Insider Information
Section 1(8) prohibits insiders from communicating unpublished price sensitive information to any other person (ie not only individuals), if the insider knows or has reasonable cause to believe, that that person or some other person would make use of the information to deal, or counsel or procure some other person to deal on a recognized exchange in those securities to which the communicated information relates.
Again, it is worth noting that dealing need not actually take place; communication of the relevant information is all that is required.
This must be combined with proof that the individual either knew, or had reasonable cause to believe, that the requisite dealing would take place.
Dealings in Securities on a Market
As we have already seen, insiders are prohibited from dealing, counselling, and procuring others to deal, and communicating unpublished price sensitive information.
With respect to dealing, insiders are prohibited from:(i) dealing in the relevant securities on a recognized stock exchange; or (ii) dealing through or as an off-market dealer in advertised securities.
(i)
Dealing in the relevant securities on a recognised stock exchange : Dealing is defined in s.13 CSA 1985, as amended by the FSA 1986.
A person deals in securities, whether as principal or agent, if he buys, sells, or agrees to buy or sell any securities.
Thus, it is not open to an officer of a company to say that he was dealing as agent on behalf of the company.
The insider must deal in securities on a recognized stock exchange, which includes dealing in securities through an investment exchange.
A recognized stock exchange is defined in s.16(1) CSA 1985, as amended by the FSA 1986, as The Stock Exchange and any other investment exchange which is declared by an order of the Secretary of State to be a recognized stock exchange for the purposes of the CSA 1985.
It is well accepted that dealings on a recognized stock exchange include unquoted share dealings on the USM and the over the counter markets.
Securities are defined in s.12 CSA 1985.
The relevant securities here are:
(a)
listed securities; and,
(b)
in the case of a company within the meaning of the Companies Act 1985, or a company registered under Chapter II of Part XXII of that Act, or an unregistered company, the following securities (whether listed or not): any shares, debentures, or any right to subscribe for, call for, or make delivery of a share or debenture;
(ii)
Dealing through, or as, an off-market dealer in advertised securities : the insider must deal through, or as, an off-market maker in advertised securities.
They are defined in s.12(c) as listed securities or securities in respect of which, not more than six months prior to the breach in question, information indicating the prices at which persons have dealt or were willing to deal in those securities has been published for the purpose of facilitating deals in those securities.
The prohibition extends to dealings in ‘advertised securities’ through or as an off-market dealer.
An off-market dealer is defined in s.13(3), as amended by the FSA 1986, as any person who is an authorized person within the meaning of the FSA 1986.
Dealings outside Great Britain
As we saw earlier, insiders are not allowed to counsel or procure others to deal.
This prohibition is extended by s.4(1) (b) which prohibits an insider, in relation to advertised securities, from counselling or procuring another to deal contrary to s.4(a) (i) or (ii) ie. through or as an off-market dealer.
Section 5 further extends the counselling and procuring provisions.
Section 5(1) prohibits an insider from counselling or procuring any other person to deal in the securities in question, knowing, or with reasonable cause to believe, that that person would deal in those securities on any stock exchange outside Great Britain.
According to s.5(1) (b) an insider is prohibited from communicating information to any other person knowing, or with reasonable cause to believe, that that person, or some other person, would make use of the information for the purpose of dealing, counselling, or procuring, any other person to deal in those securities on any stock exchange outside Great Britain.
Similarly, s.4(1) (c) prohibits an insider, in relation to advertised securities, from communicating any information in the knowledge, or with reasonable cause to believe, that it would be used for such dealing, counselling, or procuring.
Many of the shares covered by s.12 are traded on foreign stock exchanges.
An insider (as defined above) who deals on a foreign exchange, is not directly covered by the CSA 1985.
Defences
Even if the substantive elements of an insider dealing offence are proven, defences still exist.
1.
Dealing otherwise than with a view to making a profit or avoiding a loss
The most important defence is trading other than with a view to making a profit or avoiding a loss.
The prohibitions in the CSA 1985 are rendered ineffective where the defendant can show that, notwithstanding the fact that he fulfilled all the conditions mentioned in ss.1 and 2 CSA 1985, the dominant purpose of his trade was not with a view to making a profit or avoiding a loss for either himself or another person .
Some commentators have expressed concern over the nature of this defence, fearing that, if it is construed broadly, it could endanger the whole efficacy of the Act.
2.
dealings made by individuals in the bona fide performance of their function as liquidator, receiver or trustee in bankruptcy
The second defence covers individuals in the bona fide performance of their function as liquidator, receiver, or trustee in bankruptcy.
If deals made by such persons are carried out in ‘good faith’ then, notwithstanding the fact that they constitute an offence under the CSA 1985, the transaction is exempt.
3.
Specialists
The third exemption is aimed at those who perform specialist roles within the financial sector, namely jobbers and market makers.
The defence recognises that market makers play an important role within the securities market and that to provide them with no immunity would be to make that market less liquid.
Section 3(1) (d) permits a market maker to do ‘any particular thing in relation to any particular securities’ which would otherwise be in breach of the prohibitions laid down in the CSA 1985 ‘if the information was:
(i)
obtained by him in the course of a business of a market maker in those securities in which he was engaged or employed, and
(ii)
was of a description which it would be reasonable to expect him to obtain in the ordinary course of that business, and that he does that thing in good faith in the course of that business.’
‘Market maker’ is defined as including any person on a recognised exchange, whether an individual, partner, or company, who holds himself out to make a continuous succession of prices and is recognised as doing so by that exchange.
It is important to note, that, by virtue of newly inserted s.4(2) CSA 1985 the above exemption covers market makers in off-market dealings on recognised investment exchanges, other than overseas investment exchanges.
4.
To facilitate the completion or carrying out of a transaction.
An individual is not, by reason of having information relating to any particular transaction, prohibited by sections 1(2),(4)(b),(5), or (6) from dealing on a recognised stock exchange and by s.1(7) and 1(8) from counselling, procuring, or communicating that information, if he does that thing in order to facilitate the completion or carrying out of the transaction.
Some ambiguity surrounds this subsection.
It is thought that the defence is most relevant in the context of take-overs where a merchant bank may build up a stake in a target company for a prospective bidder.
The officers in the merchant bank, who know of the proposed take-over, and whose knowledge is itself unpublished price sensitive information, may deal, or counsel, or procure others to deal, provided it is done to facilitate the completion or carrying out of the transaction, that is, the bid.
5.
Trustees and personal representatives
By virtue of s.7, trustees and personal representatives (or where a trustee or personal representative is a body corporate) are exempted from the prohibitions in the Act in certain limited circumstances.
The exemption covers the situation where the trustee or personal representative, who, through owing fiduciary obligations to his beneficiary, is required to deal in certain securities at a time when he is in possession of unpublished price-sensitive information.
The trustee or personal representative may,inter alia , deal in the securities to which that information relates if his trades are based on the advice of someone who appeared to him to be an appropriate person for whom to seek such advice and who did not seem to him to be prohibited by ss.1, 2, 4, or 5 from dealing.
In essence, therefore, a trustee or personal representative may deal, notwithstanding the fact that he possesses unpublished price sensitive information relating to the securities in which he deals, if he acts with propriety by first obtaining proper advice.
6.
Price Stabilisation
According to s.6, as amended by the FSA 1986, the practice of price stabilisation (ie. trading activities geared towards stabilising share prices, especially in the first few months of an issue), if done in conformity with the rules made under s.48 of the FSA 1986, can take place despite the fact that such activities would ordinarily be in breach of the insider dealing prohibitions.
The point to note about the above defences is that if they are given a wide construction by the courts (and it is too soon to tell, as too few cases have been brought), then the risk of prosecution diminishes even further.
All other things being equal, this increases the incentive to breach Chinese Walls and trade illegally on the basis of inside information.
Penalties
Contravention of ss.1, 2, 4, or 5 of the CSA 1985 makes an individual liable to criminal penalty.
On summary conviction, the statutory maximum penalty is six months imprisonment, with a fine of up to £1000.
On indictment however, the maximum penalty is seven years imprisonment and an unlimited fine.
Unfortunately, the rate of prosecution has been very low.
Even when successful prosecutions have been brought, the courts have been reluctant to impose little more than nominal sanctions on miscreants.
This raises a serious question mark over the efficacy of the whole of the UK insider dealing enforcement regime and seriously effects the cost-benefit economic calculus faced by financial firms and individuals when deciding whether to breach Chinese Walls.
Given that only limited resources are available to police what is probably common practice, enforcement will be imperfect.
In order to maximize the use of existing resources, the enforcement regime must impose heavy sanctions so as to compensate for the relatively low risk of detection and prosecution.
Any other regime is not optimal given existing resources.
Such logic does not seem to have been present in the court's decision in R v.
Collier where the defendant, a top merchant banker with the City firm Morgan Grenfell, was given a derisory fine of £25,000 and a one year jail sentence suspended for two years.
It is noteworthy, however, that other white collar crime such as the Guiness affair attracted more public attention and consequently stiffer penalties from the bench.
It will be interesting to see whether this trend will be followed if convictions are obtained in the Blue Arrow trial and the Barlow Clowes Affair.
Other constraints, outside of the criminal law, operate.
For example, s. 59 FSA 1986 permits the SIB, if it believes any individual is not a fit and proper person, to direct that he should not be employed in connection with investment business by any authorised or exempted person.
Other SRO disciplinary measures are also available.
4.2.3.
ENHANCED ENFORCEMENT POWERS: Financial Services Act 1986
The Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA) deals with insider trading in three main ways.
First, it contains provisions which amend the substantive law of the CSA 1985.
Secondly, it confers on the DTI special investigative powers aimed at detecting those who have broken insider dealing laws.
Thirdly, it provides for civil remedies for breach of the rules made by the SIB and SRO's.
Some of these rules prohibit the misuse of inside information.
It is proposed first of all to consider the new enhanced investigative powers of the regulatory authorities and then to look at civil law remedies, both common law and statutory.
However before doing so, it is first worth mentioning two other provision in the FSA which might potentially cover insider dealing: concealing information (s.47(1)), and creating a false market (s.47(2)).
Concealing Information
By virtue of s.47(1) it is an offence for any person,inter alia , to dishonestly conceal any material facts if he conceals those facts for the purpose of inducing, or is reckless as to whether it may induce, any other person to enter or to offer to enter into, or to refrain from entering or offering to enter into, an investment agreement or to exercise, or refrain from exercising, any rights conferred by an investment.
It has been suggested that in certain circumstances a person who withholds unpublished price sensitive information may be said to have committed an offence under the subsection.
Creating a False Market
According to s.47(2) it is an offence to engage in market manipulation.
Whether this subsection applies to insider dealing is very questionable.
It is worth noting that s.47 applies to persons, thus covering a body corporate.
A person committing an offence under s.47 is, on indictment, liable to up to seven years imprisonment, or an unlimited fine, or both.
Enhanced Enforcement Powers
Under s.177(1) of the FSA 1986, the Secretary of State is empowered to appoint inspectors to investigate suspected insider dealing offences.
These inspectors may require any person who may be able to give any information concerning whether a contravention has actually occurred to:
(1)
produce the relevant documents,
(2)
appear before them, and, if necessary, to give evidence on oath, as 
(3)
generally render all assistance in connection with the suspected offence(s).
There are exceptions in respect of legal professional privilege and banking confidentiality.
It is an offence under s.200(1) to knowingly or recklessly provide inspectors appointed under the FSA 1986 with false or misleading information.
Under s.179, as amended by CA 1989, the information obtained by the inspectors is not to be disclosed.
The basic rule in s.179 is, however, subject to s.180(1), as amended, CA 1989, which permits disclosure of the relevant information in a number of circumstances eg. for the purpose of enabling or assisting an overseas regulatory authority to exercise its regulatory functions.
By virtue of s.199, as amended by the CA 1989 inspectors are empowered to enter premises and search for evidence where there are reasonable grounds that,inter alia , an offence has been committed under the CSA 1985.
The penalties for failure to comply with the request of an investigator made under s.177 are specified in s.178(1)-(2).
A refusal to answer questions for example, could, in the absence of reasonable excuse, amount to contempt of court.
Alternatively, the Secretary of State may, in the absence of reasonable excuse,inter alia , revoke that person's authorization if he is an investments dealer.
Such a power could, more than anything, prove to be the greatest single incentive to cooperate.
The point is that, with the increased powers of the authorities, there is a greater chance that the requisite evidence needed for a successful prosecution will be more readily available, requiring the insider dealer to further refine his cost benefit calculus in deciding whether to engage in the insider dealing.
The House of Lords decision in Re an inquiry under the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 illustrates clearly how the authorities are determined to take their new powers seriously and how the courts are prepared to interpret the provisions in the spirit in which they have been granted.
In that case, the dispute arose out of a DTI investigation into a suspected ‘mole’, working at either the Office of Fair Trading or the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, who passed on price sensitive information to others who then dealt on the basis of it on the Stock Exchange.
It was believed that there was a ring of people involved.
From information contained in two articles written by Jeremy Warner, a journalist with the Independent newspaper, the DTI were convinced that he knew members of the ring and could as a result provide helpful evidence to assist their investigations.
Warner refused to comply with the DTI's request for information under s.178(1).
He claimed that he had a reasonable excuse within s.178(2) in that s.10 of the contempt of Court Act 1981 conferred an immunity on journalists from disclosing a source of information unless the disclosure was necessary for the prevention of crime.
The House of Lords held that Warner did not have a reasonable excuse within the meaning of the section since his evidence was necessary (ie really needed) for the prevention of crime in a general sense.
The inspectors did not have to show that the evidence was required to stop some identifiable future crime.
4.2.4.
CIVIL LIABILITY: Is There a Remedy?
The purpose of this section is to examine the civil remedies available to persons who trade with insiders and to consider how effective these remedies are in deterring insider dealing, especially within financial conglomerates.
It is helpful to bear in mind that the persons affected by insider dealing who may seek civil remedies are: companies in whose shares insider dealing has taken place; shareholders of those companies; or outsiders who trade with insiders.
Since the CSA 1985 makes no direct provision for civil remedies we must first look to the common law and then to the recent advent of statute law in the area, as laid down in the Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA) by virtue of s.61 and s.62.
Civil Liability at Common Law
Before the enactment of the FSA 1986, the only means from which civil redress for insider dealing could be had, was through reliance on general common law principles.
These principles remain important because of the narrow scope and possible inapplicability of ss.61 and 62 of the FSA, which may only be invoked in the context of investment business and on condition that a rule against insider dealing has been adopted by the SIB, an SRO, or an RPB.
Thus the common law must still be considered in order to gain the broader perspective of the law as it currently stands.
The position with regard to face-to-face transactions is considered first, before going on to look at the position in relation to impersonal stock market deals.
1.
Breach of Fiduciary Duty
a
Action by Shareholder against Director
A fiduciary is someone who occupies a position of trust and confidence and who, as a result of that position, owes fiduciary duties.
It is well established that a director is a fiduciary.
But to whom does he owe his duties?
Does a director, as an insider, owe fiduciary duties to his shareholders?
Is he under a fiduciary obligation to disclose to shareholders with whom he intends to trade, the fact that he holds inside information?
And, if he fails to disclose the existence of such information, does the shareholder have a direct cause of action?
In Percival v.
Wright , Swinfen Eady J held that directors owed their fiduciary duties to the company and not to the company's shareholders and thereby denied shareholders recourse to a direct action against directors who had used inside information at their (the shareholders') expense.
It was clear from this ruling that if an existing shareholder who bought or sold shares was owed no special duty of disclosure then neither was an outsider who, having no pre-existing relationship to the company, bought shares from an insider.
The proposition in Percival v.
Wright , that directors owe their fiduciary duties to the company and not to the company's shareholders, has been widely criticised.
Today, the better view would appear to be that directors owe shareholders fiduciary duties in special circumstances.
The existence of a ‘special circumstances doctrine’ can be discerned from three cases:Allen v.
Hyatt ,Gething v.
Kilner , and Coleman v.
Myers .
In Allen v.
Hyatt , a Canadian case which was decided by the Privy Council, it was held that where a director holds himself out to be the agent of the shareholders, then he owes the same fiduciary duties as would an ordinary agent to his principal.
In that case merger negotiations were taking place.
The directors of one company, Lakeside Canning Co Ltd, induced certain shareholders in that company to give them the option to sell their shares.
The offer was made on the purported basis that it would strengthen the position of all the shareholders in the merger negotiations.
When the negotiations were concluded, the directors exercised their right to buy the shares and in so doing made a profit.
The case was distinguished from Percival v. 
Wright because the directors had held themselves out as agents of some of the shareholders and thus were capable of being considered as fiduciaries to those shareholders.
Likewise, in Gething v.
Kilner , certain dicta would support the view that in some circumstances directors owe fiduciary duties to shareholders.
In that case, the plaintiffs were shareholders in R Co.
Another group called TC Ltd sought to acquire the plaintiff company's assets.
A firm of stockbrokers whose job it was to advise R Co's shareholders on the merits of the offer, concluded that the offer was unsatisfactory.
R Co's directors disagreed and recommended their shareholders to sell.
The plaintiff's sought an injunction to restrain R Co's directors from recommending the offer.
It was held, that the directors of R Co owed a duty to their shareholders which included the duty to be honest and not to mislead.
The special nature of the facts of the case mean that it has a very narrow reading and for this reason might amount to nothing more than an amalgam of common law duties not to be dishonest.
Undoubtedly the most significant case to advocate a special circumstances doctrine has been Coleman v.
Myers .
There, the New Zealand Court of Appeal held that in special circumstances a director would owe fiduciary duties to shareholders.
In the words of the Woodhouse J (as he was then):
…the standard of conduct required from a director in relation to dealings with a shareholder will differ depending upon all the surrounding circumstances and the nature of the responsibility which in a real and practical sense the director has assumed towards the shareholder.
In the one case there may be a need to provide an explicit warning and a great deal of information concerning the proposed transaction.
In another there will be no need to speak at all.
There will be intermediate situations.
The circumstances in that case which prompted the court to establish a duty centred on (1) the nature of the face-to-face transaction (ie the family character of the company),(2) the high degree of inside information which the insiders possessed, and (3) the actual conduct of the takeover.
Accordingly, the insiders were under an obligation, inter alia, to disclose material matters about which they knew or had reason to believe the relevant shareholders had insufficient knowledge.
This they had failed to do, and, as a result, damages were awarded for breach of fiduciary duty.
Of course, it is uncertain to what extent, if any, a UK court would follow this decision.
In all likelihood, the approach adopted in Coleman v Myers would be endorsed by the UK courts.
Allen v.
Hyatt suggests that the courts are willing to recognise special circumstances which alter the nature of the relationship.
Similarly, the House of Lords in Ebrahimi v.
Westbourne Galleries Ltd , subjected the exercise of legal rights to equitable considerations, in conditions comparable to those of Coleman v Myers .
Yet the value of such a ‘special circumstances’ doctrine is limited, since it would only cover insider dealing in face-to-face transactions and so provide no remedies to those dealing though impersonal stock exchange markets.
b
Action By the Company:
i
against an insider
In common with directors, senior officers holding positions of responsibility and professional advisers, such as merchant bankers, and lawyers, are also fiduciaries, and are, therefore, bound by fiduciary ties.
Given that these insider/fiduciaries occupy a privileged position of trust in relation to the affairs of the company, it is conceivable that they may inflict a hurt upon it.
It is well established that where a wrong is done to a company, the company is the proper plaintiff.
Applying this principle to insider dealing, it could be argued that a company has the right to bring an action against an insider for any profit made by reason of the fact that he has (i) abused his fiduciary position by using unpublished price sensitive information which he acquired by virtue of his position as an insider; or (ii) misappropriated corporate property (it is essential under this head that unpublished price sensitive information be seen as property; whether it is, is not entirely clear).
The merits of an approach allowing the company to seek civil redress are essentially twofold: first, no victim need be identified; and secondly, an action may be brought in the context of anonymous stock market trades.
In Regal (Hastings)v.
Gulliver , it was held that any profit made by a director as a result of the misuse of confidential information, which he had obtained by virtue of his position as an insider, was liable to account for that profit to the company.
It was, therefore, permissible for the company to bring an action against the directors to recover the profits.
By analogy, the same principle could apply to other insiders, such as merchant bankers, who misuse confidential news.
But the decision in Regal (Hastings), permitting the company to seek civil redress, is not without its difficulties.
Not only has there been a reluctance on the part of directors to enforce such a remedy on behalf of the company by suing fellow directors, but its adoption in the context of insider dealing does very little to help the real victim.
It is the shareholder (in a face-to-face transaction) or the shareholder or outsider (in a stock market deal) who is ‘harmed’ by insider dealing, not the company.
Indeed, as the Justice Report concluded:
[T]he company will not normally itself have suffered any loss, and there seems no reason in equity why it should benefit from the punishment of the insider's misconduct…
[I]f the insider is a substantial shareholder, the damages paid by him will, in part, indirectly return to him and he will still be left with a net profit on the transaction…
Also, what of the situation where the insider sells shares on the basis of unpublished price sensitive information which he has acquired by virtue of his position in order to avoid a loss?
It is uncertain whether the principle laid down in Regal (Hastings)covers this situation.
However, if the common law is to address the needs of the twentieth century then it must.
Although, in some instances, it is possible to ratify some breaches of fiduciary duty, it would appear that according to the Privy Council ruling in Cook v.
Deeks , the mala fide abuse of an insider's position or the misuse of corporate assets does not permit ratification.
It could be argued that the same principle also applies to the misuse of inside information.
ii
against a third party (’ tippee’) as constructive trustee
If a third party participates in an insider's (eg director, senior officer, or professional adviser's) breach of trust, may the relevant company bring an action against that third party for the recovery of any profit made by him?
The law is not entirely clear in this area, but it would appear that there are two grounds upon which the third party, the tippee, may be held liable to account as constructive trustee.
First, where he knowingly assists in a dishonest and fraudulent design or breach of trust undertaken by the insider, notwithstanding the fact that he did not acquire possession of the trust property (’ knowing assistance’).
Secondly, where he knowingly receives trust property in breach of trust (’ knowing receipt and dealing’).
On the first ground, ‘knowing assistance’ in the breach of trust or the dishonest and fraudulent design, it necessary to prove from the outset knowledge of the existence of a trust.
It is also necessary to show that the third party ‘has knowingly assisted [the]nominated trustee in a fraudulent and dishonest disposition of the trust property.’
The third party's dishonesty must be clearly established.
While this much is clear, some questions remain.
Is it necessary to show that the defendant subjectively knew of the dishonest design or merely that he ought to have known?
In other words, is constructive knowledge sufficient?
This issue is important because of the complex nature of such frauds, meaning that proof of actual knowledge is hard to acquire.
According to Ungoed-Thomas J in Selangor (No 3), constructive knowledge suffices.
However, in Carl Zeiss actual knowledge was favoured.
The latter approach was endorsed by Buckley LJ in the Court of Appeal, where he stated,obiter , that the actual knowledge was needed.
In short, the law is unclear, though perhaps the better view is that subjective knowledge is required.
A requirement of such a degree of knowledge might still cover the situation where a broker executes deals on behalf of an insider, as long as he knows of the nature of the deal or continues to execute orders despite strong suspicions.
Establishing the required degree of knowledge, however, would prove difficult.
The second ground (’ knowing receipt and dealing’), has been neatly summed up by Bingham J:
[Where a person, not appointed as a trustee,]has received trust property with actual or constructive notice that it is trust property transferred in breach of trust, or because, not being a bona fide purchaser for value without notice, he acquires notice subsequent to such receipt and then deals with the property in a manner inconsistent with the trust,[he is deemed a constructive trustee.]
(emphasis added).
It is clear then, that, according to this head of liability, a third party may be liable if he receives corporate property with actual or constructive knowledge of a breach of trust.
Thus, liability may follow where the third party does not know, but ought to know, of the breach.
Again, the question arises concerning whether inside information constitutes corporate property.
The better view is that inside information would rank as such.
In conclusion, the law is very uncertain in this whole area and it is unlikely that an action against a third party tippee for insider dealing will be brought or succeed.
c
Derivative Action by Shareholder
As we have already seen, the general principle regarding a wrong done to the company is that the company is the proper plaintiff.
This general principle is, however, subject to a number of exceptions where a shareholder may bring a derivative action on behalf of the company.
Yet even if a shareholder were able to bring a derivative action under one of the exceptions to the rule in Foss v.
Harbottle , the practical difficulties of ensuring that proceedings are actually commenced would be very considerable.
The most appropriate exception would be fraud on the minority.
Here the shareholder could argue that the insider dealing was either a mala fide abuse of position or a misappropriation of the company's assets, neither of which are ratifiable.
He would, however, also have to establish wrongdoer control.
It is possible, though very unlikely, that the courts would grant a further exception to the rule in Foss v.
Harbottle , by allowing a shareholder to bring a derivative action for alleged insider dealing.
It is also worth mentioning that even if the courts did allow an individual shareholder to bring a derivative action, that individual would still be unable to secure a direct remedy.
Any damages that might be recovered would belong to the company.
It is debatable whether a shareholder could proceed under ss.459–461 of the Companies Act 1985, as amended by CA 1989, alleging that a minority (including himself) has been unfairly prejudiced by those in control of the company, for their failure to call the insider to account to the company.
The directors, however, could argue that to do so would expose the company to adverse publicity.
Again, even if this form of relief were to succeed, an individual shareholder would still be unable to secure a direct remedy because any sums recovered would belong to the company.
It would seem, therefore, that while various potential remedies for breach of fiduciary duty do exist, it is unlikely that they will ever be used.
As a result, there use as a deterrent for enforcing Chinese Walls will be of limited effect.
2.
Breach of Confidence
In contrast to breach of fiduciary duty, an action for breach of confidence would appear to represent a more effective anti-insider dealing deterrent.
For example, if one arm of a conglomerate offering financial advice to a client acquires, whether directly or indirectly, inside information from that client and, without that client's express or implied consent, deals on it, or relays it to others who deal on it, the conglomerate is potentially liable for an action brought by the client for breach of confidence.
The law in this area is not confined to contractual relationships, but may also be based ‘on the broad principle of equity that he who has received information in confidence shall not take unfair advantage of it.’
According to Megarry J (as he then was) in Coco v.
A N Clark (Eng) Ltd , such an action is dependent on three essential factors.
The first concerns the definition of confidential information.
The second concerns when and where a duty of confidence arises.
The third involves establishing a breach of that duty through the unauthorised use of the information.
These three issues are now considered.
The question of what constitutes confidential information was addressed by Lord Greene MR in Saltman Engineering Co Ltd v.
Campbell Engineering Co Ltd .
The acid test, according to the Master of the Rolls, was whether the information had ‘the necessary quality of confidence about it, namely, it must not be something which is public property and public knowledge.’
It is clear that unpublished price sensitive information fulfils this requirement.
An obligation of confidence can arise through contract, either express or implied.
Equally, an obligation may be imposed even where there is no contractual relationship, provided it is obvious from the facts.
According to Megarry J (as he then was) in Coco v.
A N Clark (Eng) Ltd , such an obligation of confidence arises where:
…the circumstances are such that any reasonable man standing in the shoes of the recipient of the information would have realised that upon reasonable grounds the information was being given to him in confidence, then this should suffice to impose upon him the equitable obligation of confidence.
In particular, where information of commercial or industrial value is given on a business-like basis and with some avowed common objective in mind…
I would regard the recipient as carrying a heavy burden if he seeks to repel a contention that he was bound by an obligation of confidence.
In view of this, it would appear that a corporate finance arm of a conglomerate, acting as an underwriter to a client, would fulfil this test if, in the course of its relationship with that client, it acquired confidential information such as earnings figures, future corporate plans, new innovations, or inventions, and would, as a result, owe an obligation of confidence to that client.
Indeed in Schering Chemicals Ltd v.
Falkman Ltd , Shaw LJ said:
…the communication in a commercial context of information which at the time is regarded by the giver and recognised by the recipient as confidential, and the nature of which has a material connection with the commercial interests of the party confiding that information, imposes on the recipient a fiduciary obligation to maintain that confidence thereafter unless the giver consents to relax it.
Of course it is highly likely that the corporate finance arm and the client will be contractually bound in any case, thus enabling us to dispense with the issue of whether an obligation of confidence is owed.
It is, however, possible that an employee of the professional adviser, here the corporate finance arm of a conglomerate, could misuse or disclose the confidential information.
Does an action lie against them?
If so, it would not be on the basis of contract (there being no contractual bond) nor on the basis of a duty of fidelity (since the confider does not employ the employee), but on ‘the broad principle of equity’.
Furthermore, employees owe a duty of fidelity and good faith to their employer.
Knowing misuse of confidential information would be a breach of this duty.
It would be implicit that City employees know that they are not to use confidential information for the purposes of insider dealing.
Thus, the confidence is breached where there is an unauthorised use of such information by the confidant.
Insider dealing would without doubt constitute an unauthorised use.
Fiduciaries would also owe similar obligations.
It is essential that there is an unauthorised use of the confidential information.
In this context unauthorised use means: use or disclosure.
It is clear therefore that the use (insider dealing) or disclosure (tipping) of confidential information would be covered.
There is no requirement that use or disclosure be intentional; nor must loss to the company be established.
Moreover, a third party may be prohibited from using confidential information where he obtains the information with actual knowledge that it was received as a result of a breach of confidence.
Thus where the discretionary fund management arm of a conglomerate receives confidential information from the corporate finance arm about Company X, the fund management arm may be prevented from using the information of disclosing it if it has actual knowledge of the breach of confidence or possibly where it ought to have known of the breach.
At a more general level, what remedies are available when a confidence in this context is breached?
The remedies available are injunctions, damages, and an account of profits.
Though when confidential information has actually been misused the applicable remedies are damages and an account of profits.
Only the person to whom the duty of confidence is owed will be allowed to sue; in other words, an outsider who is adversely affected by trading in shares to which the information relates, will again have no remedy.
An action for breach of confidence acts as a further incentive to prevent the company or an individual on his own account from breaching Chinese Walls.
Such a breach not only leaves the company (or rather those individuals who act on its behalf) open to criminal liability under the CSA 1985 and civil liability under the FSA 1986, but also to a claim by a corporate client for breach of its obligation of confidence.
3.
Breach of Statutory Duty
The issue of whether breach of the CSA 1985 will provide a basis for liability in tort for breach of statutory duty is one on which the courts have not yet been asked to decide.
In the US this remedy has become well developed.
However in Britain it seems extremely unlikely that the courts will adopt a similar approach especially given the legislature's prior decision in the CSA 1985 to opt only for criminal measures.
4.
Miscellaneous Remedies
(a)
Powers of the Criminal Courts Act 1973
Section 35 of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 empowers the courts to require any person who has committed an offence to compensate anyone who has suffered adversely as a result of his crime.
It is possible, though again unlikely, that this discretionary power could be used to provide civil compensation in cases of insider dealing.
(b)
Extra-legal control by the Take-over Panel.
A number of the Take-over Panel rules prohibit trading on the basis of inside information.
Firms regulated by the Panel who are found to have traded on the basis of inside information are subject to the discipline of the Panel.
A potentially more far-reaching power is bestowed on the SIB by virtue of ns.47A(1) FSA 1986.
Under that section the SIB have been empowered to issue statements of practice governing the conduct and financial standing of persons authorized to carry on investment business.
According to principle 3, on market practice, a firm should ‘comply with any code or standard as in force from time to time and as it applies to the firm either according to its terms or by rulings made under it.’
This would include,inter alia , the Take-over Code.
Since the commencement of this part of Principle 3 requires a formal act by the SIB, it is currently inoperative.
Civil Law Remedies under the Financial Services Act 1986
1.
Section 62
There has been much speculation since the introduction of s.62 of the FSA 1986 concerning the potency of the provision as a statutory civil law remedy for insider dealing.
The section has been amended recently by new section 62A, which, by virtue of secondary legislation, makes clear that s.62 is intended,inter alia , to cover insider dealing.
Despite this, the effectiveness of the newly amended s.62 will depend largely on how the courts decide to interpret it.
The general consensus of opinion is that a successful action under s.62 for insider dealing will be hard to sustain.
Section 62 provides a right of action for certain breaches of the regulatory framework established by the FSA.
In brief, breaches of most SIB, SRO or RPB rules are covered.
According to ns.62A(1): ‘No action in respect of a contravention to which section 62 above applies shall lie at the suit of a person other than a private investor,except in such circumstances as may be specified by regulations made by the Secretary of State ’(emphasis added).
It is clear from the above that under the new provisions the general principle is that only a private investor has a right of action for a contravention to which s.62 applies.
However, it is also clear that this general principle is subject to exceptions.
According to ns.62A(1) these exceptions are to be specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
The appropriate regulation for our purposes is SI 1991 No 489, regulation 3 of which outlines the circumstances where an action may be brought at the suit of a person other than a private investor.
The most important exception is found in regulation 3(c) which permits an action to be brought under the newly amended s.62 by a person who is other than a private investor where there has been a breach of rules prohibiting insider dealing.
Clearly before an investor (be he a private investor or market professional) can establish a civil remedy for insider dealing under s.62 there must first exist an SIB, SRO, or RPB rule prohibiting the practice.
The SIB's new Conduct of Business Core Rule 28 has been adopted for this purpose.
According to Core Rule 28, a firm is prohibited from carrying out a transaction (either in the UK or elsewhere) for its own account (or on the account of an associate acting on its own account), if its associate, or employee of either, is prohibited from effecting the transaction by virtue of the CSA 1985.
The firm is further under an obligation to use its ‘best endeavours’ to ensure that it does not knowingly effect a transaction for a customer it knows to be prohibited under the Core Rule.
Core Rule 28 may be thought to restrict the firm's business unduly.
However, Rule 28 must be read in conjunction with Core Rule 36, on Chinese Walls.
By virtue of Core Rule 36, many transactions which would fall full square within Core Rule 28 are exempted because the Chinese Wall serves to negative the firm, or certain individuals within the firm, of the requisite knowledge that would bring it within the prohibition contained in Core Rule 28.
Since SRO's are required to ensure that their rule books provide investors with protection which is at least adequate in comparison to that afforded by the SIB's rules, the SRO's will be obliged to adopt anti-insider dealing rules broadly similar to those of the SIB.
It is clear then, that,prima facie , s.62 (as amended) covers insider dealing.
However, in practice there are likely to be great problems in bringing a successful action.
For example, the plaintiff must prove, on the balance of probabilities, that, first, there has been a contravention of Rule 28 (or its SRO equivalent), and secondly, that he has suffered a loss as a result of the defendant's contravention.
Uncovering a breach of Rule 28 will not be easy given the complex nature of insider dealing transactions.
What seems fairly certain is that a private plaintiff will not uncover a breach of Core Rule 28 where the criminal authorities have failed to prosecute under the CSA 1985.
In the US, the practice has developed whereby in instances where the authorities have successfully prosecuted the defendant, the private plaintiff may use the findings of the criminal trial to prove his own case.
Such a practice might well develop in the UK.
It is noteworthy that newly amended s.62 permits,inter alia , market professionals to sue for insider dealing violations.
This could well be a significant development, since where the plaintiff is a market counterparty on the wrong side of an insider deal, that party would probably have greater resources, increased access to the relevant information, and more of an incentive to bring an action.
However, even if the plaintiff overcomes the difficult hurdle of proving that Core Rule 28 (or a comparable SRO rule) has been breached, he must further show that the contravention caused him loss.
Loss is not defined in the FSA, but it probably refers to a pecuniary loss.
Thus the plaintiff would be obliged to show that he either bought/sold shares at an inflated/deflated price compared to what would have been the price, but for the defendant's actions.
That is, he must show that the loss incurred was caused by the insider's actions.
As we saw in Chapter Three, establishing such privity on anonymous stock markets is, in strict legal terms, virtually much impossible.
Certainly the computerization of the Stock Exchange will make it much more easy for the authorities to find out who is trading and when, but it will not show privity.
So where does this leave s.62?
Is it only a paper tiger, or does it really have teeth?
The issue of how to prove loss is a major stumbling block and is prone, under strict judicial interpretation, to render the section redundant as far as insider dealing is concerned.
It is quite anomalous therefore that SI 1991 489 regulation 3(c) makes specific provision for any person to sue for breach of Core Rule 28 (or a comparable SRO insider dealing rule).
This anomaly could, however, be remedied if the courts were to embrace novel theories of what constitutes loss given the novel essence of insider dealing.
This would involve interpreting loss in terms other than pecuniary, for example, in terms of loss of reputation or market standing.
Failing this, the section either ought to be amended to provide, as does s.61 (below), for persons to sue where they have been adversely affected, or, as is the case in the US, where they can show that they have traded during the same time period as the insider.
As it is, the situation remains quite unsatisfactory.
A re-amended s.62 would have significant bite.
It would act as a further incentive for conglomerates to enforce their Chinese Walls for fear of being sued for damages by investors, particularly other market players, who suspect the conglomerate to be trading on the basis of inside information.
2.
Section 61: an Alternative to Section 62?
From the foregoing discussion it is obvious that, as things currently stand, any person attempting to recover damages from an insider will, under s.62 as amended, face enormous difficulties in proving not only that a breach of the relevant insider dealing rule has actually occurred, but also that he has suffered a loss as a result of it.
An alternative, indeed additional, remedy which may be of help to an aggrieved investor is that provided by s.61 of the FSA.
Section 61 empowers the SIB (by virtue of delegated powers conferred on the Secretary of State) to apply to the court for,inter alia , a restitution order (or, as it is sometimes referred to, a ‘disgorgement order’) requiring any firm who infringes,inter alia , the SIB's conduct of business rules, to disgorge their profits.
The court will grant such an order if it is satisfied that:(a) profits have accrued to any person as a result of that contravention; or that (b) one or more investors have ‘suffered loss or been otherwise adversely affected .’
If an order is made, the sum to be disgorged is based on either the amount of the profit which has accrued to the insider, or the amount of loss or adverse affect to investors, or indeed, a combination of both these factors.
Any amount paid to the court under s.61 is to be paid out, or to be distributed, among such persons as the court may direct, being a person or persons appearing to the court to have entered into transactions with the miscreant.
It is clear that since s.61 covers,inter alia , breaches of the SIB conduct of business rules, a disgorgement order could be used by the SIB in relation to insider dealing cases where Core Rule 28 (or a comparable SRO rule) has been breached.
Unlike s.62 (above) liability is not dependent solely upon proving loss.
Other routes are open; namely, that a profit has accrued to an insider, or that an investor has been adversely affected by the contravention in question.
But even these tests may be difficult to satisfy unless the courts are again prepared to be flexible.
Proving that a contravention has occurred, even if only on the balance of probabilities, will not be easy, nor will demonstrating that an alleged miscreant has made a profit as a result of his contravention.
Of course, the court may still grant a disgorgement order merely where it is satisfied that an investor has been adversely affected.
But even this term is unclear.
It would seem sensible, therefore, that given the current limitations of s.62 the courts ought to adopt a liberal interpretation of ‘adversely affected’.
It is interesting to note that Parliament struck these words out of s.62 because they took away from the purity of the section.
This begs the question: why were they not removed from s.61 as well?
One possibility seems to be that s.61 was intended to cast a wider net of liability than s.62.
If this is so, sensible judicial interpretation might enable s.61 to provide an effective civil remedy and a significant deterrent for insider dealing.
Whatever the outcome, s.61 style remedies are important for the future development of civil liability for insider dealing.
4.2.5.
SUMMARY
There is no doubt that at common law there is no effective remedy for an individual who is harmed due to insider dealing.
Equally, common law remedies are riddled with so many complexities that they are unlikely to exercise much deterrent effect on conglomerate entities operating behind Chinese Walls.
New remedies and deterrents are needed.
These are potentially available by virtue of s.61 and s.62 of the FSA 1986.
However as yet they are untried in the context of insider dealing, and are likely to prove difficult to sustain.
It is to be hoped, therefore, that, in the not too distant future, these remedies are either developed by the courts, or remodelled by Parliament.
4.3.
THE REGULATION OF INSIDER TRADING IN THE US
In the US, insider trading law has evolved at a much faster pace than any other country.
Despite the recent advent of statute law in this area, there remains no statutory definition of what constitutes insider trading.
The fear is that if defined, legal experts will exploit loopholes which, although within the letter of the law, are outwith its spirit.
As a result, reliance has been placed mainly upon case law to map the contours of the current prohibition.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which was formed in 1933, and remains the governing regulatory watchdog body for the US securities markets, has constructed its enforcement programme of insider abuse on a number of rather pragmatic bases.
First, on the general anti-fraud provisions contained in the Securities Act 1933 or the Securities Exchange Act 1934 (SEA), as developed by case law; and second, on what has recently emerged as the SEC's new and potentially most potent weapon — the misappropriation theory.
Although s.16 of the SEA 1934 covers certain forms of insider trading, the most important legislative provision is s.10 of the SEA 1934 from which Rule 10b-5 is derived.
The growing corpus of US case law which these prohibitions have spawned, make it possible to devise a framework outlining the country's current proscription of the abuse.
Thus, in the US insider trading may be defined as trading in an issuer's securities (or communicating or ‘tipping’) while in possession of material non-public information relating to the issuer's securities or the market for those securities.
This may involve either the misappropriation of confidential information or the breach of a fiduciary duty of confidentiality.
Before considering the development of insider trading at a federal level, let us look first at the position at common law.
4.3.1.
Insider Trading at Common Law
At common law, an action for insider trading was originally based in the tort of misrepresentation or fraud.
We saw earlier that in the UK the main problem with an action for misrepresentation was that, as a general rule, neither party to a business transaction was required to disclose information to the other unless they were under some confidential or fiduciary obligation to do so; and, in the UK, owing to Percival v.
Wright it was established that a director did not stand in a fiduciary relationship with his shareholders.
At the turn of the twentieth century, this ‘majority rule’, as it was known, held sway in the US; thus denying a shareholder the right to sue a director who used inside information in face to face transactions.
However it was not long before the majority rule was being challenged by a special circumstances doctrine, and by an even wider rule that directors owed fiduciary duties to shareholder per se .
The special circumstances doctrine was successfully upheld in the 1909 US Supreme Court decision in Strong v.
Repide and is today the dominant rule, with the wider principle, that directors owe fiduciary duties to shareholders per se, gaining ground in a number of states.
While the approach taken by the US courts has been much more progressive than that which has been adopted in Britain, it is nonetheless clear that in neither jurisdiction do directors owe a duty of disclosure when trading on impersonal stock exchange markets.
The limitations of individual recovery at common law led some courts to develop a rule allowing the corporation to recover the insider's profits by way of a derivative action which encompassed the situation where the insider traded on impersonal stock markets.
For example, in Brophy v.
Cities Serv Co the court held that when ‘an employee in the course of his employment acquires secret information relating to his employer's business, he occupies a position of trust and confidence toward it, analogous in most respects to that of fiduciary…[consequently the information was not to be used]in competition with or to the injury of…[the corporation].’
In a further passage, the court held that it was not necessary for the corporation to suffer injury.
In the later case of Diamond v.
Oreamuno ,Brophy was heavily relied upon.
Applying both trust and agency principles, the court concluded that an insider who traded on the basis of material nonpublic information was liable to account to his corporation for the profits.
The decision in Diamond , however, was not followed in Schein v.
Chasen or in Freeman v.
Decio where the courts ruled that a corporation could not recover unless it first proved that it had in fact been injured by the insider's illicit trading.
Either way, in the US at common law, an insider does not owe an outsider any duty of disclosure when the insider trades on impersonal stock markets.
4.3.2.
Insider Trading at Federal Law
Federal law on insider dealing has become so well developed that recourse to common law remedies need only be had in exceptional circumstances.
In the wake of the Wall Street Crash Congress enacted a plethora of legislation aimed at ensuring fair and orderly markets.
The most important pieces of legislation for our purposes are the Securities Act 1933, the Securities Exchange Act 1934 and the Glass Steagall Act 1933.
Section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act 1934 represented the first legislative attempt in the US to curb some of the dangers associated with insider trading.
The section, however, has a narrow scope applying only to directors, officers, and large shareholders.
Section 16 requires these individuals to report all trading activity in the shares (or options) of their company, prohibits short selling, and requires disgorgement of any profits to the issuer which results from holding a position less than six months.
As the problem of insider trading increased it became increasingly evident that s.16 was insufficient.
Attention quickly focused on the SEC's Rule 10b-5.
Rule 10b-5 was first promulgated in 1942.
Initially the rule was not viewed with any great significance by either the Commission or academic commentators.
However, it was not long before the courts began to use the provision in an attempt to curb insider trading.
In Kardon v.
National Gypsum Co the court held that corporate officers who traded face-to-face with shareholders on the basis of material nonpublic information were in violation of rule 10b-5.
In 1961, in the Commission's administrative proceedings against a regulated broker-dealer in Re Cady, Roberts & Co , the SEC outlined for the first time the basis of the insider trading prohibition.
There it was said:
…the obligation [entails]two principal elements; first, the existence of a relationship giving access, directly or indirectly, to information intended to be available only for a corporate purpose and not for the personal benefit of anyone, and second, the inherent, unfairness involved where a party takes advantage of such information knowing it is unavailable to those with whom he is dealing.
Initially then, while the insider trading prohibition was directed only at persons connected with the company whose securities were in question, the Cady, Roberts decision broadened the scope of the law considerably to extend to, in this example, a trust officer who traded on the basis of inside information he had obtained from an insider.
Thus the SEC held that Rule 10b-5 was not confined to traditional insiders but was equally applicable to ‘those persons who are in a special relationship with a company and privy to its internal affairs, and [who]thereby suffer corresponding duties in trading [on]its securities’.
Furthermore, on the basis of the second limb of this key dicta, the wider principle could also be extracted: insider trading in impersonal stock markets was in breach of Rule 10b-5.
The Commission's ruling was soon given judicial backing in SEC v.
Texas Gulf Sulphur Co .
There it was held that those persons who had access to inside information were required to observe the ‘abstain or disclose’ principle ie they had either to disclose the inside information which they held or abstain from trading.
The court said:
Anyone in possession of material inside information must either disclose it to the investing public or if he is disabled from disclosing it in order to protect a corporate confidence, or he chooses not to do so, must abstain from trading in or recommending the securities concerned while such inside information remains undisclosed.
In 1971, the Texas Gulf Sulphur decision was developed in the administrative case of Re Investors Management .
There, a brokerage house, acting as underwriter, legitimately acquired inside information from one of its clients.
On learning of the information, the brokerage house sold a large stock position which it had built up in the client's shares.
The brokerage firm argued that it was a non-insider with no special relationship to any insider, and did not, as a result, owe any duty of disclosure.
The Commission rejected this contention.
Instead it adopted an expansive interpretation, requiring anyone who obtained possession of material nonpublic information from a corporation to disclose this information to the market.
This was so because possession of such information placed the firm in a position ‘superior to other persons [which made it]subject to the restraints and the purview of the anti-fraud provisions’.
As the nature of insider dealing changed, there was a corresponding need to adapt other legal doctrines to fit the abuse.
The changing nature of insider dealing is well illustrated by Chiarella v.
US where the substantive law of insider trading was reviewed by the Supreme Court for the first time.
The outcome was not particularly satisfying for the authorities.
In that case the defendant, Vincent Chiarella, a print worker in Pandick Press, a financial printing firm, decoded the names of several target companies in which take-overs were imminent.
Aware that his conduct was forbidden by his employer, he bought shares in the companies prior to the announcement of the bid.
When the announcement forced the price of the shares up he subsequently sold.
The Supreme Court held, overturning the lower court, that Chiarella was not under an obligation to disclose his information or abstain from trading.
No duty was owed, said the court, where the defendant merely possessed material nonpublic information relating to the securities in which he traded.
Instead the duty to disclose or abstain was dependent upon whether the trader owed the issuer of the securities a fiduciary or other relationship of trust and confidence.
No such relationship was present.
The Misappropriation Theory
The Supreme Court's ruling in Chiarella represented a major set-back for the SEC's insider trading enforcement programme.
Although Rule 10b-5 adequately covered corporate officers who traded in the securities of their own companies — such officers owed fiduciary duties to the company if it was the issuer of securities in which they traded — the prohibition did not extend to persons who breached fiduciary duties to anyone other than the issuer of the securities traded in.
As a result of this weakness, the SEC developed the misappropriation theory.
According to this controversial doctrine, it is theft of confidential information if an individual uses nonpublic information for his own personal benefit in breach of any duty.
Therefore, a lawyer, a financial analyst, an accountant, or journalist, aware of inside information relating to a company in whose shares he trades, is liable under Rule 10b-5 notwithstanding the absence of a fiduciary duty to the issuer of the securities provided there is at least a duty owed to another person — here the law firm, the financial intermediary, the accountancy firm, or the newspaper.
Rule 10b-5 was sufficiently open-ended to embrace the misappropriation theory, since all that was required was fraud ‘in connection with’ the purchase or sale of securities, even if that fraud was not actually on the issuer of those securities but on some third party.
Despite the wide-ranging ramifications of the misappropriation theory, the lower courts have endorsed it in a number of important rulings.
In US v.
Newman , a decision in which the misappropriation theory was adopted by the Second Circuit for the first time, the court held that Newman had stolen information from his employer and had thereby breached his fiduciary duties to his employer and his employer's clients.
Equally, in SEC v.
Materia , the Second Circuit thought that ‘one who misappropriates non-public information in breach of a fiduciary duty and trades on that information to his own advantage’ was in violation of the law.
It was held that Materia had breached his fiduciary duty to his employers and to his employer's clients, and had therefore, violated Rule 10b-5.
The most recent challenge to the validity and scope of the misappropriation theory came in the Supreme Court decision of Carpenter v.
US , more commonly known as the Winans case.
The SEC has been heralded the decision as judicial acceptance of their controversial doctrine.
However on closer inspection, it would appear that this interpretation is much too wide.
It is crucial to make a clear distinction between the type of misappropriation involved in Winans and that which was at the centre of both the Newman and Materia cases.
While in Newman and Materia , the information misappropriated was the employers' clients ’ confidential information, in Winans , the confidential information was not.
Instead, the information related solely to a forthcoming newspaper column which recommended the shares of particular companies.
In other words, in Winans no confidential information was specifically entrusted to the employer whereas in Newman and Materia there had.
The facts of the case make this clear.
Winans was a reporter for the Wall Street Journal's ‘Heard on the Street Column’.
The column, which assessed the favourableness of certain investments in shares, had the potential for affecting the price of the securities it examined.
Winans was aware that Journal policy was to keep the contents of the column secret prior to publication and that the contents of the column were regarded as the Journal's confidential information.
In disregard of this fact, Winans engaged in a scheme with certain Wall Street financiers to provide them with the contents of the column prior to its publication.
The plan was for the financiers to place deals based on the probable impact of the column on the market and then share the profits.
At first instance, the District Court found (and the Court of Appeals agreed) that Winans had knowingly breached a duty of confidentiality by misappropriating prepublication information regarding the timing and contents of the Heard columns.
With respect to the charges under s.10(b) of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act, the court held that the deliberate breach of Winans duty of confidentiality and concealment of the scheme was a fraud and a deceit on the Journal; and although the victim of the fraud — the Journal — was not a buyer or seller of the shares traded in, or, otherwise a market participant, the fraud was nevertheless considered to be ‘in connection with’ the purchase or sale of securities within the meaning of s.10(b) and Rule 10b-5 made thereunder.
On appeal, the Supreme Court affirmed the Lower Court's ruling, but not without some controversy.
The Justices were asked to review two questions.
The first related to conviction under s.10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act 1934, while the second concerned conviction under the mail and wire fraud statutes.
With regard to the first question, the Court was evenly divided 4–4 and for that reason affirmed the judgement of the Lower Courts which had accepted the misappropriation doctrine.
Therefore the Supreme Court's analysis of the case really only revolved around the second question presented to it, namely, conviction under the mail and wire fraud statutes.
As a result, the misappropriation theory still rests on a rather precarious foothold.
Trading by Secondary Insiders or Tippees
Texas Gulf Sulphur , as well as affirming the general disclose or abstain principle, made it clear that the persons communicating inside information (tippers) to others (tippees) would be in breach of the law; and the tippees themselves would also be subject to the disclose or abstain rule (ie. prevented from tipping).
The case of Shapiro v.
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc in part also addressed this issue.
It was clearly held that ‘tippees’, here institutional investors, were subject to the abstain or disclose rule.
The reasoning offered by the court centred on the fact that such persons had special access to inside information which arose from communications they had received from primary insiders.
Consequently they ought to owe the same duties as traditional insiders.
In Dirks v.
SEC , the Supreme Court curtailed the liability of both tippers and tippees considerably.
Dirks, an investment analyst, uncovered a massive financial fraud about Equity Funding Corporation, having received information from Mr Secrist, a former employee of the corporation.
Dirks relayed this news to some of his clients, who sold Equity Funding Corps shares before the fraud was publicly disclosed.
The court applied a new general rule: a tippee (here, Dirks) owes outsiders (the marketplace) a fiduciary duty when an insider-tipper (Secrist) communicates to him material non public information where the tippee (Dirks) knows, or ought to know, that the information is of the proscribed type and is communicated in breach of a duty owed by the tipper (Secrist).
However a rider was also added: the question of the tipper's (Secrists) liability was dependant upon the purpose of the disclosure.
The test was whether the prosecution could show that the tipper received some form of direct or indirect personal benefit from the outlawed conduct.
In the Supreme Court's opinion it was clear that the tipper (Secrist) had not breached his duty since he did not disclose the information with the purpose of gaining some direct or indirect personal benefit.
In view of the fact that Secrist's disclosure was legitimate, it followed that Dirks had committed no wrong.
Notwithstanding the fact that Dirks was found not guilty, the tests laid down in the case are of great significance: a tipper's liability is contingent upon the purpose of his action; while a tippee's liability is limited to those situations where he knows or ought reasonably to know of the insider's breach of duty.
Much has been made by the SEC of a footnote in the Dirks case.
The note imposes ‘temporary insider’ status:
where corporate information is revealed legitimately to an underwriter, accountant, lawyer, or consultant working for the corporation, these outsiders may become fiduciaries of the shareholders…[they do not actively solicit or acquire inside information]but rather they have entered into a special confidential relationship in the conduct of the business of the enterprise and are given access to information solely for corporate purposes.
When such a person breaches his fiduciary relationship, he may be treated more properly as a tipper than a tippee.
For such a duty to be imposed, however, the corporation must expect the outsider to keep the disclosed nonpublic information confidential, and the relationship must at least must imply such a duty.
Professionals who fall into the above categories are consequently viewed as ‘temporary’ or ‘constructive’insiders.
It is important to note that the court has deemed such insiders as tippers rather than tippees.
This is significant because, as we have seen, for a tippee to be liable, the tipper must,inter alia , receive some direct or indirect benefit from his breach of duty; in the case of a temporary insider, liability is not contingent upon the person from whom he receives the information.
Tender Offers: Rule 14e-3
The SEC's Rule 14e-3, which derives validity from s.14(e) of the SEA 1934, forms the basis of insider trading liability for tender offers, or, in British parlance, take-overs, and would probably, had it been in operation, covered the trading activities of both Newman and Chiarella.
The rule, which was promulgated on 4 September 1980, has recently received implicit statutory endorsement in the ITSFEA 1988.
Rule 14e-3 imposes an ‘abstain or disclose’ requirement in the event of an offeror commencing or taking ‘substantial steps’to commence a tender offer.
The term substantial steps is used because prior to that stage it is generally assumed that there is nothing for the offeror to disclose publicly.
The rule prohibits any person (other than the actual bidder) from trading (or causing others to trade) where he is in possession of material information relating to the tender offer which he knows or ought reasonably to know has been acquired directly or indirectly from a range of persons.
These persons include the offeror, the target, or any officer, director, partner or employee or any other person acting on behalf of the offeror or target.
Trading is prohibited unless the relevant information and its source is publicly disclosed by press release or otherwise within a reasonable time period prior to any purchase or sale.
The important point to note about the prohibition in Rule 14e-3 is that it applies irrespective of whether the defendant owed or breached a fiduciary or other duty to the issuer of the securities traded in or indeed whether he breached a duty to any other person.
In other words, under the misappropriation theory it is clear that no breach of duty to the issuer of the securities traded in, is required, provided there has been a breach of duty to another person; however, under Rule 14e-3 it is not necessary for any fiduciary duty to be owed or breached.
This means that Rule 14e-3 has wide-reaching effects.
Any doubt that may have existed as to the legitimacy of Rule 14e-3 has been removed by virtue of s.2 of the ITSFEA 1988 which states unequivocally that Congress supports:
(1) the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (’ Exchange Act’) governing trading while in possession of material, nonpublic information are, as required by such Act, necessary and appropriate in the public interest and for the protection of investors.
Further support for the legitimacy of Rule 14e-3 may be derived from the introduction of new section (ns) 20A of the SEA 1934 which makes provision for a private right of action for contemporaneous traders against insiders in breach of Rule 14e-3.
Ict is important to note that rule 14e-3 provides a ‘Chinese Wall-type’ defence for multi-service financial firms which would otherwise fall full square within the prohibition outlined in the rule.
Penalties
In the US, the potential arsenal of penalties available for insider trading violations is strikingly broad.
The authorities have at their disposal a range of criminal, civil, and disciplinary deterrents.
As well as this, private investors have a right of action in certain circumstances.
It is to this private right of action that we now turn.
i
A Private Right of Action For Contemporaneous traders
In contrast to the position in the UK, it is settled law that there exists in the US, at common law, a private right of action for insider trading violations in breach of Rule 10b-5 on impersonal stock exchange markets.
Despite the existence of such a remedy, a number of problems have plagued the use of the remedy.
For example, who should have a right to sue for a 10b-5 violation?
To limit the right only to those investors who trade directly with insiders, as strict logic dictates, would make a successful action very unlikely, given that privity would be virtually impossible to prove.
In Shapiro , following the logic of both Cady, Roberts and Texas Gulf Sulphur , it was decided that an insider owed a duty of disclosure to the whole marketplace.
Consequently, all investors who had purchased Douglas Aircraft stock between the date when the defendant first traded and the date when the disclosure was finally made were prima facie eligible to bring a private action under Rule 10b-5.
By sweeping aside the common law doctrine of privity in this way, it was clear that in theory insiders would be potentially exposed to vast liability.
For practical reasons, therefore, damages have been limited to disgorgement of profits.
Recovery by contemporaneous traders has, however, been denied in misappropriation cases.
Despite the rather artifical nature of the above approach, it is to be welcomed as novel yet realistic.
Contemporaneous traders are viewed as ‘surrogate plaintiffs’ for those who actually were in privity with the insider.
By adopting such an approach, the deterrent purposes of Rule 10b-5 are still capable of being achieved.
A similar degree of innovation is required in the UK.
The above approach has been broadly endorsed by the ITSFEA 1988.
Newly inserted s.20A(a) of the SEA 1934 gives a private right of action to any person who trades contemporaneously with any person in securities of the same class where that person has violated any provision of the Securities Exchange Act 1934 or any regulations made thereunder.
By virtue of ns.20A(b) limitations on potential liability are outlined.
First of all, the total amount of damages imposed under ns.20A(a) may not exceed the profit gained or the loss avoided in the transaction(s) in question.
Secondly, the total amount of damages awarded are reduced by any amounts that the defendant is obliged to disgorge under a Commission disgorgement order relating to the same transaction(s).
Then, finally, there is a statute of limitations bar, in that no action may be taken under the section more than five years after the date of the last transaction which is the subject of the violation.
Notwithstanding this limitation, the powers contained in the section do not restrict any other express or implied rights of action.
It is now clear that the misappropriation theory which was valid in the Second Circuit, but unresolved nationally, is now encompassed by s.10(b) of the SEA 1934 and Rule 10b-5.
In interpreting ns.20A, the House Committee Report stated that: ‘the codification of a right of action for contemporaneous traders is specifically intended to overturn court cases which have precluded recovery where plaintiffs where the defendant's violation is premised upon the misappropriation theory.’
Thus ns.20A not only gives congressional backing to the misappropriation theory but also reverses the rule in Moss v.
Morgan Stanley, Inc , which required the plaintiff to show that the insider trader breached a duty which was owed to him.
ii
SEC Enforcement
The SEC is chiefly responsible for the enforcement of the federal securities laws on insider trading.
The Commission can suspend or disbar any person from the securities industry; require disgorgement of profits; and impose penalties of anything up to three times the illicit gains made on the insider trades.
The criminal penalties are also severe.
Under s.4 of the ITSFEA 1988 (newly amended s.32(a) of the SEA 1934), natural persons found guilty of insider trading’…shall upon conviction be fined not more than $1m, or imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both’, whereas for persons other than natural persons the fine stands at $2.5m.
The SEC hopes that by doubling both the statutory fines and prison sentences this will do more to re-adjust the regulatory imbalance which currently favours insider trading.
The aim is to deter both current and potential offenders.
iii
Civil Liability for Controlling Persons
Section 3 of the ITSFEA 1988 covers the civil penalties for Controlling Persons (eg financial institutions) for illegal insider trading by controlled persons.
The SEA 1934, s.21 of which deals with the liability of controlling persons, is now supplemented by ns.21A.
Basically this provides that controlling persons who ‘knowingly or recklessly’ fail to supervise their employees properly, with a view to preventing insider dealing violations, can be made liable for three times the profit made or loss avoided (this may not exceed a $1m fine) for violations committed by their employees or other controlled persons.
Controlling persons may also be liable for controlled persons who tip others.
The rationale underlying the new amendment was outlined by the House Committee Report, where it was stated that:
The Committee intends through the broadening of controlling person civil penalty liability to increase the economic incentives for such persons to supervise vigorously their employees.
Effective supervision of securities firms of their employees and agents is a foundation of the federal regulatory scheme of investor protection.
With respect to insider trading in particular, the necessity for appropriate supervision to prevent violations is evident in view of the special opportunities in this area.
It is clear, therefore, that ns.21A tightens up considerably the law in this area.
iv
Bounties
Perhaps the most novel provision in ns.21A is ss. (e) which provides the SEC with the authority to award bounties to informants.
In the past the Commission has used informants to good effect.
In forty five enforcement actions brought in 1985 and 1986, informants were instrumental in providing information in fifteen cases.
It was thought therefore that the increased use of such a system might lead to improvements in enforcement.
Consequently in an SEC Commissioners document published in February 1986 the scheme was viewed positively, but owing to competing priorities, legislation was never framed to give it Congressional backing.
The new legislative measure rectifies this failing.
Subsection (e) in part reads:
(e)…there shall be paid from amounts imposed as a penalty under this section and recovered by the Commission or the Attorney General, such sums, not to exceed 10 per cent of such amounts, as the Commission deems appropriate, to the person or persons who provide information leading to the imposition of such penalty.
Clearly this measure could significantly enhance US enforcement mechanisms.
v
Amendments Concerning Supervision
With respect to brokers and dealers s.15 of the SEA 1934 is amended by adding the following new subsection:
(f) Every registered broker or dealer shall establish, maintain, and enforce written policies and procedures reasonably designed, taking into consideration the nature of such broker's or dealer's business, to prevent the misuse in violation of this title, or the rules or regulations thereunder, of material, nonpublic information by such broker or dealer or any person associated with such broker or dealer.
The Commission, as it deems necessary…shall adopt…regulations to require specific policies or procedures reasonably designed to prevent misuse in violation of this title…of material non-public information.
Under newly implemented s.204 A of the Investment Advisors Act, 1940, the above procedural policies are also applicable to prevent the misuse of nonpublic information by investment advisers.
In effect these procedures require,inter alia , the establishment of Chinese Wall informational barriers to ensure that inside information acquired by one arm of the firm is not transmitted and used by another arm of the financial entity.
The provisions represent the first time that the Chinese Wall concept has been explicitly enshrined in statutory language in the US.
vi
Investigative Assistance to Foreign Securities Authorities
By virtue of s.21(a) of the SEA 1934 (as amended by s.6(b) of the ITSFEA 1988) the SEC has the authority to provide assistance to ‘foreign securities authorities’ if the requesting authority is conducting an investigation which is necessary to determine whether any person has violated, is violating, or is about to violate any laws or rules which the requesting authority administers or enforces.
The Commission has a discretion to conduct an investigation in order to collect information and evidence pertinent to the request for assistance.
In deciding whether to provide this assistance, the Commission is required to consider whether the requesting authority has agreed to provide reciprocal assistance in securities matters and whether compliance with the request would prejudice the public interest of the United States.
vii
US Mail and Wire Fraud Statutes
As has already been mentioned, insider traders also face the possibility of conviction under the US mail and wire fraud statutes in so far as they participate in a ‘scheme…to defraud’(ie breach of s.10b and Rule 10b-5) where use has been made of the postal system or telephonic communication.
Although the fine is derisory ($1,000 per violation) there is the possibility of a prison sentence of up to five years.
viii
RICO
The use of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act 1970 (RICO) as a penalty for insider dealing has proved highly controversial.
RICO was originally designed for organised crime, or racketeering.
But by virtue of the US Supreme Court's decision in HJ Inc et al v.
Northwestern Bell Telephone Co et al , where it was held that proof of an organised crime nexus is not required for RICO to be invoked, it is now clear that the draconian penalties applicable under RICO may be used against insider dealers.
The potential use of RICO represents an undoubted victory for the regulatory authorities.
Civil penalties include a triple damages award for any person whose business or property is harmed as a result of the violation.
The criminal penalties, however, are draconian: up to twenty years imprisonment and up to $25,000 fine for each count; provision is also made for pre-trial freezing of assets and post-trial forfeiture of any interest the defendant has gained as a result of his violation.
Perhaps RICO will be of greatest use in encouraging suspects to plead guilty in return for dropping the RICO penalties.
This is what happened in the case of junk bond king Michael Milken.
Milken faced ninety-eight counts of securities violations including insider trading.
The SEC used the RICO sanctions as a lever to force Milken to plead guilty to six counts of securities fraud (for which he received a 10 year prison sentence), pay $200m in criminal fines and penalties, and deposit $400m into a fund for injured investors.
The Milken affair was only one of a number of major swoops on Wall Street insider traders initiated by the SEC.
The Commission's action against Dennis Levine was perhaps the first major success.
Levine, an investment banker at a prestigious Wall Street firm, was alleged to have been involved in insider trading over a period of six years, during which time he made huge profits while trading on the basis of material nonpublic information in the securities of companies.
It was believed that much of the information was acquired by way of his employment as an investment banker.
On June 5 1986, Levine finally agreed to settle the dispute, disgorging $11.6m in profits and accepting permanent disbarment from the securities industry.
On November 14 1986, in SEC v.
Ivan F Boesky, et al , the Commission began its largest and most notorious case to date.
Boesky, a risk arbitrageur, was charged with dealing on the basis of nonpublic information that was provided by Levine.
In the settlement that was reached, Boesky agreed to relinquish $50m in illicit profits; pay a civil penalty of a further $50m; accept permanent disbarment from the securities industry and to plead guilty to a federal charge of insider trading.
He was subsequently sentenced to two years imprisonment.
Boesky's cooperation with the regulatory authorities has resulted in a number of other SEC investigations.
The SEC, however, have not limited their zeal to specific individual targets.
In 1988, following one of the most extensive investigations ever conducted by the SEC, charges were filed against leading Wall Street firm Drexel Burnham Lambert, for whom Milken worked, alleging,inter alia , insider dealing, stock manipulation, and numerous other securities law violations.
Again, with the threat of RICO, Drexel agreed to pay $650m, fire Milken, and, quite extraordinarily, to pledge that no client or employee should speak to him again.
The firm never recovered and went into bankruptcy.
2.3.4.
SUMMARY
Chapter Four proceeds on the premise that the misuse of insider information is a moral and economic ‘bad’ and ought therefore to be regulated.
The chapter looks at the formal regulatory approach as adopted in the UK and the US.
These formal laws are complex and in the UK at least rarely resorted to.
The point is, however, that these rules, whether they be statutory, quasi-statutory, or self-regulatory, if breached, invoke restitutive, punitive, and administrative sanctions.
In this way, they impose costs on miscreants and alter the incentives to break down Chinese Walls and engage in insider dealing.
Consequently, the rules, the penalties imposed, and indeed, the likelihood of the penalties being imposed, are considered.
In the UK, insider dealing was originally left to common law remedies.
It is clear that these remedies are largely inadequate.
Detailed statutory prohibitions have been adopted in the form of the Companies Act 1985, the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 and the Financial Services 1986.
The increased investigative powers contained in the latter piece of legislation is likely to give the regulatory authorities a greater degree of success in detecting insider abuse, however, the subjective elements of the substantive offence, as enshrined in the CSA 1985, remain an onerous burden for the prosecution to discharge.
Thus, although the equation is changing in favour of the regulators, the skilled operator with nominee accounts and bank secrecy laws in off-shore centres is still often beyond the reach of the authorities.
What effect the provision of a civil remedy under s.61 and 62 of the FSA 1986 for breach of SIB Core Rule 28 (or a comparable SRO) is, as yet, too early to tell, but most probably they will have little significant deterrent impact, unless, they are interpreted by the courts in a progressive manner, or, if needs be, amended.
US law on insider dealing is considerably more pervasive and pragmatic than that which exists in the UK.
Case law has issued an expansive web of liability, with recent statutory provisions not only confirming these boundaries, but also marking out some of the potential penalties which may be imposed.
The ITSFEA 1988 is perhaps the most important legislative initiative to emerge from the US in the field of securities law in recent times.
By approving the Act, Congress has endorsed controversial doctrines and practices hitherto conducted on a largely pragmatic and informal basis by the Commission.
For example, adoption of the misappropriation theory, not to mention a paid informant system, something which arguably is required in the UK.
Be this as it may, the emphasis of the ITSFEA 1988 is on the use of deterrent remedies.
The increased use of civil law measures and increases in statutory fines and prison sentences is yet further admission by the SEC that expending resources on detection is much too costly given the end return.
These are lessons that the UK would do well to learn.
It seemed, at one time, almost certain that the substantive law of insider dealing in the US would codified on the statute book; the momentum has now waned.
The pervasiveness of the SEC's misappropriation theory, plus the widespread bargaining powers of the SEC and the potential penalties it may impose, provide a formidable array of incentives to trade within the law.
The strength of these penalties could deter potential offenders from breaching Chinese Walls.
It must also be remembered that in both jurisdictions self-regulatory codes of conduct prohibiting insider dealing provide further incentives to trade fairly.