

2
THE DEMOGRAPHIC CONTEXT
The greying of the British population is presented as one of the major challenges of the coming decades.
This concern has been manifest in the debate over intergenerational conflict about access to resources.
Questions have been posed about the willingness (or otherwise) of future generations of working age to support those who have retired from formal employment (Johnson et al .
1989).
Such concerns have been manifest in the reforms of social security pursued by Conservative administration in Britain in the 1980s.
The documents which preceded the reforms showed a widespread concern with the relationship between the number of those available to pay national insurance contributions and the recipients of the benefits provided.
These debates are outside the scope of this volume, although some aspects of the perceived burden of supporting older people will be raised in the chapters concerned with the health status of the older age groups and issues relating to the supply and consumption of formal and informal care.
The issue of population ageing is central to the consideration of current arrangements for the provision of care by formal services.
It also provides the context for the reviews of community care, NHS provision and arrangements for Primary care.
Such debates consider the older age groups as a uniform social group with a homogeneous set of needs for health and social care.
This chapter is divided into three main sections.
The first presents an overview of the main demographic trends in Britain during this century and attempts to provide a considered overview of these population changes.
The second part of the chapter considers the main demographic and household characteristics of the population aged 65 + as these also are important when considering aspects of health status in later life and the need for health and social care.
In the final part of the chapter the focus of attention is upon the social circumstances of this age group.
Where possible comparisons are made with older countries, especially those of western Europe, as this enables us to identify the uniqueness (or otherwise) of the trends observed in Britain.
Population ageing in Great Britain
In looking at population ageing we will consider two distinct dimensions.
First we examine the trends in population structure in Britain over the last century and the forecasts for the early decades of the next millennium.
In the second section the focus of attention is upon the statistical methods used to describe population structures.
population TRENDs 1901–2025
In 1988 the estimated population of the United Kingdom was 57.1 million (CSO 1990) of whom 8.9 million, or 15 per cent of the total population, were aged 65 years or older.
During the twentieth century Britain, in common with most industrial western societies, has undergone a major demographic transformation (OECD 1988).
There are two main factors underlying this change in the nature of the population distribution: decreased mortality and reduced fertility.
In England and Wales the crude death rate for the period 1840 — 45 was 21.4 per 1000 population; for 1980 — 85 the equivalent rate was 11.8 per 1000 (CIPCS 1989a).
The most spectacular change in mortality rates over the past 150 years has related to deaths within the first year of life — the infant mortality rate.
In 1840 — 45 the infant mortality rate for England and Wales was 148 per 1000 live births compared with 9 per 1000 in 1980 — 85 (OPCS 1989a).
In addition there have been significant decreases in fertility over the same period.
In 1900 the crude fertility rate, the number of births per 1000 population, was 27 per 1000 (Tinker 1984) compared with 13.8 per 1000 in 1988 (CSO 1990).
Consequently decreased mortality among all ages (but especially in the first year of life), together with a long-term reduction in fertility, have combined to produce an ageing population structure.
This means that the proportion of younger people within the population is decreasing while the proportion of older people is increasing.
The traditional demographic structure, which was pyramid-like in shape, with a wide base (indicating a large number of young people) and narrow top (indicating few people in the older age groups), has been replaced by a more equal distribution among the different age groups.
Before the onset of the 1939 — 45 world war little concern had been expressed about the rapid decline in fertility in Britain and the consequent ageing of the population.
The first real awareness of the changing population structure and the development of the view of population ageing as ‘a bad thing’ is contained in the 1949 Royal Commission of population.
This document put forward the now stereotypical view that a population with a decreasing number of young people in it would be unprogressive and less vigorous than other nations.
The negative attributes of old age at an individual level were, for the first time, being applied to the population as a whole.
The notion of the older age groups as an economic burden posing a threat to the economic standards of other members of the population is illustrated by the report of the Phillips Committee in 1954  which was first to raise the alarm about the Prospective costs of Providing pensions for future generations of elderly.
The number of people aged 65 and over in Great Britain increased from 1.75 million in 1901 to 8.5 million in 1981.
This absolute increase has also been reflected in an increase in the percentage of total population accounted for by those aged 65 +.
In 1901 5 per cent of the population was aged over 65 compared with 15 per cent aged 65 in 1981 (see Table 2.1).
The population of Great Britain is increasing although the rate of increase is lower than at earlier times in our history.
Current forecasts predict that the population of the United Kingdom will increase to Approximately 61 million by the year 2025 (CSO 1990).
Such forecasts are, however, only predictions and are based upon the extrapolation of current trends in both mortality and fertility.
Forecasts of mortality are now reasonably accurate.
Fertility is a much more difficult aspect of human behaviour to predict!
These demographic forecasts for the numbers of older people are much more reliable as these people are already born.
Current forecasts indicate, with the exception of a slight decrease around the turn of the millennium, that the population aged over 65 will continue to increase from 8.8 million in 1987 to 11.3 million in 2025 (see Table 2.1).
The number of people in the 65 — 74 age group is predicted to increase from 5.2 million in 1981 to 6 million by 2025.
The largest proportionate increases are expected among those aged over 85 years: from 0.8 million (1987) to 1.4 million (2025), an increase of 42 per cent.
It is the large percentage increases in the very elderly age groups which constitute the data used to create an almost ‘moral panic’ about population ageing.
However, examination of the actual numerical increases indicate that the number aged 85 + will increase by about 800,000.
Population ageing is operating at two distinct levels: societal and within the older age groups itself.
In 1901 2 per cent of those aged 65 + were aged over  85; by the year 2025 this will have increased to 12 per cent.
However, the very elderly still only represent a minority, approximately 1 per cent of the total population.
It is fairly unproblematic to predict the number of older people in the population at future points in time.
These individuals are already born and we may fairly accurately estimate mortality for different age and sex groups.
However, predicting what proportion of the total population the older age groups (or any other subset of the population) will represent is more problematic as it depends upon the number of children future generations produce.
The birth rate is notoriously difficult to predict as people remain very capricious in their decisions about when, and how many, children to have.
Hence all predictions about what proportion of the total population the 65 + age group will constitute in the future are little more than speculations based upon the extrapolation of current trends.
To overcome this problem many policy papers which examine population ageing produce a variety of projections using different fertility assumptions.
Although we can state what percentage of total population the older age groups currently represent, it is not reliable to quote future percentages; such predictions should be treated with the utmost caution.
Population ageing is not unique to Britain but is a characteristic feature of most western industrial societies and, increasingly the less developed parts of the world.
Scott and Johnson (1988) report that in 1980 8.5 per cent of the world's population was aged 60 years or over; by 2025 this is expected, if current trends persist, to increase to 13.7 per cent.
Among the developed countries of the world 11 per cent of the population are over 65, compared with about 4 per cent in the developing nations (Laslett 1989).
In demographic terms the developed countries are old societies, whereas the developing world has a youthful population structure.
More specifically Europe is the oldest of all the continents.
Among 14 countries of Europe, North America and Australasia trends in population structure are very similar (Table 2.2).
For example in Great Britain the percentage of the population aged 65 and over was 5 per cent in 1901 and 15 per cent in 1985.
During the same period in New Zealand this age group increased from 2 per cent to 10 per cent of total population.
population DEPENDENCY RATIOS
Of obvious importance within individual societies is the relationship between the different age groups as this has considerable implications for the development of health and social policy and economic development.
For example, a young society will need educational infrastructures.
As has already been hinted, many western countries are concerned about the ageing of their populations, largely because of issues relating to the perceived burden of financially supporting older people and their high use of health and social services.
There is an obvious need to be able to develop indicators which summarize the structure of a given population at a variety of scales of analysis (e.g national, regional or county).
Several different methods are available to describe the age distribution of populations and the relationship between its constituent age groups.
One of the most frequently cited indices is what is termed the ‘dependency ratio’.
This is the ratio of the combination of those aged 65 + (or whatever age is taken as a proxy for entry into later life) and those aged 0 — 15 to those of working age (i.e. 16 — 64).
The overall dependency ratio may be subdivided into two constituent elements; the elderly dependency ratio, known in the USA as the ‘gerontic’ dependency ratio, and the youth dependency, or ‘neontic’, ratio.
Examples of the method of calculation of these indicators are shown in Table 2.3.
Much of this moral panic about population ageing seems to have developed from the widespread and possibly indiscriminate use of population dependency ratios (Calasanti and Bonanno 1986).
In 1980 the overall dependency ratio in Britain was 56.2 and it is predicted to increase to 56.7 by the year 2020 (Table 2.4).
The increase in the elderly dependency ratio over the same period was from 23.2 to 25.5; a rate of increase considerably less than that likely to be experienced by many other developed countries.
Comparison of the patterns of demographic change suggested by the overall and gerontic ratio illustrates the importance of looking at both the total population and its component segments.
For example, the overall dependency ratio for Canada is projected to decrease by 3 per cent between 1980 and 2020; this masks a predicted 205 per cent increase in the gerontic ratio over the same period.
One feature of the use of both dependency ratios and population projections  is that they concentrate upon expected changes in structures.
By definition they do not look backwards at the kinds of demographic transformations with which various societies have already coped.
Such a solely prospective perspective promotes the impression that large percentage increases in, for example, the very old (i.e. those aged 85 +) are a new experience which is unique to the next three decades.
Careful examination of Table 2.1 suggests that this is not the case.
The interwar years in Britain were characterized by large percentage increases in the population aged 85 +.
Similarly in both Britain and the United States overall dependency ratios were highest in the immediate post-war period, as a result of the baby boom.
Overall dependency ratios are projected to be at their lowest in the United States in 2010 (Binney and Estes 1988).
Indices such as the dependency ratio are widely quoted and are of some use in portraying overall trends and relationships between different elements of the population of Specific countries (or any other geographical area).
They are also of interest in enabling the demographic profile of countries to be directly compared.
However, their meaningful interpretation is problematic for two reasons: methods of calculation and assumptions.
Calculating dependency ratios retrospectively or for current circumstances is not problematic.
The data are readily available in most developed countries.
However, while it may be legitimate to calculate such indices upon the basis of known population figures, it is highly problematic to construct future projections of the ratios as they rest upon assumptions about future patterns of fertility which are almost impossible to predict.
Consequently dependency ratios for future decades are again only best estimates and not real facts.
They must be ascribed the status due to calculations which contain a large element of estimation.
More problematic than issues relating to the calculation of these statistics are the assumptions upon which they are based.
The implicit assumptions upon which the ratios are based are contentious, value laden and rarely articulated.
The main assumptions implicit within the dependency ratio are as follows:
All those aged 0 — 15 and 65 + are ‘dependent’.
All those aged 16 — 64 are gainfully employed and contributing to the social welfare support of the two age extremes of the population.
All members of the ‘dependent population’ are equally dependent and do not present varying social costs of support.
We will now consider the validity of these assumptions.
First, the definition of the age of 65 years as initiating the onset of old age dependency is both arbitrary and socially constructed and is largely the result of institutionalized forced retirement.
The implication of these types of ratio is that the population may be divided into two groups; assets, i.e. those who are gainfully employed or assumed to be so, and liabilities, those who are not contributing to society.
Second, the typical dependency ratio assumes that all those aged 16 — 64 are gainfully employed.
How legitimate is this assumption?
Falkingham (1989) has  examined dependency ratios for Britain.
She shows that to assume that all those aged 16 — 64 are economically active is a gross assumption unsupported by the available data.
Economic activity rates vary between age and gender groups within the population; they also vary historically.
For example, labour force participation rates for women have, until very recently, been low, so that in 1981 approximately 60 per cent of women between the ages of 20 and 59 were defined by the census as economically active.
Factors such as unemployment and the number of young people attending further education also influence labour force participation rates.
Clearly the assumption that all those within a Specific age band are economically active is as naive as the assumption that all those above a certain age are inactive.
A further difficulty relates to defining precisely what does and does not constitute economic activity.
For the United States Calasanti and Bonanno (1986) have calculated a dependency ratio using a number of different assumptions about female labour force participation.
Excluding non-working women from the analysis alto-gether gives a ratio of 0.7, while including non-working women as dependent produces a ratio of 0.9.
This analysis shows how sensitive these measures are to varying assumptions about unemployment and female labour for Participation.
They also show that, for the United States, the dependency ratio actually peaked in 1960 and is now decreasing because of the return of women to the workforce.
The third assumption of the dependency ratio is that those aged 65 + and those aged 0 — 15 are equally dependent; the ratio is not usually weighted in any way.
Again this assumption is rather gross as the social and health care needs of the two age groups are rather different and the costs of supporting these two age groups are also very different.
The characteristics of the elderly population
What is loosely described as ‘the elderly population’ covers an age range from 65 to 100+ years and is not the homogeneous social group that this unitary term would indicate.
This section considers some of the important demographic features of the older age groups which are of importance when considering future and current demands for health and social care.
SEX STRUCTURE
There is a marked gender inequality in the population aged 65 +.
Later life is predominantly a female experience.
Of the population aged 65 years and over 60 per cent are female (see Figure 2.1).
This trend is at its most extreme among the very elderly (i.e. those aged 85 years or over) when there are 250 females for every 100 males.
This may partly reflect a cohort or historical effect.
The ‘old old’, i.e. those aged 85 and over, were born in the years 1890 — 1905.
The   number of males surviving to old age in these birth cohorts has been very significantly deleted by the huge mortality associated with the 1914 — 18 world war.
The gender imbalance is seen by many as the natural order of things, indicating some form of biological superiority for women.
However, this is a phenomenon of fairly recent origin.
Up to the middle of last century life expectancy was greater among males than females due to the high mortality associated with child bearing (Victor 1987).
The reasons for the current gender imbalance are not fully understood.
However, medical interventions have been relatively unsuccessful in decreasing the mortality of the diseases which are most common killers of middle-aged men, i.e. heart disease, strokes and other circulatory diseases.
The higher rate of smoking among men, causing lung cancer and much heart disease, may Partly explain the differential.
The future effect of increased rates of smoking among women in the period since 1930 upon the gender division of the older age groups remains unknown.
Our current evidence to explain the gender imbalance illustrated by the older age groups is very flimsy and is considered in more detail in Chapter 4.
This gender imbalance in later life is not a trend which is unique to Great Britain.
The majority of people aged over 65 are female in a variety of western industrialized countries (Table 2.5).
The percentage of the older age groups who are female has increased since the beginning of this century.
This probably reflects the effect of high male mortality rates resultant from the major wars and it should not therefore be assumed that future cohorts of elderly will continue to  illustrate this extreme gender imbalance.
Evidence to support this speculation is available from countries such as japan where the gender imbalance is much less marked than the countries of western Europe.
MARITAL STATUS
As with other sections of the population those aged 65 + may be classified according to their civil status.
This divides the population into four major groups: the legally married, widowed, single (i.e. never married) and divorced/legally separated.
The civil status of older people in Britain varies with their sex.
In 1981 there were marked differences in the marital status of men and women in the older age groups.
At all ages over 65 women are less likely to be married than men; 78 per cent of all males aged 65 + were still married compared with 46 per cent of females.
In contrast 50 per cent of women aged 65 + and 18 per cent of men are widowed.
This difference in marital status increases with age; for those aged over 75 61 per cent of men are married compared with 21 per cent of women (figure 2.2).
This difference between the sexes in civil status reflects two interacting factors: the tendency for women to marry men older than themselves and the differential life expectancy of men and women.
Widowhood is now something which is almost exclusively associated with later life.
As Laslett (1989) points out there is an age in every population at which the widowed form a statistical majority.
He shows that for men this occurs at an age somewhere in the mid-80s.
For women it is much earlier in their early 70s.
Changes in mortality have influenced the marital status composition of the older age groups in Britain over the last century.
Falkingham (1987) has examined trends in marital status for the over-65s from 1901 to 1981.
As death rates have declined the proportion of elderly classed as married has increased while the proportion widowed has decreased.
In 1901 58 per cent of men aged 65 were married compared with 78 per cent in 1981; for women of the same age group the proportions classed as married at these two time points  were 38 per cent and 46 per cent respectively.
In 1901 38 per cent of men were widowed compared with 18 per cent in 1981; for women the proportions were 50 per cent and 44 per cent respectively.
A substantial minority of Britain's population aged 65 + has never married.
For men this is about 3 per cent and has remained constant.
For women the never married group has always constituted a higher fraction of the older groups; in 1980 it was 9 per cent of those aged 65 +, while the peak was 1951 when it was 16.3 per cent.
The large percentage of now elderly women who never married reflects an important cohort effect which was introduced earlier; the impact of the First World War.
The high death rate among young men during the Great War of 1914 — 18 meant that a substantial number of women were unable to find partners to marry.
Thus the high percentage of now elderly women who never married is not related to ageing; it is not an age effect.
Rather this is a feature which is unique to that particular generation or cohort but which has profound implications for the provision of family care to older people in the community.
It is very unlikely that future generations will exhibit this particular demographic characteristic.
Another feature of the civil status distribution of the older age groups is the very small percentage of the older age groups classified as divorced.
This again reflects the influence of historical time.
For the current generations of older people divorce was neither easy to obtain nor socially acceptable.
The effects of high divorce rates characteristic of the post-1960s in Britain upon family structures, filial responsibility and grandparenthood remain largely unknown but will probably have a profound influence upon the experience of ageing for future generations of older people.
INSTITUTIONAL LIVING
A common image of later life is its association with residential care and institutional living.
Approximately 3 per cent of those aged 65 and over live in some form of institution, either a residential home, nursing home or a long stay hospital bed.
This is half the estimate for 1901.
The percentage of older people living in institutional settings increases with age but is always very much lower than the percentage living in the community (Figure 2.3).
Even among the very oldest old, those aged 85 and over, 19 per cent live in institutions.
However, we can look at the obverse of this and state that 81 per cent live independently in the community.
At all ages above 75 years women are more likely to be living in an institution than their male contemporaries.
In Britain it would appear that the percentage of those aged 65 + defined as living in some form of institution has remained constant or perhaps decreased slightly.
Comparisons of the percentage of those aged 65 + living in communal establishments is problematic.
The definition of what constitutes an institution varies across time and between different countries.
Very broadly it would seem that most countries in western and northern Europe have about 4 — 6 per cent of their population aged 65 + resident in some form of institution.
Data provided by Wall (1988) show that 10 per cent of those aged 65 + in Holland reside in an institution; this is the highest percentage in Europe.
Parker (1987) indicates that in Australia 14 per cent of those aged 75 + live in an institution as compared with about 5 per cent in Britain.
Given the limitations noted earlier we must, however, be cautious in drawing too many inferences from these kinds of data.
FAMILY SIZE AND KIN RELATIONSHIPS
Patterns of family formation have changed significantly in Britain over the last century.
These reflect changes in marriage rates, age at marriage, divorce and child bearing.
For older people these changes influence the size of their kin networks by influencing the number of siblings they have and the numbers of children and grandchildren.
Age at first marriage has declined this century.
The average age at first marriage is now about 23 years and the vast majority of the population, 90 per cent, has married by the age of 30 (CSO 1990).
In addition family size has decreased.
Between 1870 and 1930 average completed family size decreased from five or six children to three and has now stabilized at about two.
In addition to this decrease in size child bearing is now concentrated into a much shorter period of a woman's life.
In the middle of last century the average age at which a woman's family was completed was 39; it is now the late 20s (Finch 1989).
This has resulted in siblings being born much closer together than in earlier time periods.
The compression of child bearing has had important implications for the participation of women in the formal labour market.
It also means that couples now spend a much larger part of the life cycle in the post child bearing phase.
One result of this compression of child bearing, combined with the decreased probability of children dying and increased life expectancy, is the creation of grandparenthood.
It is now taken for granted that children will know their grandparents.
This is a relatively new state of affairs which has resulted from the changes noted above.
What are the consequences of these changes for the kin networks of the current generation of older people?
The majority of those aged over 70 have both surviving siblings and children (see Figures 2.4 and 2.5).
However the percentage with such family decreases with age.
This decline is most notable with siblings; 80 per cent of those aged 70 — 74 report that they have brothers or sisters compared with about 50 per cent of those aged 85 +.
However, these quantitative data tell us nothing about the quality or importance of the relationship.
Indeed we know very little about contemporary kin relationships (Finch 1989) and can only speculate as to how increased rates of divorce and remarriage will affect family relationships.
SOCIAL CONTACT AND SOCIAL ISOLATION
One very potent image of later life is that of social isolation and loneliness.
Invariably old age is portrayed by the image of an old lady living in obvious poverty and social neglect.
How accurate is this representation?
Are all older people socially isolated?
Many social surveys of older people have focused upon issues concerning social contact and social isolation because of the potency of this image of isolation.
This, of course, presents the methodological problem of how to measure social contact, social isolation and loneliness.
One way of tackling this problem is by enumerating the frequency with which an older person has contact with family, friends and neighbours.
The General Household Survey provides extensive data concerning three main aspects of social contact: visits from friends/relatives; visits to friends/relatives   and contact with neighbours.
Typically the survey asks if respondents have had contact with family/friends/neighbours on a scale ranging from daily to never.
The available evidence shows that those aged 65 + maintain extensive weekly contact with both their family and friends.
Only a small minority, about 5 per cent, are never visited by family/friends while 20 per cent report that they never go out to visit family/friends.
Visits to friends/relatives decrease with age (figure 2.6).
This may reflect either the decreased mobility of older people or a decline in the number of friends and/or family available for visiting.
However, with the exception of very elderly males (i.e. those aged 85 +), the percentage of those aged 65 + being visited at least weekly by their family or friends remains high, at about 70 per cent(Figure 2.7).
Contact with neighbours, at least weekly, remains high (Figure 2.8).
This numerical analysis suggests that there is extensive social contact between older people and their families, friends and neighbours.
What these empirical data cannot tell us is the quality of the interaction which has taken place.
Such issues are most appropriately researched via more qualitative approaches.
Social isolation is a very nebulous concept to attempt to quantify.
the simple quantitative approach described above suggests that very few older people are socially isolated; most have frequent contact with the wider social context.
On a more subjective level social isolation may also refer to feelings of loneliness and concerns about the quality and quantity of social contacts.
The main subjective component of social isolation examined by social researchers relates to loneliness.
Typically researchers ask older people (or those from other age  groups) to rate how often (if at all) they experience feelings of loneliness.
Studies have consistently reported that the vast majority of older people, approximately 95 per cent, never feel lonely.
Data from South Wales indicate that feelings of loneliness do seem to increase with age and are more common among women as compared with men.
The percentage reporting that they sometimes felt lonely increased from 10 per cent of males and 16 per cent of females aged 70 — 74 to 18 per cent and 27 per cent respectively of those aged 85 + (Victor 1987).
The percentage reporting that they always felt lonely showed little change with age.
The relationship between amount of social contact and feelings of loneliness is not linear.
In South Wales 10 per cent of those who were classed as always alone, and therefore by implication as being socially isolated, reported that they often or always felt lonely.
It is clear that the vast majority of older people are neither socially isolated nor overwhelmed with feelings of loneliness.
It is, however, difficult to conclude if older people are more (or less) socially isolated than younger members of society.
Researchers have, very largely, identified loneliness as a problem of old age.
Consequently these questions have rarely been put to younger members of society.
HOUSEHOLD STRUCTURE
The 1981 census enumerated 19,493,000 households in Great Britain living in the community.
This, of course, excludes those people living in communal establishments such as prisons, hospitals or residential homes.
The post-war period has also been characterized by very profound changes in family and household formation patterns.
Indeed in the post-war period Great Britain has experienced a second demographic revolution relating to the structure and characteristics of the size of the households in which people live.
There has been both an increase in the total number of households and a decrease in the average household size.
This reflects very profound social changes in the number and type of independent households within contemporary Britain.
An important feature of contemporary society is the social desirability of creating and maintaining an independent household.
families sharing accommodation on a permanent basis is not now seen as socially desirable.
This is reflected in the growth in the number of households and the decrease in household size.
One index of this change is the growth of single person households.
In 1961 12 per cent of all households in Great Britain consisted of one person as compared with 25 per cent in 1987 (Table 2.6).
Single person pensioner households now represent 16 per cent of all households in Britain compared with 7 per cent in 1961 (CSO 1990).
Single person households will represent an increasing proportion of all households in the future, perhaps as much as 31 per cent by 2001 if current trends persist (CSO 1990).
However, the percentage of such householders who are pensioners is predicted to decrease   from 60 per cent(1981) to 54 per cent (2001)(CSO 1990).
Average household size has decreased from 3.09 in 1961 to 2.55 in 1987 and will continue to decline (Table 2.6).
Similar trends are observable in mainland Europe.
For example, in 1981 31 per cent of households in the Federal Republic of Germany and 29 per cent in Denmark consisted of a single person (CSO 1989).
Against this background of significant changes in household formation patterns it is hardly surprising that there has been an increase in the proportion and number of older people living alone (Figure 2.9).
The percentage of people aged 65 and over living alone has increased from 10 per cent in 1945 to 36 per cent in 1985, while the percentage of those living with others has decreased from 60 per cent to 20 per cent over the same period.
These changes reflect a variety of social factors, including the decrease in the age of marriage, a    decrease in the average age at which the last child is born combined with a closer spacing of children.
These trends, allied with the increased life expectancy of older people, have combined with the result that children are increasingly likely to have left the parental home to establish an independent household before the death of their parents.
This results in a shortening of the average duration of time in which families live as a nuclear group and an increase in the phase of the life cycle in which the couple live alone post-child rearing — the empty nest phase.
These changes also reflect the increased ability of older people to financially maintain their own households after the children have left home and a very strong social desire by all age groups to be independent.
At all ages older women are more likely to be living alone than their male contemporaries (Figure 2.10).
Almost half of women aged 65 + (45 per cent) live alone compared with 17 per cent of males.
As would be expected from the evidence about marital status presented earlier more men (60 per cent) live with their spouses than do women (32 per cent ).
The large concentration of older people living by themselves has tended to divert attention away from the often complex household structures in which older people live.
Dale el al .
(1987) report that a 25-category classification system was required to fully represent the variety of types of household structure in which older people in Great Britain lived.
Despite the availability of statistics describing societal level changes in household formation which have influenced the type of household in which  older people live, this still remains the subject of considerable mythology.
As finch (1989) describes, it is commonly asserted that this century has seen the demise of the extended family structure which is commonly assumed to have been the norm at previous points in time.
Laslett (1972) has demonstrated unambiguously that three generation or extended households were not the norm in pre-industrial times for the simple reason that comparatively few older people were found in the population before the later part of this century.
Furthermore, Finch (1989) suggests that much co-residence between relatives was driven by economic imperatives and was often for a temporary period only.
We should also not make the rather simplistic assumption that co-residence implies a strong bond between relatives.
Nor does the setting up of separate households necessarily imply a weakening of social and caring relationships.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
Within Britain, and other countries, older people are not equally geographically distributed.
This has important social and health policy implications as planning, at both national and local levels, must take this imbalance into account.
The main concentrations of older people in Britain are on the south coast, in subsidiary retirement areas such as the north-east and north Wales coast and within inner city areas, especially in the north and north-west.
Several factors account for this distribution: the ageing of populations in situ ; out-migration of the young and in-migration of older people.
The relationship between these factors in determining the spatial distribution of the elderly is unknown and probably varies historically.
However, most of the current distribution is probably accounted for by the ageing of local populations with migration being of secondary importance.
Evidence for this is provided by the relatively low rates of geographical mobility in Britain as compared with other countries.
Evidence for the importance of ageing in situ can be seen from the ring of ‘ageing’ suburbs of both private and public sector housing which surround many of the large cities in Britain.
ETHNICITY
Issues regarding the ethnic minority dimensions of ageing are only now beginning to be addressed in Britain.
At the 1981 census people of pensionable age represented less than 4 per cent of all households with a head drawn from the New Commonwealth (Asia, the Indian subcontinent and pakistan).
A feature of British society in the next 25 years will be the ageing of the ethnic minority communities who came to the country in the 1960s to provide labour (Figure 2.11).
We know very little about how the experience of ageing will vary between those who came to this country a-s economic migrants and the indigenous population.
We have little hard information about how ageing   affects minority communities.
However, we have a number of potent stereotypes about the ‘more caring’ nature of minority communities and their reluctance to use formal services to provide care traditionally provided by the family in their country of origin.
The accuracy of these images remains unproven.
There is much work to be done in enumerating the real needs of minority elders for services and to develop services which respond to the cultural needs of these communities.
The social circumstances of older people
Several aspects of the social circumstances of older people are important when discussing their ability to pay for the care they require.
These are economic activity, financial situation and housing type and quality.
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
Economic activity rates are low among those of pensionable age.
Data from the 1981 census indicates that 7 per cent of women aged 65 — 69 and 17 per cent of men were defined as economically active (see Figures 2.12, 2.13).
These low rates of economic activity reflect the requirement to have formally retired from paid work in order to receive the state retirement pension in Britain.
Since 1951 there has been a significant decrease in the labour force  participation of older male workers.
During the 30 years from 1951 to 1981 the proportion of males aged 60 — 64 who were defined as economically active decreased from 87.5 per cent to 74.6 (Figure 2.12).
Johnson (1988) observes that this decrease is not a new phenomenon but is a continuation of trends which have their origin in the last century.
However, the pace of decline has quickened in the post-war period.
Similar trends may be observed in most western industrial societies.
The factors used to explain the decreased labour market participation of older men may be classified into three groups: health, economic and structural.
Poor health and disability are both consistently associated with early exit from the labour market.
Both parker (1980) and Walker (1985) have shown that ill health is an important factor in the decision to take early retirement.
However, the validity of these findings is challengeable as respondents may feel encouraged to give socially acceptable reasons for early retirement such as ill health rather than factors such as self-interest.
Economic variables such as the demand for labour and the state of the economy are obviously important in the retirement decision.
Phillipson (1982) has argued that older workers form a ‘reserve’ army of labour which can be recruited in times of labour shortage and discarded during periods of depression.
The third set of factors are structural and include the availability of private pensions and social security income entitlements.
Johnson (1988) investigated the interrelationships between these sets of factors and concluded that structural reasons have become increasingly important in the early retirement decision.
However, he also concludes that the precise relationship between these influences upon the decision to retire from work early probably varies between different sectors of the economy.
For women the picture is more complex.
The post-war period has seen an increase in labour force participation (see Figure 2.13).
For women aged 55 — 59 the percentage classified as economically active increased from 28 per cent in 1951 to 52 per cent in 1981.
As yet there has been little research considering early retirement among women and its social meaning and impact.
At a very superficial level it has been suggested that retirement is not problematic for women because of the importance of their ‘other’ social roles.
It remains to be seen if this impressionistic statement is correct or whether it will apply to future generations of elderly women who have been active in the labour market for most of their adult life.
FINANCIAL SITUATION
Two contrasting images of the financial and living standards of older people may be identified.
The first casts older people as being almost inevitably poor and this draws a causal relationship between income and later life.
This is a perspective with a long historical pedigree.
A more recent image is diametrically opposed to this and emphasizes the affluence of later life.
It is this perspective which has generated the image of the woopies (well off older people), opals (older people with affluent lifestyles) and the jolies (jet setting oldies with loads of loot).
Older people who remain active in the formal labour market will be in receipt of earnings from employment.
Those not gainfully employed are dependent upon two main sources for their income: pensions and savings.
Pensions may be  received from two main sources: the state and previous employers.
First, there is the state retirement pension.
This is known colloquially as the old age pension and is payable at a flat rate to all those who have finally retired from the labour market provided they have the appropriate national insurance contributions.
For those older people with an income below a defined level additional pensions are payable.
Up to April 1988 this was known as supplementary pension and was the arm of the supplementary benefit system catering for older people.
Since April 1988 this has been replaced by income support.
Older people may also be in receipt of a pension from a previous employer (an occupational pension).
Furthermore, older people may have savings or investments which will yield income.
This is termed unearned income.
Support from relatives may also be received but it is difficult to quantify this source of income and it is excluded from the analysis which follows.
Since the immediate post-war period older people have become more reliant upon the state for their income (figure 2.14).
In 1951 42 per cent of pensioners, income derived from the state compared with 60 per cent in 1984/85.
Over the same period the percentage derived from earnings has decreased from 27 per cent to 9 per cent.
The state is the most important single source of income for the older age groups.
The levels at which state pensions are paid is, therefore, crucial to the standard of living of older people.
International comparative studies of the income levels of specific social groups such as the elderly remain rare because of the difficulties involved in making comparisons between societies with widely differing responses to the issue of income maintenance in later life.
These problems are compounded by  differences in absolute and relative levels of income between societies.
At this macro level of analysis it has been demonstrated that older people in Britain experience an income level relative to other members of society which is considerably below that enjoyed by their counterparts in Europe and North America (Hedstrom and Ringen 1987).
These authors indicate that the incomes of the 65 — 74 age group in Britain are 76 per cent of the population average compared with 94 per cent for the other six European and North American countries included within their study.
Thus Hedstrom and Ringen (1987, p. 238) state that ‘with the exception of Britain, the standard of living of elderly families is not far behind the national average’.
At the international level of analysis it seems that the elderly in Britain fare much worse than their European colleagues.
However, the limitations of these data must be borne in mind, especially the fact that they are limited to a single point in time.
These authors also examined the distribution of income within the elderly populations of the countries studied.
This exercise revealed that the elderly in Britain were characterized by less income inequality than their European counterparts.
This paradox is explained by the fact that in Britain the vast majority of older people are poor and there is therefore less difference in income levels between the group.
This is in direct contrast to the European studies where there are much greater variations within the elderly population in terms of income levels.
There is a substantial body of research comparing the income of the retired population in Britain with those below retirement age.
Optimistic statements from government sources suggest that the real incomes of the retired are increasing and that this group is improving its economic position with regard to the rest of society.
Fiegehen (1986) reports that the share of total disposable personal income (TDPI) attributable to pensioners has increased from 7 per cent in 1951 to 15 per cent in 1984/85.
During this period the percentage of retired people within the population increased from 13 per cent to 18 per cent.
The source of the increased disposable income of older people is attributed to two factors: the growth of the pensionable population and increased affluence of older people.
This increase in TDPI may simply reflect the fact that pensioners start from a very low base.
It also calls into question what percentage of TDPI pensioners ought to represent.
The poverty statistics are cited as further support for the view that the elderly are becoming better off in relation to the rest of society.
In 1950 pensioners constituted 70 per cent of those claiming supplementary benefit compared with 59 per cent in 1984/85 (DHSS 1984).
However, this change has been brought about almost entirely by the increase in the long-term unemployed rather than an increase in the living standards of older people in the lowest income groups; it is not the result of a vast increase in the incomes of older people.
Rather it reflects the creation of an even poorer group, the long-term unemployed, who have very low incomes.
It seems that older people in Britain are better off than some other groups dependent upon welfare for their source of income; but they have not improved their situation with regard to those in employment.
The prevalence of poverty among this group remains very high, although we should not neglect the fact that there are a minority of affluent elderly.
Overall approximately 25 per cent of those aged 65 + have an income at or below supplementary benefit rates and a further 44 per cent live on the margins of poverty, i.e. they have an income within 40 per cent of the poverty level (Victor 1989a).
Within the elderly population, it is the very old (i.e. those aged over 80), women, those living alone, those from manual occupations and the disabled who are most at risk of experiencing poverty in later life (Victor 1989a).
HOUSING CIRCUMSTANCES
The population aged 65 + is often characterized as being income poor but asset rich.
This refers to the fact that, as Figure 2.15 shows, 50 per cent of those aged 65 + are home owners.
Unlike younger age groups those over retirement age are usually actual home owners as opposed to holding a mortgage.
Overall about 35 — 40 per cent of those aged 65 + rent accommodation from the local authority (public sector housing), with the remainder renting from a private landlord.
The percentage classed as home owners is projected to increase to 60 per cent by the year 2000.
Young elderly will illustrate a higher rate of home ownership than the older elderly.
One reason for the interest in rates of home ownership among the older age groups is the potential of realizing the asset and   using it to pay for care.
Such schemes neglect the importance of inheritance, the desire by older people to leave something to their children or grandchildren.
The widespread promotion of such asset liberating schemes would, of course, do nothing for those without a house to sell or realize the capital value of.
Conclusion
There is a trend throughout the countries of western Europe and North America for the ageing of the population.
These trends look set to continue into the early decades of the next millennium.
However, it is not yet possible to predict with any certainty what proportion of the population the older age groups will represent as future fertility remains the subject of considerable speculation.
It seems likely that the trend towards the establishment of separate households will continue, and this will result in more older people living alone or with their spouses.
Several features of the older age groups which are currently taken for granted, including the predominance of women and the stereotype of the elderly spinster, in part reflect cohort effects; future generations are unlikely to display these trends to the same degree.
Thus predicting the future health and social care needs of the older age groups, as indicated by demographic factors, is Largely speculative.
3
PHYSICAL HEALTH: PATTERNS OF MORTALITY
The high profile of biological theories and perspectives in gerontology have resulted in a perceived general association between age and (ill) health.
To be old is to be, of necessity, unhealthy.
This image of old age is not new.
De Beauvoir (1985 p. 104) quotes the rather gloomy view of old age written by the Egyptian poet Ptah-hotep in 2500 BC 
From a health policy perspective the scenario depicted is that the increasing numbers of older people described earlier will lead to the population of the western industrial nations being infirm, demented and disease ridden with an insatiable demand for health and social care.
The greying of nations is presented as an inescapable world wide pandemic from which there is no escape.
Furthermore, old age is perceived by both lay people and professional workers alike as a cause of ill health.
Blaxter (1983) in her study of women's thoughts on health and the cause of disease clearly identifies an acceptance of poor health as an attribute of normal ageing.
Conversely youth is depicted as a time of vitality and good health.
These stereotypes form the context within which to attempt to consider the health of older people and the relationship between health and ageing and variations in health status within the older age groups, using a variety of different measures including mortality, morbidity and disability.
Before presenting the empirical data concerning health status, the thesis developed by Fries concerning future patterns of mortality and morbidity in later life is described.
Health in later life: the thesis of Fries
The tone of the debate about the health implications has been overwhelmingly negative.
One of the most interesting theoretical propositions about ageing and health status has been proposed by Fries (1980) in an article in the New England Journal of Medicine and subsequently developed in more detail (Fries and Crapo 1981).
Fries outlined a twin set of ideas about the health of older people termed the ‘rectangularisation of mortality’ and ‘compression of morbidity’based upon his observations, as a practising clinician, of North American society.
Each of these ideas is considered separately although the two processes are inter-related.
The first part of the argument relates to the rather alarmingly titled concept of ‘rectangularisation of mortality’.
This term relates to the effect upon natural lifespan of a decrease in premature mortality.
Fries made the assumption that the natural lifespan of the human species is of fixed duration; in his work he takes this as 85 years.
As premature mortality decreases, he argues, more people will live to the limits of this natural lifespan.
This will greatly increase mortality at the end of the natural lifespan creating an almost rectangular pattern of mortality (see Figure 3.1).
Fries argued that the elimination of much premature mortality would result in the creation of ‘natural death’.
By this he meant that death would result from the body ‘wearing out’ at the end of the natural lifecourse rather than early death resulting from disease or trauma.
The second element of Fries's argument relates to the ‘compression of morbidity’.
He indicates that, with the control of premature mortality largely   the result of reducing mortality from infectious diseases, the pattern of population morbidity will be dominated by chronic diseases.
If the onset of such diseases can be delayed then morbidity will be compressed into the final years of life.
He argues that more people will live to the full extent of their lifespans and that the onset of disability will be squeezed into the last phase of life.
This delay in the onset of chronic disease would increase the number of disability free years in old age which the average person would experience.
This rather optimistic view would, therefore, suggest that an increase in the elderly population need not be problematic in health care terms as the population might not display as much morbidity as current cohorts.
These propositions have been hotly debated and a variety of different responses were soon forthcoming (see Bury 1988).
Fries's argument is dependent upon the notion of a fixed human lifespan.
He felt that the idea that the human lifespan could continue to increase was biologically implausible.
Several authors have argued that there is no evidence to support this proposition (Manton 1982; Schneider and Brody 1983).
Neither do they support the view that mortality in late life is due to the body ‘wearing out ‘, as Fries asserts, rather than to specific and clinically identifiable disease states.
This debate as to whether the human lifespan is indeed finite remains unresolved.
It has also been suggested that the ideas proposed by Fries rest upon an assumption that mortality rates in later life have reached a plateau and will not show further changes.
In both Britain and the United States late age mortality rates have decreased markedly in the post-war period (see below).
These changes in mortality, especially among the old elderly, suggest that we have not reached the maximum human lifespan.
There are also problems with the compression of morbidity thesis, most notably the lack of any clear and rigorous evidence of decreases in morbidity and the non-availability of measures of morbidity with which to test his proposition.
Bury (1988) also points out that the argument concerning decreasing mortality and morbidity rates is contaminated by cohort effects and influences.
Fries argues that preventive activities can result in the delayed onset of morbidity and chronic disease.
Again, there is remarkably little evidence to support (or indeed refute) the argument that an ‘active and healthy lifestyle’ can delay the onset of disease and disability in later life.
The debate about the validity of these twin propositions continues.
Bury (1988) provides some interesting ideas about how the debate can be moved forward by designing research projects which examine ageing from a longitudinal perspective.
He also illustrates how the debate has become obscured by competing ideological perspectives about the value of prevention in influencing the onset of disease and disability in later life.
The status of Fries's ideas remains that of interesting speculation.
However, they have been of considerable value in that they have challenged the assumptions of many gerontologists and policy makers and forced a closer examination of our knowledge about health and ageing in later life.
Mortality
In the United Kingdom the 1836 Births and Deaths Registration Act provides the framework for the current system of death registration.
All deaths must be notified with the Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages.
A death certificate is completed by the certifying doctor and gives details of the disease which resulted in death, and any underlying conditions.
The certificate also includes details of the name, sex, final occupation and place of residence of the deceased person.
The information provided on the death certificate provides the basis of mortality data which are eventually published and analysed by researchers and social commentators.
The death certificates are collated and analysed by the Office of population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS).
The main cause of death is classified using the international classification of diseases (ICD).
These data are then made available in a variety of different forms.
There are practical problems with the use of mortality data.
These include considerations of the completeness of the system's coverage and the delay in making the data available.
There is generally a two-year time lag in the information being made available due to the large size and complexity of the data set.
This may not matter with mortality data, where it seems unlikely that there would be very rapid transformation in the main causes of death.
More important are questions concerning the accuracy of the identification of the cause of death, especially for older people.
Mortality data are, therefore, readily available in Britain.
Consequently mortality is the oldest and most widely used index of health status.
Indeed, debates about changes in health status are dominated by the use of traditional health indices such as mortality.
Evidence to support (or refute) variations in health status within and between populations is typically presented in terms of differences in death rates.
The use of mortality data to describe the health status of the population is based upon the assumption that mortality is a good proxy measure of the amount and main causes of morbidity within the population.
In 1987 there were 566,994 deaths certified in England and Wales (OPCS 1989b).
The majority of these deaths, 450,630 (79 per cent) were of people aged 65 and over (see Table 3.1).
Deaths before the age of 65, so-called premature deaths, are comparatively rare.
One general index calculated from death and population information is the crude death rate.
This simply expresses the total number of deaths per 1000 total population.
The crude death rate in England and Wales in 1987 was 11.4 per 1000 for males and 11.1 per 1000 for females.
PATTERNS OF MORTALITY
A number of more specific indices may be calculated from aggregate death and population data.
When looking at changes over time (or making comparisons between areas) one way of overcoming differences in overall population structure is via the calculation of age and sex specific mortality rates.
The overall   distribution of mortality rates within the population shows a J-shaped distribution.
Mortality is relatively high in the first year of life and then decreases during childhood (see Table 3.1).
From the age of 15 years mortality rates then start to increase.
For the population aged 65 two main trends are evident.
First, the mortality rate increases with age from 41.2 per 1000 for males aged 65 — 74 to 191.5 per 1000 for men aged 85 + (Table 3.1).
Similar age-related increases are observed for women.
Second, at each age mortality rates are lower for women as compared with men (this is considered in more detail below).
This gender difference in mortality is not specific to later life but is a pattern which is observable at all ages (see Table 3.1).
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN MORTALITY
At all ages for those aged 65 + female death rates are substantially lower than those for males.
This male — female difference in mortality was not very marked at the start of the century but has now emerged strongly.
In the early decades of last century gender differences in late life mortality were very small.
For example, the excess male mortality was 10 per cent for those aged 65 — 74 and 5 per cent for those aged 85 +.
This contrasts with the position for 1981 — 85 where in the 65 — 74 age group men have a mortality rate 87 per cent above their female counterparts (see Table 3.2).
Even in the over-85 age group males have mortality rates 25 per cent above those for women.
There are two main hypotheses for male — female differences in mortality: biological/genetic and social/environmental factors.
Verbrugge (1989) considers that only 10 per cent of the gender difference in late-age mortality is   due to biological or intrinsic factors and 90 per cent is a result of differences in social variables such as smoking behaviour; Waldron (1976) suggests that 75 per cent of the difference is attributable to behavioural factors.
Gee and Veevers (1983) offer a more sophisticated hypothesis.
They propose that the relationship between biological and social factors in explaining gender differences in mortality may vary over the lifecourse.
They suggest that social and environmental factors are most important in the early phases of life with biological/genetic factors more important in later life.
This implies that social and behavioural factors explain the failure of men to survive to later life but biological factors then maintain the mortality advantage of women in later life.
INTERNATIONAL VARIATIONS IN LATE-AGE MORTALITY
There are substantial differences in mortality rates among older people in developed countries (Table 3.3).
The late-age mortality rates prevalent in Japan are considerably better than in the other three comparison countries.
For example, Japanese mortality rates for the 65 — 74 age group are only 60 per cent of those prevalent in Great Britain.
For those aged 75 + mortality rates in Japan are 20 per cent lower than those recorded for Great Britain.
This offers the prospect of further room for improvement in late-age mortality in most developed countries.
Excess male mortality appears constant across the four very different countries included in the table.
THE MAJOR CAUSE OF DEATH IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
What are the main causes of death?
Under the system of death registration functioning in the United Kingdom the cause of death must be described on the death certificate.
The returns on individual certificates are coded using the international classification of diseases, and aggregate data about the main causes of mortality in the population are published.
Given the complexity of this task there is always a time lag in the publication of mortality by cause of death data.
Although rates of mortality differ between men and women the main causes of mortality do not.
Examined in very broad terms for both men and women the two largest single causes of death are circulatory diseases (e.g. heart disease, stroke, etc.) and cancers of all sites (see Table 3.4).
This pattern of mortality has remained approximately constant over the post-war period.
Within each of the broad ICD chapters the vast majority of deaths are of older people (Table 3.4).
Causes of mortality in later life
Does the pattern of mortality change with increasing age?
The four main causes of mortality in later life are heart disease, cancers, respiratory diseases, cerebrovascular disease (stroke).
These diseases account for 71 per cent of deaths in those aged 65 +.
With increasing age the percentage of deaths attributable to heart disease and cancer decreases, while that for cerebrovascular disease (stroke) and respiratory diseases increases (Figure 3.2).
People aged 65 + account for 72 per cent of all cancer deaths in England and Wales (see Table 3.5).
The broad ICD chapter heading of cancers encompasses a whole variety of different types and sites of cancers.
However, some sites of cancer are much more common than others.
For both women and men the largest source of cancer mortality is that relating to the digestive organs (e.g. stomach, etc.).
This accounts for about 30 per cent of all deaths from cancer; the second largest source of cancer mortality is lung cancer for men (33 per cent of all deaths) and breast cancer for women (20 per cent) of all cancer deaths.
Lung cancer accounts for 15 per cent of female cancer deaths.
All of these sources of cancer mortality include an element of preventability.
This is at its most extreme for lung cancer, which is an almost entirely avoidable cause of death (i.e. it is strongly associated with smoking).
For the older age groups there is a distinct gender difference in the importance of lung cancer as a cause of death.
For older men it accounts for between 20 — 40 per cent of cancer deaths.
In contrast lung cancer is a much less important cause of death for older women.
This reflects the comparative rarity of smoking among very elderly women (see Chapter 6).
No doubt this pattern of mortality will be influenced by the ageing of generations where a large percentage of women have smoked.
For women of all ages breast cancer and cancer of the cervix account for 18 per cent of cancer deaths.
Both types of cancer are now subject to national  screening programmes as early detection may prevent these cancers being fatal.
However, both schemes only screen women up to the age of 65 years although those aged 65 + represent 60 per cent of all breast cancer deaths and 46 per cent of cervical cancer deaths.
It is not clear why the age of 65 was taken as the cut-off point for these screening programmes.
For cervical cancer it has been suggested that physiological reasons make it more difficult to take good smears from older women.
However, the reasons for selecting these cut-off points has not been the subject of debate.
For both diseases women outside the screening programme account for the majority of deaths.
As we shall see in a later section a woman aged 65 can expect to live for almost another 20 years.
Fletcher (1990) has argued for the extension of cervical screening after the age of 65 years but as yet there has been no similar argument for breast cancer screening.
Heart disease and stroke are very prevalent among the older age groups.
In England and Wales those aged 65 + represent the majority of deaths from all forms of heart disease and strokes.
The stereotype of the coronary heart disease patient is that of a middle-aged man.
Mortality data indicate that only a minority of such deaths occur in ‘the executive male’.
Both forms of mortality death rates increase progressively with age and this reflects the pattern of incidence described by community studies.
Again, these diseases can be reduced by preventive activity as both are strongly linked to smoking behaviour and, to a lesser degree, to other lifestyle factors such as diet and exercise.
CHANGES IN MORTALITY
How have mortality rates changed over time?
In Britain death registration and population data are available from the 1840s onwards.
Overall the crude death rate has decreased markedly in Britain over this century.
In 1901–04 the male crude death rate was 17.0 per 1000; for women it was 15.0 per 1000 (see Table 3.6).
Making comparisons of crude death rates across time or between populations is problematic as the rate is obviously influenced by the age composition of populations: a population with a large component of older people will illustrate a higher crude death rate than a population of the same size including a lot of younger people.
To overcome such problems comparisons are usually made via the calculation of standardized mortality ratios (SMRs).
Taking the period 1950 — 52 as the standard, the SMR for England and Wales has decreased from 249 (1901–04) to 75 (1980 — 84)(OPCS 1989a).
As measured by the mortality index, the health status of the population has improved markedly over the last century and a half.
During the post-war period the crude mortality rate for England and Wales has showed little change (see Table 3.6).
However, over this period there has been a substantial improvement in late age (i.e. 65 +) mortality in Britain (Table 3.6).
Since 1961 there has been a 19 per cent decrease in the mortality rates for males aged 65 — 74.
The largest percentage decrease in mortality during these   three decades is shown by women aged 75 — 84.
These trends are not unique to Britain and may be observed in various countries.
For example, in the United States there was a 16 per cent decline in mortality rates among males aged 85 + and 36 per cent among females of the same age during the period 1965 — 85 (Verbrugge 1989).
The reasons for these declines in late-age mortality are not well understood but probably reflect a variety of factors including better health care and improvements in nutrition and other aspects of living conditions as well as improvements in the availability and quality of medical care.
Have these overall changes in mortality been reflected equally in the different causes of death?
This simple question is rather less easy to answer.
The evaluation of changes in disease specific mortality rates over time is problematic because of changes in classification procedures and death certification practices.
For the North American white population aged 65 + there have been significant decreases in mortality from stroke and ischaemic heart disease.
Between 1968 and 1976 mortality from ischaemic heart disease in women aged 85 + decreased by 21 per cent and by 17 per cent for males (Verbrugge 1989).
Similar decreases in heart disease mortality and stroke mortality have been observed in a variety of different countries (Smith and Jacobson 1988), although the decreases observed in the United Kingdom have been less dramatic than those recorded in some other countries.
The reduction of mortality from both stroke and ischaemic heart disease are characteristic of much of the developed world.
However, the decreases observed in Britain are smaller than those recorded in other countries.
For example, Japan recorded decreases in overall stroke mortality for both men and women of about 50 per cent between 1972 and 1982; in England and Wales the decrease was about 35 per cent over the same period (Smith and Jacobson 1988).
Satisfactory explanations for these reductions in mortality from circulatory diseases have not yet been arrived at and may reflect a change in the disease, improved medical care or changes in lifestyle habits.
Data from Alderson and Ashwood (1985) examining changes in cause specific late-age mortality between 1950 — 54 and 1980 — 84 confirm the general patterns outlined above.
There have also between significant decreases in late-age mortality from ischaemic heart disease and bronchitis (Table 3.7).
However, mortality from lung cancer increased significantly over this period.
This reflects the ageing of cohorts where smoking had been a more prevalent lifestyle habit.
This trend gives considerable cause for concern as lung cancer is an almost totally avoidable source of mortality.
WHO (1988) provide statistics for the 65 — 74 age group for the United Kingdom for the same time period as Alderson and Ashwood (1985).
These data show that for the 65 — 74 age group mortality from stroke decreased by 42 per cent for males and 50 per cent for females.
Significant decreases in mortality from heart disease and respiratory diseases are also observable from these data.
However, overall cancer mortality increased by 24 per cent and 9 per cent respectively for men and women and lung cancer mortality has approximately doubled.
For women mortality from breast cancer increased by 17 per cent.
Indeed, Alderson (1988) observes that age-specific mortality rates for breast cancer have remained essentially static this century and to date there is little evidence that early detection and treatment of this disease is having much effect.
EXPECTATION OF LIFE
Changes in mortality have had an effect upon life expectancy — the age to which the average person can expect to live.
Life expectancy is usually calculated from birth but may be computed for any age.
In 1906 life expectancy at birth for a male in Britain was 48 years and 51 years for a female; in 1985 the average expectation of life at birth was 71 and 77 years respectively (see Figure 3.3).
The average child born in Britain can expect to live, on average, 23 years more than its counterparts born at the turn of the century.
Expectation of life at age 65 has increased less dramatically over this century; 2.4 years for men and 5.3 years for women.
Even so, a 65-year-old male can expect to live for another 13.2 years and a female of the same age for 17.2 years.
The changes in late-age mortality observed between 1961 and 1985 are reflected in increased life expectancy (see Table 3.8).
Expressed in percentage terms the largest increases in life expectancy are illustrated by very elderly women.
Between 1961 and 1985 men and women aged 65 — 74 years have recorded life expectancy increases of 11 per cent and 14 per cent respectively; for those aged 85 + the increases are 8 per cent for men and 20 per cent for women.
In the US similar trends are evident with women aged 75 and over showing a 20.6 per cent increase in life expectancy between 1965 and 1985 (Verbrugge 1989).
There are variations in life expectancy within Great Britain.
Smith and Jacobson (1988) report that expectation of life at birth for a male born in England and Wales in 1983/84 was 71.3 years compared with 69.9 years if he was born in Scotland.
For women the expectations of life at birth were 77.4 and 75.9 years respectively.
In 1983 the expectation of life at birth in England and Wales was 71.3 years for men and 77.3 years for women (Whitehead -1987) compared with 55.3 and 54.4 years respectively for citizens of Bangladesh.
Those born in countries referred to as the Third World are much less likely to reach what would be considered to be old age.
However, the variations in mortality between the developed and Third World in the later years of life are much less extreme.
Hoover and Siegel (1986) report that in Europe expectation of life at age 60 is 18.3 years compared with 14.1 in Africa and 14.3 in South Asia.
Japan records the greatest life expectancy for both males and females.
Social class and mortality
Inequality in health, especially that based on social class or occupational status, is a topic which has been subjected to considerable scrutiny.
It is accepted that within any given population there are natural variations in health status.
The inequalities in health debate has focused on identifying the extent to which socially generated variations in both health status and use of health services exist within and between populations.
Although there is no consensus on the causes of inequality on health, their eradication is a policy common to the United Kingdom and the 33 other members of the European Region of the World Health Organization (WHO).
In 1980 these countries committed themselves to the concept of health for all by the year 2000.
The targets for this strategy were agreed in 1984, the first of which stated that
by the year 2000, the actual difference in health status between countries and between groups within countries should be reduced by 25%, by improving the level of health of disadvantaged nations and groups.
The implications of what this should mean for older people have not been quantified.
THE BRITISH CONTEXT
The WHO programme of health for all by the year 2000 is a challenge to governments throughout the world to improve the health status of their populations.
One important aspect of the health for all (HFA) approach is the reduction of inequalities arising from the concepts of age, class, ethnicity or gender or any combination of these dimensions.
Within Britain there are a variety of different ways of recording and classifying social class.
The most frequently used is the Registrar General's classification which is based upon occupation.
This divides the population into six main groups: class I (professional occupations such as the law); class II (senior managerial occupations); class IIIn non-manual (skilled non-manual occupations); class IIIm (skilled manual occupations); class IV (semi-skilled manual occupations); and class V (unskilled manual occupations).
When examining class  differences in mortality and morbidity it is usual to group together social classes I and II to form one category at the top of the class hierarchy and social classes IV and V to form the group at the lower end of the class distribution.
Inequalities in health status centring around the concept of social class are an enduring and pervasive feature of British society.
Both the Black Report (DHSS 1980) and the Health Divide (Whitehead 1987) have indicated that the health experience of the population varies significantly with social class.
The standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for males aged 20 — 64 for all causes in 1979 was 99 for non-manual workers and 129 for manual workers.
For the period 1979 — 83 Townsend et al .
(1988) report that for 65 out of 78 causes of death for men aged 20 — 64 in Britain the standardized mortality rate (SMR) is higher in classes IV and V than for classes I and II.
The reverse gradient applies for only one cause of death, malignant melanoma of the skin.
For women, out of 82 causes of death 62 demonstrate a classic social class gradient.
Only a few causes of death for women illustrate a reverse class gradient (malignant neoplasm of the breast, malignant neoplasm of the brain, malignant melanoma of the skin and acute lymphoid leukaemia).
Within Britain the debate about the existence of class-based inequalities in health has become politically controversial.
However, in academic terms, the debate has centred upon whether inequalities in health are increasing or decreasing.
From a gerontological perspective this is a debate which has focused upon identifying inequalities in male deaths before the age of 65 years (i.e. Premature male mortality).
Rarely have researchers extended their analysis to consider inequalities within older age groups, possibly because they have implicitly or explicitly adopted a biological/medical framework which considers that old age is characterized by universal and inevitable ill health.
Thus, inequalities in health status characteristic of the earlier phases of the life cycle are assumed to be overwhelmed by the biological process of ageing.
A significant disincentive to the consideration of social class and ageing are the problems surrounding the definition and quantification of social class for older people.
A parallel may be drawn here with the debates surrounding the classification of class for women.
Estes et al .
(1984) observe that, at least in the United States, older people are seen as a separate social class defined in terms of a qualifying age and their formal withdrawal from the labour market.
Such a perspective does not recognize the existence of internal variation within this group.
However, it is clear that there are problems in developing a class taxonomy for older people.
In Britain class is typically defined on the basis of occupation.
This is problematic for a group which has no longer a part to play in the productive sector.
Guillemard (1982) argues that we should widen our conceptualization of class to include typical lifetime trajectories which examine relationships to the means of consumption and production, and to the agencies of state.
While conceptually this is an interesting development such measures would be difficult to operationalize.
Thus in Britain we usually have to resort to a occupation-based definition.
In the United States research has shown that membership of a social class group predicts a shorter life expectancy and higher death rates from all diseases.
These findings are consistent across studies despite variations in methodology, ways of defining social class and populations studied.
In the United States class is usually recorded in terms of income, level of education or occupation (or indeed some combination of these).
For example, Estes et al .
(1984) report that for those aged 65 + in 1974 reported activity limitation varied from 61.2 per cent of those with five years' or less education to 34.2 per cent of those with a college education.
MORTALITY AND SOCIAL CLASS
Evidence for class-based variations in mortality is provided by Fox et al .
(1985).
Using data from the OPCS longitudinal study they showed that, for males, class-based inequalities extended into later life.
The SMR for males aged 65 — 74 from the professional and managerial classes (social classes I) was 68 compared with 109 for those from unskilled occupation groups (Table 3.9).
The difference in the relative mortality of the extremes of the class hierarchy decrease with age.
However, for those aged 75 + mortality among those in social class V is 59 per cent higher than for their counterparts in class I. These data would seem to indicate that, for men at least, social class differences in mortality remain a feature of later life.
Conclusion
Mortality data are the most readily available source of information about the health of the population.
However, the information is limited in that it tells us only about those who have died.
We must make inferences about the health status of the survivors from these data.
Despite the limitations of mortality data it is possible to draw a number of conclusions about the distribution of health  and illness in later life.
First, there have been substantial improvements in mortality over this century which are reflected in increased life expectancy.
These improvements in mortality are now almost totally confined to the first year of life and the years after age 65.
Second, women have a longer expectation of life than men.
Third, the main sources of mortality are cancers, circulatory diseases and respiratory diseases.
The pattern of mortality is broadly similar for men and women.
Fourth, there have been decreases in mortality for several major diseases, especially heart disease, stroke and respiratory disease.
In contrast cancer mortality overall has changed little.
More worryingly, mortality from lung cancer is still increasing.
In the next chapter we consider morbidity patterns in later life and consider how far they reflect the patterns described by mortality data.
4
PHYSICAL HEALTH: PATTERNS OF MORBIDITY
Morbidity is a broad term used to describe non-mortal patterns of ill health within the population.
Once again this is a limited way of examining health in that we are assuming that the distribution of health is the inverse of the pattern displayed by morbidity.
In considering patterns of morbidity both within and between populations it is usual to distinguish between acute and chronic health problems.
The prevalence of acute health problems
Acute health problems are self-limiting conditions of short-term duration such as colds or flu or others with a defined span such as a broken leg.
Such conditions may be much more amenable to medical intervention than chronic conditions.
One source of data about self-reported acute health problems is the General Household Survey.
The annual General Household Survey (GHS), is based upon a sample of approximately 10,000 households resident in Great Britain, and provides some data about the prevalence of acute and chronic health problems as well as considering the utilization of health and social care services.
The GHS has been running since 1972 and is a large-scale survey designed to meet the information needs of a variety of different government departments.
The GHS includes a core of questions which appear in each year's survey.
This is complemented by different years focusing upon specific topics or issues.
For the gerontological research community the 1980 and 1985 GHS are of special interest as these years' surveys had a special section concerned with those aged 65 +.
These sections looked in detail at activities of daily living and the provision of additional help.
The 1985 GHS also included a special set of questions concerning informal care.
Secondary analysis of these data and published tables are used extensively in this book.
Each year the GHS asks ‘in the 14 days prior to interview have you had to cut down on any of the things you usually do (about the house/at work or in your   free time) because of illness or injury?’
Those who report restricted activity are then asked for how many days they have had to reduce their activities.
From GHS data we may therefore calculate the prevalence of self-reported acute health episodes and the duration of these episodes.
In 1987 14 per cent of the population of Great Britain, 16 per cent of females and 12 per cent of males, reported that they had had an acute health episode in the previous 14 days.
As might be expected from the study of mortality data acute health problems are not equally distributed throughout the population.
The self-reported prevalence of acute illness, as defined by restricted activity due to a health problem in the 14 days before interview, increases with age from 12 per cent for the population aged 15 — 44 to 21 per cent of those aged 75 + (Figure 4.1).
Although the prevalence of acute health problems does seem to increase somewhat with age only a minority of those aged 75 + report the presence of such a health problem.
Another way of examining acute illness prevalence is to consider specific acute health problems and the extent to which their prevalence increases (or decreases) with age.
Detailed symptom data are available from the health and lifestyle survey (HLS); a large scale survey of the adult population of Great Britain undertaken in 1984 — 85 (Table 4.1).
These data show an age-related increase in the reported prevalence of only some of these symptoms.
For example, the percentage reporting that they had had a cold or flu in the previous month showed little change with age.
However, among the older age groups there was a very marked gender difference in the prevalence of these symptoms; 43 per cent of women aged 65 — 74 report that they suffered from painful joints compared with 28 per cent of males.
Chronic health problems
Chronic health problems and disability are long term and are not usually curable, although medical intervention may alleviate some, or all, of the associated symptoms.
A typical example of such a long-term health problem is arthritis.
It is these types of health problems which are perceived as being an integral, inevitable and universal feature of old age.
Estimating the prevalence of such conditions within the population is, however, problematic as this depends both upon the methods of study used and the threshold used to define disability.
WHAT IS DISABILITY
A major problem in research when considering chronic health problems is that of terminology; words such as disability are frequently used in popular discourse, legislation and academic research with a resultant confusion over precise meaning.
One useful tool for thinking more clearly about the whole concept of chronic ill health is the international classification of impairments, disabilities and handicaps.
This distinguishes three key concepts: impairment, disability and handicap.
Impairment describes parts or systems of the body which do not function properly such as hearing or sight.
Disability refers to restrictions or lack of ability to undertake activities considered normal.
Thus disability relates to things people cannot do such as going to work, cooking or participating in  sporting activities.
Handicap refers to the disadvantage experienced by an individual as a result of the impairment or disability.
For example, poor eyesight (an impairment) may result in poor vision (a disability) which might result in the person failing to gain employment (handicap).
The position is a little more complex than this simple schema suggests.
Not all impairments result in disability.
Although a large proportion of the population has visual impairment the availability of appropriate glasses or contact lenses means that a much lower percentage of the population has a visual disability.
It is also important to remember that a single impairment may give rise to numerous disabilities.
The relationship between disability and handicap is rather more complex as this is related to the physical environment, the availability of helpers and the kinds of social role that the individual is expected to fulfil.
THE PREVALENCE OF CHRONIC HEALTH PROBLEMS: GHS DATA
The annual General Household Survey has always included a question about chronic health problems in its researches.
The GHS uses a two-stage approach to identify those with chronic health problems.
First, respondents are asked if they have any long standing illness, disability or infirmity.
This is subsequently referred to as long standing illness.
Second, those who report the presence of such a condition are then asked if it limits their activities in any way.
This is referred to as long standing limiting illness.
In 1987 33 per cent of the population, 35 per cent of females and 32 per cent of males, reported the presence of a long standing illness.
The prevalence of this type of health problem increases steadily with age so that 72 per cent of those aged 75 + report this type of health problem (see Figure 4.2).
Not all of those with a long standing illness report that it restricts their activity.
Consequently 21 per cent of the population of Great Britain report that they have a long standing limiting illness (19 per cent of males and 22 per cent of females).
The proportion of the population reporting a limiting illness increases with age (Figure 4.3).
However, it is worth noting that, even among the very oldest age group, almost half of the population do not report the presence of this type of health problem.
THE PREVALENCE OF DISABILITY: THE OPCS DISABILITY SURVEY
Studies of the prevalence of disability in the community are influenced by both study design and the way that the questions are asked.
To illustrate this point the disability prevalence estimates for those living in private households generated by the GHS question on long standing limiting illness and the OPCS disability survey were compared (see Figure 4.4).
The OPCS disability survey was commissioned in 1984 and consists of four separate surveys carried out  between 1985 and 1988.
These surveys covered adults in private households, adults in institutions, children in private households and children in institutions.
Details of the methodology are described by Martin et al .
(1988).
The overall disability prevalence rates generated by the OPCS disability survey are lower than those produced by the GHS: 208 per 1000 population aged 16+ compared with 135 per 1000.
For those aged 75+ the pattern is reversed: i.e. the GHS data produce lower disability prevalence estimates  (Figure 4.4).
For example, the OPCS disability estimated prevalence for those aged 85 + is 32 per cent higher than that produced by the GHS: 779 per 1000 population compared with 588 per 1000.
This difference probably reflects the variation in questions and methodology used in the two surveys.
One instance of this is that the GHS question asks about restrictions of activity.
Many older people may consider any limitations of activity which they experience to be a result of old age rather than a chronic health problem.
These differences between the estimates of the prevalence of disability in two large-scale and well conducted surveys serve to remind us that there is no absolute and ‘correct’ disability prevalence estimate.
This reflects the point made earlier that disability is a continuum and that the threshold at which disability is defined determines the prevalence rate.
HOW MANY DISABLED PEOPLE ARE THERE?
The OPCS disability survey estimated that there were six million people in Great Britain with one or more disabilities (see Table 4.2).
The vast majority of this population, almost 70 per cent, were aged 60 or over.
This means that approximately 4,275,000 adults aged 60 and over have some form of disability, using the OPCS definition.
The absolute number of adults classed as disabled increases continuously with age up to 79 years and then decreases slightly.
This decrease reflects the lower numbers of people in the population aged 80+.
When expressed as a rate there is a continuous increase in disability with age.
WHERE DO THE DISABLED ELDERLY LIVE?
Of the 6,202,000 adults defined as disabled, 422,000 (7 per cent) lived in some form of institutional care.
At all ages the vast majority of those defined as disabled reside in the community; institutional care caters only for a minority of this population.
The percentage of those with disabilities living outside the community is greatest for those aged 80 + where 17 per cent live in institutions (see Table 4.2).
DISABILITY PREVALENCE: COMMUNITY AND INSTITUTIONS
The GHS is a survey which considers only those resident in the community,; residents of institutions are excluded.
Thus prevalence estimates based upon the GHS will under-report the true prevalence by excluding a highly dependent and disabled group.
However, it is difficult to generate accurate disability prevalence for the institutional population as the total number of those resident remains unknown.
Without some idea of the denominator it is impossible to calculate a prevalence rate.
Consequently it is not possible to calculate separate community and institution disability prevalence rates.
The OPCS disability survey included both institutions and a community sample from which overall disability prevalence estimates are generated.
Inclusion of the institutional population will increase the estimated prevalence at each group.
For example, the prevalence of disability for those aged 80 + is 674 per 1000 population when only private households are considered and 714 per 1000 when the institutional population is included (see Table 4.2).
Inclusion of the institutional population appears to increase the overall disability prevalence rate by about 6 per cent.
THE SEVERITY OF DISABILITY
As well as estimating the number of people with disability it is important to have some indication of the severity of those disabilities.
The OPCS survey  asked about the ability to undertake a variety of specific activities; it did not ask about severity of limitation.
Indeed this would have been difficult to achieve within its methodology.
The survey has therefore developed its own severity scale to summarize the extent of disability.
This was a complex undertaking as the scale had to compare limitations within broadly similar disability areas, compare severity between different types of disability and assess the severity of different combinations of disability.
Martin et al .
(1988) describe the procedure used to develop the severity scale which ranges from 1 (least disabled) to 10 (most disabled).
While there are obviously problems in developing and using this type of notional scale it has some utility.
Several points may be considered from an examination of the distribution of disability severity.
First, overall there are more people in the least disabled category than in the more severe category (see Table 4.3).
For example, there were 1,186,000 adults in private households classified in severity category 1 compared with 102,000 in category 10.
Changing the definition of disability so that the severity class 1 was excluded would reduce the number of disabled people in the population from 6,202,000 to 5,004,000 (a reduction of 1,198,000)!
Second, the pattern of disability differs between institutions and private households.
In the community the pattern reflects that described above: there are more people in the least disabled categories.
In institutions the pattern is reversed so that there are 13,000 adults in institutions in severity group 1 and 108,000 in category 10.
It is only for the most severe disability class that the majority, 51 per cent, live in some form of institutional care.
Third, older people are over-represented in the more severe disability groups: those aged 60+ constitute 75 per cent of the most severe disability group but only 64 per cent of the least severe category.
THE PREVALENCE OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF DISABILITY
Disability is not a unitary concept.
Rather there are a variety of different dimensions of disability.
The OPCS disability survey (Martin et al .
1988) considered 13 different aspects of disability ranging from difficulties with locomotion to problems with consciousness, eating and drinking and disfigure-ment (Table 4.4).
In both absolute and relative terms locomotion, i.e. mobility difficulties, were the most common.
Overall the OPCS survey indicates that 3,323,000 people aged 60 and over have problems with mobility.
However, this does not give any indication as to how much the individual is handicapped by this problem.
Although not all elderly obviously experience mobility problems this is clearly an extensive problem for older people.
Within each type of disability there is a consistent pattern of the prevalence rate increasing with age.
Again within each type of disability the majority of those who experience the problem reside in the community.
IS PREVALENCE OF DISABILITY INCREASING?
The data provided suggest that in all cases the prevalence of morbidity increases significantly with age.
However, it is important to emphasize that, even in the very oldest age groups, ill health is not a universal feature of later life.
Several factors may account for this observation.
Selection effects may ensure that only the fittest survive to experience old age.
Second, our expectation that all elderly are ill is clearly misplaced.
However, this conclusion must be interpreted with caution.
The suggested increase in prevalence of morbidity with age is based in this case upon cross-sectional data.
Meth-odologically this is flawed as cohort influences such as patterns of smoking and other behavioural factors, diet, privation in childhood and access to, and quality of, medical care may also be important.
Using a longitudinal methodology, Milne (1985) and Jagger et al .
(1989) among others have demonstrated an age-related increase in morbidity.
However, when making projections about the health status of future generations of elderly it is important to recognize that cohort effects may be very influential.
Today's elderly experienced great hardship and deprivation during their formative years.
Furthermore, they did not have the same access to health services that future generations will have received.
The analysis of trends over time offers another indirect method of considering age and cohort related effects upon health.
The prevalence of long-standing limiting illness, as recorded by the GHS, is increasing across all age and sex groups (Table 4.5).
A similar trend is evident for acute health problems.
This would mean that each successive cohort entering old age would be less healthy than its predecessors.
However, it is not possible to make this inference from the data as they are based upon subjects' responses to a single question.
The apparent changes in the prevalence of health problems may reflect changes in peoples' expectations about their health as well as real changes in the prevalence of chronic health problems.
Changes in the question wording used also make the meaningful interpretation of time series health data problematic.
HOW MANY DISABLED ELDERLY WILL THERE BE IN THE FUTURE?
Predicting the numbers of disabled elderly into the future is problematic as it depends upon the projection forward of current patterns of disability.
It is possible that future cohorts of older people will illustrate different patterns of disability.
There is an additional problem which centres upon the choice of the disability prevalence used for projection.
As was illustrated earlier, two well conducted surveys of chronic health problems produced differing prevalence rates; the inclusion (or exclusion) of the institutionalized population within the prevalence rate will also influence the resultant prediction.
In 1988 there were, according to the GHS long-standing limiting illness prevalence estimate, 3,373,100 people aged 65 + classed as disabled compared with 3,702,000 using the OPCS survey estimate (see Table 4.6).
Projecting these rates forward to 2025 reveals that there would be 4,514,000 people aged 65 + with chronic health problems using the GHS data and 4,558,000 using the OPCS estimate.
Both estimates suggest a significant increase in the numbers of elderly with chronic health problems in the early decades of next century.
However, these are only projections of current trends and we cannot be certain that current levels of morbidity will be reproduced by future generations of elderly.
WHAT ARE THE CAUSES OF DISABILITY
We have indicated that disability is fairly prevalent amongst the older age groups.
What are the causes of these disabling conditions?
Mortality data indicated that cancer, circulatory diseases and respiratory diseases were the biggest causes of death.
Are these the main causes of disability?
The OPCS disability survey provides some indication of the main causes of disability and suggests that these vary between adults in private households and those in institutions.
For those in private households 46 per cent of disabled adults   reported disorders of the musculo-skeletal system, while 56 per cent of those in institutions reported mental disorders (see Table 4.7).
A similar pattern has been reported for North America.
The pattern of disabling conditions does not show any significant differences between the sexes.
The main causes of mortality among the older age groups were not the most important causes of morbidity.
Consequently inferences made about the main sources of morbidity in later life drawn from mortality data will be misleading.
Important sources of mortality such as cancer are not significant sources of disability.
Conversely, musculo-skeletal problems, which account for few deaths of those aged 65 +, are a major cause of disability in the community.
THE PREVALENCE OF HANDICAP
As noted earlier handicap describes the disadvantage resulting from disability or impairment.
Data from the health and lifestyle survey indicate that for those aged 65 — 74 43 per cent of men and 39 per cent of women with a chronic health problem report that it does not restrict their activities, or handicap them.
At the opposite extreme 14 per cent of men aged 75 + and 30 per cent of women are rendered house bound because of their disability (see Figure 4.5).
Of those who reported that their disability handicapped them in some way, 90 per cent stated that they ‘had to take special care’ and 86 per cent reported a restricted work or social life.
This confirms the well observed inverse relationship between disability and social contact.
Disability prevalence: activities of daily living
The investigation of disability in later life may be developed further by considering the ability to undertake a variety of activities and tasks considered essential to an independent life in the community.
Researchers typically focus upon personal care tasks (e.g. washing, dressing and feeding) and  household management activities, or instrumental activities, such as shopping or cleaning.
It is also usual to include information about aspects of mobility such as getting around the house and coping with steps and stairs.
Studies which have examined the ability of older people to undertake activities of daily living (adl) usually take one of two main approaches.
The first attempts to identify how much difficulty a person has performing a specific task while the second approach considers whether help is received in order to undertake specific tasks.
The focus of this latter approach is of enumerating the dependency of the older age groups.
For the population aged 65 + the vast majority are able to cope with outdoor mobility and getting around the house (see Table 4.8).
In terms of personal care less than 10 per cent have problems bathing, washing or feeding; however, almost one-third, 29 per cent, have problems cutting their toenails.
Of the instrumental daily living activities jobs involving cleaning pose problems for about 20 per cent, while cooking is a problem for less than 10 per cent .
There   is obviously a hierarchy of tasks implicit within this list; difficulties with cleaning will be fairly common but problems with feeding much rarer.
The percentage of those aged 65 + reporting problems with these adl tasks does increase substantially with age irrespective of the task under review.
For example, 17 per cent of those aged 65 — 69 and 76 per cent of those aged 85 + have problems with tasks which involve climbing.
HAS THE PREVALENCE OF ADL PROBLEMS CHANGED OVER TIME?
There are few longitudinal studies which have published data describing changes in the ability to undertake specific adl activities over time.
Comparison of three national surveys carried out between 1976 and 1985 reveals very little change in the percentage of older people reporting difficulties with a plethora of adl activities (see Table 4.9).
HOW MANY ELDERLY IN THE FUTURE WILL HAVE ADL PROBLEMS?
Grossing up the responses to the 1985 GHS adl questions reveals that approximately 2,500,000 people aged 65 + have problems in cutting their toenails (see Table 4.10).
Household maintenance activities such as cleaning windows or domestic chores such as shopping represent a problem for approximately 1,500,000, while a much smaller number, about 170,000 have severe mobility problems in, e.g., getting to the toilet.
Again, projection forward of these rates to the year 2025 suggests that there will be a significant increase in the numbers of older people requiring help with personal and house care activities.
Gender variations in morbidity
Women over 65 experience both worse acute and chronic health than their male counterparts (Table 4.11).
This could simply be an artefact of the differential age   distribution of the sexes for, as we saw in Chapter 2, there are more women in the very elderly age groups.
Standardization is a statistical technique which takes into account the differential age distribution (see Table 4.11) and this suggests that older women do indeed experience more ill health than males of the same age.
Such findings have also been reported in North America (Verbrugge 1989).
It is well documented that men are less likely to survive to old age than women.
The morbidity data presented demonstrated higher prevalence of chronic health problems among women as compared with men.
It therefore seems that sex differences in health status are characteristic of the whole of the lifecourse.
Although women are more likely to survive to old age than men they are more likely than men to experience chronic ill health.
Again there are several explanations posited to account for these gender differences in health status.
Three explanations suggest that the observed difference is an artefact of social structure because
women are more willing to report symptoms;
it is ‘easier’ for women to go sick because they have fewer social roles; or
fewer constraints.
The fourth explanation accepts that the gender difference in morbidity is real and results because women have more commitments and work harder than   men.
It seems likely that several factors account for the gender differences in morbidity and that there are different explanations for different types of illness.
Morbidity and social class
There are significant differences between social classes in the prevalence of chronic and acute ill health (Figure 4.6).
Those elderly from social classes 1 and 2 illustrate a prevalence of long standing limiting illness which is 20 per cent lower than that recorded by their counterparts from classes 4 and 5.
Standardization to take into account the differing age and gender composition of the class groups indicates that the observed variations are not simply an artefact of the differential age and sex composition of the social class groups (Table 4.12).
Consistently, those elderly from the professional and managerial classes experience better health than their contemporaries from the manual occupation groups.
Policy implications
Current evidence indicates that older people are more healthy than popular stereotypes suggest.
It appears that for acute health problems older people are little different, in terms of prevalence, from younger age groups.
However, it is clear that chronic health problems appear to increase with age.
Most of the   evidence is based upon cross-sectional data and must, therefore, be interpreted cautiously.
The current scenario of an ageing population suggests that we can expect an increase in disability prevalence as the elderly population itself ages.
However, there is much uncertainty about the health of future cohorts of elderly.
Will they be as disabled as current cohorts?
Will the extreme gender differences in health status continue?
Will current class inequalities in health continue to be important?
Improved data are required before these questions can be answered with any certainty.
Indeed, comparison of the 1980 and 1985 GHS data suggests that there may indeed be differences between cohorts in the prevalence of chronic health problems.
If confirmed by longitudinal analysis this would indicate that the ageing of the population over the next decade need not automatically bring an increase in the number of people with health problems and who require care.
This observation would also support Fries's compression of morbidity thesis (1980).
5
MENTAL HEALTH IN LATER LIFE
Having considered the methodological issues and epidemiological terms for describing disease in population this chapter is concerned with the mental health of older people.
Dementia is the mental disorder most usually associated with the later parts of the life cycle.
The epidemiology of this condition is considered in detail in this chapter.
However, this chapter also includes other aspects of mental health including the affective disorders such as anxiety and depression and less clinically defined dimensions of mental health.
Dementia
Much of the literature concerned with ageing focuses upon notions such as satisfaction, adjustment and other terms describing individual psychological and social well being(Coleman 1988).
The frequency of use of these terms suggests that ageing and, more specifically, old age is the most problematic phase of the life course.
This rather negative view of later life is especially common when we consider mental health and, specifically, dementia.
The labels most readily ascribed to an older person are ‘demented’ or ‘senile’.
Slater and Gearing (1988) suggest that these negative views of mental health in later life are held by professionals as well as the wider society.
Slater and Gearing (1988) give the following quotation from Samuel Johnson, written in the  eighteenth century, to illustrate their argument that we are too ready to ascribe the label demented to older people.
Dr Johnson wrote 
Dementia may be defined as the global impairment of higher mental functioning including the loss of memory, problem solving ability, the use of   learned skills, the loss of social skills and emotional control.
The consciousness of the sufferer is not impaired.
In the most general of terms this condition is both progressive and irreversible.
Dementia is a complex state and not every person who experiences the disease will present the complete spectrum of symptoms.
Despite the use of dementia as a global term, it is not a single condition.
Rather there are a variety of different disease states which may produce the dementia syndrome.
These include Alzheimers disease, which was first described in 1907, multiple brain infarctions (small strokes in the brain), drug  toxity and Huntington's Chorea.
HOW FREQUENT ARE THESE DIFFERENT TYPES OF DEMENTING CONDITIONS?
This is a very difficult question to answer authoritatively as accurate diagnosis of the different types of dementia is often difficult and may not, in many cases, be confirmed without a post mortem.
In both hospital and community populations Alzheimers disease and multi-infarc dementia are the two major causes of dementing conditions (Table 5.1).
Specific causes such as tumours, drug toxicity, infection and trauma appear to be of lesser significance as causes of dementia.
However, at a clinical level such factors need to be excluded when examining a patient suspected of having dementia.
These data must, however, only be taken as very approximate guides as to the probable distribution of causes of dementia as studies have not standardized the way they define and collect their information.
Given the difficulty of identifying the different types of dementia it is usual for epidemiological studies of this disease to concentrate upon organic brain failure as a single condition.
Rarely can community surveys, for example, differentiate between the different disease types.
This concentration upon identifying broad trends in the epidemiology or organic brain disorders is reflected in the sections of this chapter dealing with incidence and prevalence.
The prevalence of dementia in later life
How common is dementia among the older age groups?
As is indicated in the following sections it is not easy to answer this alarmingly simple question.
The   freedom with which the epithet ‘senile’ is attributed to the old, but especially old ladies, might give the impression that the disease is virtually universal among all those over 65.
One possible way of attempting to establish the prevalence of dementia is via the analysis of death certificate data.
DEMENTIA MORTALITY
In 1987 in England and Wales there were 9,572 deaths attributable to senile and pre-senile dementia, of which 488 were of the pre-senile type (OPCS 1989b).
The vast majority, 95 per cent, of deaths certified as due to dementia were among those aged 65 +.
Dementia death rates increase with age and are very similar between the sexes, with the exception of those aged 85 + where rates are considerably higher for females as compared with males (Figure 5.1).
While death certificates are a convenient source of epidemiological data, their validity for the study of the dementing diseases is questionable.
Martyn and Pippard (1988) examined the death certificates of 117 people who were diagnosed as demented whilst alive.
Dementia was recorded as the cause of death for 22 per cent of cases and mentioned on 57 per cent of certificates.
This evidence indicates that mortality data are of little use when trying to establish the prevalence of the dementing illnesses as they are almost certainly a significant underestimate of the true prevalence of the condition.
COMMUNITY STUDIES OF DEMENTIA PREVALENCE: METHODS OF MEASUREMENT
The dementing illnesses are the most researched aspect of mental health in later life.
Henderson (1990) reports that there have been over 50 population studies of dementia prevalence and Jorm et al .
(1987) have comprehensively reviewed 47 such studies.
In Britain there have been a number of different community dementia studies conducted in a diverse number of locations including Liverpool, Nottingham, Melton Mowbray and Newcastle, which have attempted to establish the prevalence of dementia among older people.
In attempting to establish the prevalence of dementia a variety of different instruments have been used to identify the presence/absence of the condition.
Recent British studies of dementia prevalence have largely relied upon the twelve-item information/orientation scale from the Clifton Assessment procedures for the Elderly (CAPE)(Pattie and Gilleard 1979).
The scale was originally developed to distinguish organic and functional mental disorders in a hospital population of older people.
Subsequently this scale has been used in Melton Mowbray by Jagger et al .
(1989) and Nottingham by Morgan et al .
(1987).
The twelve items in the scale are shown in Table 5.2 and include questions about an individual's awareness of both time and place.
The brevity of the scale and its general acceptability in community survey settings are the two main factors underlying its popularity.
Responses to the individual items are scored.
The scale has a range from 0 to 12.
Correct answers are scored 1 and incorrect answers score O.A score of 7/8 or below is usually used as the cut-off point to define the presence of dementia.
The validity of this scale has been considered by studies in both hospital (Pattie and Gilleard 1975, 1976) and community settings (Morgan et al .
1987).
These  validity studies compared clinical opinion as to whether a respondent showed signs of dementia with their score upon the scale.
Copeland et al .
(1976) devised the geriatric mental state (GMS).
This was a broad ranging psychiatric questionnaire which covered a variety of aspects of mental health.
The information collected by this standardized set of questions was then presented to a clinician for a diagnosis.
A computer algorithm, AGECAT, has now been developed to undertake this task (Copeland et al .
1987).
The data from the GMS are put into 157 symptom groups which are then gathered into eight clusters.
This index distinguishes five different levels of organic brain syndrome ranging from severe to subclinical.
COMMUNITY STUDIES OF DEMENTIA PREVALENCE: RESULTS
Of the extensive number of community dementia studies undertaken in Britain 10 are reviewed in Table 5.3.
These dementia prevalence studies have produced overall rates ranging from 2.5 per cent to 9.3 per cent of those studied.
Estimates of the prevalence of severe dementia also show a variation from 1 per cent to 6 per cent of those studied.
WHY DO THESE PREVALENCE ESTIMATES VARY SO WIDELY?
As was discussed in Chapter 1 the notion of prevalence depends crucially upon the unambiguous classification of the study population into cases (i.e. those with dementia) and non-cases (i.e. those without dementia).
The first important point in interpreting these wide differences in prevalence estimates between studies is the method used to define dementia.
It seems likely that dementia is the extreme end of a continuum of behaviour; the point prevalence is to some degree determined by where the case definition line is drawn.
The concept of   mild dementia is especially problematic.
At what point does mildly forgetful behaviour become dementia?
How do researchers allow for differences in intellectual abilities between the varying members of their study population?
The issue of intellectual ability is especially important when considering the prevalence of mild dementia.
The type of instrument used to survey the population may well influence the resultant prevalence estimate.
There has, however, been little work explicitly comparing the different instruments for identifying dementia.
Recently Black et al .
(1990) compared the information/orientation CAPE sub-test with a standard clinical interview and other dementia measures in a non-random sample of those aged 75 +.
The impetus for this work was the seemingly low prevalence rates generated by the Melton Mowbray study.
The comparative study illustrated the variability of the instruments.
As might be expected the agreement was greatest for the unambiguous cases of severe dementia and diminished as the diagnosis became less clear cut.
Other factors concerned with study design will influence the degree to which prevalence rates may be compared across studies.
These have been summarized by Henderson and Kay (1984) as follows:
1
Sample size.
Large samples should permit more accurate estimates of prevalence than smaller studies.
The number of subjects in the studies shown in Table 5.3 ranges from 300 to 1200.
2
Sample composition.
Some studies include only those resident in the community while others also include the institutionalized population.
Although the number of older people living in institutions is small the prevalence of dementia among this population appears to be high (see below).
Their inclusion in a community prevalence study would therefore inflate the resultant prevalence rate.
3
The definition of the study population.
As Table 5.3 shows there is a diversity between studies in the age taken as defining the elderly population.
Some studies use the age of 65 + to define the elderly while others use age 70 +.
Simple comparisons of prevalence estimates across studies is, therefore, problematic.
4
The age range within the study population.
The age range of the study population will enormously influence the final estimated prevalence rate.
This is because the prevalence of dementia seems to increase with age (see below).
Inclusion in the study population of the young elderly (i.e. those aged 65 — 74) will deflate the rate for the group as a whole.
Inclusion of large numbers of very old elderly in the study population will produce the opposite effect.
Ideally all studies should produce age specific rates to overcome this problem.
However the calculation of such rates is not legitimate if the sample size is insufficient.
5
Non-response bias.
Published studies of dementia prevalence record non-response rates ranging from 8.7 per cent(Gruer 1975) to 20.3 per cent (Broe  et al .
1976).
High rates of non-response may make the prevalence estimates invalid.
We might speculate that those with dementia would be less willing to participate in a research project than the mentally fit.
In addition, failure by respondents to complete all the items, known as item non-response, may also influence the result as those who do not complete the scale are excluded from the denominator.
Despite these methodological problems several commentators have attempted a synthesis of the results.
Ineichen (1987) suggests an approximate dementia prevalence rate of 2.9 per cent of those aged 65 + while Brayne and Ames (1988) favour a rate of 5 per cent.
However, these should be taken as approximate estimates.
Given the observations about the importance of methodology, study design and case definition noted above we can probably conclude that there is no one single ‘true’ estimate of dementia.
Rather there are a range of estimates resulting from the influence of study design factors and the reality that dementia is a continuous range of behaviours.
PREVALENCE OF DEMENTIA IN INSTITUTIONAL SETTINGS
The prevalence of dementia among those living in institutions appears to be high.
However, there are a variety of different types of institutional setting in which an older person might reside.
These are residential homes (either public or private), private nursing homes and long-stay hospital beds.
Further details of the different types of residential care are contained in Chapter 7.
Three of these studies suggest, for the institutional elderly population as a whole, a prevalence rate of approximately 30 per cent(Ames et al .
1988; Clarke et al .
1984; Mann et al .
1984).
The more recent study in Belfast by Hodkinson et al .
(1988) produced higher rates.
The institutional population varies considerably between these different care settings.
Primrose and Capewell (1986) and Harrison et al .
(1990) examined severe dementia prevalence in the different care settings.
The latter study gave prevalence estimates of 44 per cent for local authority residential care, 63 per cent for long-stay hospital care and 32 per cent for private nursing homes.
In long-stay psycho-geriatric beds the prevalence is virtually 100 per cent by definition!
Support for the high prevalence of dementia in nursing homes is provided by Bond et al .
(1989), in their study of the evaluation of NHS nursing homes; they reported that approximately 70 per cent of the nursing home population showed mild/severe dementia.
We may draw two main conclusions from these data about the prevalence of dementia among the institutionalized population.
First, it is evident that rates are much higher in institutions as compared with community.
This is not surprising as dementia is a major reason for admission to long-stay care.
The second important point is that we must not treat the institutional population as a single group.
Very broadly residential homes cater for the physically frail  whereas nursing homes/long-stay hospital care is more likely to cater for the mentally frail.
Consequently global prevalence estimates for the institutionalized elderly will underestimate the prevalence for hospital care and be an overestimate for the residential sector.
Prevalence rates relate to a specific point in time.
This is why they are sometimes referred to as ‘point prevalence’.
It is difficult to use these data to draw any reliable inferences as to whether the prevalence among the institutional population is increasing.
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES OF DEMENTIA
International studies of dementia have all the above methodological problems combined with differences in the interpretation of behaviour which are culturally based.
Gurland et al .
(1983) undertook community surveys of the population aged 65 + in both London and New York.
The study produced prevalence estimates of 4.9 per cent and 2.4 per cent respectively.
Henderson (1990) suggests a prevalence rate for Japan of 4 — 6 per cent.
More detailed work needs to be undertaken before it is possible to establish if there are geographical variations in the prevalence of this condition.
RISK FACTORS FOR DEMENTIA
Dementia is not a single disease; rather it is the manifestation of a number of different conditions.
Establishing risk factors which identify those at an elevated risk of experiencing dementia is problematic because of multi-causality.
It is probable that the risk factors for multi-infarct type are similar to those for stroke in which hypertension is implicated.
To date there are few well established risk factors for dementia of the Alzheimers disease type.
Other interesting hypotheses about potential risk factors for dementia include educational status, ethnicity, Downs Syndrome, aluminium and a wide variety of social and environmental factors.
DISTRIBUTION OF DEMENTIA WITHIN THE population AGED 65+
The prevalence of dementia is not equally distributed between the different groups which comprise the post-retirement population.
Although the precise rates vary, there is a clear trend for dementia prevalence to increase with age (see Figure 5.2).
In the South Wales study described in the figure the prevalence of dementia ranged from 3 per cent of those aged 70 — 74 to 17 per cent of those aged 85 +.
Morgan et al .
(1987) report dementia prevalence rates of 1.8 per cent of those aged 65 — 74 and 5.6 per cent of those aged 75 +.
From their comprehensive review Jorm et al .
(1987) conclude that dementia prevalence increases exponentially with age with rates approximately doubling every 5.1 years.
Are women more likely to experience dementia than men?
Both Copeland et al .
(1987) and Morgan et al .
(1987) publish data which indicates that dementia prevalence rates are higher among females than males (Table 5.4), as do Vetter et al .
(1986)(see Figure 5.2).
However, Jorm et al .
(1987) concluded that there was no significant difference in overall dementia prevalence between the sexes; the increased rates among women were simply an artefact of the greater age of women studied.
This review did suggest that the prevalence of Alzheimers disease was more common among women.
SURVIVAL OF THOSE WITH DEMENTIA
The study of the survival of those with a specific disease is important because survival rates combined with incidence rates determine the prevalence rate.
Changes in mortality rates will result in either a decrease or increase in prevalence according to the direction of change in mortality.
When considering survival rates three different starting points for the calculation may be identified; point of onset, point of diagnosis and point of entry into care.
For the accurate calculation of survival rates point of disease onset is the theoretically most desirable starting point.
However, the identification of the precise point at which any disease starts is problematic.
This uncertainty is magnified when dealing with a disease like dementia where the onset may be highly insidious.
Survival time from point of diagnosis is more easily determined but less useful.
Disease diagnosis may vary both within and between communities because of differences in health care systems and structures.
Consequently generalizations about survival after diagnosis may be problematic.
Similarly, although survival from entry into care is easy to calculate, it is of little use as it is highly sensitive to the admissions policy of the institutions studied.
The relationship between dementia and mortality remains unclear.
Several studies report increased rates of mortality among prevalent cases of dementia (Kay et al .
1970; Thompson and Eastwood 1981; Maule et al .
1984).
A three-year follow up of a sample of elderly (aged 65 +) in Liverpool revealed that 44 per cent of women and 40 per cent of men defined as having organic brain disorders had died, compared with 11 per cent and 16 per cent of the well population.
Jagger et al .
(1989) report that, in a five-year follow up of the population aged 65 + in Leicestershire mortality rates of 87 per cent for the demented and 36 per cent for those without the condition.
Any change in the survival rate of those with dementia is of importance as this would influence the prevalence rate for the disease.
Christie (1985), and Blessed and Wilson (1982), studying those admitted to hospital, suggested that survival after the diagnosis of dementia was increasing.
A similar conclusion was reached by Gruenberg (1977) from a population study in Sweden, although further analysis of the same population failed to reach the same conclusion (Rorsman et al .
1986).
While this is an important question because of its key impact upon prevalence rates, the survival time of those diagnosed as demented remains a subject of debate.
On the basis of the evidence surveyed it would seem that those with dementia do experience elevated mortality compared with their non-demented peers.
However, it is unclear whether survival rates of those with dementia have increased or decreased over the post-war period.
We may only speculate upon how these survival rates will change in future decades.
INCIDENCE OF DEMENTIA
There are far fewer studies of the incidence of dementia.
Adelstein et al .
(1968), using first contact with services to define the incident case, produced incidence rates of 1.9 and 2.1 per 1000 for those aged 60 +.
Maule et al .
(1984) report an  annual incidence rate of 0.9 per cent of those aged 65 + in their Edinburgh study.
Jagger et al .
(1989), in a five-year follow up, report an annual dementia incidence rate of 1.4 per cent for the population aged 65 +.
This study also produced annual age specific incidence estimates.
These ranged from 0.9 per cent for those aged 75 — 79 to 2.56 per cent for those aged 85 +.
Overall, Brayne and Ames (1988) suggest a guestimate annual incidence rate of 1 per cent for the population aged 65 +.
However, much further work is required, especially in the calculation of age and sex specific rates.
There is also considerable scope for more work examining, for example, differences between ethnic groups in terms of both incidence and prevalence in dementia.
HOW MANY CASES OF DEMENTIA WILL THERE BE IN THE FUTURE?
One of the main incentives for the collection of prevalence and incidence disease data is the identification of service needs for current and future generations.
In future decades in Britain the relative number of elderly will increase.
In addition, the very old will form an increasingly large element of the total elderly population.
The broad implication of this demographic change is that those diseases particularly associated with the elderly will increase in prominence.
The most usual way of predicting future service needs is by the forward projection of current prevalence data to the predicted age structure of the population in the future.
This method assumes both constant incidence and survival rates for the period of the population projections.
This is the approach used by Ineichen (1987).
Given our current state of knowledge about the dementing diseases we have few alternative options.
Ineichen (1987) suggests that future projections be based upon the forward projection of two rates: 1 per cent of those aged 65 — 74 and 10 per cent of those aged 75 +.
In 1981 there were 5,200,000 people in Britain aged 65 — 74 and 3,300,000 aged 75 + (see Table 5.5).
Applying Ineichen's prevalence rates to these populations suggests that there were 382,000 cases of dementia in 1981; by the year 2025 forward projection of these prevalence estimates would suggest that there will be 590,000 cases of dementia in Britain.
Depressive illness
The main focus of work concerned with mental health in later life has been upon dementia; there has been much less empirical study of the affective disorders, depression and anxiety.
‘Depressed’ is a word frequently used, by both professionals and lay people, to describe an individual's mental state.
Defining rigorously what constitutes a clinically significant depressive illness is problematic, regardless of the age range under consideration.
In psychiatric terms depression is a broad concept which includes slowness of thought, negative thoughts, morbid sadness and depressed moods.
Like dementia depression is obviously a continuum; where the case definition boundary is drawn will obviously influence the prevalence and incidence rates generated.
There are a number of different scales available to determine the prevalence of depression within different populations.
One of the most popular scales is the symptoms of anxiety and depression (SAD) developed by Bedford el al .
(1976) from the delusions, symptoms and states inventory (Foulds and Bedford 1979).
The scale has been further developed for use with the elderly by McNab and Phillip (1980).
Several community studies, most notably the ones in Nottingham (Morgan et al .
1987) and South Wales (Vetter et al .
1986) have used this instrument.
This scale consists of seven items relating to depression and seven to anxiety in the previous month (see Table 5.6).
This scale is used in two stages.
First subjects are asked if they have experienced each symptom.
Those who respond yes are then asked if this has upset them ‘a bit’, ‘a lot’ or ‘unbearably’.
For each   question a score 0 to 3 is possible and the depression scale has a range of 0 — 21.
A score of 6 is taken as indicating severe distress and 4 — 5 as borderline.
A similar scoring system is used for the anxiety component.
As with dementia, different studies have produced a range of depression prevalence estimates ranging from 6 per cent to 12 per cent.
These differences reflect the effects of the same set of research methodology factors as discussed for dementia.
Overall it seems likely that about 10 per cent of the population aged 65 + experiences depressive illness of clinical significance (Table 5.7).
There is little evidence that the prevalence rate is age-related (see Figure 5.2).
In South Wales 6 per cent of those aged 70 — 74 were defined as depressed compared with 5 per cent of those aged 85 +.
Morgan et al .
(1987) report rates of depressive illness of 10.0 per cent for those aged 65 — 74 and 9.5 per cent for those aged 75 +.
Using a stricter definition of a case of depression produced only a small difference in depression prevalence between these two age groups (4.5 per cent and 5.5 per cent respectively).
A consistent finding of studies of depression is that rates for women are approximately double that for males of similar groups (see Figure 5.3).
In the Liverpool study the depression prevalence for women was 13.6 per cent and 7.6 per cent for men (Copeland et al .
1987).
Similar results have also been produced by Griffiths et al .
(1987).
One explanation for this gender differential in the prevalence of depression might be the greater percentage of elderly women who live alone.
Although the actual rates produced by studies appear to differ two trends seem to be consistent: the lack of an association between depression prevalence and age and an excess prevalence among women compared with men.
This later sex difference in dementia prevalence is characteristic of the pre-retirement age groups.
What are the causes of depression among older people?
Murphy (1982) reviewed 100 cases and concluded that depression among older people had similar causes as for younger people and was focused upon major life events such as bereavement.
The prevalence of depression among the elderly in institutions has been less well researched.
Mann et al .
(1984) reported that the prevalence of dementia amongst assessable residents in the twelve homes studied was 38 per cent.
Harrison et al .
(1990) report depression prevalences among assessable residents   of 11 per cent in NHS long-stay psychiatric beds, 28 per cent for local authority residential homes and 35 per cent in private homes.
Cross-national studies of depression are both rare and difficult to interpret.
However, the study of London and New York undertaken by Gurland et al .
(1983) and using an explicitly comparable methodology produced rates of depressive illness of 12.4 per cent and 13 per cent respectively.
Anxiety
Another aspect of mental illness examined in community samples of the elderly is anxiety states.
The SAD described above includes seven items concerned with anxiety (see Table 5.6).
The scoring system is the same as described for depression.
Vetter et al .
(1986) report that 15 per cent of those aged 70+ living in two areas of South Wales displayed symptoms of anxiety.
This compares with the 11 per cent for the population aged 65 + reported by Morgan et al .
(1987).
There appears to be little change in prevalence rates with age (see Figure 5.2), but rates are considerably higher in women as compared with men (see Figure 5.3).
The prevalence of this dimension of psychiatric disturbance in institutions has not been reported.
Psychiatric symptoms
Further data concerning the prevalence of a variety of psychiatric symptoms are available from the health and lifestyle survey.
The General Health Questionnaire (GHQ) is a 30-item psychiatric screening instrument which collects data about symptoms in the previous few weeks.
A score of 4/5 is usually suggested as being indicative of psychiatric disturbance.
Using this cut-off point the health and lifestyle survey reported that 27 per cent of men and 33 per cent of women aged 18 + could be classed as having psychiatric problems.
This again serves to highlight the importance of the cut-off point in determining estimates of illness prevalence.
There is little evidence from the GHQ that the percentage of the population scoring over these thresholds increase significantly with age.
Of the 65 — 74 age group 25 per cent of men and 33 per cent of women scored 5 +; for those aged 75 + the respective percentages were 39 per cent and 43 per cent.
The same survey developed a malaise index which is a simplified version of the GHQ.
However, unlike the GHQ, it has not been validated against psychiatric opinion.
This scale provides little evidence of increased rates of psycho-social disturbance among the older age groups (see Table 5.8).
A higher prevalence of these symptoms among women as compared with men is obvious.
The relationship between mental and physical health
It is well documented that physical and mental health are inter-related.
Vetter et al .
(1986) demonstrates a consistent relationship between symptoms of anxiety and depression and physical disability.
For example, 3 per cent of those without any physical disability showed symptoms of depression compared with 20   per cent of the severely disabled; similarly 7 per cent of those without physical disability are defined as showing anxiety compared with 40 per cent of the severely disabled (Figure 5.4).
Dementia prevalence is higher among those who are physically disabled.
However, this relationship is confounded by the effect of age; disability increases with age, as does dementia.
It is not yet clear if there is an independent relationship between physical health status and dementia.
No independent relationship has been established between hearing loss in later life and the three main components of mental health, anxiety, depression or dementia (Jones et al .
1984).
However, visual impairment does seem to be related to both anxiety and depression.
Jones et al .
(1987) report that 36 per cent of those with some or much difficulty with sight are classed as anxious compared to 14 per cent without sight difficulties.
For depression the respective percentages are 15 per cent compared with 7 per cent.
Social class and mental health
Little attention has been given to the relationship between mental and social class for the older age groups.
Analysis of the data collected in South Wales revealed that there was no statistically significant difference in the prevalence of dementia or depression across the social class groups.
However, the prevalence of anxiety was related to class: 9 per cent of those from social classes 1 and 2 were defined as anxious compared with 19 per cent from classes 4 and 5 (Victor  1989b).
What this difference means is not clear; it could be a manifestation of a variety of factors including the very different financial circumstances of the two groups!
Mental health and social support
The importance of social support and contact for the health and well-being of individuals is well documented.
The Alameda County longitudinal study reported higher mortality rates among those who were lacking in ties with the community.
Social support remains, however, a rather nebulous concept to define and measure in social surveys.
It may be defined objectively in terms of numbers of contacts between individuals.
Alternatively, subjective feelings of the amount of social support may be important.
Social support may be measured in terms of quantity or quality of contacts.
Data from the health and lifestyle survey suggest that, regardless of age, symptoms of psycho-social disturbance are correlated with social support.
Those with well defined social support networks illustrate lower rates of psychological disturbance than their more isolated counterparts.
Although this is a well identified relationship it is not possible to state the nature of the relationship.
Are individuals psychologically disturbed because they are isolated or are they isolated because they are in some way disturbed?
Suicide
Although suicide is not, in itself, a psychiatric illness it may be taken as suggestive of impaired mental health.
In 1987 there were 3,986 cases of suicide in England and Wales.
This is, almost certainly, a gross underestimate of the true number of suicides.
Those aged 65 + accounted for 902 (23 per cent) of these recorded suicides.
For men, the suicide rate increases with age; consequently the highest rate is illustrated by those aged 85 +, a rate of 228 per million population (Figure 5.5).
At all ages rates for men are considerably higher than those for women of the same age.
However, it is impossible to determine how this pattern is influenced by the known under-reporting of suicides.
Other mental health issues
Few studies have considered the prevalence of conditions such as mania and schizophrenia amongst the older age groups.
For these serious psychiatric conditions the onset of new cases in later life appears to be very rare.
Rather these are mental health problems which predate the onset of later life.
Conclusion
Our knowledge about mental health in later life remains patchy and is, in many domains, highly limited.
Most data are derived from cross-sectional studies, with their inherent methodological limitations.
Two types of mental health problem in later life may be distinguished: conditions identified in all age groups and those specific to the elderly.
Affective conditions such as depression do not seem to increase with age.
It appears that for these types of conditions few new cases are identified in later life.
However, dementia is seen as being specific to the elderly age groups.
Current evidence suggests that the prevalence of this disorder is about 1 per cent for the population aged 65 — 74 and 10 per cent for those aged 71 +.
One of the main reasons for the identification of the number of elderly (or any other age group) suffering from any disease is to establish information for service delivery and the planning of future services.
Given the ageing of the population considerable interest has been expressed in identifying the number of elderly in the future who will experience this condition.
This is usually undertaken by applying current global prevalence rates to projected future population structures.
This method assumes, of course, that there is no change in either incidence or survival rates.
Consequently all predictions of the number of future cases of a disease which are based upon prevalence rates will provide only approximate indications of future demands.
For useful planning more accurate age specific incidence rate data are required.
6
HEALTH BELIEFS AND BEHAVIOUR
As indicated earlier the most persistent of all stereotypes about ageing is that the later phases of the life cycle are a time of universal, and inevitable, biological decline.
This results in older people being consistently represented as ridden by physical and mental ill health.
To be old is to be unhealthy.
This perspective is not confined to Britain; it is found in many countries, both developed and less developed.
Estes and Binney (1988, p. 69) describe the image of older people in America as ‘to be old is to be frail, sick, dependent and vulnerable’.
The pervasiveness of this stereotype, especially in Britain, is probably the result of the interplay between several factors.
Gerontological research has been heavily influenced by medical and biological theories which stress decline and sickness.
Much research has started from the premise that old age is a social problem and has concentrated upon the problem dimensions of ageing such as ill health, disability and senile dementia, rather than examining normal ageing.
Consequently in Britain there is a strong tradition of investigating the prevalence of ill health and specific medical conditions among older people.
One consequence of this approach is that there has been comparatively little research examining the beliefs and attitudes of older people about their health.
In a similar fashion investigation of health-related lifestyle behaviours in later life has also been neglected.
In this chapter we examine aspects of the health beliefs and behaviours of older people.
What is health?
Health is a term which is used extensively but remains one of the most difficult ideas to define with any degree of precision.
Indeed, health is a complex and multi-faceted entity which often defies the best efforts of researchers either to define or measure.
One way of thinking about health is as the absence of disease.
Disease is an easier concept to define as it is, in theory at least, identifiable by either deviation from measurable biological standards or by the presence of pathology.
It is, however, not very easy to undertake population or  community studies of disease for reasons of practicality.
However, the concept of disease is not as clear cut as the above definition implies.
The definition of what constitutes a ‘disease state’ is influenced by social concepts as is the definition of what is normal or average.
Health is a much broader and socially defined concept than the simple absence of disease.
As the classic WHO definition indicates, health is ‘a state of complete physical, social and mental well being, not merely the absence of disease’.
It is, therefore, hardly surprising that the attitudes and beliefs held about health by the population and its constituent subgroups are both complex and superficially inconsistent.
Studies in several areas of Britain have indicated that ideas about the meaning and definition of health held by the general population are complex (Blaxter 1983; pill and Stott 1982, 1985; Williams 1983, 1990).
These studies have indicated that health, for the lay population, seems to have three distinct dimensions: the absence of disease, as a functional concept (i.e. the ability to cope with daily activities) and health as a positive notion embracing ideas about fitness and general well-being.
These ideas about the different aspects of health have been identified in a study undertaken in France (Herzlich 1973).
It remains unclear as to how culturally and temporally specific these ideas about the main dimensions of health are.
There is a further complication in that individuals hold views about health at a variety of different levels of analysis.
Strongly held beliefs at the individual level may not be maintained when describing health at the societal level and vice versa.
Consequently both perspectives need to be examined when considering what people understand and mean by terms such as health.
GENERAL BELIEFS ABOUT HEALTH
It is difficult to investigate general beliefs about health within the confines of a large-scale structured survey.
However, the health and lifestyle study, a large survey of a random sample of the British population carried out in 1984/85, offers insights into several aspects of beliefs about health and illness.
One way of considering broad based beliefs about health was to ask, ‘Are people more healthy now than in their parents' time?’
The majority, 78 per cent of males and 75 per cent of females aged 65 +, thought that people were healthier than in their parents' time.
This was little different from the responses provided by younger age groups.
It might be expected that the percentage thinking that health had improved since their parents' time would increase with age.
In fact the reverse pattern was observed.
The proportion reporting that they thought people were healthier now than in their parents' time decreased with age, from 78 per cent of those aged 65 — 74 years to 67 per cent of those aged 85 years and over (Victor 1990a).
There were no obvious gender or class differences in responses to this rather general perspective upon health in society.
Increased prosperity, improved diet and improved health services were the main factors advanced for improvements in health by the older age groups  (Table 6.1).
These responses, like those in the next sections, were provided by respondents without prompting and were classified at the data analysis stage of the study.
Compared with younger age groups, older people are much more likely to suggest that improved prosperity has brought about improved health, while younger people are more convinced of the importance of health education.
From these data older people seem to be identifying the importance of structural variables (e.g. income, living standards, etc.) in improving health status.
In contrast the younger members of the population appear to be offering more individual behavioural dimensions to explain improved health status.
This difference between these rather broad age groups may be indicative of significant age-related variations within the population in terms of how they consider health.
It seems unlikely that these differences are the result of ageing; rather they probably illustrate the effect of historical time and the differing general, social and cultural attitudes towards the cause of health and illness at varying points in time in Britain.
If there are important differences in how varying generations perceive and conceptualize health then this has important implications for the development of health promotion and education strategies.
Concepts describing health
One way of investigating lay beliefs about health is to ask what attributes identify a healthy person.
Respondents in the health and lifestyle survey were asked ‘Think of someone who is very healthy, who are you thinking of and why do you call them healthy?’
One interesting finding of this exercise was that for each age group the age of the healthy person approximated to the individual's broad cohort group.
Across the age groups the healthy person was usually described as a male even when the respondent answering the question was female.
Regardless of age health appears to be an attribute which is primarily associated with males.
When describing health in someone else three main themes are identifiable from the responses provided by respondents: health as a state of positive fitness; health as a state of not being ill; and health as being  functionally active.
These models of health vary across the age groups (see Table 6.2).
Younger people are more likely to identify health as being physically active or as the absence of symptoms (i.e. never being ill) than older people.
Older people are more likely to represent health as a state of social functioning, such as being active.
For example, 32 per cent of the pre-retirement age group see health as being physically fit compared with 10 per cent of the over-65 age group.
Older people are also much more likely to describe health within the context of an individual's age.
Older people, not unreasonably, relate health to others of their own approximate age rather than comparing themselves with younger people in their physical prime.
When describing what health means to them personally a different set of explanatory frameworks appear to be invoked (Table 6.2).
Regardless of age and gender, health is viewed by the majority as a psychological rather than physical or social paradigm.
Health is described by phrases such as being happy, being unstressed and being able to cope.
Older people were much more likely than the young to be unable to describe what they meant by health.
Underlying this broad level of agreement across the generations there are several significant age variations within the elderly population.
With increased age there is a significant decrease in the percentage describing health as being physically fit from 13 per cent(65 — 74) to 3 per cent (aged 85 +).
Do men and women hold different views about what constitutes health?
For those aged over 65 the responses were remarkably similar for both males and females.
Both sexes are characterized by the predominance of the psychological definition of health at the individual level.
Blaxter (1990, p. 30) gives some examples of the kinds of responses provided by respondents which fell into this psychological category.
A 72-year-old female replied ‘I think health is when   you feel happy.
Because I know when I feel happy I feel quite well’, while a 74-year-old farmer's widow stated ‘I've reached the stage now where I say isn't it lovely and good to be alive, seeing all the lovely leaves on the trees, it's wonderful to be alive and to able to stand and stare!’.
Perceptions of health status
One aspect of health status omitted from the previous chapter on morbidity relates to perceived health status.
This is concerned with how people evaluate their overall health status.
Typical of such questions is, ‘Compared with other people of your age how do you rate your health in the last year?’.
Clearly there are problems in interpreting responses to these types of questions.
It could be argued that such questions are of little value as respondents may be unwilling to label themselves as being in poor health.
Nor do we know what comparative standards our informants are using.
There have been a large number of studies which have sought to establish the validity and accuracy of replies to this sort of question.
Responses to this question correlate well with consultation with a GP, mortality and adjustment to illness (Blaxter 1990).
However, the question is included in the analysis presented here as a broad overall indicator of how older people feel about their general health status.
The General Household Survey asks respondents to rate their overall health as good, poor or fairly good for the previous year.
Overall 40 per cent of those  aged 65 + rate their health as good.
Women are less optimistic about their health status than men: 38 per cent of women aged 65 + rate their health as good compared with 44 per cent of men.
There is a decrease with age in the percentage describing their health as good and a rise in the percentage reporting poor health (Figure 6.1).
For example, 46 per cent of those aged 65 — 69 report their health as good compared with 32 per cent of those aged 85 +.
Although there is a marked decrease with age in the percentage rating their health as good this is not matched by an increase in the percentage classed as poor.
Approximately 21 per cent of men and 25 per cent of women in each group define their health as poor.
The decrease in the percentage classed as good is matched by an increase in the percentage defined as fairly good.
So with increased age there is a switching of health rating from good to fairly good but no large increase in the percentage classing themselves as in poor health.
The relationship between health rating and gender is rather more complex than the overall rating described above might indicate (Figure 6.1).
Between the ages of 65 and 79 men are more optimistic about their health rating than women.
However, over the age of 80 years there is little difference between the sexes.
In the previous two chapters we have shown that there are marked social class variations in the health status of older people.
Consistently those older people from professional and managerial occupations experience better health than their contemporaries from the manual occupation groups.
Is this pattern illustrated for overall health rating?
Scrutiny of Figure 6.2 indicates that this    pattern is replicated for overall health rating.
Of those from social classes 1 and 2 53 per cent rated their health as good, compared with 32 per cent from classes 4 and 5.
As with aspects of physical and mental health the population classification derived from overall health ratings is dependent upon the question asked.
If a health status question asks people to rate their health in comparison to others of their own age the pattern of age-related change in responses does not materialize.
Consistently, approximately 60 per cent of the population aged 65 + rate their health as good, 30 per cent as fair and 10 per cent as poor (Victor 1987).
How well does older people's overall rating of their health status compare with the prevalence of acute and chronic health problems?
There is a strong correlation between those who rate their health as poor and the prevalence of chronic health problems (see Table 6.3).
Hence 90 per cent of those who rate their overall health as poor also report chronic health problems, compared with 34 per cent of those who report good health.
The relationship is less obvious for acute health problems.
Asking hypothetical or speculative questions is one way of investigating perceptions and feelings about certain issues.
Data from the health and lifestyle survey (Cox et al .
1987) suggest that older people are fairly negative about future health status.
Almost a quarter (22 per cent of those aged 65 — 74 and 23 per cent aged 75 +) consider that it is very likely that someone of their age will develop a serious illness over the next ten years.
Only 4 per cent and 7 per cent respectively rate this prospect very unlikely.
However, it is not obvious whether the respondents expect this to happen to them specifically or if it is a population level observation.
Healthy lifestyles in later life
Health behaviour is concerned with the strategies and responses to illness demonstrated by individuals as well as the activities undertaken to preserve, promote and maintain health.
This includes activities undertaken by individuals to prevent disease or to detect it in an asymptomatic state.
The health  maintaining and promoting activities of older people have been neglected, although their importance has been recognized by WHO when it stated that ‘…
Health education, information on the promotion of health and prevention of disease’ was required for the older age groups (WHO 1982, p. 8).
Health behaviour in later life is clearly rooted in the social context in which older people live and reflects the influence of such activities at earlier phases in the life cycle.
We may further distinguish between preventive and health maintaining behaviour.
Preventive behaviour describes those activities designed to reduce the risk of developing an illness, while maintenance describes activities designed to maintain and, perhaps, improve health.
The potential range of preventive and maintenance activities among older people is clearly substantial, ranging from smoking cessation to ensuring that a dwelling is adequately heated.
Aspects of individual lifestyle, as well as structural factors, are related to health.
Much of the current climate of education about health stresses the importance of individual lifestyle behaviours.
Lifestyle is a term which is often used but very rarely defined.
Implicitly it is conceptualized in terms of the personal behaviours which individuals indulge and which are well recognized as risk factors for various diseases.
Increasingly attention is paid to the four lifestyle areas of smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise and diet.
How do older people fare with regard to these aspects of health related behaviour?
HEALTHY BEHAVIOUR
Overall, the vast majority of the older age groups, 91 per cent of those aged 65 — 74 and 88 per cent of those aged 75 +, felt they were leading a fairly or very healthy life.
Only 1 per cent felt that they were leading a very unhealthy lifestyle (Table 6.4).
What features made their lifestyle healthy?
Three factors dominate the leading of a perceived healthy life: taking exercise, having a good diet and being of moderate habits (Table 6.5).
Interestingly non-smoking and non-drinking were cited by many fewer respondents as contributing to being healthy.
The health and lifestyle survey reported that overall about 70 per cent of the British population reported that they ‘did things’ to promote their health.
This proportion showed remarkably little variation with age.
Two types of behaviour, diet and exercise, dominated the activities proposed as the health promoting behaviour in which older people participated in (Table 6.6).
In terms of exercise older people were more likely to report activity such as gardening while younger subjects suggested active sports.
There is considerable interest among older people in doing (more) things to promote their own health.
This is perhaps in sharp contradiction to the common stereotype of older people passively accepting the onset of the tide of ill health associated with later life.
Increased exercise/activity was the health promoting/improving activity which the majority of older people wanting to improve their health suggested (Table 6.7).
This was the option preferred by 50 per cent.
If these responses are extrapolated to the general population aged 65 + then there is a massive unmet   demand among the older age groups for improved access to leisure facilities.
It is, perhaps, salutary to reflect upon how difficult we make it for older people to use the range of leisure facilities provided either because of physical access problems, inappropriate classes and high entry costs.
LIFESTYLE FACTORS
Four lifestyle factors — smoking, alcohol consumption, exercise and diet/weight control — are well established risk factors for a variety of diseases.
How well do older people perform on these key behavioural factors?
Smoking
Smoking, of either cigarettes, pipes or cigars, is not equally distributed throughout the population.
The prevalence of smoking varies within the population in terms of factors such as age, gender, social class and ethnicity.
The lowest rates of smoking are found among the population aged 60 and over (see Table 6.8).
For men the older age groups also contain the highest proportions of ex-regular smokers.
The data describing the prevalence of smoking illustrates a good example of a cohort effect as older women, those aged 60 and over, have the highest proportions classed as never smoking.
This reflects the influence of cultural and social factors as it was totally unacceptable for women to smoke when these women were in their formative years in the interwar period.
Smoking for women became socially acceptable only in the 1939 — 45 war and after.
This is now being reflected in the high rates of lung cancer and heart disease among women.
Epidemiological studies have consistently pointed to the health hazards associated with smoking, but most studies have looked at health risks amongst those who are middle aged.
However, Kaplan et al .
(1989) examined the impact of smoking status on mortality over a 17-year period for 60- to 94-year-olds included in the Alameda County study in the United States.
The results indicated that current smokers showed excess mortality when compared with non-smokers.
Those who gave smoking up in later life occupy an intermediate position.
The evidence now suggests that giving up smoking in the seventh decade of life brings health benefits.
Active steps should be taken to encourage older people to quit smoking (Vetter et al .
1988).
Alcohol consumption
The pattern of alcohol consumption among the older age groups is very similar to that for smoking.
Older people are less likely to consume alcoholic drinks than the younger age groups and those who do drink consume less than their younger contemporaries.
Overall 22 per cent of men aged 60 + and 54 per cent of women are non-drinkers or have never drunk alcohol (see Table 6.9).
This compares with 8 per cent and 23 per cent respectively for the 18 — 39 year age group.
Again several factors explain this distribution: the higher mortality of very heavy drinkers; the influence of social attitudes; the fact that when the older age groups grew up attitudes against drink and for temperance were very much stronger; and possibly the fact that the reduced incomes of older people offer less opportunity to consume alcohol (there is a clear relationship between alcohol consumption and disposable income).
Diet
Dietary habits cover a range of areas including frequency and regularity of eating, the type of meals consumed and the regularity with which certain types of food such as fruit are eaten.
Clearly researching these areas is highly problematic, especially if details about the amount of food eaten are required.
The health and lifestyle survey has investigated some of these aspects.
However, it is very difficult to devise a scale which summarizes dietary habits on a range from good to bad.
Older people are more likely to eat breakfast than other age groups; conversely they are less likely to eat snacks or have meals outside the house.
This reflects a variety of influences.
Traditional wisdom bases ‘a good diet’ around the consumption of three meals a day of which breakfast is seen as the most important.
Older people are more likely to eat red meat and less likely to eat fruit, vegetables and salad.
However, it is difficult to identify if this reflects a cohort effect: does this reflect what this age group were brought up to believe was a healthy diet or the reduced income of older people?
Exercise
Exercise is now seen as being an important aspect of lifestyle which is associated with health status.
A sedentary lifestyle is now seen as being a very important risk factor for heart disease and other conditions.
Few older people, approximately 10 — 20 per cent, participate in active leisure pursuits such as swimming or jogging.
However, participation in activities such as gardening and walking is high among these age groups, as we saw earlier.
The benefits of activity in promoting good psychological and physical health among older people are increasingly being recognized.
Data from North America indicate that the mortality risk of those who remain active in later life is lower than their more sedentary counterparts (Kaplan and Haan 1989).
It would seem that there is considerable evidence for increasing the participation of older people in such activities as swimming.
Weight control
It is also suggested that, in the interests of health, we should maintain our weight within desirable limits.
One method of calculating desirable is the body mass index (BMI).
This expresses weight in kilograms divided by height in metres squared (W/H&sup2;).
Using data from the health and lifestyle survey shows   that a lower proportion of the older age groups have a BMI within what is defined as indicating a correct weight (see Table 6.10).
Policy implications
Elucidating lay beliefs concerning health is of considerable policy importance.
It is vital to consider what, if any, differences there are between lay and professional concepts about health.
Successful health education/promotion should be grounded in a strong understanding of how people conceptualize their own health.
Health campaigns based upon an inadequate understanding of the health beliefs held by the target population stand little chance of success.
Compared with those aged under 65, the post-retirement age groups are more likely to consider that health has improved since their parents' time.
This is, perhaps, not surprising as, over the lifetime of the current cohort of older people, there have been very substantial improvements in the health of the British population.
Older people identify improvements in material circumstances such as housing, diet and general prosperity, and improved and more widely available health care, as the reason for improved health.
In contrast the younger members of the sample were more likely to favour health education/promotion as the reason for improved health.
This might suggest that older people hold a more collectivist public health notion of improving health status.
It may also suggest that older people are more fatalistic about their health.
From a health promotion perspective it would seem that individualistic based exhortations to improve health will have little chance of success amongst the older age groups.
Two strategies are worth pursuing.
First, older people could be made more aware of the importance of changes in  individual behaviour and their potential health benefits.
Implicit within this strategy is the promotion of a positive view of health.
Second, health campaigns for this age group appear to stand more chance of success if promoted at a group/ societal level.
Older people have, until recently, been largely excluded from health education/promotion activities.
This reflected a very negative and ageist view that there was little which could be done to improve the health of older people.
This view no longer holds sway and health educators/promoters are increasingly turning their attention to older age groups.
However, before any such activities can be successful it is  important to understand how older people conceptualize their health.
Programmes may then be designed which build upon these notions.
As yet, however, we cannot be certain about the most effective route by which these activities can have maximum impact within the older age groups.
However, Barnard (1988) argues that the empowerment of the older age groups is essential to this process.
Furthermore, improved material circumstances for most older people are a prerequisite; no amount of activity will promote changes in behaviour and attitudes if the target group has inadequate material resources with which to change their lifestyle.
7
HEALTH CARE PROVISION AND USE
Health and social care for older people are provided by the formal sector (i.e. agencies of the state such as hospitals) and the informal network of family and friends.
This chapter examines the contribution of the health care agencies.
In considering the health care provision agencies we may usefully divide them into two main types: primary care and secondary care.
The structure of health care provision
As was briefly described in the introduction, Britain has a socialized system of health care which is largely funded from general taxation.
The NHS aims to provide a comprehensive range of care which is free at the point of consumption.
The objective of the NHS is the provision of an equitable health care service which is accessible to all citizens of Britain regardless of where they live or of their financial and personal circumstances.
The pre-April 1991 organization of the NHS distinguishes between DHA-run services and primary care.
DHA services include acute and long-stay hospital care, psychiatric hospital provision and community nursing services, including health visiting.
These services are run and managed by the DHA.
Primary care is used to define the family doctor service.
Under the arrangements for health care provision current in 1990 the DHA was not responsible for the provision of general practitioner (GP) services.
Within the National Health Service the general practitioners (GPs) are independent contractors.
THE PRIVATE MEDICAL SECTOR
The medical profession were reluctant to accept the creation of the NHS and to obtain their agreement to the creation of the service they were allowed to retain their private practices.
Consequently throughout its existence the NHS has been complemented by a residual system of private provision.
Doyal (1979) reports that only 3 per cent of consultants work entirely in the private sector.
The continued existence of the private sector has allowed those with sufficient resources to avoid the worst aspects of the state system.
The provision of private medicine, both within and without the NHS, has remained a controversial issue.
Governments of varying political persuasions have attempted to either decrease or increase the role of the private sector.
The Conservative government elected at the 1979 and two subsequent elections has sought to encourage the development of a system of private medical care alongside the NHS.
This development has been proposed as a way of improving standards in the NHS by stimulating competition.
One method of paying for private health care is via insurance.
Several firms such as BUPA specialize in this aspect of health insurance.
Currently 8 per cent of the population has private health insurance, which is usually paid for by an employer rather than by the individual.
Private health insurance coverage rates vary within the population from 10 per cent of those aged 45 — 64 to 4 per cent of those aged 65 +.
The leading companies are reluctant to provide insurance for this age group and those who will include older people in their schemes have very high premiums.
The private sector does not aim to produce a comprehensive system of health care; in Britain it has developed specialized aspects of health care provision.
Ham (1985) reports that the private sector provides 5 per cent of acute beds, 8 per cent of all beds and receives about 8 per cent of all non-emergency admissions to acute hospitals.
The private sector makes a major contribution in the field of elective surgery such as hip replacements and is now also a significant provider of long-term care for the elderly via the development of private residential and nursing homes (see Chapter 8).
CHANGING THE STRUCTURE OF HEALTH CARE PROVISION: THE NHS REVIEW
Many of the proposals contained in the White paper Working for Patients (DOH 1989a) have passed into law as a result of the British parliament passing the NHS and Community Care Bill in June 1990.
The proposals, in force from April 1991, contained in this document are consistent with the ideology of the administration in that it is an attempt to apply market principles to the institution which is the cornerstone of the British welfare state.
The detailed proposals were noted in the introduction.
However, at the heart of the changes is the creation, within the NHS, of an internal health care market.
This is to be achieved by the separation between those who will be responsible for purchasing care (DHAs and budget holding GPs) and the providers of care (i.e. opted out NHS hospital trusts, the independent sector and directly managed NHS hospitals)(see Figure 7.1).
The theory underpinning this reorganization is that competition between providing units will increase both the range and quality of the services provided.
The DHA (or other purchasing agent) will then, it is argued, be able to obtain care for their residents which   provides greater value for money.
This, of course, relies very heavily upon being able to define and measure value for money.
SPECIAL HEALTH CARE PROVISION FOR OLDER PEOPLE
Pre-NHS voluntary hospitals were reluctant to accept patients who were chronically ill.
Consequently the NHS inherited a large number of public hospitals containing many who were defined as chronically ill and written off as being impossible to rehabilitate and restore to the community or independent living.
A disproportionate number of these patients were elderly.
The post-war period in Britain has been characterized by the development of geriatric medicine as a legitimate medical specialism.
This branch of medicine owes much to the pioneering efforts of Marjorie Warren who demonstrated that, with proper assessment and rehabilitation, many of the elderly in these chronic sick establishments could be returned to independent living.
However, it should be noted at this stage that only a minority of elderly patients are heated by the geriatric services.
The definition of geriatric medicine proposed by the British Geriatrics  Society (BGS) is ‘the branch of medicine concerned with the clinical, preventive, remedial and social aspects of illness in the elderly’.
However, the BGS declines to offer a definitive identification of ‘the elderly’.
Very broadly this speciality is concerned with the treatment of acute episodes of illness, the management of long-term health problems and with those who are admitted to long-stay beds in hospitals.
Key features of geriatrics as a medical specialism are the concepts of assessment and rehabilitation, a concern with multi-disciplinary working and the recognition of the importance of social factors in disease onset and management.
No agreed definition of who is a geriatric patient has yet been arrived at.
Here we may draw an  analogy between geriatrics and paediatrics, another age-based medical specialism.
Paediatrics has, given the declining birth-rate, been extending the upper age range of its client group, while geriatric medicine has been extending the minimum age of its client group.
As we will see later, people aged 65 + are the main client of the NHS.
If the age of 65 + was adopted as the definition of geriatrics then the NHS should be renamed the National Geriatric Medicine Service.
The way in which specialist health services for the elderly are provided nationally varies considerably.
Some areas operate an age-related service whereby all medical admissions above a certain age, usually 75 +, are seen by the geriatricians.
In other areas geriatrics patients are defined by their need for rehabilitation and multi-disciplinary care.
So although in Britain we have a national system of health care provision the way services have developed shows considerable variation between districts.
One feature which appears central to both versions of geriatric provision is the commitment to the provision of a service which is area-, rather than simply hospital-, based.
Hence domiciliary visits by medical staff are an integral part of any specialist service.
How such patterns of provision will be influenced by the imposition of the market discipline remains the subject of considerable discussion.
How much is spent on health care services?
Having considered the structure of health care provision in Britain we next consider how much is spent on the provision of these services.
Expenditure on the health service is a significant item within the national budget, representing about 5 per cent of gross domestic product (Table 7.1).
There are extensive debates about whether this percentage of GDP is, in fact, adequate.
Clearly Britain spends a lower percentage of its GDP on health care than other countries.
For example, Sweden and France spend just over 9 per cent of GDP on health care, while the United States spends 11 — 12 per cent of GDP on health care (Leathard 1990).
It is not as clear, however, how much more Britain ‘ought’ to spend on health care, although many commentators are agreed that the present amount is insufficient.
How is the health care budget distributed?
Leaving aside debates about the adequacy of the overall budget we can also consider how the current budget is distributed.
There are four main ways of considering this question:
1
Between geographical regions.
2
Between different arms of the health care system (e.g. hospital versus community services).
3
Between varying client groups (e.g. Paediatrics versus psychiatry).
4
Between varying age groups.
It is well documented that there are geographical variations in both health status and health care expenditure within Britain.
A special committee, the resource allocation working party (RAWP), was convened to establish ways of moving towards a fairer distribution system.
It might be naively assumed that these variations in expenditure reflect the varying patterns of need for health care illustrated by the population.
No such correlation is evident.
Indeed, the available evidence supports the opposite conclusion: expenditure is greatest in areas of least need and lowest in areas of greatest need.
Observation of this pattern led to Julian Tudor-Hart (1971) formulating his ‘inverse care law’ which he stated as ‘…the availability of good medical care tends to vary inversely with the need of the population served’.
If we examine expenditure by type of care provided, i.e. hospital or community, then it is obvious that acute in-patient care dominates the programme budget, accounting for 34 per cent of all expenditure.
It has been the policy of successive governments since 1976 to move the balance of expenditure from hospital to community services.
However, this redistribution has not yet taken place to any significant extent, with the acute hospital sector managing to preserve its stranglehold upon health care expenditure.
A third way of considering expenditure distribution is via the allocation given to specific patient or client groups.
Scrutiny of Table 7.1 reveals that hospital and maternity services account for the majority of funds.
The so-called Cinderella specialisms of mental health, mental handicap, the physically disabled, and specialist services for the elderly are less well resourced.
The final perspective upon resource allocation is by age group.
It is the very oldest age group, those aged over 85, who record the highest per capita expenditure at £1452 per person per annum(Table 7.2).
Clearly in simple population terms the older age groups account for a disproportionate amount of health care expenditure.
For example, those aged 85 + represent 1 per cent of total population and account for 8 per cent of health care expenditure.
Those aged 65 + account for 48 per cent of all NHS expenditure, as compared with 20 per cent in 1951/52 (Bosanquet and Gray 1989).
This increased expenditure upon the older age groups probably arises from the inter-relationship of several factors including: price inflation in health care; population change; the increased use of health services.
Although we can look at expenditure patterns in a number of different ways three main points are evident.
First, any attempts at reducing expenditure on the NHS will impact most significantly upon the older groups, who are the main consumers of health care services.
Second, the increase in the numbers of very elderly will, if current trends persist, impose considerable extra demands upon the health care system.
Simply to maintain current patterns of expenditure will require considerable expansion of the budget, without allowing for   technological changes in service provision.
Third, the NHS changes are very concerned with improved management and ‘efficiency’ and do not seem to confront the need to increase resources simply in order to maintain the status quo.
Utilization of hospital services
Acute non-psychiatric hospitals play a vital role in the provision of medical care for all members of the community but especially older people.
At its creation the NHS inherited the existing stock of hospital provision.
This varied widely in both the quantity and quality of the fabric and type of buildings.
At the time of its creation the NHS took over about 1700 public hospitals and about 1000 voluntary hospitals, a large proportion of which were facing bankruptcy.
To overcome the piecemeal pattern of provision which was the legacy of the pre-NHS supply the 1960s saw the policy of developing a network of district General Hospitals.
These were acute hospitals providing a full range of services to a population of about 100,000 — 150,000.
There was a clear acceptance of the need to plan acute hospital provision in order to equalize the distribution of hospital beds throughout the country and replace much of the existing pre-First World War hospital stock.
The philosophy of planning services centrally in order to achieve equitable distribution has clearly been abandoned by the new NHS philosophy which concentrates upon local decision making and competition rather than cooperation between hospitals.
HOSPITAL UTILIZATION BY OLDER PEOPLE
Annually about 9 per cent of the population visit hospital as an in-patient.
The percentage of the population reporting a hospital in-patient stay shows a J-shaped distribution very similar to the pattern for mortality (see Figure 7.2).
For the older age groups men have a higher rate of hospital admission than women.
For those aged 75 and over 20 per cent of men and 16 per cent of women reported an in-patient stay in hospital in the previous year.
Levels of in-patient hospital admission in Britain are lower than those reported from North America.
Mullner et al .
(1987) report that 20 per cent of Americans aged 65 and over were admitted to hospital in 1986; this represents 10.8 million hospital admissions.
In Britain 11 per cent of those aged 65 + are admitted to hospital annually, approximately half the American rate.
It remains a subject of debate as to whether this enormous difference in admission rates reflects differences in morbidity (i.e. demand for care) between these two countries or differences in the supply of hospital beds.
HAVE HOSPITAL UTILIZATION RATES CHANGED OVER TIME?
Data about utilization of hospital services over time are sparse.
One source for considering if utilization rates are increasing (or decreasing) is via the   comparison of hospital discharge rates based upon information from the hospital in-patient enquiry (HIPE).
Unfortunately information is available about discharges rather than admissions.
Further, these data are flawed for detailed those discharged alive!
Using these data to inform decision making about the quality of care offered by different hospitals would obviously be problematic.
A pattern of increasing acute hospital utilization is observed if we compare age specific hospital discharge rates for the period 1979 to 1985 (Figure 7.3).
Overall discharge rates increased by 25 per cent between 1971 and 1985 from 856 per 10,000 population to 1074 per 10,000.
For those aged 65 — 74 hospital discharge rates increased by 35.8 per cent between 1971 and 1985 — an annual average increase of 2.2 per cent.
For those aged 75 + the increase in discharges was 46 per cent over the same period (average annual increase of 2.7 per cent)(Bosanquet and Gray 1979).
Why have discharge rates increased?
These data reflect, to some degree at least, activity within the hospital sector.
Clearly there appears to have been a significant increase in activity across all age groups, but especially among the older age groups.
Whether these increases reflect increased morbidity, a greater willingness to care for older people or an expansion in capacity is a matter of debate.
HOW DO, OLDER PEOPLE ENTER THE HOSPITAL SYSTEM?
There are a variety of different ways in which an individual may access the hospital system and end up as an in-patient.
Very broadly these are as an   emergency, via a GP referral, from an out-patient clinic or via a waiting list.
Under the current system of provision, waiting lists, usually for elective surgery, are one way o& rationing health care.
The issue of the length of waiting lists, their variation in length between areas and the amount of time an individual patient may wait remain highly contentious.
Reducing waiting lists is at the top of all politicians' political agendas, regardless of their political persuasion.
About 20 per cent of admissions of those aged 65 + are via the waiting list.
The vast majority of older people enter hospital as a result of an emergency or medical referral.
This raises several issues.
Are clinicians reluctant to put older people on surgical waiting lists because they are in some way discriminating against older people?
Are the kinds of medical problems faced by older people more likely to present as an emergency than those posed by younger age groups?
Is the debate about reducing waiting lists less relevant to the medical care needs of older people than the younger age groups?
Is an obsession with reduced waiting lists an example of covert ageism?
It is likely that the creation of the internal market, if it does emerge, will be heavily concentrated towards elective surgical procedures.
The idea of travelling between areas to take advantage of shorter waiting times appears to have some public support as Leathard (1990) quotes a survey which suggests that 40 per cent of people would go anywhere in the country to avoid waiting for treatment.
However, it is unclear if older people, who are least likely to have access to transport, are in favour of this idea.
Again, a concentration upon elective surgical procedures may mean a reduced provision of other acute services, to the detriment of the older age groups.
TREATMENT SPECIALISM
Hospital medicine is a highly specialized activity.
This is reflected in the way care is provided.
Upon entry to hospital older people will be admitted to the branch of medicine dealing with their type of illness.
For example, an older person with a fractured femur or requiring a hip replacement will be cared for by an orthopaedic surgeon; someone requiring a cateract operation will be under the care of an ophthalmologist.
In what medical specialisms are older people treated?
Data from HIPE give some indication of where in the hospital service older people are treated.
Overall those aged 65 + represent 33 per cent of all discharges from hospital; if paediatric and obstetric beds are excluded then those aged 65 + account for 60 per cent of discharges.
Those aged 65 + are, therefore, the largest single consumer group of the services provided by acute hospitals.
The older age groups are, by definition, the main clients of the geriatricians.
However, they also form the largest single patient group for general medicine (44 per cent), general surgery (32 per cent ), ophthalmology (49 per cent ) and orthopaedics (27 per cent ).
Older people are not confined, when cared for in an acute hospital, to the geriatrics department; they are the single largest patient group for most major medical specialisms.
When considering how demographic change may affect the demand and supply of health care it is important to remember that such changes in demand will affect all the major medical specialisms and not be confined to departments dealing exclusively with older people.
The appearance of older people as the largest single patient group in most major medical specialisms is a fact which is not yet recognized by the training offered to medical and nursing staff.
Given the distribution of older people throughout the different medical specialisms it could be argued that all doctors (and nurses) should receive some training in the main aspects of geriatric medicine, with its emphasis upon rehabilitation and the role of multi-disciplinary care and assessment.
Data from a study in Wales suggested that patients treated by geriatricians were more likely to receive post-discharge services than their contemporaries treated by general physicians (Victor and Vetter 1985b).
LENGTH OF STAY IN HOSPITAL
How long do older people remain in hospital?
The average length of stay in hospital for older people is usually longer than that for a young person with a similar medical condition.
This reflects the multiple pathology which is often a feature of older people presenting with specific medical conditions.
Average length of stay increases with age from 14 days for a person aged 65 — 74 to 34 days for someone aged 85 + (Figure 7.4).
Length of stay also varies between different medical specialisms.
For example, the average duration of stay in general medicine for a patient aged 65 — 74 was 14 days compared with 17 days  for a patient aged 85 +.
This difference is hardly surprising as treatment specialism is acting here as a proxy measure of morbidity.
One of the most characteristic features of the hospital sector in Britain in the past decade has been the massive overall reduction in the average length of stay (Table 7.3).
The largest overall reductions have been achieved in the 85 + age group.
Between 1981 and 1986 the average hospital stay for a patient aged 85 and over decreased by 7.7 days.
The specialisms of geriatrics and orthopaedic surgery have recorded the largest decreases in average length of stay.
Taking a longer timespan, 1971 — 85, Bosanquet and Gray (1989) report that the average stay for a patient aged 65 — 74 decreased by 34.8 per cent from 22.1 days to 14.4 days.
For a patient aged 75 + the decrease was from 41.4 days to 24.7 days, a decrease of 40.3 per cent.
These trends for a reduction in length of stay are not unique to the older age groups.
Between 1971 and 1985 average duration of stay for all age groups decreased from 15.1 days to 10.7 days, a decline of 29.1 per cent.
Nor are these trends unique to the British system of socialized medicine.
In the United States average stay for a patient aged 65 + decreased from 13 days in 1967 to 8.8 days in 1986 (Eisdorfer et al .
1987).
TRANSFER FROM HOSPITAL BACK TO THE COMMUNITY.
For many patients, irrespective of age, admission to an acute hospital constitutes only one phase of their medical career.
Many patients need continuing care, follow up or rehabilitation.
It is a strong commitment to the  concept of continuing care in the community which is a hallmark of the approach and philosophy of geriatric medicine.
A constant theme in research concerned with the hospital care of older people is the discharge from hospital back to the community.
Discharge is, perhaps, the wrong term to use.
This implies a severing of relationships when many older people will need continuing care; perhaps the term ‘transfer’ would be more appropriate.
Research has consistently demonstrated that the transfer of older clients from hospital to the community can be very problematic with older people being sent home without adequate arrangements having been made for their continuing care (Victor 1983).
Some medical specialisms, especially geriatric medicine, are much better than others at arranging effective transfer.
This problem centres upon effective communication between hospital, community and local authority services.
Despite the regular production of research reports arguing for better discharge planning little seems to have changed, especially in specialisms other than geriatric medicine.
The issue of an effective and humane transfer of an older person from hospital to the community is of considerable importance.
In order to effect such a transfer a whole variety of different agencies may be involved including remedial therapists, GPs, social work, community nursing and domiciliary services.
Under our current system of care provision there are problems in co-ordinating the activities of these different agencies.
It is unclear as to how proposed changes in the systems of NHS and social care provision will improve communications between agencies.
One example of how there may be problems with the new system is the case of stroke.
The care of stroke patients involves a plethora of different health and social care workers.
When DHAs are looking to purchase stroke care how many different contracts will they have to place?
Will they have to contract for rehabilitation services separate from the contract for acute beds?
How will follow up and rehabilitation services for patients who have undergone joint replacements be organized if the surgical contract has been placed with a hospital some distance away from the DHA?
The introduction of markets and contracts is obviously going to be fraught with problems for those patient groups who present a multiplicity of different health and social care needs.
READMISSIONS TO HOSPITAL
These significant reductions in the duration of hospital episodes for older people have prompted the suggestion that this may have an adverse effect by increasing readmissions rates.
The scenario depicted is that decreased hospital stay means that older people (or indeed patients of any age) are being sent home with high levels of dependency; community services/informal carers cannot cope and the person has to come back into hospital.
How accurate is this stereotype?
It is problematic trying to consider hospital readmission rates as most hospital computer systems currently in operation are not easy to interrogate and rarely produce information about readmissions on a routine basis.
Consequently specially designed research projects have attempted to enumerate hospital readmission rates.
Typical of such studies was a project undertaken in Parkside DHA, an Inner London health district (Victor and Jefferies 1990).
This study followed up a cohort of 386 patients aged 65 + for six months after their discharge home.
At the end of the study period 130 (38 per cent) had been readmitted to hospital within Parkside; 68 (18 per cent ) were readmitted within one month and 25 (6 per cent ) were readmitted within seven days of their initial admission.
The number of readmissions ranged from 1 to 16.
The above study is subject to several of the methodological and conceptual problems which surround attempts to quantify readmission rates.
First, there is no accepted definition of the time period for which readmissions should be calculated.
Second, there are problems surrounding the ability to capture admissions to hospital.
The Parkside study relied upon readmissions which occurred within the three hospitals within the DHA and underestimates readmission rates as it excludes readmissions which happened outside the study area.
Third, studies cannot accurately quantify mortality rates.
It is highly probable that many of those in the initial cohort of patients would have died.
These limitations serve to underestimate readmission rates.
Studies based in Britain on the 65 + age group have consistently failed to identify age or sex as ‘risk’ factors for readmission (Victor and Vetter 1985a; Graham and Livesley 1983; Andrews 1986).
The data from Parkside conform with the results of previous British studies by failing to link readmission to the demographic characteristics of patients.
Readmission rates were related to initial length of stay.
The average length of stay of readmitted patients was 12 days compared with 15 for those not readmitted.
Patients readmitted consistently had a shorter length of stay in all specialisms than non-readmitted patients.
This, at face value, at least supports the notion that short length of stay may be linked to subsequent readmission to hospital.
However, much more work is required before it is possible to state if the relationship between these two events is causal.
MEASURING THE QUALITY OF HOSPITAL CARE: THE ROLE OF READMISSION RATES
The debates about the relationship between length of stay and readmission have served to highlight the potential of readmission rates being used as a surrogate measure of outcome after hospital care.
One feature of the debate about the proposed changes in the structure of the NHS is an increased emphasis upon the measurement of the quality of care provided by the different elements of the health care service.
Measuring the quality of the hospital service is obviously difficult, especially given the diversity of different forms of treatment.
One measure which has been proposed as a quality of care indicator is readmission to hospital.
The simplistic assumption underlying this suggestion is that hospitals with high readmission rates are providing a poorer quality of care than hospitals with lower readmission rates.
The use of readmission rates as an indicator of outcome rests upon the assumption that they may be used as a proxy for morbidity resultant from poor clinical care.
The validity of this key assumption has not been proven.
Conceptually, all readmissions are bad, since to go into hospital again may be a profoundly disturbing and negative experience for the patient (i.e. a poor patient outcome).
However, it is simplistic to assume all readmissions are indicative of poor patient care as some readmissions are planned.
Further it is obvious that other factors such as the social circumstances of the patient, his or her environment and the provision of care in the community by both formal and informal carers are also important in influencing readmission.
Unplanned or emergency readmissions may be a more useful outcome indicator.
However, unplanned readmissions that are due to a new disease are not necessarily suggestive of poor care.
Thus, only those unplanned readmissions in some way related to the index admission have any utility as a surrogate measure of outcome.
Further, such measures suggest notions of avoidability.
To develop a meaningful measure of readmission which has any validity as a measure of clinical care requires that the admission be unplanned, related to the index admission, and in some way avoidable.
Operationally, this might be defined as those unplanned readmissions occurring within a ‘short’(but specified) interval after the first discharge.
The debate about using readmission to measure quality of care is obviously much more complex than it seems at first sight.
The recent Acheson Report on Public Health in England identified ‘ensuring the means to evaluate health services’ as one of the three core tasks of the public health function in the NHS.
This emphasis upon evaluation has been reinforced by the recent White paper on the future of the NHS.
The utility of using readmissions as an index of outcome and as a surrogate method of identifying ‘poor’ clinical care is limited by the conceptual and methodological limitations noted earlier.
Readmission to hospital after an initial episode of treatment is not solely dependent on the quality of the initial care but is dependent on a whole  variety of factors unrelated to the initial in-patient stay.
Consequently readmission has little future as a general indicator of outcome, even though the increasing ease with which this index may be calculated by using computerized patient admission data bases is a strong attraction.
THE INAPPROPRIATE USE OF ACUTE BEDS BY OLDER PEOPLE
The most appropriate way of providing health care for older people within the hospital sector remains a point of contention.
There are those for (Horrocks 1982) and against (Evans 1983) the establishment of age-related specialist services for elderly people.
Although the merits of each approach have been described, no rigorous evaluations of these different perspectives on the care and treatment have been undertaken.
However, even if an age-related service is established for those older people with acute medical problems, older people will remain high consumers of services provided in surgery and other specialist areas of modern medicine.
Alongside the debates about the most appropriate method of caring for the elderly are concerns about the ‘blocking’ of acute beds by older people who no longer need the facilities provided by an acute setting but who, for other reasons, cannot be discharged.
It is a common stereotype that substantial numbers of acute hospital beds are occupied by older people who no longer need them.
This then raises the question as to what is the inappropriate use of an acute hospital bed?
How are the so-called bed-blockers to be identified?
It is no surprise to realise that those studies which have investigated the problem of ‘bed blocking’ have concentrated upon older hospital patients; studies have not researched this topic for younger people as their right to an acute hospital bed appears to go unquestioned.
How is the bed-blocker to be identified?
Simply asking staff to identify inappropriately placed patients is obviously potentially subject to bias from several sources.
Previous research which has considered the problem of the blocking of acute beds by inappropriately located patients have related staff views to a length of stay for four weeks (or more)(Coid and Crome 1986).
Using this protocol a survey of two Inner London hospitals revealed that of older patients (i.e. those aged 65 +) were classified as bed blockers (Victor, 1990b).
This estimate suggests that 8 per cent of acute beds were being ‘blocked’ by these patients.
Patients likely to be labelled as bed blockers consistently display problems such as incontinence and dementia which are likely to present considerable nursing care problems (Victor 1990b).
Why are such patients described as being inappropriately placed?
Data from a study in Inner London revealed that the single most important reason cited was the need for nursing/institutional care (81 per cent).
Comparatively few elderly were remaining in hospital because of community care/social problems.
The debate about the blocking of acute beds by elderly people is interesting  for it calls into question how the health care needs of older people are evaluated.
Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that the blocking of beds by inappropriately placed patients is not a feature unique to the elderly.
However, it is very rare indeed for the question about the inappropriate use of acute beds by younger patients to be raised.
The whole notion of bed blocking seems to imply that older people enter hospital and then wilfully continue to occupy a bed which, in the views of staff, they no longer require.
Older people (or indeed patients of any age) do not become bed blockers of their own intent.
Rather where such cases do occur it is because the health and social care system cannot provide the type of care these patients need.
Hospital consumer satisfaction
What do older people think of hospital care?
Little is known about the attitudes of older people towards the services offered by the acute hospital sector.
A survey of the over 75s living in South Wales revealed that 86 per cent had either visited or stayed in a general hospital ward compared with 33 per cent for a geriatric ward (Salvage et al .
1988, 1989).
Of those interviewed 52 per cent reported that they would be pleased to enter a general ward compared with 13 per cent for a geriatric ward and 10 per cent for a geriatric hospital.
These negative perceptions of the geriatric ward/hospital confirm the findings of several other previous studies.
The main advantages of all three settings related to the quality of care offered.
However, the main perceived disadvantage of the general ward was the ‘noise’, which was mentioned by 23 per cent.
The main disadvantage of the geriatric ward/hospital was ‘being surrounded by ill elderly’, which was cited by a third of respondents.
More data about general attitudes towards the health service is available from the British social attitudes survey (Table 7.4).
The majority of people, regardless of age, were satisfied with the NHS as a whole.
However, levels of overall satisfaction do seem to have dropped between 1983 and 1987.
It is difficult to interpret this change in attitudes, which could reflect increased levels of patient expectation, a decrease in the quality of the service provided or a combination of the two.
Levels of satisfaction with in-patient care are generally high.
However, concerns are expressed about the waiting times for elective surgery and out-patients and a perceived need for more medical and nursing staff.
Overall it appears that the very oldest age group, those aged 75 +, express the least criticism of the services provided.
A part of the recent NHS White paper was devoted to the need for hospitals to undertake much more extensive ‘market research’ in order to establish what the clients (patients?) wanted to be provided.
However, they are given little guidance as to how they should go about undertaking such projects.
Luck et al .
(1988) report their experiences of undertaking market research in a variety of settings for South Birmingham DHA.
Their study of quality of care for the   elderly in hospital, with specific reference to respite care, is illustrative of these types of surveys.
Patients and relatives responded more positively to the ward survey than did visitors.
Does this reflect a real difference in perceptions or the reluctance of patients and their carers to criticize in case their respite care arrangements were jeopardized?
All consumer surveys undertaken in hospital could be restricted in their utility because patients, in a dependent position, may be reluctant to offer their ‘true feelings or observations’.
The Birmingham study highlighted three problem areas: patient autonomy (i.e. wearing own clothes, deciding what time to get up); ward facilities and layout and communication between hospital staff and carers.
The first issue requires a change in organization practice and attitudes towards the patient group.
The second requires capital changes.
Neither of these two problems will be easy to confront.
If changes are not made as a result of these surveys then such enterprises may lose credibility and be seen as a diversionary tactic.
Utilization of mental hospital services
Separate information is available for utilization of mental hospital beds which distinguish between first admissions and all admissions.
Those aged 65 + are significant users of mental hospital beds.
In 1986 they accounted for 34 per cent of all admissions and 37 per cent of first admissions compared with 22 per cent and 27 per cent respectively in 1976 (DOH 1989c).
For both first and all admissions to mental hospitals the rate increases progressively with age (see Figures 7.5 and 7.6).
There is a marked gender difference in first admission rates; the rates for women being approximately  one-third higher than for males.
No such difference is observed for all admission rates.
As with the use of acute beds there has been a significant increase in utilisation by older people during the years 1976 — 86.
In that ten-year period there was a slight decrease in overall first admission rates;— 4 per cent for males and — 16 per cent for females.
For those aged 65 + only women aged 65 — 74 years show this decrease in first admission rates (see Figures 7.7 and 7.8).
Over the same period overall mental hospital admission rates increased by 14 per cent for men and 5 per cent for women; the increases in admission rates characteristic of the population aged 65 + were considerably greater than this.
For example hospital admission rates for men and women aged 75 + increased by at least 60 per cent during the decade.
Primary health care
In Britain every member of the population is registered with a doctor whose circumstances may range from working alone (a single-handed practice) to working within a large health centre consisting of several GPs working in concert.
In the British system of socialized medicine consultation with a GP is free.
It is now stated policy to encourage GPs to group together into health centre-based practices.
However, this is not easy to achieve because, as was noted earlier, GPs are independent contractors and free to practise as they wish.
The role of the GP with older patients is, potentially, limitless.
However, in a report on the potential contribution of family doctors to the care of older people Almind et al .
(1983) proposed four key principles for good primary health care of older people.
These were:
1
To help prevent unnecessary loss of function.
2
To prevent and treat health problems which adversely affect quality of life in old age.
3
To supplement the existing system of informal care and prevent its breakdown.
4
To give older people a good death as well as a good life.
GP CONSULTATION RATES
What percentage of the population consult their GP?
According to the 1987 General Household Survey (GHS) 17 per cent of those aged 65 — 74 and 22 per cent of those aged 75 + consulted a GP in the 14 days before interview compared with 15 per cent for the general population (Figure 7.9).
For both males and females there is a U-shaped pattern of consultations, with the highest rates being reported for the very young.
Annually it is estimated that approximately 75 per cent of those aged 65 and over will visit their family  doctor.
Millard (1988) estimates that on any day in 1981 the family doctor was caring for approximately 2 per cent of those aged 75 and over.
Establishing trends over time in GP consultation rates is problematic.
Comparing 1972 and 1987 shows, for all age groups, a slight increase in GP consultation rates in the 14-day reference period (see Figure 7.10).
At all ages consultation rates are higher among females as compared to males.
However, the differences are quite slight in most age groups.
Where do older people see their GP?
Older people like other members of the population may consult their GP at the surgery or request a home visit.
There is a clear trend for the number of older people reporting a home visit to increase with age from 18 per cent of those aged 65 — 69 to 62 per cent of those aged 85 + (Figure 7.11).
Such visits are time consuming and may increase the GP's workload significantly.
Consequently it is estimated that those aged 65 + account for 27 per cent of GPs' time in 1981/82 as compared with 22 per cent a decade earlier.
If this pattern is maintained in the future then the increased number of those aged 85+ will have important implications for the workload of family doctors.
We may speculate that GPs may become less willing to maintain the very elderly on their lists when they have to provide care within a specified cash-limited budget.
CONSUMER VIEWS ON THE GP SERVICE
What do older people think about the services offered by the GP?
Data from the British social attitudes survey indicate that attitudes towards the service provided by GPs are very positive (Table 7.5).
There are few who express complaints with the quality of care offered.
However, there is some dissatisfaction with the system for providing care functions.
Particular problems are centred around the time available for consultations and the workings of the appointment system.
Few appear to express problems in the system of changing GPs.
Yet making this easier is one of the changes enshrined in the NHS and Community Care Bill.
How will this Bill affect what patients appear to want, longer consultations and improved appointment systems?
CHANGES IN PRIMARY CARE: THE IMPOSITION OF THE NEW GP CONTRACT
Following the White paper Promoting Better Health (DHSS 1987) a new GP contract has been imposed upon family doctors by the Department of Health and came into force in April 1990.
The stated objective of this new contract is to improve the standard of general practice and it proposes substantial changes in the way general practice is structured and financed.
Included in the new contract is the compulsory retirement of doctors at the age of 70.
One aspect of the contract which has provoked much discussion is the identification of specific activities which family doctors must undertake and the setting of targets for specific activities such as cervical smear testing.
With regard to the health care of older people the most salient feature of the new contract is that they will be required to annually invite each patient on their list aged 75 and over to participate in a consultation which should assess the health of the patient.
In return for undertaking this activity GPs will be rewarded with a special fee for each patient screened.
The health check will cover six main dimensions: sensory functions, mobility, mental condition, physical condition including continence, social environment and use of medicines.
The result of each assessment invitation must be recorded in the  patient's notes.
Clearly this is an attempt to impose a national screening and surveillance programme to monitor the health of older people.
However, the GP may subcontract out the screening visits/consultations to other health professionals working under his or her direction.
SCREENING AND THE ELDERLY
This imposition of routine health screening for the older age groups in the new GP contract is obviously premised upon the assumption that routine screening is beneficial to the health of the population.
However, this is a rather questionable assumption.
The only British trial of health screening in the non-retired population failed to identify any positive health benefits in favour of the screened group.
For older people there have been a variety of different screening trials using an assortment of highly diverse methodologies.
Postal screening (Barber and Wallis 1976) and visits from nurses (Tulloch and Moore 1979) and health visitors (Vetter et al .
1984; Luker 1988) have all been used as methods of routinely screening all the elderly in a given population.
What have the results of such projects been?
All have identified considerable ‘unmet’ need for services in the populations screened.
Routine visiting by a health visitor may increase the receipt of services by older people (Vetter et al .
1984).
However, what are the health outcomes of offering such screening services?
Vetter et al .
(1984) in a study of elderly in South Wales, reported decreased mortality among their screened group of elderly.
However, this study did not find any differences in morbidity between the two groups.
The alternative to universal screening is a more selective approach, focusing upon the high risk groups.
This, of course, begs the question of who is in the high risk group.
For older age groups the conventionally accepted high risk groups have been the very elderly (i.e. aged 85 +), the recently bereaved, those recently discharged from hospital, those living alone and those who have recently moved.
However, Taylor el al .
(1983) argue that only very advanced age and recently discharged from hospital actually  warrant identification as indicators of vulnerability.
The mandatory imposition of this task upon GPs has generated an extensive debate about its efficacy.
A survey of primary health care team workers in Bath DHA reported that 80 per cent favoured regular assessment of those aged 75 + in their own homes (Tremellan and Jones 1989).
However, there was no clear agreement between the professions surveyed as to who should undertake these assessments, although 89 per cent felt that it should involve the health visitor.
Those interviewed favoured a case finding approach rather than true screening, i.e. the identification of asymptomatic disease.
Social, environmental and daily living activities were suggested as the appropriate basis for assessment rather than clinically based assessments and tests.
Although it is difficult to estimate what positive health benefits for the older  person will result from the imposition of a national screening system there will be profound implications for the health and social services.
Since the seminal paper by Williamson and colleagues (1964) every survey of the elderly at home has identified significant amounts of previously unmet need.
These range from the need for hospital admission to the need for community support services such as chiropody.
How such probably very extensive unmet need will be met without a substantial increase in resources remains to be seen.
Indeed, is it ethical to undertake assessments if the GP cannot then deliver appropriate services to meet the identified needs?
Community nursing services
Community nursing services are funded and managed by the District Health Authority (DHA).
Throughout this volume the term ‘community nursing’ is taken to include the work of district nurses of all grades ranging from auxiliary to sister/charge nurse and health visitors.
Up until 1974 these services were organized by local authorities rather than health authorities.
Consequently such services have only been under the administration of health authorities for a short while.
Much of the pattern of provision of community nursing services and their mode of working reflects their origin as a non-health authority administered service.
These nurses may work from a GP practice or DHA health clinic.
Their work is primarily concerned with the care of patients and focuses upon technical procedures such as injections and dressings and the personal care of patients, e.g. bathing, etc.
In contrast health visitors, who are also DHA funded, are concerned with prevention and assessment, especially in the field of child care and development.
These services are usually geographically based and have a strong local connection.
In 1986 the Cumberlege Report proposed that district nurses, health visitors and school nurses should come within the umbrella term community nursing.
This report proposed a change in the orientation of nursing services from hospital to the community.
In summary the report proposed that nursing services should be organized around a target population of 10,000 — 25,000 within a geographically defined area.
This concept is, however, rather difficult to implement as there is often no easily definable area around which to develop services.
This problem is especially acute in urban areas where there is no co-terminosity between areas used to administer health, GP or social services.
Furthermore, areas such as wards or enumeration districts used for the collection and analysis of census data are usually not related to administrative areas used by service providers.
The future of these recommendations has been further confused by the changes contained in the recent NHS White paper.
District nursing and, to a lesser degree, health visiting services are important for older people.
Those aged 65 + represent about 50 per cent of the workload of district nurses and 10 per cent of health visitor workloads (Table 7.6).
In 1985   approximately 5 per cent of those aged 65 + were in receipt of district nursing services and 4 per cent health visiting services, compared with 2 per cent for both types of service in 1972.
Utilization rates for both these services increase significantly with the age of older people.
For example, 2 per cent of those aged 65 to 69 are in receipt of district nursing care compared with 20 per cent of those aged 85 + (see Figure 7.12).
What do older people know about community nursing services?
District nurses are well known.
Salvage et al .
(1988) report that 87 per cent of those aged 75 + were aware of the district nursing service as compared with only 20 per cent for the health visiting service.
However, levels of satisfaction were high among those who had received either service.
While the proportion of the population aged 65 + receiving community nursing doubled between 1972 and 1985 the situation for health visiting remained constant.
The role of health visitors with older people remains   unresolved.
Several studies have suggested that health visitors have a major role to play in screening and assessing the elderly (Luker 1988; Vetter et al .
1984).
Health visitors are seen by their fellow health professionals as the group most suited to undertake this activity (Tremellen and Jones 1989).
However, the same study revealed that at least half the health visitors surveyed saw the focus of their work being the 0 — 5 age group.
This probably reflects the balance of their training where the emphasis is upon pre-school aged children.
If a course includes an element concerned with older people it is usually from the perspective of geriatric medicine rather than gerontology, with its emphasis upon normal ageing.
Service utilization by ‘vulnerable’ groups
We have seen that all forms of medical care utilization increases with age.
There are also gender differences in service use.
How much are services used by two particularly ‘vulnerable’ groups, those living alone and those who are severely disabled as defined by a score of + on the Townsend index?
With the exception of the GP, 1985 GHS data indicate that services reach only a minority of these two groups (Table 7.7).
For example, GP home visits were reported by 78 per cent of the severely disabled and 35 per cent of those living alone.
The coverage of the district nursing service was 31 per cent and 7 per cent respectively.
In the previous chapter we saw that there were social class differences in mortality and morbidity among the older age groups.
Are these differences reflected in their patterns of service utilization?
Crude medical service utilization rates are very similar for older people from across the spectrum of social classes (see Table 7.8).
However, as illness is not equally distributed across the social classes it would appear that older people from manual occupations under-consult their GP.
Using 1985 GHS data age, sex and disability, standardized consultation rates were calculated for the population aged 65 +.
This exercise    suggested that there were few class differences in community nurse use or acute hospital care.
However, there does seem to be evidence that older people from professional and managerial backgrounds overconsume primary care services, especially home visits from GPs.
Conclusion and policy implications
Health services are used extensively by older people.
Those aged 65 + account for approximately half of all expenditure on the NHS.
They are the main consumer group for virtually every major medical specialism.
Recently there has been a trend towards reducing length of stay for all patients, especially those in the older age groups.
Financial constraints have forced hospitals to treat more patients more rapidly.
These constraints are also forcing a reappraisal of the role of the hospital in the care of older people.
Hospitals are, essentially, technologically sophisticated institutions geared towards crisis intervention.
Is such a model of care appropriate to meet the needs of an increasingly old, and possibly frail, population?
Clearly hospitals must respond to the changing patterns of disease with which they are going to be faced.
The major medical specialisms must realize that the majority of their patients (consumers) are increasingly going to be elderly, with the resultant problems of frailty and multiple pathology.
Consequently increased emphasis needs to be placed upon the role of assessment, rehabilitation and transfer rather than discharge back into the community.
These changes would point to the need for more integrated care to meet the ‘real’ needs of older people.
Will the changes in provision currently being put into place lead to greater integration or fragmentation?
8
PROVISION AND USE OF SOCIAL CARE
The 1989 Griffiths White paper,Caring for People , made a key distinction between people with health care needs and those with social care needs.
Although this distinction was not defined it is obvious that the Griffiths review was very much concerned with non-acute medical types of social care which would be provided in the community.
In this chapter we briefly examine the development of community care policy; consider the Griffiths reforms and how they might affect the structure and organization of social service departments; and consider the role of formal and informal caring agencies.
Community care: the policy context
The post-war decades in Britain have seen a growing emphasis upon community as opposed to institutional provision for those groups in society requiring long-term care.
Such groups include the elderly as well as those with mental illness or physical and/or mental handicaps.
This trend is general to western Europe and North America.
Across the range of western industrial societies there is a trend towards decreased institutional provision and a greater emphasis upon the care and maintenance of older people in their own homes for as long as possible.
As the 1981 White paper,Growing Older , commented ‘care in the community must increasingly mean care by the community’(DHSS 1981, p. 3).
In the field of care of the elderly it was stated that
the primary objective of departmental policies…is to enable old people to maintain independent lives in the community for as long as possible.
To achieve this high priority is being given to the development of domiciliary provision and the encouragement of measures designed to prevent or postpone the need for long term care in hospital or residential homes.
DHSS 1978, p. 13
Thus, it is argued, care of the elderly is a responsibility which should be shared  by all, and not one which solely involves statutory services.
In this manifestation community care is seen as the responsibility of the family with state services only playing a rather residual role.
WHAT IS COMMUNITY CARE?
The origin of the term community care remains obscure.
Bulmer (1987) observes that the first official use of the term was in 1957 and was related to the field of mental illness.
In this context community care was taken to encompass both residential care and care which it was deemed appropriate for local health and social service authorities to provide in non-institutional settings.
Walker (1982) comments that in this formulation community care implies support for the person by their friends, family and neighbours; an emphasis upon non-institutional forms of care, the provision of domiciliary statutory services and appropriate measures to prevent (re-) admission to institutional forms of care.
However, over the decades, while the terminology has remained constant, the meaning of the term community care has undergone a subtle transformation.
It is possible to isolate several features of community care.
In its original manifestation the term was used to mean care outside large institutions.
In this sense the term may still be used in debates about the care of those who are mentally ill or handicapped.
A second key element is the provision of services and care outside an institutional setting.
Third is the idea of providing care in as normal i.e. non-institutional setting as is possible given the needs of clients.
Fourth, there is a stress upon the involvement of members of the community in the care of those with long-term care needs.
These multiple meanings given to the term community care result in a lack of precision and clarity.
This makes it possible for governments of all political persuasions to argue in favour of this policy.
Bayley (1973) first suggested the useful distinction between care ‘in the community’ and care ‘by the community’.
Care in the community implies the use of statutory resources provided in clients' own homes; care by the community is associated with the mobilization of resources from within the community (voluntary organizations and informal carers such as friends, neighbours and kin).
There are thus two main models of community care.
First there is the notion of the community using its own resources to provide care via family and friends as well as voluntary and locally based formal services, and second there is the idea that the community's resources will be supplemented by those from external sources (e.g. national government).
Increasingly in Britain statutory services are seen as being used as the last resort in the care of older people; the care of older people is being placed firmly within the domain of the family and the informal sector.
How are community care services currently organized?
As illustrated in the first chapter, formal community care services are provided by a variety of different agencies.
The health sector provides community nursing, long-stay care and day hospital places as well as acute beds.
Local authority social service departments are traditionally associated with the provision of domiciliary care services, typically home helps, as well as social work and residential care.
The voluntary sector is also a provider of social care as are housing departments/associations and, increasingly, the private sector.
It is obvious that the same types of care are being provided by a variety of different agencies.
For any single client a variety of these actors are likely to be involved in their care and maintenance in the community; hence concerns among policy makers about coordination between agencies in the actual provision of care.
Community care: recent policy developments
There has been a broad consensus about the appropriateness of community care as a social objective.
However, this has not been seen to be a very effective set of policies.
So it has been subject to recent rigorous scrutiny by a series of government reports: the Audit Commission (1986), the House of Commons Social Services Committee Report (1985) and the Griffiths Report (1986) which resulted in the 1989 White paper Caring for People .
THE AUDIT COMMISSION REVIEW
The Audit Commission review which was published in 1986 identified five main obstacles which they thought accounted for the slow and fragmented way that community care had developed in England and Wales.
These were:
1
The different budgets maintained by health and local authorities which made the desired shift in resources from health to social services difficult to organize.
2
The lack of one-off finances to bridge the costs involved in moving from institutional to community care.
3
The use of social security benefits to fund private residential care which, it was suggested, offered an incentive towards institutional rather than community care.
Following a small change in the rules for supplementary benefit provision elderly people claiming a supplementary pension were allowed to enter private residential care with the full cost being met by the state.
This had resulted in a growth in the number of homes and a huge increase in the bill to the Exchequer.
Subsequently the government ‘capped’ the amount of money it would pay in private care fees.
This example  illustrates how one branch of government, through a minor change in welfare benefit regulations, has developed a policy in almost total opposition to the policy of community care being pursued by the health and social service agencies.
4
The problems resulting from bureaucratic difficulties due to differing geographical boundaries between health and social services, the non-compatibility of their organizational structures and divided and unclear responsibilities.
5
The inadequate training programmes which meant that there were inadequate staff to support the move from institutions to the community.
THE GRIFFITHS REVIEW
In December 1986 Mr Norman Fowler, the then Secretary of State for Health and Social Security, initiated a review of community care chaired by Roy Griffiths.
The terms of reference for this enquiry were ‘To review the way in which public funds are used to support community care policy and to advise on the options for action which would improve the use of these funds as a contribution to more effective community care’.
This review may be seen as a follow up to the report by the Audit Commission (1986) and concern about the spiralling cost of social security payments to those in private residential/nursing home care noted above.
The terms of reference for this review stated very clearly that the extent of resources being made available for community care was not being questioned.
Rather the focus was again upon expending the money more judiciously.
The Griffiths Review concentrated upon adults who required care and support from others because they were elderly, mentally ill or handicapped or physically disabled (the so-called ‘priority care groups’).
The review was published in March 1988 as a Green paper Community Care: Agenda for Action and resulted in the November 1989 White paper Caring for People .
The long gap between the publication of the Green paper and the White paper reflected the unpopularity among government circles of the main recommendations of the Green paper.
THE COMMUNITY CARE WHITE PAPER: CARING FOR PEOPLE
This White paper is based upon the assumption that for most people community care is the best form of care available.
The ideology underpinning this report, therefore, promotes the ideals of the family as the main source of care and the home as the appropriate place to receive such care.
There is a clear emphasis upon promoting the choice of individuals in influencing the type of care they receive, providing care outside institutions if at all possible and limiting the amount of care available so as not to foster dependence.
This later point reflects the concern voiced by this administration to reduce the  ‘dependency culture’ which they felt was promoted by universal and ‘overgenerous’state welfare systems.
With these objectives in mind the White paper states that the proposed changes intended to:
1
Enable people to live as normal a life as possible in their own homes or in a homely environment in the community.
2
provide the right amount of care and support to enable people to achieve maximum independence.
3
provide people with greater say in how they live their lives and the services they need.
What is community care?
As noted earlier, there has been a conspicuous failure upon the part of politicians in particular to say what they mean by the term.
According to the White paper community care may be defined as providing the right level of intervention and support to enable people to achieve maximum independence and control over their own lives.
This requires the provision of a range of services.
What should community care consist of?
The government identifies the key components of community as follows:
Services which respond sensitively and flexibly to the needs of individuals and their carers.
Services which allow a range of options for consumers.
Services which do not intervene more than is necessary to promote independence.
Services which concentrate upon those with greatest needs.
Six main objectives are indicated by the government for service delivery.
These are stated as:
1
promoting the development of domiciliary, day and respite services to enable people to live in their own homes.
2
Ensuring that services providers make support for informal carers a high priority.
3
Making proper assessment of need and good case management the key to the provision of good quality care.
4
promoting the development of the independent sector.
5
Clarifying the responsibilities of agencies to increase accountability.
6
Securing ‘better value for money’.
The White paper goes into some detail as to how these objectives are to be achieved and it is beyond the scope of this volume to go over them in detail.
It is, however, worth indicating that the paper does set specific priorities for ‘elderly and disabled people’.
This heading, which the report uses, is illuminating as it indicates that, for the government at least, old age and disability are synonymous.
The priorities set are as follows:
The promotion of positive lifestyles through health education, health surveillance, and screening to reduce the need for in-patient and residential care.
The promotion of coherent networks of services which assist people to live dignified and independent lives in the community.
The provision of a full range of services.
The avoidance of unnecessary institutional care by assessment of need for care.
Improved access to information about services at both local and national services.
The key recommendations of this White paper were summarized briefly in the introduction.
However, the main organizational and philosophical changes are briefly reiterated.
First, there is the acceptance that elected local authorities, via their social services departments, should become the prime agency in developing community care with the responsibility for the publication of community care plans for their area, the assessment of individuals' needs for care, the purchasing of appropriate care and the inspection of all segments of the residential sector.
Second, as with the health care sector, the government is attempting to develop a market for social care by separating the responsibility for those who purchase care and those who provide care.
This will be achieved via the stimulation of the private and voluntary sector.
In addition to their other responsibilities local authorities may still continue to be direct care providers if they so wish.
Third, there will be a single unified social care budget which will cover all forms of care, either residential or domiciliary, purchased by local authorities.
New entrants to private residential or nursing home care will not be funded via the social security system.
There will be a single method of entry for those being supported by public funds irrespective of the type of institution (i.e. Public, private, voluntary) which they wished to enter.
HOW WILL THESE AFFECT THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENTS?
There are significant variations in the way in which local authority social service departments are organized.
However, we may identify, currently, two main styles of structure organized around either the functions provided by the department or the client groups served (see Figure 8.1).
Many departments are also organized around the provision of services in a decentralized style within defined geographical locations, variously termed patches, localities, areas and sectors.
What will the post Griffiths review departments look like?
While we cannot be certain about the precise structure it is clear that departments will have four main functions: assessment, purchasing of care, inspection of services and direct care provision (Figure 8.2).
Furthermore, some of these parts of the organization   will obviously no longer be working closely together.
Cooperative relationships between sections will be, in theory at least, replaced by competitive ones.
For example, those purchasing care cannot establish too close a relationship with the direct care providing groups.
The inspection section must work at arm's length from the provider units, and so on.
Implementation of this new social care providing system is, therefore, likely to radically affect the structure of social service departments and the relationship between its constituent elements.
How much do we spend on community care?
We expend a considerable amount of money upon the ‘formal’ community care services (Table 8.1).
Of the £3124 million spent on community care a considerable amount is spent on older people; 63 per cent of all expenditure is spent on residential care.
Social care provision: the long-term care sector
Some older people, for a variety of reasons, require long-term care.
In Britain long-term care is provided by three main sources:
1
Long-stay beds in the hospital sector.
2
Private/voluntary nursing and residential homes.
3
Residential accommodation provided by local authority social service departments.
Statutory responsibility for providing facilities for those elderly in need of care and attention is currently divided between the local authority (LA) and district health authority (DHA).
Under part 3 of the 1948 National Assistance Act LAs  are required to provide residential accommodation for persons who, by reason of age, are in need of care and attention.
The local authority can discharge this responsibility either by running or managing its own homes, known colloquially as ‘Part 3 homes’ or by sponsoring residents in homes provided by the private and voluntary sector.
Long-stay care in hospitals is provided for the physically or mentally frail elderly.
The provision of this form of care has its origins in the pre-war public hospitals, which had a large number of patients with chronic health care problems.
Typically, long-stay hospital beds are located off the main DGH sites.
This has tended to foster a very negative attitude towards this form of provision and the staff who work in such units.
Typically such beds are located in pre-1914 hospitals, although the British Geriatric Society has consistently argued that they should be located in district general hospitals.
In the last decade the private sector has started to develop the amount of residential and nursing home care it provided.
Some elderly people entering private care do so using there own financial resources.
However, those in such care may, subject to their financial circumstances, claim public support from the social security systems to meet all or part of the charges.
Up to 1980 the supplementary benefit regulations permitted claimants in residential homes who could not be catered for by the local authority an amount sufficient to meet reasonable board and lodging charges in the area.
these were known as the local limit.
Under the 1980 Social Security Act this system was maintained but local offices were given the discretion to pay in full the charges made by private and voluntary residential homes.
In 1983 this was amended and a maximum payment ceiling established.
This use of money from social security system to fund institutional care has created what has been termed ‘a perverse incentive’ to institutional rather than community care.
HOW MANY PLACES ARE AVAILABLE FOR LONG-TERM CARE?
As we saw in Chapter 2 approximately 5 per cent of those aged 65 + live in some form of institutional care.
In 1985 there were approximately 272,817 people aged 65 + in long-term care (see Figure 8.3).
This represents a 21.8 per cent increase in the numbers of elderly in residential care between 1980 and 1985 (see Figure 8.3).
This increase was exclusively confined to the private sector which recorded a massive 115 per cent increase in the number accommodated.
This increase in private care may reflect both the financial incentives to increase the number of places available and an increased demand for care brought about by an increasingly frail population and the decreased availability of domiciliary services.
Why has the number of places offered by the public sector declined?
This probably reflects a number of trends, including the switch to community provision, reduced numbers of places to provide residents with single rooms and limitations upon public sector expenditure.
HOW MUCH IS SPENT ON PRIVATE LONG-STAY CARE?
The financial incentive created by the changed benefit regulations was obviously important in stimulating private enterprise because the number of elderly residents of private/voluntary homes receiving supplementary benefit increased by 104 per cent from 11,558 (1980) to 23,577 (1983).
The amount of benefit paid increased from 18 million pounds in 1983 to about 1,000 million pounds in 1989.
ENTERING CARE
Attention has been given to predicting admission to long-term care because of concerns about the processes and mechanisms by which places are allocated.
Policy makers are concerned to identify those ‘at risk’ of institutionalization so that appropriate community services can be developed to prevent/delay entry into an institution.
Indeed, the whole Griffiths White paper is centred upon reducing the amount of ‘unnecessary’ admission to institutional care.
This, of course, raises the question of who defines an unnecessary admission.
Several demographic variables are associated with admission to care.
These are being very old, being female, living alone and being unmarried; this may reflect the lack of an informal care network for those in these demographic subgroups.
These demographic variables are experienced in addition to high levels of physical dependence, frailty and mental health problems.
How is the decision to enter residential/nursing home care made?
For entry into local authority residential care Sinclair (1988) observes that such decisions are made as a response to a crisis arid that the idea of entering care rarely comes from the older person concerned.
For the private sector Challis and Bartlett (1986) observed that about 60 per cent of admissions were the result of a crisis/emergency and again there appeared to be little choice of the actual home.
Rather a home appeared to be selected upon the basis of availability rather than any other obvious criteria.
ENTERING CARE IN THE POST-GRIFFITHS ERA
The idea that people enter care ‘wilfully’ or ‘inappropriately’enter institutional care does not seem to be borne out by the available data.
It seems that most who enter care do so because there appears to be little alternative because they require high levels of care.
Will the new community care scheme be able to provide such packages of care in the community?
Once the community care reforms are implemented then entry into all forms of institutional care will be funded by the local authority only if an assessment indicates that it is the most ‘appropriate’ form of care for that individual.
Of course those who can fund their own care will not have to be assessed before entry.
When a case manager is assessing needs for care we might speculate whether, for those with intensive care needs, it might be ‘cheaper’ for care managers to opt for institutional rather than community provision.
When considering the notion of choice in relation to institutional care there are a number of different strands which require separate examination.
First, there are ideas concerned with the choice of when an individual should enter care.
Current evidence suggests that at the moment there is little ‘choice’ about when the time is ‘right’to enter care.
Will the Griffiths reforms change this?
Second, there are issues about the choice of which home to enter, the locality of the home and how long to stay once care is entered.
Again it is not clear, given the crisis-driven decisions about entering care, that any of these factors will come into play.
It seems unlikely that the individual older person will have much greater say in the decision about entering care when the Griffiths reforms are implemented as the ‘power’ will be placed with the case manager not the older person.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE INSTITUTIONAL POPULATION
As with other elements of gerontological research there has been a tendency to treat the institutional population as a homogeneous social group.
The implicit but unstated assumption is that the various forms of provision, ranging from residential to long-stay geriatric care, are entirely substitutable.
However, this is an untenable assumption and the institutional population illustrates a diverse population in terms of age, health status and needs, prognosis and expectation of life.
Within any such population it is possible to identify four subgroups: long-stay residents; those who die shortly after admission, those who return home after a period of convalescence and those who move to another long-term care setting after a short stay.
Any cross-sectional study of the nursing home/residential home population will over-represent to chronic long-term care population.
The institutional population, as Chapter 2 illustrated, is a very elderly population.
Typically, residents of both public and private sector provision will contain a large number of people aged 80 +.
For example, studies in  Southampton (Lowrey and Briggs 1986) and Edinburgh (Capewell et al .
1986) have reported the average age of clients in care at about 83 years.
The sex and civil status of residents varies within the different types of care.
Nursing home residents are, in the survey from Edinburgh, predominantly female (90 per cent) and either single or widowed (98 per cent )(Capewell et al .
1986).
Those in hospital long-stay provision include a larger percentage of men, about 32 per cent, and a higher number who are still married, about 16 per cent (Capewell et al .
1986).
This suggests that those entering long-stay hospital care present different sorts of needs from those entering public/private nursing home or residential care.
A variety of different studies have illustrated that the distribution of dependency also varies within the long-term care sector (Bennet 1986; Harrison et al .
1990; Hodkinson et al .
1988).
Direct comparisons between studies are problematic for the usual problems of varying methodologies.
However, we can draw out some general conclusions.
Physical frailty and disability varies across the different sectors, being least in public residential homes and highest in a hospital long-stay population.
Private nursing homes have higher levels of frailty than residential homes but not usually as high as long-stay hospital care.
For example, Bennet (1986) reports that the prevalence of urinary incontinence ranges from 73 per cent in a hospital long-stay population to 41 per cent in residential homes.
However, although dependency and disability are high within the institutional population we must remember that a minority of the elderly have such problems.
Even at the highest levels of disability the majority with these problems are resident in the community.
ATTITUDES TOWARDS INSTITUTIONAL CARE
Few researchers have, as yet, examined attitudes towards the institutional care sector.
Salvage et al .
(1989) examined attitudes towards residential care in a sample of those aged 75 + living in South Wales.
Most respondents had heard of local authority homes (85 per cent) or geriatric hospitals (68 per cent ).
Knowledge levels about private sector homes were much lower.
Approximately 20 per cent of subjects reported that they would be pleased to enter a private/public sector home, but only 10 per cent favoured the geriatric hospital.
The perceived prime advantage of residential homes was being well cared for and companionship; the costs and loss of independence were perceived as the main disadvantages.
For those who expressed interest in institutional care there was no clear statement in favour of either public or private care, although the geriatric hospital was unambiguously the least favoured option.
However, overall institutional living was clearly not the favoured pattern of care for the majority of older people.
These attitudes are probably not specific to the South Wales population studied as it seems among the population at large there is a general antipathy towards institutional care.
Care in the community: formal agencies
Different agencies offer domiciliary care in the community.
The vast majority of day care is provided by the public sector, although the voluntary sector does make important contributions in some areas.
Although there are many agencies operating in the domiciliary sector we have detailed utilization data for only a minority of these: home helps and the mobile meals services (meals on wheels).
Typically the home help service has been characterized as being concerned only with home care rather than personal care.
However, recent years have seen the development of the extended role of such services.
THE UTILIZATION OF FORMAL CARE SERVICES
In 1985 7 per cent of those aged 65 + were receiving home help services and 3 per cent home meals; this compares with 5 per cent and 1 per cent respectively in 1972.
Clearly such services are being received by only a minority of elderly even in the very oldest age groups (see Figure 8.4).
For example, 36 per cent of those aged 85 + receive home help services and 11 per cent receive meals on wheels.
National data about the amount of care received are not available.
However, levels of home care, in particular, are likely to be low.
Even if we take two very vulnerable groups of elderly, those living alone and the severely disabled, then the coverage of these services remains far from universal (see Figure 8.5).
There were no differences in the use of services by the social class of the older people.
Both these services are well known amongst the older age groups and levels of satisfaction among users are high (Salvage et al .
1988).
satisfaction among users are high (Salvage et al .
1988).
DEVELOPING A MIXED ECONOMY OF DOMICILIARY CARE PROVISION
To date the private sector has been less important as a source of provision.
However, it is an explicit aim of the White Paper to stimulate such care.
How successful will this policy objective be?
Clearly we cannot as yet give a definitive answer to this question.
However, there are going to be difficulties in developing private care agencies.
Will such businesses be sufficiently profitable to generate the interest of the private sector?
There are obviously more overheads when the client group is geographically dispersed rather than grouped together in a home.
How will private agencies oversee their staff?
How will matters of training be addressed?
How will older people receive the type, continuity and quality of care required?
Many factors need to be addressed before the private sector will venture enthusiastically into this form of care provision.
Care in the community: the informal sector
First, we need to ask ‘what is the informal sector?’
This may be defined as care provided by family, friends and neighbours which is not organized via a statutory or voluntary agency and is not undertaken for financial reward.
Typically the term ‘carer’ is used to describe members of the informal sector who provide care for a dependent person in the community.
The term ‘carer’ now has widespread currency in academic, policy making and lay circles.
Yet this is a concept which was not in use a decade before (Arber and Ginn 1991).
As these two authors indicate, ‘carer’ and ‘caring’are emotive and value laden terms.
The popular stereotype is that carers are perceived as a ‘good thing’, a group who are exploited by the state because their essentially unpaid labour forms the basis of current community care arrangements.
A further image is that caring is a predominantly female experience; a typical caricature of a ‘carer’ would be that of a married middle-aged woman whose children had grown up and who was looking to re-enter the labour market.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INFORMAL AND FORMAL CARE
Who is the main source of help for those older people who need help with the basic activities of daily living?
Data from the 1985 GHS provides at least a partial answer to this question by providing information about who helped those older people who required assistance with a whole variety of adl tasks.
Table 8.2 reproduces this information for a selected number of tasks concerned with mobility, personal care and housecare activities.
With the exception of the cutting of toenails it is evident that the contribution of the informal sector far outweighs that of the formal sector.
For example, of those who need help with shopping 85 per cent receive this from the informal sector.
Overall these data indicate that the informal sector is the main provider of help to older people, especially with the personal and household tasks which are required to maintain them in the community.
This finding serves to refute the   powerful myth that older people are neglected by their family and that the main burden of caring for older people falls upon the state.
HOW ARE CARERS TO BE IDENTIFIED?
The first task in attempting to enumerate the extent and nature of informal care is to define what is meant by the term ‘carer’.
This task is by no means as simple as it sounds.
We may take two approaches to the identification of this group.
First, we can establish the prevalence of ‘caring’ by undertaking a survey of the general population.
A second approach would be to identify a dependent population and then use this to identify their carers.
The most extensive source of information about the nature and characteristics of informal carers is the OPCS survey (Green 1988).
This was the first survey to attempt to study a nationally representative sample of those who were caring for the sick, elderly and handicapped, although there have been a variety of small local surveys and qualitative investigations of this topic.
How did the OPCS survey identify carers?
This study formed part of the 1985 GHS and informal carers were identified using two screening questions, which asked about extra family responsibilities resulting from looking after someone who was sick, elderly or handicapped in their own household (co-resident caring) or another household (non-resident caring)(see Table 8.3).
The questions asked have a similar objective to many of those concerned with establishing the prevalence of a specific health problem; an attempt is being made to divide the population into two groups, those who are carers and those who are not.
It remains unclear as to whether caring is so easily divided or whether, like morbidity, it is in fact a  continuum.
Furthermore, the data derived from this study about caring is obviously dependent upon respondents' perception of their status as either carers or non-carers.
The survey attempted to differentiate between caring and normal domestic labour by asking about ‘extra’ responsibilities.
We can only speculate about how accurately respondents were (or were not) able to differentiate between these two categories and if they were differentially interpreted by men and women.
An example of the alternative approach is available from the work of Jones et al .
(1983) and Qureshi and Walker (1989).
Jones et al .
used a sample of elderly resident in the community, identified those who required help with adl activities and then asked the older person to identify his or her ‘main helper’.
These carers were then followed up and details extracted about their caring responsibilities and the effects of caring.
These various methodologies which have been used to study the issue of informal care are important for they help to reconcile some of the more important differences between surveys.
HOW MANY CARERS ARE THERE?
The only national data about the number of carers is available from the 1985 General Household Survey of this topic (Green 1988).
This survey revealed that 4 per cent of adults reported that they looked after a dependant living in the same house (i.e. they were co-resident carer) with a further 10 per cent reporting that they looked after a dependant in another household (i.e. they were an extra-resident carer).
Overall 15 per cent of adult females and 12 per cent of males defined themselves as carers.
Grossing these responses up suggests that at least six million adults in Britain are carers and the majority, 75 per cent, are looking after a person aged 65 and over, 1.4 million adults provide care for more than 20 hours per week and 3.7 million have sole responsibility for the care of their dependant.
This key role of informal carers is recognised in the Griffiths White paper which states ‘the reality is that most care is provided by family, friends and neighbours’.
However, the GHS estimate of six million carers is very much larger than 1.3 million suggested by parker (1985).
How is this large differential to be explained? partly the differences reflect the varying methods.
It is also due to the very wide way that the OPCS have defined caring.
The definition does not, for very practical reasons, define caring in terms of time spent or the amount of time a dependant could be left for.
Arber and Ginn (1991), when undertaking a secondary analysis of the OPCS data, drew a distinction between ‘helping’ and ‘caring’.
They argue that these are two distinct roles which are subsumed within the OPCS survey and that this accounts for the discrepancies identified.
The main conclusion we may draw is that significant numbers of the adult population are actively involved in the care and assistance of older people.
Further, the contribution of this sector is considerably in excess of the services provided by the state.
HOW MUCH ‘CARING’ IS THERE
Data from the GHS indicates that the time devoted by carers to their tasks is considerable (Table 8.4).
Co-resident carers have a more extensive workload which reflects the more disabled nature of the dependent population and the definition of caring used in the study.
Arber and Ginn (1991) estimate from these data that the average co-resident carer cares for 52 hours a week compared with 9 hours for an extra resident carer.
Clearly those who live with their dependant are heavily committed to their task.
The value of the work undertaken by informal carers is difficult to estimate with precision.
However, if we ascribe a nominal value of £4 per hour to the work undertaken then informal carers as defined by the GHS undertake work to the value of £15,599 — £24,041 billion per annum.
WHO IS A CARER?
How accurate is our stereotype of a carer as being a middle-aged woman?
As with other social groups informal carers are not a homogeneous group.
The GHS survey reported that two-thirds of carers were not living with their dependant.
This contrasts with other surveys (Jones and Vetter 1984) which have indicated that at least two-thirds of carers were co-resident.
This differential between studies again reflects the very generous definition of carers used by OPCS.
Another important subdivision of the informal caring population must be made concerning the relationship between carer and dependant.
This largely distinguishes between spouses, who are likely to be men or women, and daughters (-in-law)(37 per cent).
However, where the carer was non-resident cent of carers were spouses and 45 per cent were daughters (or daughters-in-law).
Where the carer was co-resident they were either spouses (41 per cent) or daughters (-in-law)(37 per cent ).
However, where the carer was non-resident then it was usually the daughter or daughter-in-law (60 per cent).
These findings appear to be representative of other studies concerned with carers of dependent elderly (parker 1985; Qureshi and Walker 1989).
These distinctions  have implications for the type of care provided, the support services required and the stresses and problems associated with caring.
Several conclusions may be drawn from these data.
First, the caring population is diverse but we may identify two main groups; spouse carers and children as carers.
This distinction complicates debates about the gender-biased (or otherwise) characteristics of carers.
Spouses as carers are equally likely to be male or female, whereas children as carers are almost exclusively female.
Two points emerge from this.
Caring is not an exclusive female preoccupation.
As such a concentration upon ‘women as carers’ neglects the very important contribution of male carers (Arber and Gilbert 1989).
Furthermore, many carers are themselves elderly.
Consequently our obsession with the stereotypical middle-aged female carer is neglecting the important contribution of older people as contributors as well as recipients of care.
We may develop this further.
It is a feature of most surveys concerned with older people that they enumerate the care received by older people but rarely ask about the care that is provided by older people themselves.
WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS OF CARING?
Jones and Vetter (1984) investigated the effects of caring upon the ‘quality of life’ of the carer.
This survey revealed that 11 per cent of carers had given up their job to care.
Overall 16 per cent of carers felt that this reduced contact with their friends and 11 per cent reported reduced family contact.
Such effects were reported more by co-resident as compared with extra-resident carers.
More specifically, it was the daughters, as opposed to spouse carers, who were upset by the reduced social contact.
Consequently they also illustrated higher rates of psychological anxiety and stress than spouse carers.
Overall the effects of caring obviously vary considerably depending upon the relationship and residential relationship of carer and dependant.
BECOMING A CARER
The process whereby a family member takes on the role of informal carer is not fully understood.
Indeed, it is very likely that the process varies with the relationship between the carer and dependant.
For spouses it is probable that the entry into the carer-dependant relationship is influenced by the couple's previous marital history and relationship.
For many couples ‘caring’ is seen as the culmination of the relationship and the natural conclusion of marriage ceremony vows.
For daughters who take on the role the identification of the caring responsibility is probably much more complex and is related to a variety of factors including the services which are available, the needs of the older person, the type of relationship and feelings of filial responsibility.
Caring is usually depicted as a one-way relationship.
Most surveys explore the type and amount of care provided to the older person.
No account is usually  taken of the care which the dependant may be giving or have given in the past to the carer.
Thus such surveys ignore, for example, time spent in childminding of grandchildren and other such activities.
The degree of reciprocity in the relationship is rarely thought an important issue to research.
Yet it seems very likely that it is an important factor in explaining the caring relationship.
It is commonly asserted that older people prefer to receive care from family members rather than state agencies.
This statement is difficult to refute or accept on the base of current research evidence.
It is clear that older people value their independence and are reluctant to accept help.
Available studies are divided about the attitudes of older people to accepting help from their children.
A survey in South Wales indicated that two-thirds of older people supported the view that children should not be expected to look after their elderly parents.
It seems unlikely, however, that older people are reluctant to accept care from their spouse.
Conclusions
The formal social care providing agencies are divided into various categories either by the type of agency involved, public or private or the location of care, institution or domiciliary.
The services are used only by a minority of elderly.
Further, few such services were ever designed to meet the needs of specifically elderly people.
For example, the mobile meals services has its origin in the need to provide food to those whose homes had been destroyed by bombing during the war.
Although there have been innovations in social care provision, which are outside the range of this book to review, there is still a tendency to fit people to services rather than vice versa.
Social care is being provided by a variety of different agencies.
In terms of the size of the contribution, then, it is the informal sector which is the mainstay of community care.
The situation is such that it is care by the community rather than care in the community.
With or without the complicity of the government statutory services are performing a very limited role, However, we must not underestimate the potential role of services as it seems highly likely that propensity of the informal sector is enhanced rather than diminished by the support of statutory agencies.
There are debates about the future supply of informal care by families in future decades.
It seems unlikely that there will be few changes in the supply of care between spouses.
However, there are debates about the possible future role of children in providing care.
Implicitly the notion of family care provided by daughters assumes a specific model of family life, most notably a stable nuclear family with a non-working female at home able to provide care.
Divorce, decreases in family size and the increased labour market participation of women raise questions about future supplies of informal care.
There is a further twist to the labour supply consideration.
Many of those working in the formal care  sector are women in low-paid jobs.
Possible future labour shortages may also affect the formal care sector.
Although the White paper states the importance of the informal sector there are few concrete proposals as to how this will develop.
Carers generally operate alone rather than in a large network and, as noted earlier, they are not a single group.
This has obvious policy implications.
Carers must, like their dependants, be assessed as individuals and services developed which are appropriate to their needs.
Two further questions require consideration, if not resolution.
Is community care cheaper than institutional provision and is community care a sexist policy?
On the issue of cost the answer depends very much upon how the costs are calculated.
If we exclude the contribution of the informal sector then community care may be ‘a cheaper option’; if such costs are included or formal services are used extensively then community care is not a cheap option.
This very important fact has not been accepted and community care is still seen as a way of getting ‘care on the cheap’.
The issue about the sexist nature of community care is more complex.
Certainly there are a large number of female carers and their availability to care is implicit within many policy documents.
However, there are a significant minority of male carers who must not be excluded.
It can be argued that community care still remains essentially sexist in that it assumes a large labour force of low-paid women to staff the formal sector.
Whatever the gender of the person doing the caring it is clear that community care is a policy which is based upon the assumption that there is a pool of willing and able family members prepared to accept the role of ‘informal carer’.
Community care is being used as a euphemism for family care and it seems unlikely that recent policy developments will alter the basic pattern.