

COMPASS
COMPILED BY PETER BEAUMONT, ED DOUGLAS &: DAVID ROSE
PROFIT AND BEGHIN CLIMB NEW K2 ROUTE IN THREE DAYS
Christophe Profit and Pierre Beghin have climbed the difficult north face/north-west ridge of K2 — the route attempted by the ill-fated British expedition of 1986.
This brilliant first ascent, in a pure alpine style, ranks as easily the finest achievement in the greater ranges so far this year.
Profit, climber of the ‘winter trilogy’ of the Eiger, Grandes Jorasses and Matterhorn north faces, and Beghin, for whom this was the fifth 8000m peak, waited 45 days at basecamp for their chance, accompanied by two lady doctors.
No one had climbed K2 from Pakistan since the tragic events of ‘86, when 13 died, including AlRouse and Julie Tullis, and there were only two other teams on the mountain.
On August 12 a clear sky gave the French duo their chance, and by the following evening they were at 6900 metres, having climbed 1200 metres of mixed ground reminiscent of the north face of Les Courtes in the Chamonix Alps.
There followed a day of more mixed climbing and some grade V rock, and then, after a second bivouac, a tiring slog up a huge hanging glacier and an endless snow arête.
Profit and Beghin reached the 8700 metre summit of the world's second highest and, rated by many, hardest peak at 7pm on day three as night was falling, making route finding very tricky as they began the descent.
The British attempt in 1986 failed to make any significant impression on the route, despite much larger resources, emphasising the scale of the French achievement.
Profit commented: ‘The desire to reach the summit, the anguish there would have been if we'd come close but misses it, pushed us forward, despite our exhaustion.
I truly experienced a moment of incomparable joy up there.
K2 is a superb mountain and marvellous as my first 8000m summit.
And to do it in this style, with Pierre.’
Beghin said the pair had a lot of luck: ‘The route is more delicate than technically difficult, but it was terribly long, very hard physically.’
Profit had lost ten kilos of bodyweight on the climb, he added.
HEIGHT OF FOINAVON POSES MUNRO PUZZLE
While Munro baggers have been marking the centenary of Sir Hugh's tables, a ghost has come to trouble the celebrations — the hovering spectre of Foinavon.
Ever since Munro visited the area on his mammoth feat of cataloguing, and inexplicably rejected the locals' claim of its 3000 foot stature for his original table of 283 Munros (the figure has now been cut to 277), Foinavon has been lurking in the wings.
Now a flurry of articles have suggested that the Sutherland mountain is on the point of being re-designated the 278th Munro.
The speculation follows a mildly tongue in cheek piece by Bill Brooker in the journal of the Scottish Mountaineering Club — the august guardians of Munro's Tables .
Since then the rumours have escalated: that the sister of Arkle had been remeasured by the Ordnance Survey; that it had been resurveyed by satellite — that Foinavon, by virtue of its new stature, had joined the charmed 277.
So Compass made some enquiries.
The first call was to Ordnance Survey headquarters in Southampton.
‘Ah yes…we've heard about this.
To tell the truth I'm not quite sure where the story came from.
I don't think we've resurveyed it.
Try Glasgow.’
To Glasgow, where an equal measure of bafflement rules: ‘Try Inverness or Edinburgh.’
In Edinburgh a clue emerges: ‘Officially it is still hovering.
Inverness will explain.’
A call to Inverness…then Aberdeen and John Finlay, the area's chief surveyor.
‘The controversy,’ says Finlay, ‘is over the current designation of Foinavon at 914 metres when we converted from the old imperial contour.
Then we recontoured the maps into metric and gave Foinavon a spot height of 914.’
So does Foinavon measure up to the magic figure?
Finlay explains: ‘Since we round to the nearest metre it could be 914.5 metres, say, which would make it a Munro.
Or we could have rounded it up from 913.5 metres.
I just don't know.
‘If someone really wanted to be sure,’ he added helpfully.
‘the thing to do would be to take an optical theodolite up there and measure it.’
So there you have it.
15 MAKE IT A FIRST FOR BRITAIN
A British team guided by Mark Miller has managed to put an amazing 15 members on the summit of 7200m Masherbrum II — and claimed the second ascent and the first British ascent!
The mountain, in the Pakistan Karakoram, is sometimes known as Masherbrum Far West, and appears to have been climbed only once before by an Italian team.
The summiteers included Ian Swarbrick, Mark Neave, David Little, Andy Mayers, Teresa Booth and Norman Croucher.
The trip, organised by Out There Trekking, based in Sheffield, was their second success on a 7000m peak in two months.
Mark Miller also guided a highly successful trip to the Soviet Pamirs in August, where he, Ian Swarbrick and Tom Ackers made the summit of 7134m Pik Lenin.
GREENLAND TRIP IS A SUCCESS FOR BONINGTON
Chris Bonington and yachtsman Robin Knox-Johnston sailed into St. Katherine's Dock, London, in mid-September after an eight-week trip to Greenland.
Their objective was Cathedral Peak, an unclimbed summit of 2660m in the Lemon Mountains, inside the Artic Circle.
After an eight-day voyage to Iceland and a wait for good weather, the party made the four-day trip from Reykjavik to Kangerdlugssuaq, a fjord leading towards their objective.
Despite warnings of impenetrable ice, the crew of Knox-Johnston's boat, the Suhaili, found the fjord clear and continued up the more problematic Watkins Fjord, dodging icebergs to reach the starting point for the climbing section of the expedition.
Although there was some confusion between their maps and descriptions of the peak, Knox-Johnston, Bonington and Greenland expert Jim Lowther made a first attempt on the peak on 11–12 August.
Travelling and ferrying loads to the mountain was done at night to make use of the best snow conditions, and Bonington reports that there was still sufficient light at this time of year for night work.
Despite making reasonable progress, difficulties prevented the team from making the summit and after 24 hours effort they returned to base camp.
A shortage of time proved problematical and in order to ensure that the Suhaili negotiated the fjords successfully in picking up the climbers, Knox-Johnston returned to the boat before the others.
Bonington and Lowther went back to complete the route, which they rate at around RD/TD±, two days after their first attempt.
Lowther, with numerous climbing trips to Greenland behind him, said it was the hardest route he had done there.
Bonington commented on his experiences at sea: ‘I am not a natural sailor and found being on a very small boat without exercise very trying.
It was a great experience but I'm not sure I'd do precisely the same trip again.’
The expedition took 50 bottles of spirits with them, but we are saddened to report that despite Bonington's legendary powers of organisation they returned with one bottle of vodka still intact.
On a more positive note, the expedition did make port at the appointed hour on the appointed day, having spent several hours in a public house further up the estuary to avoid being early, which made for a very ‘happy’ reunion.
PRINCE UNDER FIRE OVER DARTMOOR LICENCE DECISION
The Prince of Wales's decision to renew live firing licences on Dartmoor for a further 21 years continues to draw criticism.
The British Mountaineering Council, in a letter to the prince from Access and Conservation Officer Bill Wright, state that ‘We are most concerned about the effect the restrictions [on live firing], or rather the lack of them, will have on the area of Willsworthy — this is an area of considerable interest to hill walkers from the South of England.’
The prince's decision has drawn a hostile reaction from many conservation organisations, including the Countryside Commission, not least because of the unprecedented length of the licences.
But despite some concessions made to access considerations, there has been little evidence that he will change his mind.
Of equal concern is the increasing intolerance of the newly united Germany towards large NATO training areas.
Recent opposition to a resumption of training at Luneburg Heath in northern Germany, an area of 120 square miles, illustrates the problems that military planners are facing.
More than half the British troops in Germany are being withdrawn over the next four years, which will inevitably put more pressure on UK training areas, making the removal of the MoD from national parks even less likely.
GEAR FAILURES FORCE ULTAR TEAM TO RETREAT
Victor Saunders' expedition to attempt the first ascent of Ultar I — the highest unclimbed mountain in the Pakistan Karakoram — has been defeated in the most galling circumstances imaginable.
The exceptionally strong team, which included Mick Fowler — with whom Saunders made the first ascent of the ravishing Golden Pillar of Spantik — Caradog Jones and Steve Sustad, had hoped for an ascent of the mountain's South East Spur — a 9,000 foot mega-Walker Spur.
Splitting into two teams for the first attempt, Fowler and Jones climbed the incomplete Japanese route up the south ridge but were driven back by poor weather, while Saunders and Sustad attempted the spur.
Loose rock forced Sustad and Saunders to retreat, during which Sustad fell 30 feet in an abseiling accident.
During their second attempt, Saunders and Sustad completed most of the difficulties on a route parallel to the spur.
They were one day from the summit, with only 200 feet of difficult climbing to do, when Saunders' crampon broke.
They decided to continue, but within five minutes Sustad broke an ice hammer, forcing them to retreat in mockingly perfect weather.
The incident was made all the more galling by the fact that neither climber had broken an axe of crampon in 27 years of combined mountaineering experience!
BOSIGRAN GUIDEBOOK COMPLAINT
The arrival of the Bosigran guide has provoked a complaint to the Climbers' Club from local activist Rowland Edwards that a comment in the historical section, which claims he is unwilling to release information on his new routes, has misrepresented his position.
The guide was written by Des Hannigan and there has been some friction between the two in recent years, caused to some extent by Rowland and Mark Edwards' new-routing techniques.
Last year, at an area committee meeting held at the Count House above Bosigran, Rowland gave the impression that his recent new-routing activities would be unavailable for publication.
Edwards denies this is the case, but in the September issue of Climber and Hill Walker , Mark Edwards was reported as having said he would not report any of his new routes (or indeed whole areas of development) until they received a second ascent.
There is obviously some confusion between father and son here, but no doubt it will be satisfactorily settled before too long.
Bob Moulton, the Climbers' Club guidebook business manager, added some perspective to the argument by saying: ‘We are not in the business of embarrassing people.
My general impression of the guide is a good one, and Towland gets a very good press and a lot of credit.
But the main thing is for people to get out there and enjoy the routes.’
ALPINE CODE STRONG ON CONSERVATION
After long deliberations, the UIAA's Alpinism Committee has come up with a draft code of practice which, while largely common sense, has the welcome bonus of strong presumption in favour of conservation.
The draft, which has the approval of the BMC, makes ten points and is likely to be adopted as the official policy of the UIAA, so cut them out and stick them up next to the picture of Catherine Destivelle/Stefan Glowacz in your indoor gym.
They are as follows:
Observe restrictions and access agreements recognised by national mountaineering federations.
Avoid any actions which might endanger access.
Do not disturb nesting birds or other wildlife.
Help protect flowers, respect sites of geological or other scientific interest.
Avoid actions which cause unnecessary erosion (i.e. taking shortcuts).
Do not leave unnecessary waymarks.
Do not disturb livestock or damage crops or trees.
Do not leave any rubbish.
Keep campsites clean.
Avoid all risk of fire.
Where toilet facilities are not available, dispose of human waste in a sanitary manner.
Do not pollute fresh water supplies.
Avoid unnecessary pollution to the snow pack.
Respect established climbing traditions in ethical matters such as the use of chalk, pitons, bolts etc.
Avoid indiscriminate or excessive use of fixed protection.
In mountain areas use motorised transport sparingly and park considerately.
Make use of public transport if practical.
On any excursions into remote or high mountains, observe the UIAA Kathmandu declaration and ethical code for expeditions.
SHOCK PLAN TO BOLT LAND'S END NEXT SUMMER
In the clearest challenge yet to the British Mountaineering Council's agreed policy on bolts, the granite cliffs of Land's End are to be equipped with bolts by a private company, assisted by controversial Cornish climber Rowland Edwards
The announcement that some routes in the area, which is visited by over 2,000 climbers a year, are to be equipped for ‘environmental’ reasons came in a press release that effectively throws down the gauntlet to the sport's governing body.
According to the release from Peter de Savary's Land's End Limited, the move was prompted by increasing concern over cliff-top erosion and a growing threat to climbers' safety due to deteriorating in-situ protection and lack of regulatory control.
Cairns Boston, head of the company's management team at Land's End, explained: ‘We have reached the point where, without these new measures, we would have to give serious consideration to banning climbing altogether at Land's End.’
But it is the language of the statement and the comments attributed to Edwards that are likely to cause further friction between him and both local climbers — with whom he has been in conflict in the past — and the BMC.
In the statement Edwards, who has already attracted criticism for placing bolts on Cornish granite, appears to set out his own manifest, which runs entirely counter to the BMC's adopted policy on bolts and access and forecasts that Land's End will eventually be seen as having set an example to the nation.
Edwards also states that he is being driven by environmental concern and that climbers are wearing the crags away in some place.
He said: ‘The trouble is that when it all started 100 years ago no-one envisaged just how popular rock climbing would become.
‘It is one of the fastest growing sports in Europe, but if we do not act now we will see the same kind of draconian measures becoming necessary in Britain as are already being undertaken in Europe.
‘In Belgium and Germany in particular, they are actually banning climbing because of the environmental threat.’
He continued: ‘I have already been slated over and over again by local climbers for putting bolts into the rock face at Land's End, but this is the way forward; of that I have no doubt.
‘I have no wish to take the adventure out of climbing — that is not in my professional interests, after all — but I would be a hypocrite if I did not accept that we are causing environmental damage.
The challenge is to stop that damage without stopping climbing.’
While Edwards claims he has been encouraged by the response to his proposals from a National Trust officer who visited the site, his scheme — due to be put into effect next summer — were immediately condemned by the British Mountaineering Council's general secretary Derek Walker.
He commented: ‘This is an extremely serious development, and we really feel that the owner should have consulted the BMC before making deals with individual climbers.’
Mark Edwards leading Titanic (E6, 6b,6c,) at Land's End.
The first pitch ends at a hanging bolt stance where the second is positioned.
(Photo by Rowland Edwards).
NOTES FROM THE ALPS By Steve Dodd
Early autumn, and still no sign that the new-route boom, brought on by the very un-Chamoniard weather, is over.
The latest batch saw offerings from the older generation.
First, a TD (they can still be found) in the Argentiere basin from a Ravanel father-and-son team.
Don't ask me which Ravanels though; their proliferation in Chamonix matches that of Waltons on Walton Mountain!
More significant has been the comeback this season of guide Ivano Ghirardini.
Now in his 40s, he made the first solo ascent of Point Young on the Grandes Jorasses in August.
A month later, teamed with American guide Joshua Geeter, he put up Indiana Stones, an ED on the N North West Face of the Aiguille Noire de Peuterey.
This 900 metre route with 27 pitches took the pair three days.
The route may never be the same again, however, because this year the normal upper snowfields have melted away to reveal rather unpleasant rock slabs.
Ivano has been more famous in recent years for his outspoken comments in the Tomo Cesen ‘Lhotse South Face…
Or What?’ controversy, and as the manufacturer of shockingly tasteless, but nevertheless very popular, gaudy mountain clothes.
The heatwave which stole Ivano's snowfields has also been wreaking rockfall havoc around the massif, with many normally safe routes becoming places to tread warily.
The classic West Face of the Petites Jorasses, for example, turned nasty at the top, causing accidents and diverting even more attention towards its controversial neighbour Anouk, Michel Piola's 108-bolt, fast-food classic.
Rockfall has been responsible for many of the accidents in the range this year, despite the predictable statement from the Chamonix Guides that most were due to incompetence — an inevitable trait of those not climbing with a guide!
Despite these grim warnings, the end of the season saw the final death toll down a little on last year.
And another record this year for Mont Blanc.
After the first ascent by a six-year-old schoolgirl comes the first junkie-ascent of Europe's biggest (not counting Eastern interlopers).
A group of young drug-addicts and glue sniffers from a nearby remand centre knocked off the voie normale in the company of their warders without too much bother, bringing a new meaning to the old phrase ‘going high.’
Many people have felt this summer that a night in the packed to bursting Gouter refuge has been enough to turn anyone to narcotics.
So at last something's been done about it, and the new renovations and extensions, being officially opened as I write, will be there to delight you all next season.
One quick note for your personal organisers: the recorded Chamonix weather forecast is now available in English:.
DRUMMOND REALISES WORLD CLIMB DREAM
The morning had dawned cloudy and ominous, but by early afternoon the sun was shining.
There were 35 of us on top of the Eiger: Edwin Drummond's Climb for the World dream realised at last.
Your correspondent climbed the Mittelegi Ridge with Roger Alton of The Guardian , followed closely by Doug Scott and Sharu Prabhu, with Tibetan refugee, 14-year-old Karma Sondup, plus James Kagambi from Kenya and Tess Borroughs, a Surrey mother of three who has worked full time for Climb for the World since first reading of it in this magazine last year.
There was a clutch of East Europeans, and the gazelle-like Sylvia |Kirkpatrick from Argentina who, with US veteran Jim Bridwell, climbed the north face.
Sylvia sustained a nasty facial wound for her efforts.
Tony Fretwell-Downing, the Sheffield computer businessman who sponsored the event, very gamely claimed his first ever route with an ascent of the loose and long west flank.
Adding to the carnival atmosphere on the summit, which is in fact an incredibly exposed thin strip of black scree, were several camera crews helicoptered onto the top, notably a Blue Peter team following Karma and Sirendra, a 16 year old Nepalese boy who climbed the mountain with Ed Drummond.
It was somewhat bizarre to observe the petrified presenter conducting her interviews, clipped to a fixed rope, as the director, cameraman and sound engineer barked instructions: ‘This way please!
Okay, now from the top, take two…lovely, now we need some back shot noddies (TV jargon, y'know).’
Below her heels the 1,600 metre precipice of the nordwand yawned.
There was also a solemn side: messages read to the world, including a warm commendation from Javvier Perez de Cuellar, and the flying of the ‘flag of flags.’
Most of us took the easy way out and accepted a helicopter ride back to Kleine Scheidegg, but Drummond and eight others stayed on top for an all-night vigil.
It's not clear how many people participated in the event in Britain or elsewhere by carrying out local ascents, raising sponsorship for the ten lifeline projects designated by the United Nations.
Hard cash will be the measure of whether Climb for the World develops into an annual jamboree or gets consigned to the drawer marked ‘heroic failure.’
But there was a good feeling up on the mountain that day.
It would be nice if it was shown to have succeeded.
NEW SOLO EPIC ON GRANDES JORASSES
Following the solo epics reported here over recent months by Catherine Destivelle on the Petit Dru and Jean-Pierre Lafaille on Mont Blanc, there's news of another very difficult new route climbed solo in the French Alps.
This time the protagonist is the Slovanian, Slavks Sveticic, and his route a direct way up a grey rocky pillar on the Croz Spur of the Grandes Jorasses.
At 1,100 metres long, A3 on French 5c free rock and a little steep ice, Sveticic called the route Manitui, after a friend killed the year before on the same mountain.
Sveticic, a near neighbour of fellow Slovenian soloist Tomo Cesen (‘the world's greatest mountaineer’ according to Reinhold Messner), had earlier soloed the very hard Rolling Stone route on the same face, and has been close to the tops of K2 and Everest.
Last year he soloed the Eiger nordwand direct in the amazing time of 26 hours — the first ascent took three months!
QUALITY CLIMBS BY BILL BIRKETT
Pull My Daisy
The route line, crossing the distinctive rainbow feature which characterises the slab.
Even amongst the mountain of slate workings above Llyn Peris, the Rainbow Slab is unmistakeable, sitting as it does above the CEGB hydro-electric power station, flowing from bottom left to top right across an otherwise faultlessly smooth, purple-banded, blue-grey wall.
Viewed from the road, it also looks unclimbable.
Exploration, forced by the paucity of lines remaining on natural rock, found the Rainbow to be a steep slab rather than a wall, and climbable after all.
With this discovery and the slate boom of the mid-80s, numerous worthwhile routes were produced on the Rainbow.
Arguably the finest ‘natural’ line is the thin crack of Pull My Daisy.
For a one-pitch climb the route is remarkably balanced.
A long 20ft from the deck must be climbed with no protection.
Then the runners arrive and the sustained technical difficulty takes over the interest.
Finally, crux beneath the difficulties diminish, but runners again vanish.
A controlled mind game must now be played to reach security, still some 40ft away.
There certainly seems to be a lot of climbing to reach the iron bar at 60ft.
At this point the difficulties become acute and the crux sequence of moves begins.
Bridging precariously above the protruding spike concentrates your mind wonderfully on the old cliche —‘not a route for the married man’!
This section successfully negotiated (it would be too painful to imagine otherwise) the runners steadily distance themselves.
It's a long, but not hard, way to the top.
A difficult route to grade, and some say it is nearer E3 than E2.
PULL BY DAISY — RAINBOW SLAB, LLANBERIS
125ft(38m), E2 (5c).
First Ascent : M. Lynden, J. Sylvester, July 1984.
Location : The Rainbow Slab, Dinorwic Slate Quarries, Llanberis, Snowdonia.
Map Ref : SH 593601.
Guidebooks :Rock Climbing In Snowdonia by Paul Williams (Constable).
Llanberis by Paul Williams (Climbers Club Guide).
Rock and Protection : Slate, generally good but caution should be exercised.
Carry a small to medium sized rack and long tape for the metal spike.
Access : At Llanberis take the road opposite the Snowdon Mountain Railway station and follow this down and left to the large car park of the Padarn Country Park and Lakeside Railway (former quarry buildings).
A large incline leads steeply up right.
Follow this to a brief respite and winding shed.
Follow the track until the level bears off right.
Slip through the wire fence (obviously bent) and follow the level until, at a point some 100 yards before a large building (old engine sheds), a vague path drops down the spoil heap to some trees.
Follow this, bearing left to reach some small ruined buildings and a water race.
Cross this (now above a quarried face) and take the incline descending to a lower level.
Bear left horizontally along the level to arrive beneath the Rainbow Slab in about 300 yards.
You are now above the bridge leading to the main CEGB hydro-electric works (20 minutes).
Observations : The slab dries very quickly and faces virtually due south, offering all year round climbing possibility.
Slate, however good in quality, is not as reliable as mountain rhyolite and care should be exercised with all holds and protection placements.
It is also extremely slippery when wet.
Return by the approach route.
Descent : Either walk left across the top of the quarry f aces to take the descending incline of the approach or find an in situ abseil bolt roughly in the centre of the wall.
The Route : A thin crack running straight up the pass to left of the obvious ‘rainbow’ feature.
Look for the protruding metal spike at 60ft/18m.
Start directly below the crack.
1.125ft 38m),(5c).
Climb the crack for 20ft/6m to find the first runner.
Continue with interest to the metal spike/bar.
The next section is the crux — use small hidden holds to make further progress.
When the angle eases trend leftwards up the wall to broken ledges and easier ground, then the top.
The World of the RED DEER
A LIFETIME'S WANDERINGS IN THE SCOTTISH HIGHLANDS HAVE LED HAMISH BROWN TO A CLOSE AFFINITY WITH THE RED DEER WHO ROAM THERE.
HERE HAMISH EXAMINES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE DEER AND THEIR MASTERS — MEN
Deer in full flight give an unmatched spectacle of graceful power.
How often have we plodding climbers and walkers set them off and thought to ourselves: ‘I wish I could travel as fast and effortlessly as that.’
Red Deer are such sober-looking snobs, however, that sometimes their flight can have comical aspects.
I was once chuntering down a slope in the peaty Mount Keen country above the Angus glens and leapt off the top of an eroded peat hag.
In mid-leap I realised there was a fox curled up asleep under the bank.
The animal looked up, saw me, and was off, all in a single movement.
Fifty yards off the fox ran into some hares and they went careering off in all directions, one of them dashing up a heather slope to cause an explosion of grouse.
The birds went off at noisy full-throttle, right through a herd of deer which had been grazing quietly till then.
The deer in turn took to their heels.
I was left standing open-mouthed at this hillside of ever growing chaos and movement.
Sometimes it pays to leap before you look.
As a schoolboy, descending from a traverse of Ben More and Stobinian, I had the odd experience of being the recipient, rather than the creator, of a deer panic.
In a remnant of old forest I came on some grazing deer and quickly dropped to ground and crawled in under a small bank where I was able to stay out of sight, out of smell, and enjoy a very good look at the herd.
Slowly the deer grazed diagonally down onto my hide.
The wind was strong from them to me so eventually they would scent me when they'd passed downhill.
In ex-army gear I wouldn't be seen, as long as I kept still, sitting on my hands, pale face buried in a heather clump, but those long heads that rose between rasping bites of coarse grass had twitching noses that never stopped their search for the enemy — a very efficient sort of olfactory radar.
Then on the slope above, there was a snort from a watchful hind and in a second every beast was in flight, careering down the hillside, leaping, bounding, in jerky yet fluid motion.
A royal smashed past a few feet to my left, then another took a dive down by sheltering bank, his hooves carving into the ground just a yard from my toes and spraying my legs with black peat.
I made myself very small as the stags crashed down the heathery, birch-studded hillside.
I suppose they'd all gone in half a minute but it seemed an eternity of fascination and fear to a cringing youth.
Deer are so much part of our hill heritage it is worth knowing a little about them.
A little is all we ever know I feel, but the big danger is when we stop learning and questioning: when we become set in our attitudes and prejudices.
On one Ultimate Challenge crossing of Scotland two girls (new to the hills) who were partnering me were horrified to see the spring casualty rate among deer.
We were staying overnight at Blackburn bothy, which is set in a small wood with a stream wending through it.
We counted 17 dead hinds in the wood, most still curled up in their last sleep, dead from cold and wet, exhaustion and starvation.
It was hardly the romantic image of red deer!
If deer have a tough life it is entirely due to human history, so man has a moral obligation to look after their well-being.
This obligation is not always fulfilled.
Red Deer (Cervus elaphus ) are really forest animals, but over the centuries we have destroyed Scotland's natural woodlands and driven the deer to live in the harsh environments of the higher, exposed hills.
Trees and cultivation are fenced off against their hungry assaults.
They have a very lean time of it in winter, and if the spring grass does not come to their succour, they die in large numbers.
Good estates ensure there are shelter belts of trees available; they feed the deer in winter and shoot the full recommended quota to keep the numbers down to what the ground can support.
People who are indignant at this ‘cruel blood spor are often quite ignorant about why deer are shot.
It simply comes down to this: if deer are not culled, they die of starvation.
Shooting the extra beasts is probably the least cruel way of dealing with the problem of a stock surplus.
Views on the social setup of the ‘sport’ must be kept separate from the necessity of managing the deer for their own interest.
There are plenty of  misconceptions about the actual culling.
Usually it is the weak, undersized and malformed beasts that are weeded out, not the finest, which would obviously be a selfdefeating exercise.
Stalking stags is turned into a sport as an economic necessity as much as anything else.
If suckers will actually pay to do the work — more fool them.
But it's money that keeps a Highland economy viable.
The keepers have the task of culling the hinds.
Throughout, it is a case of shooting deer as cleanly as possible for their own good.
Those who go regularly on the hill become aware of the system which has evolved (as the best of a bad situation) and accept its necessity.
Wandering the halls for recreation is an activity of very recent origins.
The ‘unspoilt wilderness’ many enthuse about is, in reality, nothing of the kind.
We approach much of by paths made for staling purposes and we have easy walking surfaces because it is grazed.
It would seem reasonable them, that we, as the largest users who invest least, treat the landscape with respect, and those who own it and make their living from it with fairness.
Our gripes musn't be allowed to affect the efficiency of managing deer.
In 1934/35, Frank Fraser Darling made the first intensive study of deer, and his book A Herd of Red Deer is still a valuable source book.
Probably the most useful recent equivalent is Clutton-Brock and Albon's Red Deer in the Highlands , while a short summary is in Clutton-Brock and Ball,Rum, the Natural History of an Island — a book which is worth studying for the interplay of how things affect each other.
Vast areas of Rum have been fenced off for century-long experiment to re-create the natural woodland environment.
Fraser Darling and Morton Boyd's The Highlands and Islands is a highly readable earlier study of Highland ecology (Collins New Naturalist but also in paperback) which I'd make compulsory reading for every climber and hillwalker.
Still easily found are the various books by Lea McNally:Highland Deer Forest; Year of the Red Deer , etc. which are marvellously illustrated with the author's photographs, taken as a professional stalker.
The first deer book I ever met was Mortimer Batten's The Singing Forest .
He is a largely forgotten naturalist now but this book has been reprinted several times and would be worth finding in a library to start off an interest in deer in children.
Deer stalking takes place in the autumn and it is only fair to keep off areas when casual walking could spoil someone's expensive sport — and where we run the risk of a high velocity bullet through our skulls.
This is not really a hard self-restriction.
The middle of August to the end of the third week in October is the traditional stalking period.
Many estates put up notices at this time giving a local contact where enquiries can be made about where to go.
(Permanent banning-notices are simply self-defeating rather than intimidating).
Often there is no stalking on Sunday; vast sheep areas are not stalked at all, and there are huge areas of lower hills where stalking does not occur.
There is culling on National Trust for Scotland land such as Kintail, but public access has priority and there are no restrictions.
Few islands are stalking country.
Many ranges like the Cuillin or Ben Nevis are barely used for sport.
Great passes like the Cairngorm lairigs are rights of way, as are many major glens.
Coastal walking or following our lowland canals are good options for the stalking season.
Munro-bagging should be kept in perspective, too, and the autumn semi-moratorium is no bad thing.
Tom Rigg with two of his ‘tame’ stags at Loch Ossian youth hostel.
Below: A well-used antler rubbing-post (all photos Hamish Brown).
As I detest midges more than most things in life, leaving them to enjoy their open season for humans is no hardship either.
By the end of October the first frosts have generally cleared away those devils, the colours are on the hill and the bellowing back in the glens.
The keepers still have to cull their set numbers of hinds and this goes on until it's done — often well into the new year.
Undermanning can make the task nigh impossible on some estates; on the others the approach is far too casual.
The Scottish deer population is something like 50,000 too many at present, so every bad spring produces the sorry sight of dead deer.
This is simply the result of bad management, past and/or present.
The traditions are being eroded, too, by the repeated turnover of estates and their speculative commercial asset-stripping.
Foreign and company ownership often leaves a huge gap between boss and keeper and the traditions.
Sadly, the sporting sportsman is becoming rarer these days.
The toffs are no longer willing to crawl about all day in the wilds.
They want to be driven up, given minimal exercise, and the egoistic pleasure of shooting a wild animal.
They are as out of touch will hill reality as some walkers and climbers!
The warning notices pointing out the danger of bullets are not altogether a bluff.
I've twice had close encounters of a nasty kind with flying lead.
As lads, ignorant about stalking, two of us hove over a horizon just as someone fired at a stag.
He missed the stag.
He also — just — missed us.
The other time I came near to being shot was in May, when nobody should have been firing a rifle.
It was near Loch Pattack in a thick rolling fog.
I actually felt the blast.
Almost at once the fog rolled away and in all that open bowl not a soul was to be seen.
I'd gone to ground so the culprit  could not have known of my presence.
But nobody appeared.
There were no deer.
Nothing.
I'm still puzzled by the incident and the local keeper could offer no likely explanation either when I told him.
Keepers are a group of people I admire tremendously.
Many have to live in remote place, work long and unsociable hours (often in foul conditions), must cope with clients who are often self-indulgent and in poor physical shape, and have the ability to turn their hands to anything.
They are invariably superb field naturalists, socially active and grand yarners.
They probably live the sort of lives humans were meant to live and possess the tough, gentle content of wild things, instead of the self-inflicted urban hang-ups that create so many of the world's evils.
June is the month of deer calving.
Certain corries are always favourites for dropping calves and, if known, should be avoided at that time.
The long-legged, dappled calves lie alone and without movement, but the hind will always be grazing and watching not far off so, never, ever, think they are lost or abandoned and ‘rescue’ them.
They have no fear at that stage and you may have a right old job to escape being followed.
Don't touch the calf; the mother may reject it if it smells of alien human handling.
The stags' antlers are cast each year and are best left where found as they are nibbled and eaten to recycle the chemicals and nutrients needed for growing the next set, which is probably more useful than lying in the loft at home or being turned into a table lamp.
The antlers grow through the summer, covered in a fur called velvet, which then dries and falls off, or is rubbed off by the irritable beasts.
Come October the stags are at their peak and engage in the rut — the mating game that has the hills echoing to their roaring: a sound I find utterly enthralling.
To lie in a tent with stags bellowing round the hills is to touch the marvellous.
It is a sound which can be imitated fairly easily and I've brought irate stags near by issuing an apparent challenge.
You don't want to tangle with rutting stags, however.
They do, occasionally, attack humans at this season.
On the other hand, feeding deer can make them half tame and easy to see.
Tom Rigg, the warden at Loch Ossian youth hostel, can conjure three stags out of Rannoch Moor by banging a bucket of food at the door.
In the summer, stags and hinds — by then in separate groups — will wallow in peat bogs for coolness and to be rid of pests such as the bot fly, which lays eggs under their skin or up their noses.
The breezy summits and old snow patches will be favourite spots to lie on.
Red deer come as stags and hinds (roe deer have bucks and does) and their young are calves (not fawns).
Yet just to make nonsense of pedantry, I've often heard keepers calling antlers ‘horns.’
Deer have been very much part of my life, and I hope these notes have been of interest and helpful in understanding why stalking takes place.
Being on the side of the deer, let me say that I become steadily more dissatisfied with the anachronistic system of Highland estates and landownership.
I think it is selfish and inefficient.
That vast tracts can be bought and sold as casually as a loaf of bread is immoral.
No other country in the world allows foreigners to buy its land like this.
But then no foreigner is ever going to tell me I cannot walk on my country's hills.
I'll keep away while deer are culled — for the sake of the deer.
Buy why should one man own all the deer?
It wasn't like that in the past, till the betraying chiefs invented title deeds and laws to suit themselves — at the cost of the people who were tricked, pillaged and deported.
One estate recently had the press along on a PR day and, among other things, pointed out how vital the estate was to the district.
They boasted the estate supported 15 people and that the village shop would not survive otherwise.
Two hundred years ago the estate's area supported 1,500 people, and everyone had venison as a right.
And there weren't too many deer, so the poor beasts didn't starve through mismanagement and maladministration!
It is high time politics entered into this subject.
The present government has been shown to be as ‘green’ as porridge and conservationists and bureaucrats alike fight shy of a battle royal.
Maybe it's time we began to roar like stags in the rut.
Deer deserve a better deal.
IN THE RUT
The summer pipers have flickered
wings off to Africa,
their singing spent.
Only a penny robin limps a tune
on a garden wall —
pallid reminder of the lusts of spring, green season of the birds.
Red autumn belongs to antlered hearts,
to those who would woo
through rain and frost
and snow their passion on the hills.
What toys birds are when stags roar
and roar their month-long rage
of thunderstorm and waterfall
combined.
There is a remnant of respect
in our plastic observation
of sinewy beast.
He has the power to gralloch our past
and remind us of heathery origins
and cave man doubts.
He is our hoary past breathing clouds
of frosty fear into the clean air
we live without.
Stags are nearest to gods we have,
the nearest to the oldest
stalking hopes of man.
When we hear them bellow on the
open strath
we are shut in to centuries
forgotten, rutting the centuries
up to now
till we stand in all-modern pride,
stiff with self-congratulation
at our species.
I would have stayed a stag.
Now what have we got in here?
These humans are usually good for an appetising tit-bit!
ALPINE CLASSICS
The OBER GABELHORN
Ewen MacAskill gratefully shakes the international hand of friendship on his first alpine climb
At the edge of the glacier we thankfully prised off our crampons; the end of 17 hours climbing.
It was dark and drizzly.
The Rothorn hut, only a minute away, promised drink, food, warmth and rest.
It should have been irresistible and yet we hesitated, embarrassed at having taken so long.
We knew that inside were climbers who had been on the same route, who had seen us, who had spoken to us.
The only difference was that most of them had finished long enough ago to sunbathe on the terrace, not trudging off the mountain at 9.00 o'clock.
We went upstairs to the diningroom, turned the knob, took a deep breath and went in.
The trestle-tables were full; people drinking, eating and reading; the Germans we had teamed up with for part of the way back looking smug, though they couldn't have been down much before us.
We looked for a place to sit.
‘Scotland the Brave’ shouted one of the Germans, loud enough for everyone to turn to look.
It sounded like sarcasm and for a moment we thought so too and were angry and embarrassed.
But he was grinning and called us over to join him.
It was not sarcasm.
It was a phrase spontaneously recalled by someone with only a little English.
It was meant as a welcome, as a shout of pleasure that we, too, were finally don — and perhaps also as a salute to a great day on the hill shared by all of us.
Left: The Ober Gabelhorn and the Zinal Glacier, by Kev Reynolds.
In the early part of this century the mountain had a sinister reputation, and Ewen MacAskill found it to be no pushover.
It had been my first alpine climb, and it had been an eye-opener.
I had not expected the level of exposure, the narrowness of the arêtes, the commitment.
But the main and most pleasant surprise was the sense of camaraderie among climbers in the Alps.
It goes against the spirit of the age to admit this.
The prevailing mood is to treat foreigners as Krauts and Frogs .
But the strongest memory of the climb was the ease with which we joined forces with the Germans.
And it was not just the Germans who were open to friendship.
Also in the hut were Austrians, French, Americans and English (including two heavyweights of the British climbing scene; film-maker Jim Curran and part-time comic Ian McNaught-Davis).
All they wanted to do was talk climbing: content to be in the company of people who shared the same obsession.
No-one cared how long we had taken on the route.
All that mattered was that we had reached the summit, and more importantly had a good day out.
This friendliness wasn't an isolated incident.
We were to find it repeated elsewhere over the following two weeks.
The peak we did that day was the Ober Gabelhorn, and I look back on it now with no embarrassment.
It is not the hardest peak in the Alps but it is one of the classics, and we had done it, though we had only been in the area a couple of days and had still been acclimatising.
The Ober Gabelhorn was once a prized  addition to a climber's logbook but is slightly out of fashion now, just as Zermatt has given way to Chamonix.
I came to the mountain very casually.
It was suggested as a possibility over the telephone by Martin, a fellow Scot, along with a dozen other peaks in the Zermatt area.
We tramped up the path from Zermatt to the Rothorn hut on our first full day in the Alps.
I knew nothing about the Ober Gabelhornr's history or the difficulty of the route, or even what it looked like.
About half way up, at the Trift Hotel, it came into view.
It didn't look particularly imposing, seemingly outclassed by its smaller neighbours.
Like so many good mountains, it's only close up that is scale becomes obvious.
I did not pay much attention to it as the time, because we hadn't decided which peak we were going to attempt.
later that day, looking in the Pennine Alps Central guidebook we saw it wasn't technically hard [PD7plusmn;(about V Diff)]but was committing, a long way from base and a bad spot to be when the weather breaks.
Robin Collomb, author of the guide, warned that in spite its comparatively low altitude of 4,062 metres, the routes of the Ober Gabelhorn were ‘fairly long and serious undertakings.’
Second breakfast near the summit of the wellenkuppe, with the Matterhorn proud in the background.
TREACHEROUS REPUTATION
The Ober Gabelhorn-Wellenkuppe traverse, the most frequented route up the mountain, is a very traditional climb, the kind of route that it's easy to imagine Victorians accompanied by their Swiss guides tackling: balancing along the snow arête, confronting the Grand Gendarme and cutting steps up the steep summit ridge.
Earlier this century it had a reputation as a treacherous mountain, with lots of accidents on the summit ridge — and it still claims lives.
The Rothorn Hut, built in 1949, lies below a rocky outcrop next to the glacier, with a great panorama of the Ober Gabelhorn and other Zermatt peaks, especially the Monte Rosa.
The staff weren't friendly but they were efficient, serving basic food quickly and keeping the hut clean.
The next morning we walked up the glacier and did a lengthy rock scramble, the Trifthorn (3,728 metres), partly to acclimatise, and partly because Martin had tried it a few years earlier and failed to reach the top.
The following morning we were up at 3.00am, accepted slices of bread and jam and joined the line of headtorches walking up the glacier.
Our aim was to go as far as the Wellenkuppe (3,903 metres), a beautiful mountain in its own right.
In the immortal phrase that heralds so many climbs, we had just gone for a look.
The route up the Wellenkuppe from the glacier follows a wide snow ramp and then scrambles over rock for a while.
It finishes just short of the summit with a superb rock pitch that looks hard from below but which turns out to be slabs at a comfortable angle, full of deep cracks.
The Wellenkuppe summit, a white notch against a blue sky, was only five minutes away up an easy snow slope, but almost everyone stopped at the top of the rock pitch for a second breakfast.
One side was the Matterhorn, pink in the early morning light; on the other the sharp pinnacle of the Rothorn; and beyond one of the most beautiful mountains on the world: the Weisshorn.
We would have been satisfied with the climb up the Wellenkuppe but it was so early, the sky so clear.
Lots of people were returning to the hut, but lots were going on to the Ober Gabelhorn.
It looked so close.
It couldn't be much more than an hour?
Wrong.
Totally wrong.
The first obstacle was the Grand Gendarme.
Unlike the rock pitch on the Wellenkuppe, the gendarme turned out to be steeper than it looked.
The early climbers by-passed it, preferring to traverse a steep snow slope below, almost out onto the north face.
but there are fixed ropes on the gendarme now, though it is debatable whether these make it easier, as the commando style of climbing hand-over-hand is strenuous and feels insecure.
Leaving the gendarme there was a surprising sting, a 15ft rock step.
Up to this point we had kept up with the other parties, but while they had tackled the step easily, we were left puzzled as to how they had done it.
It turned out they had downclimbed, as it was easier than it seemed from above, but we didn't know that until later.
We thought about jumping but that meant a risk of twisting an ankle, breaking a leg, or slipping and falling thousands of feet down the north face.
There was a new peg in place and Martin tied onto it, protecting me as I downclimbed.
Martin decided to abseil from the peg but as he leant back it came out.
He saw it move, jumped for a hold and found one.
I was below, completely unaware of this near miss.
It had been unnerving for Martin and we had wasted a lot of time, but we pushed on to the final ridge.
It still looked easy but the slow progress of the parties ahead showed it was not.
The reason was both underestimation of its length and the fact that what had seemed like straightforward snow slope was awkward mixed ground, the peak bearing less snow than usual.
Three Germans, two brothers and one of their wives, had left the hut after us, but caught up.
We chatted in broken English while they were waiting at stances.
A bond began to be formed when they asked Martin to place protection for them on an icy pitch just below the summit.
We sat on the cloud covered summit, two Scots and three Germans, eating chocolate and sandwiches, the last party of the day, thinking apprehensively of the long way back but all happy to have reached the top.
On our descent we began by setting up our own abseils but quickly accepted an offer from the Germans to share abseils, taking turns at setting up the anchor points.
I am not sure if it was much faster but it was good to have company.
The cloud became thicker and it began to snow.
We were conscious of how far we were from the Rothern hut, and of how soft and how avalanche-prone the snow had become in the late afternoon.
But we had no intention of stopping.
Crossing to the Grand Gendarme, we hardly paused at the rock step that had given us such a problem earlier.
It was just a scramble.
A feeling that we were in for an epic grew as we waited on the gendarme to begin a traverse across a snow ledge to the top of the fixed ropes, where the Germans, their clothes white with snow and ice, had set up another abseil.
There was a sense of menace as the snow fell heavier and the wind blew rope out across the face.
But by the time we reached the foot of the fixed ropes it suddenly changed, with the wind dropping and the snow stopping.
There were more abseils to get down the Wellenkuppe's rock pitch.
The Germans left us to pull the last rope down and headed off without us, leaving us temporarily disenchanted with international fraternity.
Maybe it was a compliment, their assumption that we could find our way down just as easily as they could.
We pushed down, the route-finding difficult and the weather like Scotland on a bad day, wet and misty.
At the top of the glacier visibility improved and we could see the hut.
It could not come fast enough, though when we did arrive, as I said at the start, we were suddenly reluctant to go in: victims of a misplaced scepticism about the generosity of fellow climbers.
The morning after the Ober Gabelhorn the Germans came over to say goodbye as we packed our gear on the hut terrace.
They were heading back to Munich.
Halfway down we caught up with them outside the Trift Hotel and sat together in the sunshine on the veranda looking up at the peaks, eating spaghetti and drinking beer.
We were friends.
We had shared a rope.
Laughter came so easily and loud that passing tourists looked at us strangely.
We were still high on the adrenalin of the previous day's climb.
HISTORY OF THE CLIMB
The climb was enjoyable in spite of knowing nothing about the mountain, but awareness of history does add to a climb.
On my return to London I tried to find out about the Ober Gabelhorn but there was little information readily available, apart from a couple of references to it as one of the great alpine peaks.
I went to the alpine Club library in London and found that while the mountain doesn't have the drama of the Matterhorn or the Eiger, there had been a lot of activity on it in the Golden Age.
It took a long time and many attempts before the standard route was worked out.
First to the summit, but by an easier route, was A.W.
Moore, a British civil servant and one of the outstanding pioneers of the Golden Age.
The ascent in 1865 was just a week before Whymper climbed the Matterhorn, Moore was partnered by Horace Walker, who, the same year, was with him on the first ascent of the Brenva Ridge on Mt Blanc, and by guide Jakob Anderegg.
The following day Lord Francis Douglas, who was to die later that week on the first ascent of the Matterhorn, made the second ascent, accompanied by Peter Taugwalder, the guide, Joseph Vian.
They had a near miss on the Ober Gabelhorn summit.
Vian had to hold both Lord Francis and Taugwalder when they fell through the summit cornice!
Lord Francis had earlier made the first ascent of the Wellenkuppe, but dismissed the ridge linking to  the Ober Gabelhorn as impracticable, a view held until the traverse was made in 1890 by L. Norman Neruda, a Swede, and guide Christian Klucker.
With all the major peaks climbed, Neruda and Klucker were part of the movement to fill in the gaps, to find harder ways up the mountains.
The only part of the traverse Klucker remembered as presenting difficulty was the Grand Gendarme, and they avoided this by traversing the snow slope below.
KINGDOM OF LIGHT
Eric Shipton spent his first alpine season in the Dauphiné in 1925.
Tim Noble finds the area just as captivating over half a century later
As we threw things in the car, thick purple cloud was boiling up out of the hidden cauldron of the Sélé glacier and over the Ailefroide Occidentale.
Lightning was flickering like huge, sinister candles caught in the wind from a black mass above the South West Ridge.
We shuddered in the lurid light and turned away from the brooding peaks to north and east.
Here at 5,000 feet the tepid breeze coiled round the trees in oily currents and several drops of warm rain splashed widely on uncovered skin.
We bent and pulled the pegs from cracked earth with a feverish haste and the tent, released from suffering the slope at last, collapsed like a strange orange animal in slow billows and blasts of fetid air.
Latecoming thunder caught us then, in its migraine-vice of sound as it rolled round and down the long Vénéon valley before the rains came.
It was time to leave the kingdom of light.
We had spent a week at La Bérade —that little unspoilt mountain hamlet deep within the Dauphiné massif where Eric shipton stayed in 1925 for his first alpine season; and though we'd found the mountains bathed in light and little snow around as we drove slowly up the battered but stupendous road from St Christoph through Les Etages, his words about the view he had from the bus exactly mirrored our mood as we peered up through a windscreen at the hills:
‘But when we reached St Christoph the clouds were retreating up the mountainsides.
Presently a window was opened and framed a sharp white peak which seemed to be hanging almost directly overhead; it glistened like a great diamond.
Then another appeared and another, and at last sunlight filled the valley.
I could not have asked for a better introduction to the summer Alps’.
This was supposed to be Sally's first proper alpine holiday, too.
Although she had climbed the West Face of the Romsdalhorn, shared leads on the Third Sella Tower and led a rope up Store Skagastoltind in the Jotenheim, she was convinced she'd not yet experienced the full horrors and rigours of a ‘real’ alpine day.
You know the tale: an overcrowded, stuffy hut, stinking mattresses and an early morning mass start into a cold and nauseous night.
In the warmth at home we planned out possible routes and looked long and hard at Robin Collomb's guide to the Ecrins Park (West Col Productions 1986) and at IGN sheet No. 241, Meije and Pelvoux.
Not much else is needed to prompt a visit than a map and some route descriptions, so thus it was that we found ourselves between the Vénéon and the Etançons on the campsite at La Bérade in August.
The site was warm and friendly, cheap and relatively clean, and La Bérade itself had all we needed: two shops, four restaurants, huge, exotic ice creams and a frites wagon.
Superb views of the peaks which rise all around and friendly international company in an uncompetitive atmosphere endeared the place to us.
The place is obviously popular with climbers seeking something other than the frenetic commercialism of Zermatt or Chamonix, but also quality routes at all grades.
British parties were much in evidence, pursuing climbs like Pic Coolidge via the South Ridge (F) from the Temple Ecrins hut for the views, and Les Bans by the E.N.E. Ridge (PD/PD+) from the Pilatte hut — what Collomb claims is ‘One of the best general mountaineering routes in the park.’
There is superb rock climbing as well.
The stunning needle of the Aigulle Dibona rising straight behind the Soreiller hut was on every other postcard from every conceivable angle, and on our original tick list by the Voie Normale.
Big serious routes on its south and west faces on perfect granite don't appear in Collomb, but details are easily gained if you can speak and read French.
With excellent huts only a few hours walk from our tent and the possibility of traversing passes between them, we were spoilt for choice.
Two lads from Teesdale, Alan and Neil, in their second season in the Dauphiné were bivouacking high in the fine weather spell and motoring round the guidebook classics.
Sally and I looked for something local and intense, a compromise between a traverse of the Meije in the wake of great names, or a pass crossing in the wake of a continental alpine course.
SETTLING FOR ROCK
We settled on a classic rock climb from the Etançons valley — the West-South-West Ridge of the Pic Nord des Cavales: a mouthful of a name to be sure and not a route well known outside the area, but Collomb assures of its worth:
‘Unchallenged as the most attractive climb of its standard in the Etançons valley.
Brittle rock on some pitches, otherwise good.
(450 m.
IV±).’
We packed the sacks for a night away, took one rope, slings and half a dozen nuts and Friends and squeezed in rock boots.
At mid-day we walked up into the Etançons valley.
A deep path cut through the lush and noisy vegetation.
Fine white glacier sand, hot to the touch, cushioned our boots.
We were bound for the Chatelleret hut which lay only 1600 feet and two hours away from our camp in La Bérade.
Being so close it's much beloved of families  on a day's outing, but is still an alpine hut for all that.
After an hour on the flat we stood on an old snow patch at the foot of the Plaret cascades and looked straight up a perfect glacier valley to the hut, and beyond the Promontoire hut, glinting in the afternoon light, high on a southerly arm of La Meije.
The path, waymarked and cleared, led on through a boulder field.
To east and west lie great ridge systems running north-south with the valley.
From each peak on these ridges big spurs sweep steeply down to merge with a rock barrier that seems to be at least 1,000 feet high.
Within these outflung arms, small icy glaciers nestle, rising steeply in places to passes, leading to other valleys and huts.
Blocking the head of the Etançons is the saw-toothed splendour of La Meije, which stretches east in a vast orange granite curtain, in places nearly 3,000 feet high, to link up with the bounding ridge at the peak of Le Pavé.
In the west the fine snowy summit of Le Rateau drops a bristly east ridge to the steep-sided Bréche de la Meije and the small, badly crevased West Etançons glacier.
It was a stunning sight, and as I lay idly in the boulders that are reputed to have fallen 1600 metres and half a mile from the South Face of La Meije to the Chatelleret, I thought of the climb to come and let the daylight drift over me.
Dappled dawn came slowly to us as we crawled weakly up a steep track.
We'd got up with the rest at 4.00 am and stumbled, steep-blind on a starry night into stony darkness: another alpine day had started in night.
At 5.00, the moving lights high on the Col du Replat path began to mock our slowness with their nods and winds.
It was time to move or, troll-like, turn to stone when daylight came.
At 8.00 we stopped at the foot of the Cavales Ridge and roped up.
Cheese, bread  and orange juice helped to quell the nausea of night and height.
We scrambled close together up cold slabs in a cold half light to a ledge below the first great prow.
An overhanging crack full of loose flakes leered down.
I traversed delicately into it and then swung into a frighteningly wide bridge.
As I pulled through 15 feet of brittle biscuit flakes to get at a wickedly inaccessible peg, my sack kept jamming in the bottle-walled groove.
I panted madly and hung on cold, clammy jams, three feet below the crux.
The sickening that I was making a mess of the first real pitch of the first real pitch of IV±, and that I'd have to take my sack off if I was going to stay on, swept over me.
Now Sally would have to sort out my mistakes amidst a tangle of runners and bulging sacks.
She was very patient but we'd lost time.
Higher up, I swung round the aréte in a wonderful position and the climbing got more open and exciting.
Pulling on long, rounded flutes of gritty granite we came to ‘the direct way.’
The direct way takes shattered cracks straight up the wall ahead, tending R to a good ledge on crest in 35m.
(IV ±, V).
Nemerous pegs may reduce the difficulty.
Sunlight smashed into me as I pulled onto the top of a little pinnacle below a very steep, friable slab.
Three gleaming pegs flashed reassuringly in the early daylight.
Motes of mica glittered in the beams that bathed me as I searched the rock above for clues.
Tight-eyed against the light, I found some finger holds at the edge of reach and slid, sackless for the second time, onto the white slab.
Boell's words that Collobm quotes came back to me again: we were on ‘a jetty battered by warm waves of light’— and moving slowly up to meet the day.
I clipped into the top peg and swung around in tides of feelings below the bulge.
Before leaving Britain, I had some climbing training in the Lakes on Gimmer and White Ghyll.
Both Laugh Not and Kipling Groove have a move or two at good 5a that are strenuous and technical but well protected by a nut or peg.
The bulge I swung beneath on pitch six of the Cavales West Ridge was one of those, I swear — but given V in the guide!
Time was running out — and patience, too.
I stood in a short sling and laybacked over the bulge on a jammed stone into a smooth scoop.
Sal sent the sack up on a bight of slack, then came up on a tight rope and the sling.
I felt sick when she praised the lead, knowing that I wasn't really coping.
We were slowing down for lunch and lack of fitness, and after traversing 200 feet of horizontal ridge and tricky gendarmes, we found a terrace in the sun below the final flawless tower and sucked on soggy oranges.
COMPARABLE WITH CORNWALL
The guide said two pitches up the wall, a chimney and a wall to a good stance.
Once more a little crux was looming in the sun.
I found the proper cracks and set off jamming in between the bulging, blocky flutes that reminded so much of the solid Sennen cracks and of the second pitch of Doorpost — but they were rounded, too, and the cracks not deep — in places like a Lundy cliff, complete with grit and tufts of grass and alarming rattles.
The wide chimney went without a nut and at the limit of the rope I toppled over my sack and sank onto a ledge.
The next pitch of V, up a ramp and wall, was certainly the best.
I left my sack for a third time clipped to Sal and relished the cool caress of wind around my back as I finally found out how to enjoy myself on the steep granite of the ridge.
The pegs were plentiful, but F not needed for a pull, and as I swept my feet from left to right across the wall on little orange nubbins and small edges below good fingerlocks, in a thin, horizontal crack, I wished it could go on and on.
The little ledge on the vertical edge was in the shade and we sat and sucked sweets and looked back down the sweeping ridge to where we'd started, hours ago.
At 3.00pm we staggered onto the summit after endless moves of II and III and guzzled down the orange juice.
We were two and a half hours over guidebook time: so much for the armchair boasts of perfect stamina!
We slowly down-climbed and abseiled the steep, but short, South Ridge to the snow.
Now the Col des Cavales is an important pass to the Pave hut beside its deep  blue, ice-infested lake, but it's loose and nasty in the late afternoon: rusty cables hang from broken bolts over a parody of a path, so without axes we kicked down steep slush and bucket-stepped, slippery ice.
In the ‘schrund, I coiled the rope and started to glissade.
Turning after 50 feet I saw my wife was sitting in the snow and weeping.
Her legs, she said, refused to work and she didn't think she could go on.
This was all my fault for underestimating the route and our stamina, so I took her sack and helped her stagger down the snowfield and moraines to the path.
We both wobbled then, through hours of stones and velvet dusk to the hut, where Sal went straight to bed, leaving me with two soups, two teas and a bottle of wine to deal with.
Three days later we sat on the steps of the Promontoire hut, having proudly made it in guidebook time.
La Meije loomed above, but I failed to find a party who were doing the Grand Pic and returning.
A long solo of Le Rateau via the west Etançons glacier and the South Ridge looked appealing — but through the telephoto I could see some big transverse crevasses in the line of march.
At 4.00 am next day, the light-flight up La Meije started.
Sally didn't want another long day on the hill, so wished me well and watched for an hour as my headtorch beam got smaller and more erratic as I moved away across the glacier, interrogating the ice.
In the middle of my glacier I lost my nerve.
Real and imagined depths were lurking under the probing axe, and twice I broke through a crust with boot and ferrule.
I knew I was courting disaster without a rope and partner on, so rushed around below the ice cliffs of the snout to see if I could force a route over the smooth slabs and close to the col.
This was worse, with impossible moves on gritty walls and creaks and trickles from the cliffs of ice.
In despair, I scrambled all the way down to the gully that falls directly from the col and tried to climb it quickly before the sun got up.
I made 400 before great arcing beams of light snaked out above the eastern-bounding ridges of the valley and I had to stop as blocks and slates came hurtling down the softening snow.
Too low, too late; my alpine judgement seemed awry.
I found a niche below a roof to one side and sat and ruminated while the sun rose and filled the upper valley with light.
That afternoon, my feelings soothed with company and talk, Sally and I walked back down the bright valley through cricket-loud grasses and thousands of flowers.
Although we we'd had a modest week in terms of routes, we'd found enough delight and challenge in the sunlit silence of the valley and the peaks — and now we knew the full potential of the place.
Next time we'd come prepared for longer, harder days.
GENERAL INFORMATION
Compiled with help from Neil Bailey and Alan Best .
Camping in the Dauphine is limited to ‘official’ sites.
La Berade is popular in mid-season and overspill is allowed in clearings down the valley, but at the same price as the actual site.
Good food shops in the village, but a great saving can be made if the bulk of provision is bought in Grenoble and carried up by bus or car.
No Epigas screw-in cartridges are available other than in Grenoble, and we took enough meths for the Trangia.
Excellent eating out in the village — especially at the Hotel des Glaciers.
If dependent on public transport, the Chamonix bus stops at Grenoble mid-morning.
The VFD bus to La Bérade leaves daily at 17.40 hrs, giving ample time to shop.
Last garage before the long Vénéon valley is at Bourgd'Oisans.
The Collomb guidebook — though the only publication available to the serious climber — has several inaccuracies in pictures and descriptions.
Excellent bivvi sites around huts (walled but not roofed) and in hollows amongst the innumerable boulders that litter the valleys.
Popular huts like the Promontoire, the Temple Ecrins, the Selle, the Dome du Neige and the Chatelleret get crowded in mid-season.
It is advisable to book a place by radio telephone in the guides' office in La Bérade.
Excellent bouldering five minutes from the campsite on the west of the river and a useful practice crag five minutes up the path to the Chatelleret.
RECOMMENDED ROUTES
West South West Ridge of Pic Nord des Cavales (IV±)
Promontoire Ridge of La Meije (AD)
Col de la Temple — Glacier Noir — Glacier Blanche — Col des Ecrins (PD)
Plaques route on Tete du Rouget (PD±)
Aiguille Dibona, North Ridge (PD) or Boell's route (AD)
East-North-East Ridge of Les Bans (PD)
Mont Giobernay North East Ridge (PD/PD±)
Pic Coolidge South Ridge (F)
South Ridge of Le Rateau (F)
The magnificent last pitch of grade V climbing on the Cavales West Ridge (photo, Sally Noble).
REFERENCES
There seems to be little in English about the area and I found research difficult.
The section in John Cleare's World Guide to Mountains and Mountaineering (Webb & Bower 1979) is suggestive but by no means comprehensive, and I could not get the extant Alpine Club Guide Selected Climbs in the Dauphiné and Vercors .
Out of print, my local stockist told me — though I sneaked a look at one owned by a venerable AC member on a meet in the Dauphiné.
‘In the process of being checked and reissued,’ he told me.
I hope it is, because the wealth of climbing routes is missing from the collomb guide and the 1977 Brailsford guide is apparently a collector's item!
(Incidentally, a comment in the Promontoire hut book by the last British party to note their presence a year ago recorded laconically, the rewards for following Brailsford and Collomb in their first choice route to the hut up a series of Grade II chimneys: the last pitch is the drain for the outside toilet!).
The section in Eric Newby's glossy reference book Great Ascents (David & Charles, 1977) is very disappointing.
In a two page chapter on that most prolific of English-speaking climbers in the Dauphiné, the American W.A.B. Coolidge, the author talks more about Coolidge's aunt and the dog Tschingel!
Edward Pyatt's Guinness Book of Mountains and Mountaineering (Guinness 1980), gives lists of first ascents — mostly by Coolidge and Almer — and a poor location map, but no bibliography; and Doug Scott's classic Big Wall Climbing (Daye Ward, 1974) tells only of the feats of Zsigimondy and Diboma on the traverse of La Meije and the first ascent of the South Face respectively.
I'd read my Gervasutti on the Olan adventure of course, in Gervasutti's Climbs (Diadem, 1978), but that was strictly dreamer's stuff.
And that was it before we left.
Our next door neighbours at La Bérade, a father and son doing hut walks and easy passes, possessed a copy of Rebuffat's Hundred Best Routes in the Dauphiné which we devoured as best we could in our compound fractured French.
EQUIPMENT
NEW FOR ‘91
Brought forward to September from its usual November date, Gladys Sellers and Tom Prentice look at what's new at the annual trade show
It was soon evident that the comfort theme from last year's trade fair was a long way from being played out.
Leading the way were many new Gore-Tex jackets in fabrics with a better ‘handle’ as the trade calls it, lighter, softer and more comfortable we wearers would say.
Not surprisingly, Karrimor were way up front with their new Baltoro range for the mountaineer and backpacker, made in Gore-Tex and a two layer fabric called Ferrara, claimed to be the most tear and abrasion resistant fabric in the Gore-Tex stable.
Three models were on view, the New Mountain, the Snow, and the Technical, aimed at the backpacker, the winter hillgoer and the climber, and priced £189, £235 and £245 respectively.
For the walker, Sprayway now have a Lady Spectrum in their lightweight Skylab Gore-Tex to accompany their men's jacket.
Bradsport have used a most attractive fabric for their Lady Montreux, which never the less, like the Lady Spectrum, has all the features a hill walker needs.
Calange had perhaps the most revolutionary Gore-Tex jacket, the LTD Pull On, made in an ultra lightweight ripstop nylon with the Gore-Tex membrane laminated to the lining.
This over-the-head version weighed only 14 oz and went into a neat little stuff sack.
There were other non Gore-Tex waterproofs that are ultra-lightweight: Mountain Equipment's Nimbus jacket (and trousers), part of their Compak range, made of a sanded microfibre fabric, and costing about £80.
Another was RAB Down Equipment's Waterproof Action Wear.
This uses a Thinsulate membrane (a new one on me) in a Pertex shell.
Berghaus's Mountaineering Suit is feather light and part of their new Aquafoil range of waterproofs.
There are eight Aquafoil garments, made from various microfibre polyester fabrics chosen to suit the expected use of the garment and all coated with a breathable PU.
Top of the range is the Eiger, quite a substantial jacket, and there's a ladies' model as well, the Electra.
Nikwax's Paramoa jacket continued to interest the functionally minded, but not those for whom fashion matters most.
However, vauDe are convinced of its merits and are co-operating with Nick Brown to create a more fashionable version.
Last year's flocks of fleeces have had many offspring in the pullover style.
Anybody who could sew had a collection on show and fashion ruled.
More functional were the fleeces to temper the effect of the wind: Phoenix had a particularly smart Windstopper pullover and there were a number of shelled fleeces.
I particularly liked Mountain Equipment's Skye reversible pullover with its microfibre shell, though if you want one with a hood, look for Berghaus's Reversible Fleece Jacket, made of Polartec 200 and covered with the latest Japanese microfibre fabric; a highly functional garment.
An interesting variant in the Polartec range of fabrics is Polartec 100 Micro, a thin, velvet — like fabric, used by Sprayway to make a fleece cum shirt; a versatile looking garment.
Boots continued to multiply, though the majority were in the expanding field of leisure walking.
However, the long awaited Brasher Mountain Master, designed for mountain walking was launched, completing their modest range of three; the Fell Master, the Hill Master and the Mountain Master.
Karrimor, having dipped their toes into the boot market last year, launched their Garment collection whose top of the range models, the Baltoro and Annapurna, are four season boots.
Not surprisingly they are now using Gore-Tex instead of Sympatex in their KSB range and have added the KSB 5, a beefed up version of the Goret-Tex KSB 3 that will take a walking crampon.
It is aimed at the trekker and European walker rather than the British winter walker and costs about £100.
Much more innovative was a new range from Salomon (the ski boot firm).
Their middle and top of the range boots were obviously a cross between a ski boot and a walking boot, designed to give a better fit, stability, and support, and some models even had a built in gaiter.
Too radical?
We'll see.
Merrel have introduced an all leather boot designed for British conditions and are calling it the Cumbria.
It looked like many of the other leather boots around, but is stated to have all the Merrell features.
Line 7, and Aigle, two French boot makers, were there with a new range of fabric boots, many with Gore-Tex bootees and several models for women.
In the backpacking rucksack range, things were quiet after the launching of Karrimor's Aurora last year.
It was on show again, just chained up this time, not in a glass case.
More work has been done in the research labs and in the field to improve shoulder strap comfort when carrying big loads, but we still await the goods in the shop.
Both Karrimor and Berghaus had a range of big, no frills, rucksacks for first time users, the former the Discovery range, the latter the Arrow range.
Prices run at about £1 per litre of capacity, about half that for non-budget sacks.
Lowe have also filled a noticeable gap in their range — backpacking rucksacks for women.
They have taken a selection from their Cordillera, Appalachian, and Outback lines, adapted the harness to suit a women's figure and called them the Nanda Devi range.
Other developments for the backpacker: Coleman are now making their Multifuel stove with a detachable fuel bottle and calling it the Apex stove.
Camping Gas have followed Trangia's lead in making a convertible meths/gas stove.
Mountain Equipment were showing their new range of four Voyager synthetic filled sleeping bags, made without any through stitching.
It was claimed that this gives an improved warmth to weight ratio of around 25 per cent and decreased bulk.
Prices range from about £55 to £120.
Overall impressions?
Microfibres are now so frequently used they no longer excite any comment: in a year or two they'll be the norm.
There is much better choice of gear for women, in fact we women have never had it so good.
Finally, I think I detected a lengthening of some waterproof jackets — fashion or function?
I await next year's exhibition with special interest.
Gladys Sellers 
HARDWARE
The only thing thick on the ground at this year's climbing and camping trade show were the bargain hunters.
Manufacturers, distributors and retailers have all felt the pinch during the recession and some hard bargaining was going on over coffee and orange juice.
Karabiners
What caught most people's attention were radical new forged karabiner designs from DMM and HB.
Both utilise a tie-off (Spectra on the HB), permanently fixed to a bar which is an integral part of the karabiner.
This has a number of advantages, the main one being that the tie-off remains in place and the ‘karabiner’ is always loaded along the correct axis in a fall.
Both the DMM Mamba and the HB Hooker are available open-ended so that a standard karabiner can be attached at the other end.
The principle disadvantage would seem to be the possible laziness of climbers to replace the sewn sling.
In the general krab line DMM unveiled their elliptically shaped Eclipse (and very nice it looks too), HB introduced a bent gate version of the excellent Hi-Lite, plus new 3000kg Hi-Lites in 11mm bar and two 12mm HMS karabiners designed for belay plates or Italian Hitch belaying.
The HMS seems to have become popular recently with Wild Country also taking a look and producing a mini-HMS.
Nuts
First we had Rocks, then we had new Rocks and now we have Super Rocks.
When will the designers at Wild Country let up — never of course!
The Super Rocks use an improved Rock design (recessed wire, more curves etc.) and come in sizes which fill the half size gaps between existing Rocks — smart thinking.
So Super Rocks, which come in sizes 1–10, complement rather than replace existing Rocks.
Look out for our comprehensive guide to protection equipment next summer.
Harnesses
Being a woman seems to be the name of the game nowadays!
Black Diamond (Chouinard as was), Beal and Edelrid are all producing harnesses specifically designed with larger leg loops for women.
Of the rest, there's a comprehensive new range from Camp and a new range from the French manufacturer Gravity.
Other new harness are a Petzl one-size and two models from Troll — the 9a and the Rock Master.
The former's designed for competition climbing, the latter a more robust version of the popular Black Master which now has improved racking.
Wild Country have also introduced a new forged buckle to all their harnesses and improved the racking on the Sky Pilot.
Harneses will feature in a major gear review next spring.
Rock Boots
This must be the first year when new rock boot models haven't been coming out of everyone's ears.
The popular budget and mid-priced range from EB seems not to be with us any more, alas, but the importers are bringing in a good looking range from Gravity which they hope will take over from where EB left off — prices from about £45 to £55.
The radical Mamba darabiner turned a few eyes on the DMM stand.
On the slightly more technical front, Scarpa have replaced their range with two new models; Rockmaster II shoe/boot and Phantom slipper.
The hope is the new rubber will wear as well, but not be quite as hard as last year's models.
There's a new model from Kamet as well; the Fix is described as a high performance shoe.
Changes also to the Vertical range with a new model of the Encore, Hueco and Friction Loafer.
We'll have a complete run-down of rock-boots next spring.
Ice Axes
Very little of interest on the technical front, save for a few more bent shaft models.
All Camp axes now come with a hexagonal shaft, aimed at improving grip and aesthetics.
Camp haven't been standing still on the walking axe front, with three new models designed; Jannu, Nuptse and Hielo.
Also looking at walking axes have been Grivel, who've come up with the Air Tech, which weighs in at a gobsmacking 460g.
But, then lightness isn't everything.
Watch out for our walking axe review this winter.
Helmets
Little new in this field, save for a natty looking UIAA plastic helmet from Allcord, called the Rock Hopper.
As a reviewer it's nice to see the occasional idea being taken up.
Having made a perfect pain of myself (not very hard) on the Edelrid stand last year, it's good to see their Full Carbon Helmet now has elastic and a headtorch clip front and back.
Mountain Waterproofs
Karrimor were showing their re-designed range of Baltoro waterproofs which combine Gore-Tex with a light, soft and reputedly hard-wearing 2 ply Ferrara face fabric.
Lowe continue their range of mountain clothing, majoring this year on their new Triple Point 800 coated fabric and Triple Point 400 for a lighter weight waterproof.
Also going down the lighter weight waterproof path are Mountain Equipment with their new Alpine Suit in Gore-Tex and 2-ply Taslan.
Taking a similar line are The North Face with their Stowaway Jacket and Pants, also in 2-ply Taslan and Gore-Tex.
Moving in the other direction are Pheonix who are already well-established on the 2-ply scene with their Driphter jackets.
Their 3-layer jacket is the Zircon, truly the first all-dancing, all-singing mountain jacket.
If you think I jest consider this; four chest pockets, two skirt pockets, two hand warmer pockets and arm pit ventilation zips, plus 3-layer Taslan!
Well be reviewing mountain jackets this winter.
Mountain Rucksacks
Karrimor have also completely re-designed and expanded their Alpiniste rucksack range, but retained the Aergo back on most of the new models, save for the 55–75 litre expedition sack which gets an adjustable SA back.
Hot from New Zealand where they virtually rule the roost are Macpack with a small range of good looking climbing and expedition sacks from 40 litres to 85 litres.
Mountain Clothing
Wild Country have totally redesigned their Gore-Tex mountain mitts, given them non-slip palms and added some technical, sticky gloves inside!
Other news is that Rohan have re-designed their full-length salopettes which were once leaders in the field.
More of these later in the year.
NB:
In the October fleece  article we stated that Berghaus Windstopper garments use Softlite fleece.
In fact, Berghaus use Polartec 200 for these garments.
Oh and while we're at it |Mountain Equipment don't source their Ultrafleece in the Far East and never have done and are dropping their Kashmira not Karisma.
So, apologies to all concerned and bring my breakfast to the dog house.
FORTY YEARS ON
INTRODUCTION By Tony Greenbank
Gordon Parkinson, who was new-routing with Arthur Birtwistle half a century ago, makes a climbing comeback
You may well become elderly one day.
Our few years are everything we have in all eternity.
Our brief little bit of time alive is everything we will ever experience or know.
And brief it is.
If you taped a sheet of squared paper to your mirror, counting down 900 squares, that's a square for every month of your life to the age of 75.
If each month that goes by you cross off one square, then by the age of 38 you have less than half your squares left.
But there are climbers still climbing with no squares left, or at least precious few to go.
Sid Thompson from Maryport, for instance, at the age of 77, is one such.
Gordon Parkinson, at 72, from Lancaster, is another.
Gordon was on the first ascent of Diagonal with Birtwistle, and also climbed with Menlove Edwards.
Sid cycles to Shepherds in winter, has done Central Buttress on Scafell 44 times, drinks mild from Domestos bottles and has no teeth.
He will probably climb to the end.
Gordon too perhaps.
He has it in him and is showing renewed interest.
On a recent visit to Scout Crag, Langdale, they had agreed to a photo-call on Route 1 , described in the guidebook as the best route on the crag — both of them cranking, ever cranking.
But the years, they take their toll.
The shoulder belays and cricket sweaters were intended to look the part.
It was the clipping and runnering where you almost heard the gear moan.
From my disembodied perch on a distant abseil rope alongside, I started to correct Sid, then realised others on the crag might mistake it as hassling.
I let it be.
So the pictures you see are like it sometimes happens.
Confident youth may never imagine a world like this in a million Sundays, but these pictures tell it like it is for by far the majority of us at one time or other; and I defy anyone to say that it could not be them — be they so lucky as still to be climbing when approaching 80.
And with such eagerness in still wanting to get to grips with the rock.
The Lakeland fells had been baked for weeks under cloudless skies; the becks were dry and the tarns warm enough to give refreshing dips.
All the radios were tuned into the number one song Stormy Weather, by Lena Horne.
It was midsummer, 1933.
I was camping in Langdale with a party of Bolton climbers.
The northern towns had annual ‘wakes’ week holidays, and in this instance it was Bolton's turn.
I was the junior tyro of the group and still at school.
On our first day we sweated up the short scree slope to the foot of Middlefell Buttress, where our threesome roped up sound hemp.
This was to be my first climb on ‘real rock,’ as I had only experienced exercises on short problems in an old gritstone quarry during the previous winter.
The granite and surroundings were a huge improvement!
After a pause to coil up the heavy ropes we set off for Gimmer.
The famous skyline appeared and the potential exposure looked awe inspiring to my youthful eyes.
For our initiation, our leader chose B Route.
My minder was young Sid Thompson (who 50 years later became known as ‘Owd Sid of Maryport,’ ref Climber Dec. ‘87).
After easy rock we congregated on the platform under Amen Corner.
As third man in the party I was given the job of carrying the large FRCC guidebook of those days.
Our leader was soon grunting in a semi layback posture, and as I had the appropriate page open, I could not resist reading out loud: ‘…
This pitch is so called because the 2nd Man, when rattling the bag of acid drops, fervently murmures ‘Amen’ to any remarks let fall by the leader while struggling with this steep wall of 8 cubits in stature!’
The top pitches, although exposed, were an anti climax.
We completed the day (and our water supply) with an uneventful but pleasant trip on A Route.
It was so hot and dry, another party on Gimer made us an offer we couldn't refuse.
We sold our can of peaches for 2 shillings — about 500% profit!
LUCKY POSTING
Above left: Sid (seated) and Gordon below Scout Crag preparing to climb Route 1.
Above: Sid views the crux with Gordon eyeing his progress from the stance.
(All photos, Tony Greenbank).
For the following day our leader hatched a Grand Tour.
This involved a long hike over Esk Hause to Gable, and to avoid the intense mid-day heat we agreed to leave the valley at dawn.
We reached Kern Knots before breakfast and had another superb day under a scorching sun, ticking off Kern Knots Crack, Napes Needle and Eagles Nest.
The long hike back seemed endless.
At Sprinkling Tarn we staggered into the water and must have drunk gallons before we felt lubricated!
During the rest of the week we sampled Pavey Ark and completed most of the alphabet on Gimmer.
I was now a climbing convert!
This was the beginning of several years of very active rock climbing on many crags.
We must have sensed that war was inevitable, as Birtwistle and myself had two feverish years in ‘38/'39, when we made many hard (in those days) ascents, including a few pioneering routes.
I had the supreme luck of an RAF posting to South Africa, where I enjoyed over two years of non-stop climbing without a rainy day!
I climbed all over, including the fabulous Table Mountain, and in the Drakensburg range.
On returning to the UK my luck held, and a posting to the fringe of Lakeland enabled me to complete my shopping list on Dow, in Langdale, Dovedaly, and on Castle Rock.
Forced retirement came in 1951 after a car accident.
Probably my most satisfying route, from hundreds, was the successful assault across the face of Dinas Mot in ‘38 with Arthur Birtwistle.
We had planned this after a brief look into Llanberis a few weeks previously.
Some modern footgear and small sized chocks would have been better than acid drops on that day!
Another first ascent on Bow Shaped Slab (Cloggy) is also a great memory.
Equipment remained relatively primitive until some years after the war.
In pre-war days most climbers were poor by today's standards.
It was often an effort to afford a length of hemp plus a pair of nailed boots.
Clothing was usually an assortment of cast-offs such as grey flannel trousers, white wool sweater, and for extra protection in cold, damp conditions, a cut-down cotton raincoat.
Boots were nailed and usually over 4lbs, and we wore plimsolls for dry rock.
Many difficult climbs were accomplished in boots, especially in the wet.
I have seen Jim Birkett layback up the Great Flake on Central Buttress (Scafell) in mist and drizzle wearing clinker nailed boots!
When the second ‘failed,’ he simply winched him.
SEEING STARS
On another hot, perfect midsummer day 40 years later, I was in Borrowdale chatting to Owd Sid from Maryport.
A few weeks earlier he had phoned me out of the blue — I think he was checking to see how many of his cronies were still alive!
During a reunion in Lancaster, he suggested guiding me up some easy routes on the roadside crags in Borrowdale.
Sid and Gordon contrast starkly with a climber in modern gear.
As I had never climbed in Borrowdale I left the selection to Sid.
‘How about Troutdale Pinnacle — it's a three star climb,’ explained Sid, with a definite gleam in his eye.
‘Sounds like a Good Food Guide,’ I said.
Sid patiently tutored me on star gradings and assured me that technically the climb was only a V. Diff, so I would cope!
We set off through the pretty woods and were soon at the base of the remarkably clean, steep granite buttress.
I was amazed to see Sid extricate from his pack a mass of ironmongery, rope, loops and various boots.
‘I thought this was a B. Diff, not the North Wall of the Eiger,’ I said.
Sid gave a growl and informed that as I knew nothing about modern techniques he had brought ‘the lot.’
I was kitted out with a one size too large pair of old EBs and we were ready for the re-education process.
The first two pitches were traumatic.
I couldn't trust the boots, and was hanging on to any hold.
By midway I was beginning to feel at home on the excellent, steep rock, placing my feet in a more balanced way and making smoother, les clumsy moves.
The rigidity and traction of the EBs was far superior to spongy plimsolls.
I also soon appreciated the ease and efficiency of the metalware in providing safe runners.
Friends were a revelation.
(Should be, I thought, at £30 a time!)
In my climbing heyday we had to make do mostly with faith and a little friction.
Rope loops and a krab could only be carefully positioned over often minuscule spikes.
En route these generally fell off.
We sometimes carried in our pockets assorted stones to wedge in cracks.
By now I was thoroughly enjoying this superb route with its delightful sloping traverse, then the last steep arête to an abrupt finish on Wimbledon turf.
Sid grinned and said: ‘You came up that last bit at a fair lick.’
I told him it was not due to a new found burst of skill, but the need to conserve energy.
On top we met a few much younger E types.
One kindly informed that Troutdale Pinnacle was a Severe (albeit mild) and not a V.Diff, which elevated my ego a notch.
When they realised that our combined ages was nudging 150 years, one wag said that if he reached our age he would settle for soloing over a stile!
Back at the car park we had a well earned cuppa and reminisced over another hot day back in 1933.
As to the future — how about coat-on, micro thin, high tack finger coverings — removed after the climb by solvent?
But whatever happens, the only certainty is that the crags will never change.
HONGU HIGHLIGHTS
Alan Ingram treks into a Himalayan mountain fastness at the heart of some spectacularly beautiful scenery
Jubilant with our success I descended through the swirling spindrift from the summit of Mera Peak (6461m) with Horst and Lal Bahadur, our climbing sirdar.
In the far distance below, nestling at the foot of the sheer ice-and-rock walls of the massive south west face of Chamlang, lay the forbidding confines of the Hongu Valley.
Access to this remote, uninhabited Himalayan mountain fastness is normally via high, snow-covered passes, although there is supposedly an obscure and difficult low level route from the south.
Our plan for the days ahead was to drop to the valley floor and follow the Hongu Khola northwards to the wild Panch Pokhari at the valleyhead, then return westwards across the difficult Mingbo La pass to familiar territory in the Solo Khumba.
Nearing our high camp on an icy platform, in the shelter of a rocky outcrop at around 5,800m, we paused for a final appreciation of the tremendous highland panorama extending before us.
Ranged along the northern horizon beneath azure blue skies were five of the world's 14 highest peaks: Kanchenjunga, Makalu, Lhotse, Everest and Cho Oyu.
In the foreground was a profusion of splendid, shapely summits.
Many we could identify from previous expeditions, but many more we could not.
Top: Panch Plkhari from the first rock peak.
Above: Lalu, the party's sirdar, breaking the ice to collect water at Panch Pokhari.
Next morning, after a leisurely start, we set off across bare rock beds from our base camp beneath the steep snow slopes of the Mera La.
Rough scree led down into a wide, sandy amphitheatre followed by a gentle descent over grassy hillsides to a pleasant campsite in a meadow, complete with sparkling stream, beneath the majestic cliffs of the nameless Peak 41 (6654 m).
From the meadow a faint trail climbed abruptly to a small lochan and then contoured along the hillside, still high above the river.
The narrow valley was overhung on its eastern flank by the immense precipices of Chamlang and on its western side  by those of peak 41.
Two faces of Chamlang: Top — the south west face on descent to the Hongu Valley.
Below — the north west face from the first rock peak.
Bringing up the rear of our party I was suddenly startled by a commotion ahead.
Something, or someone, was falling down the hillside.
I watched in alarm as the rapidly rotating bundle crashed down the slope, jettisoning bits and pieces as it went.
Fortunately it was only a doko (wickerwork basket).
One of our sherpa porters had stumbled on the rough ground and to save himself had slipped his headstrap to release his load.
Everything was recovered except a rolling pin.
The track gradually dropped to the rippling waters of the Hongu Khola, where we made camp on the banks of the river amidst azaleas and fragrang scrub juniper between the enclosing mountains.
Further progress up the unspoilt valley was made next day.
Near the head of the lake was the base camp of a French expedition hoping to climb Baruntse, but beset with problems.
Two of their members were suffering from mountain sickness and their high-altitude porters had failed to arrive.
We continued for a short distance before pitching our tents in the boulder strewn tundra now below the elegant, ice-fluted summit of Chonku Chuli.
In the evening the surround tops flamed red in the rays of the setting sun and cheerful singing emanated from the tent of our happy go lucky band of sherpas.
‘Good morning uncle,’ greeted Lalu as he brought my early morning tea.
‘Tikcha?’
(‘Is everything OK?’).
A similar greeting evoked a series of grunts and groans from the neighbouring tent.
Horst was suffering from a headache and needed a rest day.
It was another sunny morning and I took the opportunity to set off with Singi, our assistant sirdar, for a shapely rock peak rising above the campsite and offering the prospect of an interesting climb and a good viewpoint.
ADMIRING CHAMLANG
A laborious grind up the lower, stony slopes eventually gained a wide ridgetop.
To the west across the valley there was a fine view of the easy-angled slopes of the Hinku Nup glacier leading up to the Mingbo La (5817m).
Above the col jutted the imposing obelisk of Ama Dablam.
Continuing up the easy gradient of the ridge we made frequent stops to admire the icy crest and fearsome north west face of Chamlang, soaring skywards.
Our vantage point provided a proper perspective of the immense scale of this Himalayan giant.
A rough scree slope was crossed to reach the foot of the considerably steeper conical  crown of our peak.
Although unladen with any climbing gear — even the daysack was being carried by Singi — I was finding it a hard struggle to make upward progress in the thin, cold air; surprisingly more so than on Mera Peak when ice-axe, crampons and heavy climbing boots had been used.
The top still looked a long way away.
Great care had to be taken negotiating a stretch of unstable rocks and I considered turning back.
Any accident would have serious consequences.
There would be no prospect of any helicopter rescue from the isolated Hongu Valley.
‘Bestari, bestari,’(‘slowly, slowly’) said Singi.
Once across this obstacle a fine, airy scramble over large boulders, fatigue now forgotten, led to the nicely pointed summit at about 5800m and a dramatic outlook.
Just a short distance away, looming above a glacier, was the dazzling, ice-hung bulk of Chonku Chuli.
North from Chonku Chuli the pink granite mass of Makalu emerged above the seemingly vertical snow walls of the West Col (6135 m).
Further round soared the precipitous south west rockface of Baruntse, flanked by its satellite range of peaks.
MIGHTY CLIFFS
To the north we could see our route onwards through harsh, glacial terrain to the blue-grey lochans of the Panch Pokhari, ensconced at the head of the barren valley beneath a high cirque, breached by the notorious Amphu Labtse (5780 m).
From our campsite the route climbed above the tundra beneath the mighty rock cliffs of Hongu South Peak, festooned with snow and ice like feathered-icing on some gigantic cake, to the top of a lateral moraine.
The jagged crest was then followed to the ice-bound tarns of the Panch Pokhari (five small lakes).
On the approach there was a fine view over a glacial lake and crevassed snowfields to the West Col. The black, banded summits of Lhotse and Everest reared above the escarpment at the valleyhead, but were to disappear as we got closer.
That night was the coldest of our expedition when the temperature plummeted to ±25 °C.
The frozen lakes and surrounding snow peaks gleamed ethereally in the wan light of a crescent moon and a starspangled sky.
After a fitful sleep I set off alone next morning in the welcome warmth of the sun to climb the higher of two small rock peaks rising to the east of the Panch Pokhari.
An initial steep climb, made difficult only by the altitude, was followed by a gradual ascent to the high point (around 5400m) at the far end of the summit ridge.
In the profound silence I surveyed the awesomely beautiful Himalayan landscape.
Towering directly overhead were the sheer ice walls of the formidable ridge extending from Baruntse.
Prominent to the south were the massifs of Chamlang and Chonku Chuli, their complex features reflected in the tranquil green waters of a small locahn.
Along the western edge of the valley were tumbling glaciers and high rock ramparts sweeping up from the great moraines and scree slopes to culminate in lofty, snowcapped summits.
In the afternoon we retreated from our glacial amphitheatre and two days later successfully negotiated the ice flutings on the west side of the Mingbo La, the crux of our expedition, to leave behind the magnificent mountain wilderness of the Hongu Valley.
The sting in the tail was a somewhat tricky descent through the seracs of the icefall at the foot of the Nare glacier.
Back at Lukla our intrepid group of sherpas, who had made our journey through this seldom explore, high-altitude region possible, were well rewarded for their stalwart efforts on our behalf.
We had been fortunate to have an excellent trekking crew and to enjoy good conditions for a memorable adventure.
Information
The access route from Lukla to Mera La was via Hinku Valley and Zatrwa La (details given in:The Trekking Peaks of Nepal by Bill O'Connor).
The trekking agency used was: Highland Sherpa,
CREATING THE SPACE
You have to be keen to climb in the rain, but Andy Fanshawe's just that, as Ed Douglas discovers
ON THE ROCK
‘I think it's stopping.’
A disconsolate group of climbers sitting round a kitchen table all lean forward and peer out at the iron-grey clouds rumbling past.
Nature's armoured divisions are on the move — again.
‘There does seem to be a lighter patch over there.’
It's a conversation you'll be familiar with.
The altered plans, the disappointed hopes, everything as fluid as the weather, as prevarication and new ideas alternately predominate.
My plan had been to climb for hundreds of beautiful feet on one of Lakeland's fine mountain crags with one of Lakeland's fine mountain climbers, but it didn't happen.
And this is why.
First, though, whose kitchen table am I propped against with such enervating thoughts?
A very lucky man, that's who.
A very lucky man with the broad-shouldered weight of Dufton Fell dominating the view from his kitchen window, living in a house made of rosecoloured stone in a village where they know your name and don't steal the milk.
I live in a neighbourhood where the only thing left on your doorstep in the morning is secondhand lager, and thus appreciate the difference.
Andy Fanshawe: mountaineer, author and charity fund-raiser, sometime national officer of the British Mountaineering Council and student of geology, Neil Young fan and, for a brief while, my landlord.
I met him first in the Lubyanka, that brick lump on Manchester's Oxford Road that serves as home to the BMC.
He was arguing with his desk.
Not actively remonstrating with it, you understand, but disputing its intended purpose.
You and I sit at our desks and try to work.
Fanshawe uses his as drum machine, confessor weight-training apparatus.
And he never really sits at it.
He's really not very good at sitting at all.
He was not suited to the world of bureaucracy and committees, but took to that job his generous and natural enthusiasm and made a great success of it.
But an office, enclosed as it is by such tawdry considerations as walls, is not his natural habitat.
Mountains are.
We had climbed together a couple of weeks before at Goat Crag, where I was once again reminded how suited Fanshawe is to upward progress; a powerful frame and seemingly hydraulic legs brought him to the crag aeons before I arrived.
That day he led a mild extreme to the right of Praying Mantis with his usual mixture of accuracy and irresistible momentum.
I, on the other hand, had backache and climbed it as though a cattle prod were taped to my spine.
I was lowered from the stance to lie amongst the boulders and heather whingeing at my discomfort and misfortune as the crag was smothered by a swarm of conscientious drones climbing routes that I wanted to do.
Andy Fanshawe makes upward progress on Merry Monk, Lazonby crag.
Previous page, gearing up at the foot of the route (photos Ed Douglas).
And so a rapid return to the Lakes became a priority for me; a desire I shared, it seemed, with every cold front kicking around the South Atlantic.
Fanshawe brews large jugs of coffee, running through a number of scenarios which end with us climbing in beautiful weather, but still the rain angles down and Dufton Fell's gloomy aspect matches mine.
Andy's wife Caroline is in the Alps and we talk enviously of her good fortune.
‘Of course we could always go to Lazonby,’ he suggests.
‘What, as in George?’
‘George who?’
‘Lazonby.
Or rather Lazenby…
James Bond?
Never mind, let's go.’
In a Chris Bongton lavish picture book the Great Man suggests that ‘you need to be something of an opportunist to be a successful climber…you need to seize every possible chance, from a turn in the weather to a change of line on the route.
There's the satisfaction of grabbing a climb between spells of bad weather…’; all of which explains why I am not a successful climber, preferring to grab an extra hour's kip between spells of bad weather.
Andy, however, shares his near-neighbour and friend's inexhaustible enthusiasm for climbing.
It is, to be honest, infectious, and provides immunity from the frustration that the fat drops spreading themselves across the windscreen should induce.
This is it.
I am, as the magazine parlance has it, stealing in to snatch a route from under the noses of local activists.
Climbing in the rain makes you feel a lot more clever than it should rationally justify.
MUSICAL INTERLUDES
Fanny drives with his usual relish, turning the wheel with exaggerated movements and indulging one of his favourite habits, which involves him sporadically singing the chorus of some great Woodstockesque opus.
Today it's Joni Mitchell's The Circle Game, from the album Ladies of the Canyon , and if the conversation pauses Andy steps in with a musical interlude.
It smacks to me of having a brain that's too active by far.
Above the River Eden we finally stop.
Unlike the rain.
Andy is a man of vision, of prescience, of common sense.
Andy has a pair of wellington boots.
I do not.
We tramp across the wet grass and bracken and plunge through the soaking undergrowth with Andy confidently predicting, with all the security of a man who knows his feet are dry and will remain so, that this bushwhacking through chest-deep and sodden vegetation will soon bring us to the crag.
Thoroughly soaked and having missed the path, we arrive at the river, the trees heavy with rain and bent towards the water's edge.
The Eden Valley is a blessed place, like  its namesake.
The lakes and its weight of tourists lies to the west, bleak moorland to the east, and in between a fertile plain, green and lush, peppered with sandstone houses in charming villages.
At its heart the river flows untroubled by such crass intrusions as the hustle of modern living.
The crag appears suddenly on the riverbank, monstrously overhanging and shockingly red.
We've come to do Merry Monk, an HVS at its left-hand end which requires us to traverse carefully along its base just above the slow-moving water, grasping strange iron spikes driven into the rock.
At the base of a steep crack we drape our possessions on these to save them a wetting and balance out of and into different footwear.
Andy leads off up large, friable flakes, hair plastered to his head but now mercifully sheltered.
I dodge amongst the mud and greasy boulders trying to take photographs in the gloomy light.
This hidden corner of England, smothered by its dense green blanket, seems unconnected to the cold, dry sterility of the Himalaya.
Indeed, their only identifiable link is Andy, currently climbing easily up the red rock.
His restless energy, barely concealed by an affable manner, carried him across Chogolisa in 1986 and up the West Face of Menlungtse two years later with Alan Hinkes.
These climbs are recalled in Coming Through , Andy's first but, I suspect, by no means his last book.
It is an honest account and attempts to make some sort of enquiry into why climbing in, for example, the Eden Valley, isn't nearly enough.
And while the book is largely about success, Andy bravely comes to terms with his feelings of doubt as he turns his back on the 1989 Makalu expedition.
Since then he has married and the stability of his relationship with Caroline has helped him to see both what he wants and needs.
Not for nothing is the first chapter of his book called Creating the Space .
Inevitably, Himalayan climbers need a tough, self-preserving streak in their construction and Andy is no exception.
He has had to come to terms with the tragic loss of friends from the very start of his climbing career, and while he responds politely to my questions on this subject, I do not pierce the necessary shroud of self-protection that surrounds such memories.
He knows that the rock that crushed the skull of his great friend John Taylor when the two of them were swept away in a blizzard on the Ben could have finished him instead, but he deals with it calmly.
Only before embarking on a major expedition have I seen the tension surface in Andy.
The doubts, however carefully deflected, focus self-awareness.
Our finest rock climbers have become obsessed by performance, by standards and numbers.
It no longer matters who is holding the rope.
Mountaineers, however, remain passionate about life, their appetite for experience and company sharpened by the hard work and discomfort of months away.
Lazonby seems a strange place for such lofty thoughts.
Andy is bridged beneath the final overhang, placing gear.
Suddenly he moves powerfully out and up, with no hesitation or doubt, to land by a tree at the top of the crag, and with equal suddenness I am climbing.
The rock is utterly dry, without seepage or dampness, and I am struck by its temporary appearance.
large plates of rock seem only marginally attached as I follow the rope tugging gently from over my shoulder.
The crack is straightforward and I move right to below the overhang.
It seems even bigger than it did from the ground, but I bridge and reach up, grasping huge, rough jugs on which even I can feel strong.
Abseiling back down I notice that Katie, my wife, is traversing towards our gear at the base of the crag.
If she has ventured beyond the car it can mean only one thing — it's stopped raining!
We stuff the damp ropes into our sacks and walk back to the car, this time on the right path.
The air is warmer, and already the rain is evaporating back into lighter skies.
As the rain returned we drove to Penrith to buy huge Cumberland sausages and spent the evening drinking and laughing, while outside Dufton Fell grew softer in the evening light.
Then darkness fell and we were just three faces round a table reflected in a window pane.
Next year Andy travels to China with Alan Hinkes and Ulric Jessop to attempt K2 from the north.
THE BEST LAID PLANS
Fate and chance play a large part in the success of Robin Walker's South American adventure
Approaching the beautifully symmetrical summit of Alpamayo Chico.
We had already settled for Peru when Terry rang, but the vision he described was far from encouraging: Lima a cauldron of unrest and theft, the hills in the hands of ‘Sendero,’ the country on the edge of collapse.
It didn't take us long, then, to conclude that Peru was out for us at least.
We were both agreed that we prefer adventures in the hills rather than on strife-ridden streets.
But where to go?
We debated hopelessly, going round in ever decreasing circles: the Alps too crowded, the Himalaya too frightening.
Then suddenly the book fell open at a photo of La Paz and Illimania, and our Plan B stood before us with a strength that only fate can provide.
Like all contingency plans it was backed by a wealth of research and solid information.
So on the basis of a mis-spelt name and a single hazy photo, we rang our travel agent to book our flight to La Paz and put Plan B into action.
July 1, La Paz, Bolivia
Jet lag, culture shock, altitude sickness; we struggle to get to grips with this, our first morning in South America.
Poverty huddles in corners or squats by pitiful displays of chocolates long past their sellby date.
But humanity, rough and raw, intoxicates us with its unfathomable energy and good humour.
Amid such vibrant colour, the daily sorties into the collapsing, crowded streets near the cemetery become a source of such pleasure that it is not without a degree of reluctance that we finally throw our burdens onto a lorry bound for Sorata.
There, we had been assured, it would be possible to find transport to Cocoyo and the walk in.
The gloom on leaving La Paz was instantly dispelled by the views on gaining the Altiplano.
Across the canyon rose Illimani's triple summit, glinting in the dawn light and far grander than in our tiny photo, while to the right the untold delights of the Cordillera Real began to unfold.
Not even the bitter dawn cold could keep us from standing, time and time again, to feast on the sights that rumbled by: mountains, dwellings, beasts and people; then tiny white-sailed craft on the timeless blue of Lake Titicaca.
In Huarina the tarmac was abandoned for the dirt road that would take us through Achacachi, honouring us with our last good look at the Ancohuma massif before we rolled endlessly down to Sorata and the warm, wetting mists of Yungas.
ROUND ONE: July 9, Base Camp, Ancohuma Massif
The walk-in had got steadily worse as the altitude began to tell, but all that now lay behind us.
Nothing, however, was quite as we'd expected.
To begin with, the other climbers here mostly spoke English and Enrique was left having only me to talk to.
It was a little confusing to find ourselves setting off for the summits of the Viluyos barely an hour after the decision to do so.
Surely an 11 o'clock start for a 5,500m peak wasn't quite serious?
Our bewilderment was greater still when our carefully selected clothing was found to be far in excess of the requirement of the moment.
The route, at least, was what they'd said, and so with nothing worse than the altitude to battle against, we reached the summit with ample time to absorb the views.
Ridges and crests marched off north and south while, lapping at our feet, a vast sea of cloud spread east to the Amazon.
Behind stood an impressive array of walls and couloirs, though the Pico del Norte and Illampu would prove forbidden fruits, guarded as they were that year by avalanches of fresh snow.
We allowed our gaze to wander south until it lighted upon the bulk of Ancohuma's eastern slopes, a face we knew nothing of on a mountain that had only just entered our lives.
Plan B meant no plan, however, and having none we were free to react to whims, needing no more than this first glimpse for the wheels to set themselves in motion as we set off down for tea.
July 15, Ancohuma Glacier, 5,400m
With our limited experience it was seldom easy to calculate how hard things were going to be.
Four days previously we had arrived on the glacier to set up the tent and learned a lot during that long, cold night, when temperatures plummeted to 25 deg C below.
Then we had been surprised when our ascent of the nearby Jankopiti had gone like clockwork.
The ease with which we had climbed warranted the untold indulgence of biscuits with our afternoon tea.
Our confidence thus bolstered, we were now stepping eagerly out of the tent bound for Ancohuma.
Once outside, however, I barely needed 30 steps to realise that something was wrong.
It wasn't the weather threatening grey above our heads and racing in vicious squalls over the distant col, nor was it the task that lay before us.
Yet something was clearly wrong as I battled hard to find my rhythm.
Two hours later I collapsed onto the col, long after Enrique had got there, and every step a struggle.
The ocean of bad weather racing in from the north west did little to cheer me, so we sat for an hour while I gathered strength.
But the weather worsened and our morale weakened, forcing us to abandon and retreat to the tend, our tails between our legs.
The storm that night raged unappeased, obliterating our tracks and leaving us shivering and miserable.
Dawn brought a kind of truce but, defeated and demoralised, we packed and headed for base.
Later, squatting among our baggage and fellow travellers in the back of a jeep bound for La Paz, we silently nursed our battered pride, lost in thoughts of home.
Lost, that is, until the road drew level with the Condoriri summits.
We looked across at the mountains and then at ourselves, and a smile split our dusty faces, then burst into a laugh.
Plan B was no plan and we were off to Condoriri.
ROUND TWO: July 22, Tuni
A dubious-looking taxi got us to Tuni where we hired horses, haggling as always over the price.
We were relaxed, however, for this time the code was simplicity.
We were relaxed and we were strong, so with the horses carrying the load the walk-in was a holiday.
Most important of all, though, we were backed by our secret weapon: two large packets of custard creams — the missing ingredient of Ancohuma.
July 23, Lake Condoriri
We rose at five, ate and set off for Alpamayo Chico which, though relatively low at 5.330m, was reached by a simple but striking route up its north ridge.
From base camp the summit was barely visible, so on sighting the route our surprise was all the greater.
Though ever so short, the line was perfect.
A col was reached at the ridge base and we ate.
Then, unable to contain the drive and enthusiasm building up inside us, Enrique went alone, leaving me to dither between living the moment or trapping it on film.
But the view from the col was decisive and I stayed to indulge my vanity.
Enrique soon became a speck perched between shadows and sun.
Against his steady progress I worked the cameras frantically, images and sequences flooding my mind, until suddenly he was up, axes raised against the white of the scurrying clouds.
I found myself laughing at how easy it all seemed, and axe in hand went hurrying off to join him.
Condoriri from the final section of the approach (photos by the author).
July 24, Lake Condoriri
Day 2 and we are raring to go, working on yesterday's high.
The first two hours knock us into shape, however, as we battle with the boulder-strewn approach to Condoriri.
When the glacier is reached and the misery is at last over, we don crampons for the start of what we hope will be the real thing.
We have chosen the South Face, for we fear the Normal Route will no longer do for our  insatiable appetites, but as we gain the foot of the face the snow worsens desperately and Enrique if obliged to wade through powder to a dubious perch on the lip of the bergschrund.
I am beginning to doubt our sanity when he finds good ice and sets up the belay.
Sadly the ice is short-lived, but the poor snow fortunately bears our weight and we kick steps methodically, tackle the occasional bulge of rock and ice and relish the situation and the climb.
Once in the shadows we notice the gusting, frozen wind, and for the first time since arriving in Bolivia we feel cold while climbing.
Overhead, tempting us with its promise of warmth, the sun glints mischievously along the summit cornice.
But we are in no hurry, and even slow deliberately to take in the moment.
A guided pair apart there is nobody in the area, let alone on the mountain, and the solitude serves to heighten the element of adventure which is becoming a constant feature of our holiday.
All too soon (why aren't there 400m more of this?) we stand below the final pitch, which falls to Enrique.
He makes good progress until he reaches the cornice, which promptly rejects him in a cascade of cold, powdery ice.
A second attempt is made at once and now, out left, he can actually talk to the guide approaching along the crest.
But the cornice offers no aid and he tumbles and slithers down once more, cursing and swearing and showering me in snow.
Again and again he fails at the offending cornice until, half-buried, half-dead, there is no snow left, the axes bite and he is up.
The cloud-covered Amazon, the ochre tones of the Altiplano, whose intimidating monotony is broken only by the blue of the great lake — mountains and more mountains.
Desperate to charge our batteries, we linger as long as we dare before racing off down and over the glacier, through the boulders, and onto the base-camp grass.
Laughing and joking we flop by the tent and lie in the bliss of our aching limbs.
Plan B was no plan, and with no plan could not really fail.
POSTSCRIPT: September 1989, Oviedo Spain
Two days after the Condoriri climb we went out again.
A line on the Pirámide Blanca had drawn our eye, and armed with little more than our desire to do so, we climbed it.
Afterwards nobody could tell us about our route and it may have been a first ascent — we still do not know.
Nor, in fact, do we really care, for as an American commented later, it doesn't really matter.
Indeed, he went on to explain, there are perhaps quite good reasons not to tell of our new line, for in this way, he argued, others may indulge in the same small adventure we shared in Bolivia — a country where the best-laid plans are best unmade.
INFORMATION
Getting There:
Two options seem common, the first being to Miami and then on to La Paz direct or via one or two other stops, though usually without changing planes.
This is one of the commonest routes from Europe, although Luftansa fly to La Paz from Frankfurt.
The second route is via Lima, from where Lloyd Aereo Boliviano or Aero Peru flights can be taken to La Paz.
Visas are not required for entry into Bolivia, where you are given a 30-day entrance stamp, renewable at a federal police station in any major city.
Money and Costs
Bolivia is no longer the tremendously cheap country it was five or six years ago, and anything organised expressly for foreign travellers costs almost what it would in Europe.
Local transport, accommodation and food is cheap, however, and a filling three-course meal can be had for very little.
Cash is better than travellers' cheques and credit cards, which can be used in a limited way in the cities.
Transport
For the reasons stated above, local transport is best, although this means being patient.
We had friends who waited two days in Sorata before getting transport to the Ancohuma base.
Buses link La Paz to the mountain towns; so do lorries, which are far more fun.
Only 4WDs can go on from there.
For the walk-in horses are better pack animals than llamas as they carry much more and cost about the same, but horses cannot reach all the base camps.
Bargain hard over the price per animal.
Weather and Gear
June and July are felt to be the best months for climbing, though the weather in August is still good enough.
Clear blue skies mean you bake all day and freeze all night.
Storms and high winds seem infrequent.
We carried the sort of gear that would be used in Scottish winter conditions, with double sleeping mats for the glacier camps.
Ice stakes were also useful for belays and we chose 8mm × 60m ropes for climbing, though in the end we barely used them.
All gear can be sold in La Paz at quite good prices.
Bolivia is a poor but immensely friendly country.
The longer we were there, the more we wanted to stay.
The streets are busy but safe, and the sort of professional thieving that makes Lima a nightmare does not seem to exist.
Indeed, it takes hardened travellers a while to fully relax, but in the end all succumb to the magic.
REPORTS
SCOTLAND By Rick Campbell
The rumours about new routes being done on Orkney have been confirmed.
A team comprising Dave Turnbull, Andy Donson and Chris Rees climbed several hard routes there during June.
At Rora Head on Moy they climbed The Roaring Forties E3, Mucklehouse Wall, E5 6a, its direct start, Rats Stole My Toothbrush, E5 6a, and last but not least, Two Little Boys, E6 6b — all on superb sandstone.
At last a good reason to go to Orkney (for those of us not into sheep, fudge, oatcakes or 460 ft high piles of soggy digestive biscuits!).
On Shetland, on a crag near Lerwick, the lads climbed New Squids on the Block, E5 6a, and on Fair Isle at the Sheep Crag, they climbed The Good Shepherd at E3.
In Glen Coe, on Craig a Bhancair, Murray Hamilton made a superb ascent of Admission: on sight and flashed.
On the Shelter Stone Central Slabs, Gary Latter and I both repeated Alan Fyffe's E1 5b alternative start to the Pin, finding it E3 5c and excellent.
At Creag an Dubh Loch, Cannibal was confirmed at E6 and Ascent of Man at E5.
Latter and I made the second ascent of Fer de Lance on sight, confirming the E6 6b grade.
The absence of the first peg made the route quite bold.
I'd say it's one of the finest and hardest routes I have ever done.
On the North East outcrops, Graeme Livingstone has made some second ascents.
At Ballater he grappled with Alastair Ross's Private Parts, E5 6b, and at Cambus ‘o Mary Quarries with Idiot Savant, E6 6b.
At Earen Sheugh, Wilson Moir repeated Grimley Fiendish at E4 5c, 6a on this superb and (apart from Aberdonians) rarely visited crag.
Paul Laughlan on the second ascent of Salome, an intimidating E5 5c on the east face of Aonach Dubh, Glen Coe, photographed by Gordon Frazer.
MOUNTAINEERING COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND NEWS PLAN FOR GLENBRITTLE EXHIBITION CENTRE MEETS OPPOSITION
That elusive quality known as the ‘magic of Skye’ is composed of a unique combination of mountain, sea and man's past influence on the land.
The crofting villages their scattered layout and appealing design are certainly part of it.
Much of the new housing appearing on Skye of late is unsympathetic and has accordingly received much criticism.
It is leading to a slow but growing erosion of the very quality that makes Skye different.
The most recent example is an application by MacLeod Estates to construct an 80 seater restaurant and exhibition centre at Glenbrittle.
The proposed site is virtually on the shoreline in the centre of the bay, with a superb vista out over the Small Isles.
The development would be detrimental to the area for several reasons:
At present it is relatively unspoilt with only small scale commercial exploitation (a youth hostel, a mountaineering hut and a campsite), giving it a unique character that attracts those who prefer to visit less developed locations on holiday.
More day trippers would be encouraged to visit the glen, ruining its present appeal and placing far too great a pressure on the single track road leading to it — the only way in or out.
Compare the problems in Glen Nevis where in summer traffic all but grinds to a halt, to see the possible outcome.
The siting of the development in such a high profile position in the centre of the bay means it would be an unsightly visual intrusion into an otherwise unspoilt area.
The design of the building (capped with a corrugated aluminium roof!) is not in keeping with other properties in the area.
The Cuillins are a National Scenic Area.
The Cuillin Hills are popular both with walkers and climbers, yet Glenbrittle's essential beauty is maintained by low key developments that do not destroy the character.
This development certainly would, and it again raises doubts about the validity of the Government's commitment to a voluntary principle in the conservation of our natural heritage.
Whilst no-one would wish to deny landowners the ability to make a living, it must be accepted that in many circumstances, such as Glenbrittle, more appropriate (or even no) development should take place.
The MCofS have objected to the present proposal, and although the deadline for objections will have passed before you read this, I would urge all walkers and climbers who enjoy the Cuillin Hills still to send their objections to Highland Regional Council,.
PEAK By Graham Alderson
Sandblasting of the Great Slab area at Stanage to remove graffiti painted on over the August bank holiday has had the beneficial side effect of totally cleaning the afflicted area of chalk and rubber marks, and has also increased the friction.
Consequently, the Joe's Slab problems and the Direct Start to Downhill Racer seem a touch easier.
Cheedale has its usual crop of new additions.
The (very) steep section of the Cornice has its first new route of the year courtesy of John Hart.
Last Eggs Beforé M1 is the obvious line right of Monumental Armblaster finishing at the roof.
Originally graded E7 6c (F8a), it has been down graded to F7c+ after a number of repeats, including a flash by Tony Mitchell.
On the Max Wall, Keith Sharples and Jim Kelly meeted out some Rough Justice E6 6b/c (F7c), just to the right of Maxwell House.
The long Wall now has another nice new line of bolts, with Arucaria taking the 3BRs between Brothers in Arms and Jungle Rock.
The grade is an amenable and surprisingly low (F7a+).
WCJ's Pyscho Buttress has a new line between Sunrise and Early One Morning.
Dawn Razor, E4 6a, was put up by Simon Cundy and Andy Chambers.
Dovedale's Pickering Wall has also received attention from Simon.
He has added Gargoyle Sister E5+ 6b+ on the obvious slabby wall in the gully next to Thunderball.
Finally, Wirksworth Quarry has another new addition from the Suzi Sammutt/Geoff Hornby team — The Evolution of Micadia E1 5b is the slim pillar 30 feet left of the Crinoid Cruise.
On the repeat scene, Quentin Fisher's dyno at the Plantation — Deliverance — has had a repeat from an incredibly tall German called Toni.
It seems height is a distinct advantage on this problem.
Mecca, F8b±, has had its fifth ascent from Robin Barker.
Curiously, this is the first British ascent of a limestone 8b± but someone whose name does not begin with ‘M’— the previous elite being Moon, Moffat, Myers, Myles, Morgan, Martin (Atkinson) and Mark (Leach).
Just as I am about to despatch this month's musings, lots of late news has reached me.
On Friday, Sept 13, Seb Grieve made the first ascent of the outstanding rib right of Dangerous Crocodile Snoggin at Ramshaw.
This last great problem features an unprotected crux 30 feet up with a landing that would keep the local casualty department busy for some considerable time.
Graded E8 6c, Clippety Clop, Clippety Clop…is a contender for grit's hardest route and is climbed using a series of desperate á cheval moves.
Good effort Seb.
On the same day, Andy Popp made the fourth ascent of the scary Never Never Land, E6 6b.
News from France is that recent Peak immigrant Felicity Butler has just made the first British female ascent of an F7c.
She has redpointed Ceuse's Vagabone, which is an excellent effort, especially as it is considered to be more difficult for those of limited height.
? Felicity also achieved a very creditable seventh place in the recent Italian round of the UIAA World Cup.
Colin Binks on The Edale Triop, E3 6a, a new route at Stanage, put up earlier this year.
We'll have details of more new Stanage routes next month.
(photo by Jim Rubery).
WALES By Andy Newton
After an extremely mixed summer weather wise, the spell of good weather at the tail end was almost ignored in Snowdonia, with surprisingly few teams on the major crags despite the dry conditions.
There were a few first ascents, climbed mainly before everyone got bored with the weather and sloped off abroad.
On Cloggy's Far East Buttress, a regenerated Leigh McGinley climbed the right arête of The Mostest with Tom Leppert to give Luaka, E4 6a, which features both technical and bold climbing.
Norman Clacher and Merlin Tomkins climbed leftwards from the start of East Buttress Direct Finish, up the wall, cracks and a groove, to give Virgo, E3 5c.
Over in the Llanberis Pass, My Best Friend, HVS 5a, is a 350 foot line found by Phil Baxter and Matt Neil on Clogwyn Y Ddysgl, starting right of Gambit Climb, skirting Nunc Dimittis and finishing up The Ring.
Rick Newcome and Carol Becker climbed the groove, crack and wall left of Demi Sac Dame on Drws Y Gwynt to give A Touch of Class, E5 2b, while Ed Stone and Mike ‘Twid’ Turner squeezed in Al Fresco, E4 6a, between Mural and Wind, joining the Scavenger's Daughter finish at the top.
Across the Glyders on Suicide Wall in the Ogwen Valley, Ed Stone and Mark Taylor were finding a new pitch between Mur Y Meirwon and Route 1: Y Meirwon Byw E4/5 6a climbs to just skirt the right side of the turf ledge and joins Mur Y Meirwon for its enjoyable finish.
Baxter, Neil and M. Jones also climbed the groove and crack right of Boot Crack, Milestone Buttress, to give The Pals, HVS 5a.
Ian Lloyd Jones, Chris Jex, C. Allen and R. Wright have all been at work in the Llanberis slate quarries, although their findings are rather too numerous to record in detail.
Out in the sunshine at Gogarth, Twid Turner and Kath Goodey arrived at Thunderbird Zawn to climb the lines the rest of us couldn't!
Archie is Angry E6 6c, takes the seaward side of the huge arch, and the same team also climbed the steep crack, E6 6b, left of Scud, E3 5c (Ian Wilson, The Yob and Paul Trower).
Owain Jones also weighed in with Friend or Anemone, E4 6a, which is an arête finish to The Hood, E2 5c (Andy Newton and Wilson) and Walking the Plankton E5 6a, which takes the crack and remaining groove left of International Rescue, HVS 5b (Newton and Jim Wylie).
The remaining lines to the right have all been climbed by various combinations of Newton, McGinley and Liz Wade.
In the Easter Island Gully area, George Smith free climbed the start of Wandering Wall and continued up the wall above to give The Ragged Runnel, E5 6a, quoted as ‘not superseding Wandering Wall…merely an alternative exploit for those without fishing rods!’
The latest addition is by Turner and Goodey on Left Hand Red Wall, where Ramalina, E76b, climbs directly up the wall from the peg on LHRW pitch 2.
This month's quiz — who knows what Ramalina is?
LAKES By Bill Birkett
PHIZACKLEA LEADS NEW ROUTE SPREE IN WEST FELLS
Although the exact stance of the owner (Lord Egremont) of Hodge Close remains somewhat imprecise, it now appears that Hodge itself will remain intact.
BMC access officer Bill Wright has ascertained that the caves to be (or not to be?) blown up lie below and to the side of the main embankments of Hodge.
In the Western Fells region covered by the FRCC Scafell, Dow and Eskdale Guide, Al Phizaclea continues to explore nooks and crannies with the philosophy that if it doesn't move and isn't already in the guide then it must be climbed.
With accomplices J. Holden, A. Atkinson and A. Rowell, his new routing activities have included many crags, ranging from Hodge Close, with Mirror Image, E4 6b (8 bolts and one point of aid), through Eskdale Needle — Straight To The Point, E2 5c — to four routes (still unnamed) from E1 to E2 on The Napes and Kern Knotts.
On Kern Knotts, the attractive clean wall immediately left of Kern Knotts Crack has been climbed by Steve Clegg, Kerrie Clegg, Ian Carr and Rod Valentine.
Development of numerous little buttresses situated on the north east side of the Mosedale valley at 1900ft, which has been named Little Stand Crag (ref 248033), has been carried out by J. Daly and K. Daly (future guidewriters should beware — a crag was also developed around here by A.T.
Hargreaves in the 1930's.
A photo appeared in the FRCC Journal showing the routes, but the crag failed to make the guidebook!).
On Calf Howe Crag, Kentmere, Simon Barber and Phil Allder added Glasnost, E3 5c, 40ft, starting 15ft left of The Bulger.
Tongue Scar, Kentmere (452071) has been developed by J. Daly and K. Daly with four routes from VS to E2/3.
On Kirkstone Crag above Ambleside, Andy Cannan has soloed three routes: Vulture's Crack, Vulture's Fingers and Bulture's Flakes between Severe and E1.
Mike Miller has climbed out of the left hand side of The Priest's Hole above Dove Crag to produce Xoanan, E4, 6b, 80ft, while in Sandbed Ghyll, Hit The Fan, E4 6a, marked the return both of Rob Matheson and Iain Greenwood.
On the South Crag of Castle Rock, Steve Hubbard and Pete Nicholson have claimed a line — Yeltsin — Severe 25m, between Gangway Climb and Slab Climb.
In an open letter (new routes book Rock and Run) Steve has also made his feelings known on the recent spate of bolting on Chapel Head, stating ‘All I'm suggesting is that a bit more thought goes into the development of the crag.
What's best about Chapel Head should be kept, not ruined by indiscriminate bolting.’
On the crag, Dave Birkett has added Unrighteous Doctors, E6 6c (F7c ±), which takes a line from the yew on the right side.
On Raven Crag Thirlmere, A. Perry and S. Coffey have claimed an independent 200ft VS, taking a line left of Communist Convert.
In the quarries at Chapel Stile, Dave Birkett has added Keep On Keeping On, E7 7±: in effect a direct on his own Scared Rabbit.
In Parrock Quarry, the distinctive hanging groove to the left of the Master Blaster area has been climbed by John Adams and myself and called The Groove (four bolt runners).
Graded E6 6a by John, I felt it closer to 6b — a view confirmed by the second and third ascensionists Howard Lancashire and Mike Waters.
Also with John, I climbed Wall and Slab, E5 6a.
Some 8m left of The Slabs area, J. Daly and K. Phizacklea have added Banana Slide, E1 5c.
Borrowdale seems relatively quiet but just reported, although climbed last year, on Caffell Side Crag, Steve Crowe, Simon Gee and Bob Bennet added Miss O'Gynist, E2 5c, taking a crack just right of Street Walker.
It appears that M. Lowerson, with various partners — r.
Smith, N. Steen, R. Bennet and S. Crowe, has been responsible for the development on the right side of Walla Crag, producing a girdle traverse — Magical Mystery Tour, E4 6a — and a dozen other routes from E2 to E5.
Certainly the scent I witnessed (through binoculars) through the left side of the arched overhangs looked like a modern classic in the making!
SOUTH-WEST By Tim Dennell
There is both good and bad news from Lundy.
The good news is that work is well under way on a new guidebook.
Gary Givson is again involved, this time with a small team, each responsible for a section of the island.
Anyone with new route information, suggestions or very good photos should contact  .
The bad news is that it appears that the Lundy company is not making enough money to cover its costs and is looking at ways of making the island more ‘commercial.’
Though this won't mean the building of a theme park, it might mean introducing game machines to the island and other such measures.
So if you want to see Lundy in its relatively unspoilt present state, go soon.
Crispin Waddy and I. Wilson finished last year off by climbing Uncrontrolled Gurning, E5 6a, 6a.
Described as possibly the wildest route on Lundy, it takes the east face of Devil's Chimney which, as its name implies, is actually a sea stack.
Dave Lyon and Norman Clacher started this year off well with three routes in Arch Zawn.
Smoke on the Water E5/6 6b, Woman in Chains E4/5 6a and Rigging in the Frigging Arête E4 6a.
Paul Harrison and Simon Cardy were hot on their heels with Badlands, E3 5c, taking the wall right of Wanderlands.
Bastard Wet Crack (There's a name to get them all queuing!)
E4 6a, takes the thin crack left of the Pathetic Sharks in Arch Zawn.
An un-named groove left of Shardick goes at E3 5b/c on Seal Slab and at Benson's Buttress Harrison and Cardy climbed Slave Labour, E2 5c, and Captain Denver Scoines E1 5b.
At Egyption Slabs, Cris Mellor and Dennis Crampton put up Silverado, E1 5b, between Fool's Gold and Wallybaldi.
Mike Shell and Tony Sawbridge found Kathleen Turner (HVS) on the Outer St James Stone, and in Short Story Zawn, In One Bound E2 5c, starts up Big Shiner then traverses right onto the face left of Tall Story.
Andrew Walker and Pete Tibbetts have discovered a seaward face to Great Shutter Point.
The face was spotted from canoes last year and though an alpine approach is possible, a seaborne approach seems a good alternative.
A Localised Puddle of Indifference I guess Gary Gibson is going to have to do more routes just to keep people's minds ticking over during winter) HVS, is said to be the best of the bunch and worth a couple of stars.
The other routes are Rent a Rev, The Bowels The Bowels and Sink the Admiral: all V. Diff to Severe on good rock.
There is concern at the moment that reporting new routes from Lundy in magazines might affect guide sales.
I think this is tosh myself, but it's really up to first ascensionists, so send me details if you wish.
Across the water on the mainland, Andy Grieve and Lee Ernshaw have produced a potentially classic testpiece at Smoothlands.
Slave to the Rythym, E5 6b, takes a line up the centre of the slab between Creeping Flesh and Hellbound, past two pegs.
My congratulations, by the way, to the public spirited Bristol climber who tested the number one wire placement on Hellbound by taking a 60 foot lob onto it while attempting a second ascent!
Lee Ernshaw freed René at the Cheesewring at E4 6a, and at Dodman Point climbed the slab right of Spitting Images to produce In God We Trust, E3 5b, while at Compass Point, The Second Coming (it's really that good Lee?),
E4 6a, is a direct start to Easter Risings.
At Anstey's Cove, Mark Campbell has produced his first two routes.
The Gangster, E3 6a, boldly climbs a rightward line starting from Charlie, while Time Passages Direct, HVS 5c, starts right of Era.
Mark is a tiny bit keen about Anstey's and by the time the year ends will have climbed there well over 200 times this year!
He's also preparing an interim guide to it for imminent launch.
At the Dewerstone, Pete Kay celebrated his safe return from the Gulf War with Return from the Kurds, E1/25c — a good eliminate left of Central Groove.
In West Penwith the Climbers Club have published the first of two new guides to the area, both written by Des Hannigan.
The first, titled Bosigran, covers the north coast from Wicca Pillar to Sennen.
The second should be out late this year or early next.
My feelings about splitting the guide into two are mixed.
I suspect that the Bosigran/Sennen guide will prove the most popular, which means that some excellent cliffs on the south coast will be visited less frequently.
Personally I don't mind carrying a large Stanage-size guide around, particularly if it means paying less.
And by buying two guides but getting the same historical information in each you do feel you're not getting full value for money.
Having said that, the Bosigran guide is well written and easy to use.
Don Sargent's diagrams of Great Zawn in particular, are excellent and should help demystify areas like this so they achieve the popularity they deserve.
Most of the notorious grade anomalies have been ironed out and the colour photos should whet people's appetites.
Lundy's famous Devil's Slide.
See our supplement, free with this issue, for a full description of the superb Severe line up it.
At Gribba Head West, Nick Dixon has produced Pre Marital Tension at a mighty E6 71, taking the arête of the buttress to claim Storms over Africa, E6 6c.
At Gribba Head East, Pete O'Sullivan was in need of a Skin Graft, E2 5c, after climbing the hanging crack on the upper left side of the face and was also responsible for Hysterical Hamsters, E4 6b, at Chairladder, taking the right hand arête of South East Buttress.
The new guide seems to have provoked an exploration frenzy in the area.
I hope to cover this in full in my next report.
There are new route books in the Marisco Tavern, Lundy; in the Count House, Bosigran; at Compass West, Sennen; The Wild Blue Yonder, Plymouth and at the Moorland Rambler in Exeter.
FINEST CLIMBS CRUMBLE IN EXMANSWORTHY CLIFF COLLAPSE
The North Devon cliffs at Exmansworthy have suffered from major rockfall this year.
The main areas affected are the Shadowalker and Catburglar walls, which also contained the cliff's finest climbs.
Only the top parts of these walls have gone, but the second crucial abseil point is also now missing.
The rock is extremely unstable and the hanging boulder field above both areas means that the finishes to the truncated climbs are exceptionally dangerous.
Much loose material is also now present on the climbs themselves.
It is possible that climbs on the subsidiary slabs still remain.
The best approach would now seem to be by a huge tidal boulder hop from Blackchurch, or by canoe.
Abseil stakes would also be needed to regain the beach given the dense thickets between the tops of the climbs and the coast path.
OFF BELAY
THE END, NOT THE GAME; THE GAME, NOT THE END
‘…
Let the moon Shine on thee in thy solitary walk; And let the misty mountain winds be free To blow against thee…’
Jim Perrin passes on words of wisdom to a young neighbour
There's a young woman of 17 who lives just down the road from me and has taken to calling on me of late.
She tells me of bike rides and scary trips through quarry tunnels and the climbs she's done or wants to do.
It all comes out in a bubbling, chattering flood of enthusiasm and that irresistible blend of diffidence and dogma which is one of the presiding characteristics of late adolescence.
I expect my own daughter will be like this in a year or two.
The other day we were drinking coffee on the terrace in front of my house, from which you can see the Wicklow Hills on clear evenings, and Clogwyn Du'r Arddu and Bus Stop Quarry (which properly is called Allt Ddu closer at hand.
Suddenly my visitor launched into this harangue:
‘I climb for the grade, nothing else.
I don't care if it's a rubbish route so long as it's got an E-number.
My dad says there are really good routes worth doing that are only V.Diff and that's all he ever wants to take me up, but I just don't want to know.
I want to go out with ––and do E4s.
He's brilliant, he's done an E7.’
‘Oh well, I've never led anything harder than E5, and I haven't done many of those, so I must be an absolutely lousy climber,’ I said.
She gave me a long, disdainful, disappointed look and then out of the charity of her heart, graciously excused me thus:
‘Yeah, but you're old, you came from the Stone Ate.’
Don't take this amiss.
It's all good-humoured teasing and winding up, and for my part I've long since ceased to care whether or not anyone regards me as the worst climber in the world or some sort of antediluvian relic with no rights to any opinion on ‘rock climbing as it is done these days.’
Indeed, I'd probably sympathise and go a long way towards agreeing with those propositions if they were put to me.
Self-knowledge, after all, comes cheaper than libel writs.
But something happened the next day which led me to think rather more seriously about what she'd said.
Paul Williams came round to my house for tea.
His beloved's in Sheffield and he can't wait to sell his house (any takers for a neat little cottage in Cwm y Glo?) and join her there.
Meanwhile, he moons around Wales and seeks out what company he can, entertaining his listeners with an unstoppable flow of anecdote and comment about the foibles and farragoes of the climbing world.
Take a step back, view it from the angles and it becomes a sort of absurdist roman fleuve , a Dada- Climbers with which anyone with a tape-recorder and a gift for transcription would run away with the Boardman Tasker prize.
I was busy cooking, blissing out on the aroma of cod in a yoghurt and fresh coriander sauce, and wasn't really listening, but through the vapours there penetrated the fact that in Derbyshire they were queuing up recently to do a route on Raven Tor which is ‘easy 8a,’ in order to get into a book which David Jones has assembled on climbers — particularly those who can climb 8a.
I switched into listening mode:
‘What it means,’ Paul continued, ‘is that some guy…’
‘Or woman — don't be sexist about it, Paul.’
‘Oh yeah,’ he glared, ‘like who?
Anyway, like I was saying, any jumped-up little nerd can come along, work on a route  for a month and get it wired, then go down in the book as one of the greats.
And Ron, who's way out one of the greats, doesn't get a mention.’
‘What's an 81 anyway, Paul — I though we'd only got as far as 7b?’
‘French grades, dickhead!’
Which took me straight back to my young friend on the terrace, for whom only the numbers count.
Now as I said, I'm perfectly aware that the only proper and permissible response on the part of any young climber worth his or her salt to any views that I might hold, is that they're those of an irredeemably antiquated never-was-been.
But nonetheless — and for what it's worth — this obsession with number seems to me sad, reductive and weird, and I wonder where it comes from?
If I were saying here that I don't approve, then obviously it would be of no value, it would just be generation gap inanity, but it's not that, and approval doesn't come into the equation.
Potential does.
By which I mean the range of potential response to the experience of climbing.
What worries me about a desire for achievement which finds its vindication solely in number is the externality of it all.
It's the landscape that ‘wish’ inhabits, which is the one of judgmentalism and show.
‘Unless,’ it seems to suggest, ‘you can climb E7 or 8a, your humanity is a debased commodity.’
My instinct is to put all this down to the vitiating effect of the Thatcher years, when proper provisionalism, breadth, pluralism and doubt were banished and the harsh, amoral glitter of ends attained-by-whatever-means held sway.
Thinking along those lines, I took a certain glee in the thought that the style, like its progenitor, might crack and crumble into maudlin self-justification.
But that's far too simplistic.
Even Julie Burchill, the Jean Rook of the 90s, could find a halfways-intelligent refutation of that.
Exult in the rock, be free…
I tried another facet.
Wordsworth provided it.
It used to be respectable, an acceptable article of faith even, to quote Wordsworth.
Indeed, two of the great classics of mountain literature, Bill Murray's Mountaineering in Scotland , are entirely Wordsworthian in their root philosophy.
For myself, I've never entirely trusted Wordsworth.
A nature poet who thought ‘Earth hath not anything to show more fair’ than the view from Westminster Bridge?
One who claimed to revere life yet who wrote, at a time when you could be hanged for stealing a lamb, those dreadful, gloating sonnets on (‘Fit retribution by the moral code!’) the punishment of death?
However, when he surrenders himself to the moods and atmospheres of the hills, something authentic comes through:
‘…let the moon
Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;
And let the misty mountain winds be free
To blow against thee: and in after years,
When these wild ecstasies shall be matured
Into a sober pleasure…‘
These Wild ecstasies!
Do you see it now?
Not the calculations and the endless reiterated pitting of timed and manufactured strength against rock or concrete for the acquisition of a cipher, but the spontaneity and the exultation within; the freedom, the redemption from the stale routines of life.
The sun on our backs and bright crystals biting into our feet, the printed pain of a sharp finger edge cutting across the joyful soft warmth of the wind; the loving immediacy of experience which hurls us free from the containment of assessment, order and code.
Ah…!
‘By our own spirits we are defied.’
And beneath the realms of experience we then reach, the small gods of number painfully aspire, contrive and despair.
So, young neighbour, gracious one, don't grow too serious, don't forget to, don't neglect to play —‘for the universe is an empty shell wherein your mind frolics infinitely.’
What more is there to say…?
BOOKS
THE ENDLESS KNOT: K2, MOUNTAIN OF DREAMS AND DESTINY
Kurt Diemberger, Grafton Books, £25
‘Through all the exhaustion and fear of the disastrous 1986 climb, Kurt Diemberger felt himself at one with creation, part of the ‘endless knot’ which put him in harmony with the cosmos and with a force which in the end was to save his life.’
The quotation's from the jacket blurb of the English translation of Kurt Diemberger's book about the role of K2 in his and Julie Tullis's life, and for all the imprecision of the grammatical structures by which it's expressed here, it's an idea I can willingly accept.
The trouble for me is that — as happens with so many western writers on eastern topographical themes — it feels grafted on, retrospectively interpreted to give a quasi-authentic mystico-intellectual gloss, rather than profoundly integrated, even throughout what St. Augustine terms the ‘vital dimension of approach.’
It's a question of authenticity — is this theme deeply-held, is it central to an understanding of the author's character, or is it superficial gloss; perhaps even so slightly phoney?
And that question for me is never adequately answered by Kurt Diemberger's text.
This is not, you should understand, to dismiss this book.
It is far too weighty and achieved a piece of writing for any such hasty response.
But it is to wonder about the sort of book it is.
There is an externality about the Buddhist symbol's application here, and the doubts raised by that are with self-vindication.
It is, if you like, to continue with the religious motifs with which Kurt makes play (most notably in the matter of title), by Newman's Apologia out of Alexandria David-Neel's Magic and Mystery in Tibet .
It's the irrelevance of this texture which for me is one of the two main problems with the book.
The second is more easily dealt with.
The quality of translation here, with its simpering rhythms and bathetic language, proves that in this matter the major publishers have moved on hardly at all from the bad old days when the employment of unskilled amateurs or stilted romantics in translation work marred the English publication of some of the great accounts of European mountaineering.
To return to the first problem, that also focuses on to a question of style.
I haven't read such a self-consciously ‘literary’ book about climbing for some years, and that style came as a shock, perhaps even intrusion:
‘A real book needs more than just a good writer.
It needs a deep conviction, a promise to yourself, to others….’
Now that, from the preface, seems to me a pretty clear statement of authorial intent, and the impression's reinforced as Kurt continues:
‘To write about the events up there was hard, sometimes a real struggle, but it had to be.
I'll never be able to accept what happened, but at least it should never be repeated…’
The  altruistic purpose is obviously admirable, but there are factors within the text by which it is necessarily compromised.
The most striking of these is Kurt's desire to write an artistically-conceived and impressionistically structured literary masterpiece.
Unfortunately for authors, readers do not necessarily have to accept the terms they attempt to dictate, however subtly that attempt is made.
The author who is trying to present fact as objective sequence does well to eschew rhetorical structures in favour of judicious discussion.
Kurt continually espouses the former, dismisses alternative accounts not easily available to us without adequately representing them (I would be fascinated, for example, to read Willi Bauer's account of the events of early August 1986), and by doing so stimulates in the sceptical reader nagging doubts about the designs of the text upon us, about the egocentricities of its other emotional pleadings.
Kurt Diemberger
For all the questions and doubts the book raises, it's not one that I'd want to damn out of court or do without.
This, after all, is the account of a man who, in his 50s, climbed K2, sat out for days at 8000 metres savage storm from which he escaped to descend — one of only two survivors of a nightmare beyond the comprehension of most of us.
A bare narrative of the details of what this man lived through, of their effect upon him, would alone deserve classic status.
Instead, that author' given us far more than that, and the consequence is that the echo of his own insistencies  plagues our easy acceptance of his facts.
If ever artifice and device should have been foregone in favour of uncluttered simplicity in the recounting of experience, this was a case in point.
Compare it with Joe Simpson's Touching the Void and the weakness becomes apparent — the one an understated masterpiece, the other a marvellous, complex and overweening mess, defeating itself from within.
Read it you must, but do so through narrowed eyes…
MAIL
Guidebooks can't replace common sense judgement
I'm not surprised that David Lee (Oct issue) had an epic on Cust's Gully.
In wet conditions any gully on a north-facing crag is bound to be treacherously slippery, which renders even the easiest scrambling pitches dangerous.
The fact that a route is described in a guidebook, flawed or otherwise, should not affect an individual's judgement.
I should hope that anyone of lesser climbing ability that Mr Lee would have taken one look at the gully and decided that conditions were unfavourable.
The fact that Mr Lee can climb up to E1 suggests that he pushed himself into difficulties, in a scenario which must be familiar to most climbers or mountaineers.
In my books I strongly advocate that a rope is carried in the party for use as a safeguard if necessary, or to aid retreat.
If this advice had been followed I'm sure Mr Lee would not have been so worried.
I also advise against solo scrambling.
The introductory chapters of my books contain much advice which, if heeded, would help to minimise the dangers.
However, any form of mountaineering has its inherent dangers; after all, it is an adventure sport.
People have been scrambling up Cust's Gully for over 100 years, and in dry conditions it should pose no problems — although it is not particularly attractive and I only included it because it was such a traditional route.
For many years it was described in the Fell and Rock Climbing Club guide as having ‘one very small and easy pitch about halfway up.’
You can't put the onus on guidebook descriptions, the final decision on whether or not to do the route must rest with the judgement and common sense of the individual on the spot.
Honest and objective book reviewing
In the interest of fairness and the protection of fellow reviewers, I must be allowed the right of reply to Martin Collins' extraordinary outburst (Mail , Sept) in response to my review of his book Classic Walks in the Peak District .
First of all,Climber & Hill Walker readers must be wondering what he was so annoyed about, because the review did not actually appear in this magazine but its sister publication The Great Outdoors .
My review was an objective appraisal of a book which, in my professional opinion, had several serious shortcomings and errors, many of which, incidentally, I blamed on the publisher.
As head of information services for the Peak National Park, my judgement should surely be considered reliable and balanced.
It was certainly not bogged down by any kind of personal dogma, and I resent that accusation.
As a book reviewer of some 25 years experience I am not, and never will be, of the school that thinks that because you have been given a free book, you should give a good review.
As an author, I expect reviewers to be honest and objective.
If there are criticisms then I accept them with the same magnanimity which Martin claims I do not possess.
So come on Martin, such fits of petulant pique do nothing to make readers respect your professional judgement, whether it is on ‘classic’ walks or anything else.
Transcending the status of a competition bimbo
I note with some interest that Catherine Destivelle has ‘transcended her career.’
She is no longer merely a ‘bimbo,’ as designated by some experts on this sort of thing — Beaumont, Douglas and Rose.
She must be thrilled.
This is of some interest to me, working as a teacher of outdoor pursuits with girls (and boys) on Merseyside.
I spend a great deal of time attempting to persuade such girls that rock climbing is a valid female choice for recreation and person development.
We are indebted to Beumont et al for having grasped the nettle in laying down the grade at which a girl or woman can expect to be respected as a climber and transcend the status defined by ‘bimbo,’ i.e. interesting only if she happens to be pretty.
All that is required is that she should climb better, harder, in more desperate circumstances than every man on the planet and we men will accept her as an equal.
Can't say fairer than that now can we?
I was disappointed that the otherwise excellent article on Catherine Destivelle's recent ascent of the Dru was spoiled by the description of ‘her brief career as a competition rock bimbo.’
If one wished to aspire to such a role, what criteria would one need to fulfil, I wonder?
Be a woman?
Be an attractive woman?
Be an attractive French woman?
Use bolts?
Or are there other criteria that I haven't thought of?
Seeking Peak climbing stories
I'm writing a history of climbing in the Peak District from 1930 to the present.
If any of your readers has any interesting photographs or stories, I would be glad if they wrote to me at the address below.
I'm interested in early repeats, solos and free ascents and would particularly like to know if Harry Dover or Gilbert Ellis are still alive.
I would also like to know the whereabouts of Barry, Len Millson, Ivy Byne, Jack McLeod, Tom Probert, Mike Simpkins and John Gosling.
Happy camper
Following your coverage of my difficulties in getting hold of a Volcano kettle (Sept issue), I received a letter from Martin Burke , who put me in touch with Perer Bayes at the .
After a short conversation with him I hope to be in receipt of a kettle in the near future.
Many thanks from a grateful reader.
The first drink of tea will be on you.
Visual sandbag
I enjoyed Dave Cook's piece on Sandbags and Soft Touches (Oct. issue) and could add a lengthy list of both to the ones he covers.
My main reason for writing is that the photograph entitled Cool for Cats (which is, as stated, a soft touch E1 5b) actually shows someone on Manzoku, which in reality is a hard touch E1 5b.
Then again, maybe the photograph caption is an attempt at a sandbag!
EVENTS
Safety in winter
Boots Across Scotland are organising their third series of winter safety lectures, given by experienced mountain guide Mick Tighe.
As in the past, this year's shows are entitled The Good, The Bad And The Ugly and take the form of a slide show and lecture, with music.
Entry is free and open to anyone interested in hillgoing in winter conditions.
Boots Across Scotland sponsor the series of lectures as a positive donation towards mountain safety awareness.
The organisation continues to offer support to injured hillgoers and climbers and provide help and equipment to mountain rescue teams.
The lecture dates are: November 12th,.
This date is still to be finalised, please check with the centre and local area for correct date.
All lectures should start at about 7.30pm and last (dependent on question and answer period) for two hours.
Boots Across Scotland are also organising an event for June 21, 1992 (midsummer day).
The plan is to put someone on all 277 Munros on the same day, and hopefully at the same time.
At this time, over 750 people have offered to become part of next year's event and two thirds of the Munros are already pledged.
If you would like more information, please contact  
Dramatic rise in profile for British Abseil Association
An unprecedented response to your excellent article by Pete Livesey in the October issue on the British Abseil Association, means that we have now reached our membership limit of 1.2 million.
Membership from now on will be by invitation only as existing places become available through natural wastage.
On a very positive note, I am pleased to report that negotiations are in the process of being concluded with landowners to secure a number of notable cliffs for the exclusive use of BAA members.
These include: Rainbow Slab, Dinorwic; Malham Cove right wing; the Flying Buttress section of Stanage and Upper Cave Crag, Dunkeld.
Climbers should note that as soon as agreement has been reached, climbing activities will not be permitted at these locations.
Anyone attempting to flout the restrictions and climb conventionally is at serious risk of injury from BAA members abseiling down the cliff face.
We are indebted to the Sports Council for providing financial assistance for the purchase of bolts, stakes and abseil chains and sledgehammers.
It is with regret, however, that I have to report a very negative stance by the British Mountaineering Council to our association, and their outright refusal to recognise it.
It is to be hoped a change of attitude will occur as the credibility of abseiling as a legitimate activity in its own right grows.
Finally, I must add my grateful thanks to Pete Livesey and to Climber & Hill Walker for raising the BAA's profile in such a dramatic way.
FALLS PETE LIVESEY
Our man on the back page explains why he's calling it a day
Next month I will finally fall of the back page, to be replaced by columns of Classified Ads inserted by 60-year-old male Vl Diff leaders seeking 24-year-old female partners for climbing and what have you.
I am retiring, leaving this column to become a professional athlete and sports climber.
The reader of this column over the years will have noticed that relevant contemporary issues have been taken and discussed in a conciliatory and balanced manner, causing offence to virtually no-one.
The views expressed have not always been my own, but rather a collection of disparate angles on the topic, as the reader may have noticed.
This month, however, is my chance to put all that to rights.
Here and now you discover what I really think about everything.
Firstly let me say that I don't climb much these days — about a hundred or so routes a year, mostly soloed and always in trainers.
But the pleasure is always the same — grand scenery, stunning settings and the wonderful way that holds keep appearing on great slabs of bland-looking rock.
I don't like gritstone: never did — it doesn't fit any of my reasons for enjoying climbing, which is why I can't see any reason for not bolting it.
A perfect place for bolts I would have thought.
I wonder how many climbers today empathise with my reasons for climbing?
Many, I would hope, but probably few of the new sports climbers (new as distinct from ‘old’ real climbers seeking risk-free pleasure).
We have a new order of things now, with rock climbing becoming a separate activity sharing little common ground with those other activities with which it has been traditionally linked: mountaineering, alpinism, big wall climbing and fell walking.
Indeed, there is now little or none of the traditional progression or interweaving of rock climbing and other mountain activities.
As Jim Perrin almost explained in his highly perceptive and barely obscure September piece, today's rock climber does it for extrinsic reasons, creating a gulf between that activity and the intrinsic moves of the other mountain activities.
Rock climbing is rapidly becoming a pariah among mountain activities.
Sports Climbing
My understanding of sports climbing is that it is technically high standard climbing, probably 6a/b and up, where the problems of protection and its placement are removed by ladders of pre-placed bolts.
Additionally, these bolts and other protection are commonly used to rest on during the ascent.
The achievement therefore is in mastering a set of moves.
I haven't the remotest inclination to join this band of climbers, nor have I anything against what they are doing — good luck to them.
The problems arise when their activities interfere with the freedom of other hill users.
Bolting on natural limestone cliffs in the Yorkshire Dales has recently brought significant numbers of complaints from visitors to the area, with the result that access to at least one of the big three cliffs is in imminent jeopardy for all climbers.
I don't happen to think bolting is in the least bit environmentally damaging (at least not compared with other activities going on around it) but mechanical drills are bound to give it a bad image — the message her is ‘bolters, do your stuff in winter or at night.’
The BMC
I think the BMC has made two big mistakes.
Getting itself involved in access so deeply has turned it from a benign, vaguely representative organisation into one whose role is increasingly to police the activities of climbing and climbers.
However, I'm not sure it had much choice in the matter, given that it made great efforts in the 70s and 80s to change its image from an ineffective amateur body into a responsible and professional organisation.
I still hold the view, though, that meddling in access has resulted in less access than existed before in the good old ‘de facto’ days.
The other big mistake could and should have been avoided.
The embracing of, and subsequent attempts to police, sports and competition rock climbing, have created all kinds of ethical dilemmas and paradoxes for the BMC, resulting in an unworkable policy on these new and distinctly minority aberrations of real climbing.
Competition climbing is laughable in this country, and is probably a dead duck anyway.
There have been more cancelled and postponed competitions here in the last few years than live ones — all of which reflects badly on the BMC as controllers.
Why not look at the situation rationally: it's the British Mountaineering Council, and sports climbing and competitions have nothing in common with the ethos of mountaineering activities — so why not ignore them, excommunicate them?
Access
Having said the BMC made a bad move getting involved, the fact remains that access is now a major issue for mountain users; not due to the traditional problems of a landowner barring access — there is much less of that these days.
Access problems are increasingly centred around environmental issues, as politicians see mileage in the wellbeing of beetles at the expense of the wellbeing of people.
I suspect a new problem maya rise soon, as landowners are encouraged to charge for admission to mountain recreations as part of upland agricultural diversification initiatives.
It is already happening in subtle ways: £2 to park your car beneath Simon's Seat or Snowdon.
Again, as long as the BMC remains a respectable organisation, climbers will be increasingly affected by access problems.
Professionalisation
Various pressures have resulted in growing professionalisation in climbing which has changed the activity and will continue to change it — probably for the worse.
Commercial and media interest has contributed to the professionalisation of rock climbing, especially exemplified by the sports climber.
The combined effects of increasingly structured institutions and the growing effects of rules and litigation have radically altered the training and qualification structure of mountaineers, and more importantly, the average climber's attitude toward such things.
External bodies such as the National Council for Vocational Qualifications and the Health and Safety Executive are forcing through the increased professionalisation of the teaching and climbing and the rescuing of climbers.
I suspect it is not entirely for the good.
Anyway, I don't care — Bye!
Next month, for his final piece, Pete Livesey has revised what he considers one of his best published articles:A Short Walk with Ron 