

COMPASS COMPILED BY PETER BEAUMONT, ED DOUGLAS & DAVID ROSE
Himalayas claim life of top woman climber
Kangchenjunga has claimed the life of distinguished Polish mountaineer Wanda Rutkiewicz.
She was reported missing in May by members of a Mexican expedition of which she was a member, and hopes of her safe return later faded.
On May 11 she was at Camp IV (7,900m) on the north side of the mountain with her companion Carlos Carsolio, where she complained of sickness and did not eat well.
At 3.30am the following day they left for the summit, Wanda climbing slowly by herself while Carlos, who was going well, reached the summit at 5pm.
On descent he met Wanda at 8,300 metres and helped her arrange a bivouac.
He described her as ‘tired but lucid’.
Carlos told her he would wait at Camp IV while she attempted the summit, which he did until midday on the 13th, when he descended to Camp II at 6,800 metres.
He returned to base camp on the 16th, by which time hope that Wanda would return had largely faded.
Born in Lithuania during the war, 49 year old Wanda had a distinguished career.
She was the third woman to climb Everest, in October 1978, and followed this achievement with an ascent of Nanga Parbat.
She led two expeditions — both with women only — to K2 in 1982 and 1984, before succeeding in the fateful summer of 1986.
Her ascent was the first but it was marred by the loss of climbing partners Liliane and Maurice Barrard and two of her best friends, Wojciech Wröz and Dobroslawa Miodowicz-Wolf.
In the last three years Wanda had a string of successes, including Shisha Pangma, Gasherbrum 2 with Rhona Lampard in 1989 and a new variation on Gasherbrum 1's north-west face in 1990 with Ewa Pakiewicz.
Last year she increased her tally of 8,000 metre peaks to eight, with ascents of the west face of Cho Oyu and the south face of Annapurna.
A woman of immense determination and stamina, Wanda's death will be keenly felt around the world.
Makalu failure fuels commercial debate
NICK MASON'S expedition to the west face of Makalu has, to no one 's surprise, failed dismally.
The £250,000 trip barely rose above the bergschrund on the unclimbed face, and failed again after transferring its attentions to the ‘normal route’, the north west ridge.
Criticised by the BMC, the UIAA and the whole of the climbing press, the team's heavyweight approach was matched only by its collective inexperience.
But to sponsors British Telecom this failure, and the criticism from fellow mountaineers, was unimportant.
Repeatedly, the stars of the team were pictured on primetime television thanks to BT's technology, and on every occasion there was the obligatory mention for BY.
What would that have cost in the open advertising market?
Commercialisation of the Himalayas is now fact.
Its most bizarre sales gimmick so far is a guided trip to Everest next year, led by New Zealand guides Rob Hall and Gary Ball.
Priced at about £20,000 and aimed mainly at the American market, the expedition promises not only the now commonplace deluxe basecamp and satellite telephone links, but a 24-hours service, complete with VDE, providing constant information about share price movements on Wall Street.
More gimmicks will mean more overcrowding in the world's highest mountains.
On May 12 this year 32 people reached the summit of Everest.
This alarming statistic led Qamar Ali Mirza, president of the Pakistan Mountaineering Association, to make a moving plea at a conference of Greater Ranges nations being held at the time in Kathmandu: ‘Please give a respite to these big mountains.
Give them a year off so they can recoup’.
But there was little sign of any of the national authorities present taking any notice.
As he spoke, there were no fewer than 17 expeditions on Everest, all paying hefty fees; 250 climbers on the Nepal side alone.
The only comment from Tek Pokharel of the Nepal Mountaineering Association was that it was a question of managing numbers, not limiting them: ‘Everest is a big mountain’, he said.
Where will it end?
Already there are stories circulating of a market in Everest permits, with holders of these valuable documents attempting to cash in places on forthcoming commercial trips.
Lafaille solos new route on Jorasses
JEAN-CHRISTOPHE LAFAILLE, the French alpinist who dominated new-routing in the Mont Blanc massif last season, has rope-soloed a new line on the north face of the Grandes Jorasses.
The climb, which tackles directly the steep rock buttresses of the Croz Spur, is undoubtedly an important addition to modern extreme alpinism in the range.
Lafaille first attempted the line in early March this year, but was forced back after four days by a combination of high winds and snowfall.
He returned to the Jorasses at the end of April, as soon as the méteo promised a spell of fine weather.
The climb was outside the ‘official’ winter season but conditions were still far from perfect on the sombre north face.
Lafaille rapidly reached his previous high point and bivouac, and recovered the sleeping bag he had been forced to abandon.
The next 500 metres were to prove the crux of the route: 12 pitches of sustained verticality, complicated by poor rock and a layer of ice.
Lafaille knew he had to complete this section before there was any chance of a bivouac site.
He finished the last hard pitch in darkness.
The following day he was still 300 metres below the summit of the Jorasses, and although the climbing was now easier, his progress was slowed by fragile rock and deteriorating weather.
It took him eight hours of careful, painstaking work to reach the summit.
Lafaille, a 26-years-old professional guide from Gap, has emerged in the last few years as a climber of unique all round ability.
He began as a rock climber, opening new routes on the Provencal ‘super-cliff’ of Ceuse, and entered enthusiastically into the athletic rigours of the new generation of sport climbers.
Although largely unknown in Britain, Lafaille has an impressive rock climbing curriculum vitae .
He was the first Frenchman to climb 8c, and has free-soloed routes graded 8a± (about E6/7).
He took part in several indoor competitions, winning first place in the Provence Open, before deciding his real ambitions lay elsewhere.
Lafaille's alpine career proved equally brilliant: first winter solo of Divine Providence on Mont Blanc's Grand Pilier d'Angle; winter solos of the Bonatti and the Swiss routes on the Grand Capucin; and first winter solo of the American Direct on the Drus.
Last summer he took his solitary art one stage further, opening two new routes on Mont Blanc in a single trip.
In recent years the alpine trend has been for less adventurous climbing: bolted instant classics from climbers' such as Michel Piola — safe rock routes with a savage backdrop.
Lafaille's climbs give vivid illustration that adventure can still be found, even in the world's most crowded massif.
The Federation Francaise de la Montagne et de l'Escalade — the French equivalent of the BMC and an enthusiastic supporter of bolted climbing — hjas just awarded Lafaille its ‘Cristal’ trophy for his ascents last year.
Recognition, perhaps, that adventurous times have returned to alpine climbing.
Above: Jean-Christophe Lafaille high on his new route, which takes a direct line up the Croz Spur on the Grandes Jorasses.
Left: Lafaille: the 26-years-old mountain guide is setting new standards of boldness and technical difficulty in the French alps.
Photos by 
Moon supports claim to world's hardest climb
BEN MOON, nursing injured tendons after a six-day attempt on Wolfgang Fullich's super-route Aktion Direkt, is supporting the claim that it is the hardest rock-climb in the world.
‘Wolfgang's route is harder than my climbs’, he admits.
Moon, whose own route Hubble, F8c±, at Ravenstor is still unrepeated, is a strong supporter of the modern ‘microroute’.
He believes longer climbs such as Jibé Tribout's Just Do It (see Reports ), Which rely more heavily on stamina than power, are not of the same order of difficulty.
‘Aktion Direkt is probably the hardest climb in the world.
It's not right to call it a boulder problem; it has 16 moves and is 25 feet long.
That's not a boulder problem by any means as far as I'm concerned’.
Moon is sceptical of Tribout's claims for Just Do It at Smith Rock in America.
He has not visited the cliff, but questions the Frenchman's ability to climb at the highest levels.
‘I have to go on Jibé's past record.
I don't think he's climbed 8c, to be honest.
Stamina may be his strong point, but it doesn't mean he's the hardest climber in the world’.
Tribout, says Moon, tried to repeat Ben's Maginot Line at Bolx just before leaving for America — he had already repeated it once — and failed.
‘Maginot Line is English 6c, and if he isn't doing that grade then Just Do It can't have hard moves on it’.
Moon has a project route of his own, above the Plage at Buoux.
He describes it as a steep overhanging wall, with two hard 12 feet sections.
He has constructed a model of the route in the Stalybridge workshop of climbing wall manufacturers Bendcrete, for whom he now works.
‘The Buoux route is a longterm project’, he says.
‘At the moment I can't do any of the moves.
It may prove too hard, something for a future generation’.
Ben now agrees with Continental opinion that his route Agincourt at Buoux, heralded as the first ever 8c, was actually preceded by Gullich's Wall Street in Germany.
And he now downgrades his own Maginot Line at Volx to a mere 8b±, after Patrick Edlinger discovered a toe-hook move to overcome the crux.
The debate about the future direction of hard rock-climbing — longer stamina routes or short power climbs — continues.
Ben believes his style of climbing will ultimately prove the more difficult.
‘Maybe you have to make a choice, but I don't think there are any hard stamina routes; it's just a question of training stamina for six weeks’.
Ben hopes to be free of his injuries by September for a renewed attempt on Aktion Direkt.
Award should improve crag etiquette
THIS correspondent, like many others, has suffered at the hands of groups under instruction.
Having been abseiled onto while soloing, had my runners pulled on by top-ropers and queued while large parties top-roped routes too hard for them, the BMC can only be congratulated for finally taking the matter in hand with an award for single pitch supervisors.
The award is aimed at group leaders who top-rope parties on small crags and will concentrate not just on safety but on crag ethics and etiquette, an emphasis on the problems outlined above.
The decision to initiate the award scheme was taken by the BMC's management committee following the recommendation of its training advisory group.
While the BMC has always avoided awards in the past as not being in the spirit of climbing, it was persuaded by the increasing use of crags like Stanage by large groups under instruction.
According to BMC general secretary Derek Walker, special emphasis will be put on minimising the impact of group use on independent climbers.
Agreement has also been reached for a Europe-wide European Mountain Leader Award with France, Belgium, Italy, Spain and the UK for leaders of walking groups in the mountains of Europe below the glacier line.
The first course will be run at Plas-Y-Brenin in November for those already holding a winter mountain leader award.
Scott seeks clients at £12000 a time to fund trip
DOUG SCOTT is hoping to lead a trip this winter to that most expensive of climbing venues, Antarctica, to make first ascents of the continent's second highest peak Naomi Uemera (15,257 feet) and Tyree (15,895 feet).
He also hopes to climb the better known Vinson (17,057 feet).
However, to make this feasible commercially he needs to take up to six clients, for each of whom the cost will be about £12,000.
This covers the huge cost of the Adventure Network International charter flight from Punta Arenas in Argentina, and then a Twin Otter to basecamp.
Besides Scott, the guides will be Sharu Prabhu and Phil Ershler.
Interested parties with enough cash can write to .
Pen Trwyn restrictions
NEW lower-off and abseil points are now in place at the reopened upper Craig Pen Trwyn, but the BMC emphasises that continued access depends on the strictest observance of the agreement.
Because of the danger to cars on Marine Drive, the local council insists no climbing takes place between 9 am and 6 pm on bank holiday weekends, and throughout July, August and the first week of September.
Vested interests blamed for collapse of Mar Lodge deal
THERE are renewed fears that the scenically spectacular Cairngorm estate of Mar Lodge — which contains Ben MacDhui, the second highest mountain in Britain — might be lost to the nation following a failure by conservation bodies to put together a financial package to buy it.
Mountaineering Council of Scotland president Bob Reid described the news, which broke on the same day as the much criticised Cairngorms Working Party consultation paper was launched, as part of ‘a double whammy for the Cairngorms’.
The landowning vested interests are entirely to blame, said Mr Reid.
‘Their excessive influence over government means that the sacred cow of the Cairngorm sporting estate will persist’.
‘Government funding for Mar Lodge's future through Scottish Natural Heritage couldn't be agreed to because it would be a nail in the coffin admission that the present deer forest system is at the root of the most serious problems for the Cairngorms’.
He was annoyed, he said, that deer forest managers were given the kid glove treatment while hillwalkers and climbers had the big stick of stiffer sanctions waved at them — such as no-go areas.
The attempt to buy the estate was put together by the World Wide Fund for Nature, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the John Muir Trust, who were committed to raising £5 million with promise of a further £3.5 million from the National Heritage Memorial fund.
Simon Pepper of the WWF said: ‘We have had to recognise that having spent a considerable time on this project and having devoted considerable resources by our organisations, it has not been possible to secure the overall package which we considered necessary for going ahead.
We have therefore decided to withdraw at this time’.
Carn a'Mhain and the expansive view from Carbh Choire — part of the Mar Lodge estate (photo )
That package included agreeing the running costs of the estate with the Scottish Natural Heritage agency, which was not finalised despite lengthy negotiations.
The move to withdraw is a calculated gamble by the agencies to provoke further debate about the future of Mar Lodge in the hope that a new initiative might overcome the remaining obstacles to securing the estate's future.
‘One of the problems’, said Nigel Howkins of the JMT, ‘has been that while our initiative was underway, people felt that something was being done about Mar Lodge’.
The consortium felt that suspending their initiative would encourage the debate to start again, he added.
A cynical observer might argue that the assembly of a £5 million bid might easily be described as ‘something being done’, and the failure of the attempt can hardly be viewed as a positive step, even if the debate on the estate's future is now reopened.
It is likely that the 77,000 acre estate's American owner John Kluge will now look for a private buyer, especially as the lodge itself, devastated last year by fire, has almost been renovated.
Mar Lodge has some of the best hillwalking terrain in the country, including several Cairngorm Munros and part of the Lairig Ghru, the popular pass through the massif.
Fires may lead to access ban
HILL fires in the Peak District, which stretched national park resources at the end of May, as rangers fought to contain the damage, may have been started deliberately.
Four fires in a week occurred at an especially sensitive time of year.
On the 28th alone, three were burning between Cluther Rocks and Red Brook on Kinder, and on two areas of Bleaklow, around Alport and Torside Clough.
Chief ranger Ken Drabble said damage in the district was considerable, with this year's new growth destroyed along with the eggs of ground nesting birds.
People reported seeing smoke from over 70 miles away and helicopters were used to help fight the blaze.
Ken also suggested the fires were not accidental: ‘I think these fires were probably malicious.
Accidental fires do happen when the Peak is very dry but we haven't been in that situation yet.
And they usually occur in popular locations, while these have been in very remote areas’.
Asked for a possible motive in setting fire to the moors, Ken remarked: ‘There is nothing stranger than human beings’.
He added that a ban, like those seen during dry spells in recent years, would not be ruled out if the situation became extreme.
He asked all climbers and walkers to remain vigilant.
Flagstones for the Pennine Way
THE Countryside Commission has funded a massive £9,000 airlift of Lancashire mill glagstones in an effort to stem the problems of serious erosion on four badly affected areas of the Pennine Way.
In the first ever co-ordinated airlift of this scale to repair erosion damage, the flagstones, recycled from demolished Lancashire cotton mills, were lowered by helicopter at strategic sites along the Way to be laid as paths.
The sites of the helicopter drops were in Northumberland, Durham, Calderdale and the Peak.
Nearly 600 tons of flagstones were dropped during the operation: 300 tons along the Border Ridge near Blindburn in the Northumberland National Park; 60 tons in Teesdale near Cauldron Snout and Bleabeck Force; 65 tons at Calderdale near Longfield Common and 135 tons near Bleaklow in the peak National Park.
Tony Philpin, Pennine Way co-ordinator, said that by tackling all the problem areas simultaneously the project was more cost effective in terms of the bulk purchase of the flags and hiring the helicopters.
‘The flags are ideal for the worst eroded stretches as the stone will blend with the environment and integrate into the landscape…,’ he said.
The flags also have the advantage of low maintenance, and because they are rough riven should not be too slippery in wet weather.
The length of the repairs to be done with the flagstones will vary from several miles to a few hundred yards, and they will be laid with the help of local authorities, volunteers and environmental associations.
Mr Philpin said: ‘The use of the helicopter is the only possible method of transporting heavy materials; otherwise vehicles would simply sink in the peat bogs they were hoping to repair’.
The airlift will build a total of three kilometres of paths at an average cost of about £30 a metre, with the whole operation being paid for by the Countryside Commission.
Keith Pennyfeather, a senior countryside officer with the commission said: ‘Much of the restoration being carried out on the Pennine Way inevitably occurs at remote sites a considerable distance from the nearest road.
‘Though it may seem an expensive solution, airlifting is the only acceptable way of avoiding serious damage to vegetation that would occur from repeated journeys in vehicles’.
Whillans hut
WORK has begun to convert the ruined Gothic Rockhall Cottage at the Roaches into a climbing hut to commemorate the life and climbs of Don Whillans.
The work, which is being paid for out of the memorial fund launched after Whillans' death, began recently and is due to be completed by this autumn.
In the meantime, the BMC is asking climbers visiting the Roaches — scene of many monstrous Whillans armblasters — to avoid the path running past the cottage and follow the diversion signs instead.
BMC Limited
THE BMC, which at present enjoys the vague legal status of an unincorporated association, is proposing to become a limited company — a move which will make things easier for legal purposes in a number of ways.
The new limited company will acquire, after formation, all the BMC's equally limited assets, but before the move is made, any BMC members can make their views known to Derek Walker and his colleagues.
The change would be made at an emergency general meeting in North Wales on September 19.
QUALITY CLIMBS
OLD MAN OF STOER
Luke Steer keeps a wary eye on the fulmars as he negotiates the finishing ledges (photos )
This is deservedly the most popular of all the famous sea stacks.
The rock is excellent, climbing quality equally so, and the grade and commitment are at a more amenable level than either the Old Man of Hoy or Am Buachaille.
Even so, this lonely Old Man remains impressive and commands a degree of respect.
His body expands with his height and his head overhangs his feet in a manner that seems to deny the natural laws of equilibrium.
The fact that this stack is merely structured from stone, the result of a well understood physical sequence, does nothing to detract from the Old Man's personal aura.
His power and character extend beyond mere physical form.
Tom Patey, ‘Dr Stack’, understood that well.
Perhaps after a cold swim across the channel, as your own personal adventure begins to unfold, you too will begin to understand.
After a rather tricky, sea-washed beginning, the true nature of the rock becomes apparent.
The crux, above the big ledge of the first stance some 40ft above the base, has been described as a slab.
Some slab.
In my estimation it more closely resembles a wall.
However you class it, a curving crack leads rightwards to overhangs in a situation of some impressiveness.
Fortunately it's easier than it looks, but still full Very Severe.
The great cave stance provides calming sanctuary, but above further menace lurks.
In the nesting season — roughly from March to the end of June — fulmars await.
They puke with great accuracy and surprising range.
Be tolerant, they have an equal right to life.
The mess does wash off, and the smell does go…in time.
A final sting in the tail — beware of loose flakes, a number of accidents have occurred here — leads to the summit block.
The head of the Old Man and a magic moment.
The climb was, of course, the work of Tom Patey, father of stack climbing.
A folk hero, a man who could draw climbers literally hundreds of miles just to sit in the same pub and hear him sing and play his accordion.
A time when adventure came first and pure athleticism played only a minor role in the great climbing game.
After the first ascent of the Old Man Patey commented: ‘It's a great climb.
Three times bigger and better than Napes Needle’.
A tribute from one great character to another.
OLD MAN OF STOER — NORTH-WEST SCOTLAND
Old Man Of Stoer (Original Route): 240ft (73m), Very Severe (4c, 4a, 4b).
First Ascent:T W Pater, B Robertson, B Henderson, P Nunn, 1966.
Guidebook:Rock Climbing In Scotland (Constable) by Kev Howett.
Rock and Protection:Torridonian sandstone, like concrete — sound, hard and rough.
A moderate mixed rack suffices.
Access:High in the NW of Scotland is the thriving fishing port of Lockinver and turn off as for Stoerhead lighthouse.
A track bears off right just prior to the lighthouse (leading to an aerial) and this is followed until you can pick a way through the peat bogs.
After a mile or so the Old Man is reached, just south and west of the actual Point Of Stoer (25 minutes).
Descend easily to a point level with the base of the stack.
The Old Man and its slabby plinth are separated from the mainland by a 30ft (9m) channel.
At high tide this is sea filled and access is only possible by swimming across.
At low tide it is sometimes just possible to cross the channel without swimming.
However, once across it is usual to fix a Tyrolean traverse to ensure a dry retreat after the climb.
The Route:Once the slabby plinth is gained a belay can be taken (on the landward side) beneath a rotting cluster of pegs and slings (the Tyrolean anchor).
The next section is quite often damp and slippery.
1.
70ft (21m), 4c.
Climb up about 10ft (3m) to traverse the large, horizontal crack leftwards (Friend protection).
This reaches a large, flat corner ledge (possible belay to reduce rope drag).
Pull out leftwards from beneath the overhang to gain a groove, followed by a crack, leading directly up to a big ledge.
2.
70ft (21m), 5a.
The steep wall above is climbed via a shallow, rightward curbing crack (crux to reach the overhangs.
Take the crack through these then traverse delicately leftwards to reach a good ledge.
From here climb up to a large thread belay and cave stance.
3.
45ft (14m), 4a.
Move right round the corner to follow a high, rightward leading ramp and belay on a tiny ledge (nesting fulmars can be a problem here — Their aim is now well practised!).
4.
55ft (16m), 4b.
Climb straight up the V-groove to ledges (more fulmars) than take the short crack above or the ramp on the left to finish.
The Old Man, displaying his thickening midriff, standing proud against the ocean.
Descent:Abseil down the mainland face, one full 165ft (50m) abseil can be made to the plinth if taken from the pegs and slings placed on a ledge just below the summit.
With 45m ropes two abseils are required.
The first reaches a long ledge (not on the route but on the landward face) approximately 60ft (18m) above the base.
A RUN OF BAD LUCK
TRUE CONFESSIONS OF A CLIMBING JONAH 
The question has to be asked: ‘Is it me, or does it happen to other climbers as well?’.
Recently I was in an equipment shop when I chanced upon a climbing friend.
Noticing I was buying a new battery for my headtorch he grinned knowing and said: ‘Oh-oh’ Somebody in for another Hebbert epic?’
I was indignant!
The battery was for a camping weekend — so that I could see at night.
As chance would have it we were going camping with another family whose father was to accompany me for a day's climbing on Pillar.
But the climbing was carefully planned and a headtorch would not be necessary for that, thank you very much.
Two days later we were in the grips of another Hebbert epic, running round the High Level Route to get back to Wasdale Head for 10.00pm — our estimated time of return had been three hours earlier!
Allow me to present the evidence and then reach your own verdict.
Long before I took up climbing on any regular basis I accompanied a friend for a summer evening's sport at Lawrencefield in Derbyshire.
I can't recall the routes up which I was dragged, but what I do remember is strolling back to the car under one of those hazy, purple, Peak District sunsets, contentedly weary and glowing with achievement — only to find that thieves had struck.
The car had been broken into and our ‘civvies’ stolen from the boot.
An hour later we were standing dejectedly in the reception area of Central Bar police station in Sheffield, clad in T-shirts, shorts and EBs.
‘We wish to report a theft’, said my chum.
The reply was deadpan.
‘Oh, what's been stolen?’ inquired the desk sergeant.
Do many people walk into a city centre police station at 10.00pm wearing shorts and EB's?
That one was dismissed as an unlucky incident, but my troubles continued.
I presumed the countless minor mishaps to be part of any climber's learning process.
Seconding my first VS on the tiny limestone sea cliff above Jack Scout Cove — at Silverdale on the Cumbria/Lancashire border — I moved up, forgetting to unclip and remove a runner.
Spartan Slab on the Etive Slabs: scene of yet another Hebbert epic (photo & name:).
Intimidated by the vast sweep of Morecambe Bay's shifting sands below, I had to reverse a strenuous move and, in the days before I discovered contact lenses, ended up entangled in awkward loops of rope, my spectacles askew and dangling precariously  from one ear.
On an outing to the obscure Gate Crag in Eskdale we picked a route called Bosigran — this had to be climbed because I'd just returned from my first climbing trip to Cornwall.
I recall my partner panting, puffing and praying his way over a traverse which in no way resembled the route description, to arrive with abject horror at my belay.
He declared: ‘You'd have been safer belaying to a daffodil stalk!’.
My upper climbing garments have always proved wayward in the role of guidebook protection.
It matters not how many shirts and jumpers are tucked securely into the tightly tied waistband and excruciatingly buckled harness.
Somehow the guidebook will always find a chink in this armoury and creep out on the crux move, to wheel and flutter its way to the boulders below.
In the latest example of this phenomenon, high on the massive granite sweep of South Ridge on Arran's Cir Mhor, a pristine copy of Howett's Constable compendium decided to play truant — and landed, incredibly, within a few feet of my rucksack below, leaving us to puzzle out the route unaided.
Important items of equipment have mysteriously gone missing: a headtorch, which was on my head as I returned to the car at the end of a Wasdale winter expedition but was nowhere to be found when I arrived back home; or the key, map and information to a hut in Wales for which my club had recently gained reciprocal rights — all three items vanished between locking up the hut on our departure and arriving back home in South Cumbria.
Then, or course, there are the falls.
One year, after I notched up a particularly impressive tally of flying time, our club created a new annual award called ‘Peel of the Year’— convinced there would only ever be one recipient.
Laybacks and handjams have been especially efficient at suckering me into their grip only to spew me out into airborne humiliation.
I hobbled my shameful way from First Buttress North on Lundy as the sun's last rays winked over the darkening sea (and last orders for food were being called at the island's only pub) after tumbling from the very last move of the 90ft first pitch of Road Runner.
I swung majestically from the very end of the crux traverse on Gimmer Crag's Kipling Groove, in from of an audience I half expected to hold up marks for style, and had to allow my younger and less experienced partner to show me how it should be done.
At the end of a taxing day on Twistleton Scar in Yorkshire, I could not leave before crowning the day with an ascent of the notoriously polished Candle Crack — only to skid like a bemused Bambi on ice and slither to the rocky moorland beneath.
I was carried ignominiously between two colleagues back to the car and greeted my wife with the sheepish grin she had been dreading ever since I took up the sport.
Only months later that sheepish grin turned to agonised grimace as the alternative start to Do Not in White Ghyll, Langdale — then graded to HVS 5a but since upgraded to E1 5b — petered out to nothing.
Limbs began a desperate gibbering bid to scrabble their way out of trouble.
Strength ebbed, arms turned to jelly and the Hebbert flying machine was in action again.
This time a wicked module of rock jutting from an otherwise clear trajectory rapped my ankle as I sped past.
An X-ray later condemned me to six months away from this crazy pastime.
Yet all of these could happen to any climber.
It was the Cloggy episode which started the whispering campaign.
Flushed with the success of a comparatively trouble-free ascent of Great Slab/Bow-Shaped Slab combination I picked out a ‘sheep’ on the wolfish East Buttress — the classic VS climb Curving Crack.
After two pitches I suffered one of those inexplicable aberrations and instead of following the blatantly curving crack into which we had been cramming our limbs for the last 60ft I launched up an unerringly straight vertical groove above the belay.
Dismay turned to shell-shock at the increasingly desperate struggle to stay in contact with the rock, culminating in a pure faith-in-grass tug as holds ran out completely.
Psyched down after this epic battle I allowed the treacherous turf to gain revenge on the much easier pitch above.
It performed a Velcro impersonation, sending me spinning right back down to the pitch below.
Somehow I got back up and completed the climb — but by the time I hobbled and shuffled back to the sacks, the sun was already casting its final, blood red spotlight on Cloggy's slabs and buttresses.
By the time we reached Llanberis it was touch and go whether we would make it back to base at all that night.
Days later we discovered we had climbed the crux 5b pitch of Vember!
The following spring the same duo, neither of whom had climbed since the previous autumn, was optimistically toying with the idea of opening the season with Dream of White Horses on Gogarth.
The day dawned misty and drizzly so we went to have a look, confident heroics would not be called for.
By the time we reached the rock promontory from which the classic view of Wen Zawn is obtained, the mist was slowly being burned away and the sun was rapidly drying out that awesome looking slab.
When we reached the start after a nervous descent there were no fewer than seven climbers ahead of us.
A nerve-wracking wait added to the mounting psychological pressure as we charted the progress of the sun over the Anglesey seascape.
When our turn came progress was slow in the face of firstly the exposure, then the increasing delicacy of the holds.
We reached that long final traverse on what looks like an arc of crumbling cheese as the last of our  fellow gladiators was disappearing from view.
Knowing my partner's dislike of traverses I laced it with gear — but inserted that final, final nut before making the last heave to safety.
When I came to try and take in, the rope would not budge.
A tug-o'-war ensued and suddenly the rope came — unzipping all those carefully placed runners like a thumb through a banana skin.
My partner almost ran across the traverse as if to depart a potential trouble spot before it was aware of his passage.
The trouble was, neither of us had been here before and Holyhead Mountain in the gathering gloom emphatically had the last laugh.
It was 10.00pm when we finally found our car.
A pale autumnal sun played over Etive as I gazed up the beckoning folds of Spartan Slab with another partner, watching the leisurely antics of an American climber and his female ropemate on this classic VS.
The decision to head for Etive had been a late one, after we were repelled from a planned attack on Ardgour's Garbh Bheinn by a combination of midges and a deer stalking manager.
The opening pitches of Spartan yielded to a steady, workmanlike approach, but doubts began to creep in as we were delayed by the American and his partner, who spent as much time conversing as climbing.
The fearsome overhang on the third pitch, which calls for the bold gritstone approach favoured by neither of us, caused further delay.
By the time we reached the testing manoeuvres on pitch four and the wickedly smooth layaways on pitch five, we were staring benightment in the face.
As the last echoes of American drawl died away we scrambled up the final pitch and slithered down the dangerous descent in near darkness.
We negotiated our way through mud and bog by headtorch and finally reached the Kinghouse as talk of a search party was moving beyond bar-room jest.
And so back to that visit to Wasdale for a couple of classic Pillar Severes sandwiched within an invigorating traverse of the High Level Route.
After a slower than expected march we were gearing up on the famous Green Ledge in bright sunshine — the Ennerdale mountains stretching away like the bony spine of a slumbering dragon.
Gimmer Crag lurks, awaiting its chance to give Hebbert a flying lesson.
We were tingling with anticipation and at one with our surroundings.
The trouble was they were the wrong surroundings!
Our plan was to ascend The Appian Way on the west face of Low Man before tackling Rib and Slab on High Man — but you do not begin The Appian Way from anywhere near the Green Ledge.
Scrambling turned to roped up exploration as the frustrating hunt for anything remotely matching the guidebook description ensued.
Eventually, well into the afternoon, we found the route — but had to wait for a couple who pushed in front claiming they were ‘HVS climbers’ and would not take long.
They actually went off route and were not seen again.
The finest pitch is the second, which includes a magnificently exposed traverse on the minutest of holds with hundreds of feet of space beneath your heels, I did not believe the traverse would go at Severe and tried it higher up, stupidly inserting a runner in the process.
When I eventually crossed the wall correctly, my second could not retrieve the runner; neither could a party which came up behind him.
I had to reverse, climb up to retrieve the runner and cross the wall for a third time.
We finally reached the top — to discover that the party behind had used some of our gear at a belay.
We had to wait for all three of them to finish before getting it back.
As the sky faded to orange over the sea of felltops, it became clear that not only was Rib and Slab out of the question but we would be struggling to get back to Wasdale before nightfall.
Well, is it me?
Am I some sort of climbing Jonah, the victim of misfortune and circumstance?
Or am I just plain incompetent — a liability to anyone reckless enough to venture onto rock with me?
Some years ago, shortly after I took up climbing, a more experienced Geordie acquaintance was taking me up the Barbican on Castle Rock, Thirlmere.
He set out on the infamous traverse, then decided I was not up to it and we must engineer a retreat.
A good hour later, following numerous entanglements of rope in a tree, we arrived safely back to earth.
I remarked it was an experience I would not care to repeat.
In his Geordie tones he replied: ‘Wha-ay man…have you never had an epic before?
You're not a real climber until you've had some epics!’
By that reckoning I can certainly count myself a ‘real climber’.
I comfort myself with the belief that my friend was right and those epic days on the crags will endure long after the memories of trouble-free ascents, which merely add another tick to the guidebook, have dimmed.
Epics, surely, make up the fabric of a climbing memory.
When we are too old to force our limbs up the crags and are ready to regale our grandchildren with tales of derring-do it will be the epics which have them on the edge of their seats.
If this is the case, then my fund of fireside thrillers will be rich indeed.
PEAK ROCK
THE ROACHES
Paul Nunn, that well known Peak guru, once said that ‘Ironically, the finest gritstone crags are neither in Yorkshire but in Staffordshire’.
He was referring to that glorious trio of cliffs, Ramshaw Rocks, Hen Cloud and the Roaches.
Before I moved to Sheffield in 1970 I had done my homework and knew that for a first visit to this corner of the Peak the venue had to be the last of these three crags.
Equally, I also knew which three routes we had to do to bag the most renowned classics.
A team of three, al ‘freshers’ at college, we rolled up one sunny September Saturday morning with a plan to sample the very best the area had to offer.
The roadside parking was more limited in those days, but of course there were far fewer cars about so we had no problems on that score, and the walk up to the lower tier was over in minutes.
In the pinewoods below the cliff the air was still and I remember being distinctly intimidated by the size of Raven Rock, where our first tick of the day was to be found.
It had to be Valkyrie (VS 4b, 4c).
The name is so good that it is used twice at  opposite ends of the Peak District, and both routes are major middle grade classics.
The Roaches Valkyrie is one of the longest routes in the area, finding a sneaky way up a superb buttress with engrossing climbing, good protection and exemplary rock.
What more could a climber ask for?
Steve led the first pitch — a fine corner crack offering good jamming and bridging, with plenty of protection from old style nuts (or more modern camming devices).
The crack is often green but the rock is as rough as wrt-ridden rhino hide and upward progress was swift.
There's an awkward step passing a small ‘bulglet’ then an easy traverse leads left to a stance behind a series of colossal jammed flakes.
From here the interest begins to escalate.
On the left side of the stance stands a gigantic gravestone of a block which has to be crossed.
After a couple of moves I gained the crest of this and draped a big sling over its tip before setting off on a journey of discovery down the other side of the offending obstacle.
Above: Descending after finishing Valkyrie.
Left: The intimidating finish of Sloth.
Right: High above the Roaches crowds, Dave Spence tackles Saul's Crack (all photos by )
From astride the flake it is necessary to reverse down the edge by a gripping slither, controlled by the braking effect of the left hand jammed in the crack.
As I approached  the base of the flake all appeared lost, as the only thing visible was the ground far below.
Fortunately there proved to be a hidden foothold right at the base, which I hit just before dropping into space.
(An aside: After over 20 years of climbing in the Peak District I have come to the conclusion that the upper pitch of Valkyrie sees more epics than almost any other.
The reason is quite simple: it is not a route to do on a single rope.
The leader slithers down the flake, places a runner and does the crux, leaving the hapless second the harrowing job of reversing the flake with the rope running downhill and the prospect of a major fall into space should he muff the moves.
If you only have one rope, do your second a favour and either double it up or pull it through after doing the pitch and drop it back to your mate to protect the moves down the flake.
With such thoughtfulness he will probably buy you a pint in the Rock at the end of the day).
Back to the story.
From the base of the flake a long stride left gains a foot ledge.
I found it difficult to transfer my weight onto this, but by dropping my left hand a good undercut aided the awkward pull across.
A traverse round the corner gains the front of the buttress and after one balancy step it was a romp to a belay, sat on the forehead of this giant Easter Island lookalike.
The first part of the day had gone according to plan.
SUPERB FISSURE
We stomped down the stone steps to collect our sacks and made for the Upper Tier of the crag.
The vast roof split by the crack line of Sloth looked fierce, so we sneaked past it in search of less intimidating fare.
We found it in Saul's Crack (HVS 5a)— a superb fissure splitting an impressive bulging buttress and having the added attraction of being put up by that living legend, Joe ‘hand jam’ Brown.
Easy rock leads to the first bulge, where a swing left under the overhang gains a glorious hand-jamming crack.
Storming on up this I reached an ominous overhang.
Fortunately it has some generous holds on the lip and a powerful pull gained rock of a much saner angle and a pleasant amble to the cliff top.
There is no doubt that Saul's Crack is not a route on which to learn the mystical art of jamming, but it is a good test of technique.
If you emerge from the top with the backs of your hands (and your shins) intact, award yourself the Gritstone Jammers' Proficiency Badge: Bronze Award.
(For the Silver Award you have to do The Vice on Stanage and for the Gold Award Cave Crack at Froggatt — and taping up is definitely not allowed.)
The day was going well, but there was still the problem of that huge overhang that appeared to dominate the view from all directions.
Why did it have to be so far off the ground?
Sloth was put up by a youth named Don Whillans.
Don was one hell of a climber.
Almost all his climbs have a certain something: a thinly disguised air of intimidation often allied to a raw brutality.
Sloth is no exception.
I led up the awkward flake crack to a sitting stance on the Pedestal — a huge, flat topped flake stuck to the face — and called up the big guns.
Richard had only been climbing a few months, but he was as strong as an ox and had no respect for tradition (he didn't know all the horror stories).
He moved up the tricky little wall (the technical crux) to the roof, and draped a thick sling over the huge pointed spike known as the Cheeseblock.
Then he was away, swinging along the creaking flakes in a most cavalier fashion as I sat there, slack jawed and dry mouthed.
At the lip he stopped and hung there, assessing the upward view for what seemed like an age.
Then he dropped the bombshell: ‘Watch me, I'm going to try and get back down’.
He managed that with great aplomb.
After reversing one move his feet slipped, followed rapidly by his hands, and a moment later he landed on top of me with a crash of flailing limbs and a clatter of runners.
Fortunately there was no damage done.
Composure regained, Richard said he thought he could see a good hold but was not totally sure; hence the rapid retreat.
I tried to convince him there must be jugs at the grade and he fell for it, allowing me to breathe a great sigh of relief.
Elegy (E2 5c): gritstone slab climbing at its best.
ROUTE DIAGRAMS Left: HVS 4b, 4c Centre: Ellegy, E2 5c Near right: Saul's Crack, HVS 5a Far right: Sloth, E1 5a
On the second sortie he made no mistakes and shot up the route like a man with a mission.
I followed it on a snug rope and pronounced it ‘gripping but mild’, but then again, it's always easy on the blunt end.
Sloth has been graded Hard Severe, VS and HVS over the years.
I have done the  route a dozen or more times since that distant autumn, and although I know it is ‘easy’ I have never set off across that huge ceiling without a feeling of apprehension.
I think a grade of E1 5a is fair and reveals a lot about the ‘feel’ of the route.
SUBTLE PROGRESS
We had ticked the best three routes on the cliff and were well pleased with our day: a buttress, a crack and an overhang, all of peerless quality.
Of course the ‘big three’ are only the tip of the iceberg — there are dozens more brilliant routes at the Roaches, including one classic of a style that had been left unrepresented by our day out.
Slab climbing using the excellent frictional properties of gritstone is a superb and subtle form of progress, requiring steadiness and a cool head rather than great strength.
Elegy (E2 5c) on the Lower Tier of the Roaches is for me the finest slab climb on gritstone.
It starts with a battle up the evil, leaning, wide crack of the Bulger (VS 4c) to gain ledges at the bottom right corner of the slab.
The object of the game from here is to get established out on the left on the slab, but a swine of a bulge bars access to it.
Setting off around the corner after negotiating the flake on Valkyrie.
Many folks go a long way up the Bulger to fix a high runner and top-rope the move, but this is a bit naughty, and it won't help you on the upper slab.
A Friend 4 can be placed by the move so it is safe enough, without having to resort to cheating.
The simplest way to pass the bulge is to kick your right foot up the wall behind you.
This has the effect of tipping your centre of gravity enough to sidle round the beast and gain the undercut flake that runs tantalisingly up and left before fizzling out in the centre of the slab.
A couple of slots in the flake will accommodate wires and/or small Friends, then all that remains between you and the top is 25 feet of totally absorbing padding.
The holds all take the form of bumps and ripples on the slab.
There is nothing to hook your fingers over and allow you to relax, so keep cool and keep going.
A final pull on rounded (and sometimes damp — be warned) ledges and it's all over and you can breathe again.
Brilliant!
INFORMATION
THE ROACHES
Grid ref: 005623
SUMMARY
One of the most important gritstone outcrops in the country with over 300 routes on superb, rounded gritstone.
It is rather exposed to the vagaries of the weather.
ACCESS
From four miles north of Leek on the A53 (Buxton road), a minor road branches north west and leads through Upper Hulme to reach roadside parking in a mile or so.
The Lower Tier is five minutes' walk away.
Arrive early at weekends.
GUIDEBOOK
Staffordshire Gritstone, published by the British Mountaineering Council in 1989.
THE ART OF DESCENT
Martin Moran offers some sound advice on minimising the dangers of climbing in the Alps
We were high on the North Face of the Droites when the storm struck.
Though it is 11 years ago the memory of it still haunts me.
The overwhelming blackness, the cracking peals of thunder and the piercing flash and hiss of forked lightning; I've never since been in an alpine storm of such ferocity.
Within minutes a gusting blizzard was raging, and the climax of our first season in Chamonix had turned into a nightmare.
We climbed eight pitches of glassy ice through the storm and at nightfall emerged on the summit ridge, already close to exhaustion and chilled to the bone.
To stop there, exposed to the lightning and the cutting wind, was unthinkable.
A blind descent of the mountain's south face in the dark seemed our only option.
We found the brêche, from which we knew a steep couloir dropped to the Talefre Glacier, and started abseiling from such old slings and pegs as we could find on the sidewalls.
My torch failed, and I found my hands too cold to fix it, so just followed Charlie's light from stance to stance.
And then it happened.
As the couloir eased in angle, so the volume of sifting snow accumulated.
We stopped abseiling, packed away one rope and ploughed down into the unknown, tied loosely on the other line.
Then I lost my footing and slid past Charlie, my legs tangled hopelessly in the rope.
He was immediately plucked off and we plunged downwards, drowning in a tidal wave of powder snow.
Suddenly I sensed the ground disappear and for seconds we were airborne.
We had shot clean over the bergschrund.
Thankfully our landing was cushioned by the deep new snow and we came to a rest 100 metres lower, badly bruised and half strangled by the rope, but somehow down the couloir in one piece.
Abseiling off the Drus at night (photos:
I think it's time we bivouacked’, I muttered, when we had struggled free of the rope.
It was past midnight and we shivered through to dawn in guilty contemplation of our good fortune.
I've never forgotten the lessons of that night: the abseils from doubtful anchors, my refusal to stop when the torch packed up, our failure to coil up the rope properly, and the lack of faith in our ability to survive a bivouac.
An urgency bordering on panic is no way to get off the hill safely.
EPICS IN SOFT SNOW:
It is hardly surprising that the great majority of accidents in the Alps occur during descent.
The carelessness born of fatigue and the complacency that follows victory are so often the preconditions for disaster, and they have to be fought with great patience and total concentration.
The acquisition of experience in an alpine mountaineer is essentially the cultivation of these two mental qualities.
Deteriorating snow conditions late in the day cause most problems on alpine descents.
The heat and burning sunlight of daytime are easily misjudged when leaving a hut in the middle of a starry night.
The snow may crust at night, due to outward radiation, even thought the air temperature remains well above freezing point.
As soon as the sun rises the surface melts into bottomless slush with a startling rapidity, by which time you are probably committed to the route and its subsequent descent.
So beware of this deception, and look for a forecast with freezing levels of 3,500 metres or lower before tackling mountains with serious snow descents.
The hot alpine summers of recent years have made these sort of conditions all too prevalent, particularly early in the season when there are masses of spring snow ready to melt.
Later on, similar conditions occur whenever a fresh snowfall is followed by a sudden change to hot, settled weather, but in August and September any new snow lies more thinly over bare ic.
Whenever ice lurks just beneath the surface the trials of descent are greatly magnified.
You simply cannot plough down as you might do in deep, wet snow.
Rather it is essential to face in and front point of the ice, even on slopes as gentle as 30 degrees.
Moving together on the rope in such conditions offers very little security because the leader has no decent footing on which to hold a slip.
It is therefore often wise to pitch such descents, which of course can take an eternity.
In the bare conditions typical after the end of July, the stonefall risk on descents increased greatly.
Couloirs which are silent by night issue continuous fusillades by day.
Every hour spent pitching an icy descent increases the party's exposure to this risk, and meanwhile an afternoon thunderstorm may be brewing to provide the finale to your epic.
Good judgement of conditions, an early start and a fast, efficient ascent are essential to avoid such torrid descent.
Unfortunately good judgement must mature through hard experience, but it is basic commonsense to check the freezing levels on the forecast, and to ask other climbers, and particularly hut guardians for information on the condition of your proposed route.
Even having made a commitment to the climb, the option of retreat is always open if you sense the temperature is too high or the snow conditions dangerous.
Speed on the climb will certainly avert problems later in the day.
For an ascent of the Whymper Couloir of the Aiguille Verte for instance, a midnight start and a six hour target time are prerequisites to success.
This means climbing the whole route in the dark, and since an efficient descent on frozen snow should only take four hours, then you should be back at the Couvercle Hut sipping beer by 11am.
If this seems fast, consider that Armand Charlet guided Wilfred Noyce down this 1,500 metre AD descent in two hours in the 1950s, and I don't imagine that either of these great climbers made a single unsteady step throughout.
If you do find yourself on top of a difficult peak late on a hot day, a final option to wait until sundown before tackling the descent.
It is always tempting to push on, but why not consider the pleasures of a few hours snoozing in the sun followed by a swift descent on hardening snow?
ROUTEFINDING ON EASY ROCK:
On easy but long rock descents the routefinding can be bewildering, even when you are simply trying to reverse your line of ascent.
The Hornli Ridge of the Matterhorn typifies the ill-defined grade II terrain I have in mind.
I pride myself on an ability to remember route details, but I don't think I kept to my line of ascent for more than a third of the way down the first time I did the Hornli Ridge.
In descent rock features may look quite different, distances are hard to judge and much of the terrain is hidden from view by intervening convexities.
So it is essential to memorise your line of ascent as far as is possible, piecing together its major features and landmarks, even the times taken for each section, so as to smooth your downward passage.
Nothing inspires the confidence as much as sudden recognition, while nothing is more dispiriting and worrying than to lose all track of your route.
Yet among the many people I teach and guide in the alps, an inability or unwillingness to memorise their route is perhaps the most common failing, and this applies to very able climbers as well as novices.
The descent of a complex rock ridge which you have not previously climbed poses special problems.
There is no better example than the East Ridge of the Aigulle Noire.
Forsaken as a route of any merit in ascent, it is the obligatory way down for parties summitting from the classic South Ridge of West Face climbs.
Patience, coupled with a trial and error approach, is the only means of descending this pinnacled 100 metre ridge.
A thorough prior scrutiny of guidebook descriptions and diagrams can help greatly to find the general line of such descents.
The relevant details should be so well learned as to be recalled in their entirety without any need to consult the guide during the actual descent.
However, it is wrong to place total reliance on guidebook descriptions.
They are at best generalisations and can be misleading as to the relative scale of different features.
Where there is a conflict between your instinct and the guidebook directions at any point on a descent, I'd tend to trust to intuition.
Many alpinists reconnoitre their approach to a mountain on the afternoon before a climb, and this good practice should apply equally to the descent route.
It is tempting to sit on your backside at the hut on a hot afternoon but an hour's reconnoitre may repay its effort many times over.
It is unfortunately true that however good your routefinding, long rock descents usually take much longer than you expect.
1a SINGLE TAPE THREADED THROUGH ANCHORS
PITON ANCHORS
Dangerous later pull on pitons
TAPE KNOT
Chafing of tape pitons
Single thickness of tape
ABSEIL ROPE
1b SINGLE TAPE TIED OFF WITH OVERHAND KNOT
Loops adjusted to equalise lengths
Downward pull only on each piton
OVERHAND KNOT
ABSEIL ROPE
Double tape thickness at loading point
1c TWO SEPARATE ROPE SLINGS TIED TO EQUAL LENGTHS
Slings tied to equal lengths
DOUBLE FISHERMAN'S KNOT
Extra friction when pulling rope through
ABSEIL ROPE
Figure 1.
Abseil anchor sling arrangements
One's inability to make better speed on a scrambling descent seems as paradoxical as it is frustrating.
British climbers simply do not get enough practice in downclimbing before they visit the alps.
The Cuillin of Skye apart, we have no hills where such descents are obligatory.
The want of technique is compounded by the greater nervousness felt when facing out and surveying the whole sweep of exposure below.
Descending broken rock requires a nimble style, with the emphasis on sure footwork and the hands always placed for balance and as security in the event of a slip.
An ability to face out or sideways on easy ground must be developed in the interest of speed, but equally you should know instinctively when to turn inwards to get a surer support as the rock angle increases.
Once the grade of rock increases to II+ or III in a standard, most parties will want to protect a descent with running belays, or else take fixed belays and do pitches.
ABSEILS DOS AND DONT'S:
The alternative on steepening rock is to begin abseiling, and on popular routes bunches of pegs and slings indicate the points at which such tactics are usually adopted.
Most alpine abseiling is done from in situ anchors.
An examination must be made of such pegs and bolts for signs of corrosion, and there should always be at least two anchors at each stance.
The anchors are usually linked by sundry cords and tapes of varying age and wear.
Often it is difficult to fathom how these slings are knotted and connected.
Their quantity is no guarantee as to their security.
ABSEIL ROPES
Autoblock loosened and slid down ropes by spare hand during abseil
AUTOBLOC SLIDING PRUSIK KNOT ON CORD
SHORT SLING ⅓ METRE
HARNESS
BELAY/ABSEIL PLATE
Coming off the north ridge of the Zinal Rothorn (AD & plusmn): a tricky rock descent with grade II and III pitches.
Running belays and short pitches secure the party.
Figure 2.
Protecting an abseil with a sliding autobloc
Examine the slings with equal care before trusting your life to them.
Have a knife handy to cut away any really old slings which are badly bleached or frayed, or else exhibit scorch marks from the friction of the ropes of previous parties.
These should be replaced with new tape, of minimum ⅜″ width, and parties should carry some 10 metres of abseil tape for this purpose on serious descents.
Otherwise you will end up sacrificing expensive sewn slings or else chopping up the climbing rope itself.
It is all too easy to rely on whatever previous parties have left in place.
You may be less complacent when I tell you that the friction of pulling just one wet and grit-encrusted rope through an abseil anchor can be enough to weaken thin tape to the point of sudden fracture when the next load is applied.
Fig 1 shows some methods of equalising slings so as to place an equal load on each anchor.
Fig 1a is often seen but is vulnerable to shock loading if one anchor pulls out and creates a dangerous lateral pull on the pitons.
Figs 1b and 1c use 50% more tape but prevent shock loading, give double tape thickness at the load point and are far stronger and more durable.
The only risk with threading the abseil rope through two or more slings, as in 1c, is that extra  friction is created during rope retrieval.
Where there is only one in-situ anchor, or else you are making your own anchor points, the first person down should have back-up protection, clipped independently into the abseil ropes, and adjusted so as to come into immediate effect if the main anchor fails, but without directly supporting it.
Having thus tested the strength of the main anchor, the last person down can remove the back-up before abseiling.
Given the vulnerability of tape and sling anchors, as well as their unsightly appearance, I have some sympathy with the equipping of regular abseil lines in the alps with stainless steel pegs, short chains and even bolts where necessary.
They may be seen as evidence of the insidious creep of sport climbing ethics into the mountains, but used sparingly they eliminate an unwanted and unnecessary risk and cause less visual intrusion.
The second risk area in abseiling is the loss of control of the rope.
It is true that many experienced abseilers will tackle the steepest descents without any protection or having tied the hanging rope ends together.
This is a wilfully incurred risk in the pursuit of speed, but you never have to follow suit.
By tying an autobloc knot above the abseil plate (Fig 2) and clipping this to your harness on a short sling, a sliding prusik is created which will lock automatically if you let go of the rope, as for instance if hit by stonefall.
The ability to lock the rope quickly is also very useful when searching for the next stance, or else in performing diagonal manoeuvres.
Only the first person down need apply such protection, because the ropes can then be safeguarded from below for the rest of the party.
By pulling the hanging ropes tight, a person on the stance below can lock the abseil plate if control is lost.
The third and perhaps most feared risk in abseiling is the jamming of the ropes during retrieval — unfortunately a common occurrence on easier angled ground.
This chance can be reduced by arranging the line of the ropes to avoid sharp flakes and vice-like cracks, ensuring the anchor slings are long enough to prevent jamming against the rock, and finally by the first person down testing that the ropes are running freely through the anchors before the others abseil.
Another thoughtful refinement is always to arrange the knot in the abseil ropes on the top of the anchor slings so that it doesn't run against the rock when pulled.
If the ropes do jam then please remember that the great Giusto Gervasutti met his death during just such a retrieval operation.
Never use the jammed rope as your sole support when climbing back up.
It may be held by the most tenuous snag, so always have a belay from below.
Descending the Jardin Arête (AD+) on the Aigulle Verte: a spectacular and complex route.
THE FINAL OBSTACLE:
A yawning bergschrund is often the final straw on a fraught descent.
As the last obstacle between you and safety, no short measures should be taken in protecting the passage.
An abseil from a large snow bollard is the classic method, but if there are any other means available use them in preference.
Bollards are prone to sudden collapse, and the ropes often jam in the groove behind the capstan during retrieval.
The back of the bollard should be well padded with expendable clothing, and a buried axe should always be used as a back-up.
Yet I don't doubt the wisdom of the climber who, faced with a dodgy bollard at the end of a great day out, is happy to sacrifice an axe to make a sure abseil.
It is indeed better to arrive both late and destitute than never.
GARDEN TRILOGY
FRENCH FOR ALL
French limestone isn't all about big numbers, bolts and Buoux.
Al Churcher fled the Mistral to discover Collias, Russan and Seynes in the Gardon valley near Avignon
COLLIAS
In future I must make it a rule never to use those cold, wet, good-for-nothing days for looking at crags.
After two days of torrential rain the Mistral was blowing the Gallic equivalent of brass monkeys and the sky was the colour of Hammer funerals.
The Gardon was so full of silt (plus the occasional dead sheep or cow) that looking down from the third floor of the Pont du Gard it looked more like a flow of molasses than a river.
No wonder Collias didn't really enthuse me.
A year later and once more Mistral -driven, I decided to give it another try.
Was I glad I did!
In the sun the cliffs were transformed.
Our one day visit soon stretched to two, and when we left at the end of three superb days' climbing there were still routes we wanted to do.
The left hand side of the cliff (Secteurs Brazza to Maria's Lovers) has mainly short routes of up to 20 metres.
Although some of these are unpleasantly slippery, Lunule's Pary (Severe), Le Bras (HVS) and the longer Carlos (40m VS4c/5a) are all worthwhile in the lower to middle grades, while the wall of ‘Silence’ now sports the hardest climbs at Collias including Un Doux Chation Arrive (8a).
But it is the 50 metres high Grande Face which provides most of the best climbing, and the central part, with its three clearly defined changes of angle, must be unique.
FRICTION PADDING
The lower slabs are so low angled that few of the routes are more than Diff to V. Diff.
With huge solution pockets and plenty of bolts, these provide superb introductory routes.
From the ledges above, the next tier is more of a conventional slab angle.
The white rock being what it is, the routes which involve much friction padding have inevitably acquired the characteristic shine of much-loved, much-caressed limestone.
But above, and to right and left, are the superb pocketed walls that led Martin Lochner is his Topos á la Carte to compare Collias rock to that of Verdon 'aber etwas rauher ’(but somewhat rougher).
There is a wealth of face climbing from E1 upwards.
Chicno (E1 5b), Royale (E3 6a), and the two E2 5cs of Tecnofrite and Cocaine on adjacent faces of the stunning white pillar at the extreme right of the crag, are all worth three stars; but Ginette, at E3 6a, must be the route of the crag and is surely worth five!
Left: On Dimanche Inachevé at Seynes (6b=).
Above: The corner of Diedre Jaune at Collias — a superb 45m pitch (photos ).
Don't get the idea that Collias is only about mid-extreme pocket pulling, for the crack climbs are just as good, and this is the point where the mid-grade climber can really begin to lick his or her lips.
Porthos is an excellent two pitch Severe, but the corner of Diedre Jaune (HVS 5a/b) is perhaps even better, and can be led in one superb 45 metres runout.
Sans Soleil has a wonderfully exposed top crack at HVS 5a/b (although pitch one is very polished, so either scramble up to its right, or approach by pitch one of Sansisu).
Projet de Gauche and Projet de Droite (e1 and E2 5b respectively) push the grade up a bit and, like the excellent Excelsior (E25c,5c), both finish with tricky walls.
RUSSAN
Twenty-two kilometres upstream, above a huge meander in the Gardon, are the newer cliffs of Russan.
With development starting in 1984, the first guidebook not appearing until 1989, and comparatively more difficult access than the virtually roadside Collias, even the easiest routes here are still unpolished.
From the parking area above, you can easily walk down at either end of the crag, but it's much more fun to follow the path leftwards and make a free 25 metres abseil through the blow-hole in the roof of the enormous cave of Baume Percée.
While pulling down the ropes between the stalactites, crane your neck upwards and peer at the bolted lines of Jacky Godoffe's grade eights, such as Autoportrait (8b+).
Just the thing for a wet day!
GOLDEN STALACTITES
Walking along the foot of the crag to the right, the area of golden stalactites forming the Secteur Maelstrom is equally impressive.
As you would expect, most of the routes in this area are in the 7a-plus league, including a quartet of 8a+'s taking the hanging stalactites: Quart de Siécle, Maelstrom, Eau de Colonne and Pipe Line.
Plenty of scope for cellar-dwellers here!
A taste of stalactite climbing at a more human level is provided by the sustained E1 5b of Arrampicatopitheque (thankfully the climbing's easier than the name) to the left of Casamanche — itself one of the best 7bs.
You're probably getting the picture by now— Russan is a typical product of the 80s.
With the exception of a few intervening slabs, the routes are always steep, rarely less than overhanging or more than 25m, on near perfect rock and well equipped with bolts and chains for ‘moulinette ’.
In all a superb situation above the great sweep of the river.
Yes, it is mostly hard — of 100 routes in the 1989 guide only 17 are in the VS/HVS band (French 5a to 5c), another 17 are E1/2, and over half the total is found at French 6c+ and above — most of these are 7b or more.
But the quality of the climbing at all grades is still enough to make a two or three day visit worthwhile for anyone climbing from HVS?
E1 up.
In the adjoining sectors of Chantoisel and Basqyuet, the beautifully intricate, airy aréte of Tamponoir Brisée (E15b), the wall and crack of Réve de Visnu (E25c) and the enticing natural line of Pulsion du Jour (E15b) would be enough to make a memorable day for any lower extreme leader (with the classic HVS flake crack of Flute de Krishna for a warm-up or down).
Add the fact that by my visit (Easter 1990) paths had been cleared under several hundred metres of new cliff to the left, and that six bolt-guns were at work equipping lines on an impressive upper tier, and I'm sure the next guidebook will be at least twice as thick.
And then there's the swimming!
The extraordinary Stalactite Arch (E2 5b) at Seynes.
SEYNES
Some 30 kilometres to the north of Collias is the beautifully unspoiled medieval town of Uzes — try to stop off for at least an hour to explore its maze of cobbled streets.
Halfway between here and Ales (on the D981) is the tiny village of Seynes, not quite overlooked by the long limestone escarpment behind and left of the village.
Take the minor road running parallel to the main road just after the village.
Park after a few hundred metres and don your mountain boots for the approach — and all of two minutes.
Views of the river are replaced by the blue hills of the Cevennes.
Because of its proximity to Russan and Collias the three crags are generally seen as a group.
Like Russan, development started in 1984.
The appearance of the first guide in 1989 was followed by a new route boom, and a new guide was due in mid-1990.
But with its mixture of slabs and walls (often topped with small, juggy overhangs) lending itself to a superb variety of climbs from V.Diff upwards, Seynes is perhaps closer to Collias.
With very few exceptions, almost all the routes are on rough, near-virgin limestone, for only a small number of the easier classics have become polished — sadly, but perhaps inevitably, including the superb slabby pillar of Marie (HVS5b).
The whole escarpment is several kilometres long, but so far development seems to be confined to a group of crags at its right-hand side.
Not to be missed on the central and right hand crags are: Tychodrome (Severe), Crecerelle and Doctor Cynoque (VS), Plaisir du Gourmet and Concerto No 3 en Sol Majeur (E1 5b), Verdon (E2 5b), Les Amants de la Deroute and Dimanche à la Campagne (E2 5c), and Dimanche Inachevé (E3 5c).
The left-hand crag — Nouveau Monde — starts gently with a worthwhile group of Severes, steepens to HVS (Jardinerie and Queenstowne being perhaps the best) and then to E1 5b.
The exquisite Fragment de Vie has a layback flake, a slab, and a final bulging wall on jugs — all in 30 metres.
GOTHIC ARCH
Turn the corner and it's certainly a different world, if not a new one.
A world of gently impending walls and grades of French & Brigand d'Amour and Symphonie du Nouveau Monde are said by my partner Johny Adams to be excellent 7as, but there are more than a dozen others (up to 8b) to try.
Some 30 metres left is a weird and wonderful group of stalactites — some grotesquely gargoyle, others forming a perfect, elongated gothic arch — with a line of bolts up the middle.
‘You've got to do it, Al — it's only about gritstone HVS’, enthused Johny.
Knowing his liking for old-fashioned, Puttrell-style thrutches, I pointed Stephane up it, and wasn't at all surprised to find it more like E2 5b.
Recovering from the energy expended, Stephane appreciated my translated comparison with the guidebook description of Curbar's Right Eliminate.
We had no time left to visit the extreme right sector (Top Secret) which had nine routes of around English 5c in the 1989 guide, but now has many more.
A quick breakdown of the routes in the guide is a good way to end, for the 100 routes split almost exactly into quarters: V. Diff to VS, HVS to E1, E2/3 and E4 and above.
By the time you read this there will certainly be 200 or more routes, and although many of these will be big numbers, there is certainly the potential for more instant classics in the middle grades on one of the friendliest crags I've ever visited.
Sun-baked rock at Collias, with the Gardon below.
COLLIAS RUSSAN SEYNES INFORMATION
ACCESS
Collias — from the north to Orange or Avignon via the A7 autoroute from Lyon.
Take the N100 from Avignon to Remouslins (approx 20 kilometres).
Follow the road for Uzes for about six kilometres, then follow signs for the magnificent Roman aqueduct — the Pont du Gard (left bank)— and then for Collias.
Entering Collias, follow signs for Kayak Vert canoe hire centre, and park near this by the river.
The cliffs lie about 100 metres upstream.
Russan — from Collias follow the D18, then the D112 to Russan.
On entering this small village follow the Rue du Castellas for a short distance until, just after a gravel pit on the left, a track bears off left.
Follow this for two kilometres (one very rough section, but easily passable by ordinary cars) to reach the obvious parking area above the cliffs.
Seynes — see intro to that section.
CAMPING ETC
There are many campsites in the area, including one at Collias.
There is a good site at Tarascon, which is also convenient for Mouries, Fontvielle etc.
Day trips from Orgon, Cavaillon, or even Buoux are equally possible.
Several sites exist near to Seynes, including the municipal site at Uzes, and at Riviere de Theyrargues and Fumades (about eight km to the north) and Saint Jean de Ceyrargues, a similar distance to the south.
Russan has good possibilities for swimming and festering, and the 22 kilometres canoe trip from Russan to Collias is highly recommended.
Hire of a double canoe from Kayak Vert, including transport to Russan, was about £20.
THE TRAIL OF BONES
The Trail of Bones, one of the most dangerous trading routes in the Darakorum, guards the way to the Chong Kumdan massif.
Lindsay Griffin braved its perils to attempt this remote group of unclimbed Indian peaks
Well north of Leh — the mystical capital of Ladakh — lies the second largest glacier in Asia.
No one has ever accurately defined the Indo-Pakistan border at the head of the Siachen glacier, and since 1984 troops from both sides have been at war on the high passes of this inhospitable land.
In order to substantiate her claim, India has permitted several foreign expeditions, always accompanied by a team of nationals, to visit this highly restricted military area — a combat zone in the heart of the greatest collection of unclimbed peaks in the Karakoram.
The expedition's base camp at 16,700ft, in the heart of the Chong Kumdan massif (photos by ).
I HAVE never been a good passenger.
On this particular journey I occasionally opened my eyes and peered through the slats of the truck.
Far below — almost vertically below it seemed — lay the turbulent bed of the gorge and, all too frequently, the twisted remains of olive-green army lorries.
I quickly squeezed my eyes shut in an attempt to sleep through it.
This failed and I spent three days in a state of constant terror before my (surprisingly!) safe arrival in Ladakh.
I was travelling with a mixed assortment of British and Indian mountaineers, en route to an unexplored range in a remote corner of the East Karakoram.
Our mountain — Chong Kumdan — lay to the east of the Siachen, and although still in a sensitive area, was far enough from the fighting to persuade government officials to sanction our visit.
To reach it would mean travelling along one of the world's great international trade routes, linking Leh with the central Asian province of Yarkand.
For centuries caravans had carried woollen, felt and sild carpets from China and returned with Indian spices, textiles and, of prime importance, hashish.
The crux lay in crossing a high and dangerous glaciated pass called the Saser La.
In 1986, Peter Hillary — son of the famous Sir Edmund — became the first foreign tourist to repeat this route since that great mountaineer and explorer Eric Shipton, 40 years previously, on his way to take up a consular appointment in the Chinese outpost of Kashgar.
We would be the next to follow in the great man's footsteps.
RIGID CLASS SYSTEM
Our expedition was the brainchild of a small, rotund, Bombay businessman with a penchant for climbing in the outermost reaches of the Himalayas.
Harish Kapadia, cloth merchant, gourmet and editor of the prestigious Himalayan Journal , is one of India's best known mountain explorers.
His jovial personality made him delightful company and his chosen Bombay mountaineers were equally affable.
However, a rigid class system still prevails throughout the country and the Indians' attitude towards local labour was often a source of embarrassment to the British contingent.
Indian mountaineers are generally middle, if not upper-middle class citizens and servants automatically taken for granted.
‘I don't understand these ‘washing machines’ that you have in the West’, Harish once said.
‘I just throw my dirty clothes on the floor and next day they appear clean and pressed in my wardrobe’.
From Leh, the first part of the trade route is now used by a military road — the highest motorable highway in the world — traversing the Khardung La at 18,380ft (more tightly shut eyes!).
Later it crosses the Shyok river, a major feeder of the Indus, and enters the wide valley below the Siachen.
We met our horsemen, dressed in the typical maroon, knee-length cloaks that are standard attire in this area, as Sasoma.
What had previously been a two-family, Buddhist hamlet, was now an unsightly army compound.
Yet the hospitality shown by the ‘inmates’ was truly magnificent and we were almost sorry to leave the following morning for our seven-day trek to the Chung Kumdan glacier.
We had walked but a short distance when the path rounded a corner and led towards an impressive canyon with no obvious way forward.
Shipton had noticed it too.
‘It would be difficult to imagine a less likely looking place for the continuation of the great trade route into Chinese Turkestan.
To the right of the thundering gorge, great precipices continued perpendicular and unbroken; to the left was a vast slab of smooth rock, two thousand feet high, very steep and apparently, from below, not offering a foothold for a goat’.
In fact a cleverly constructed path almost invisible from the valley floor, makes 37 zigzags up this remarkable slab and allows entry to a hanging valley and, beyond, the Saser La.
It is dangerous place.
Unstable rock, high on the left flank, periodically cascades down the lower section of the route.
In the frozen hours of dawn it all appeared rather benign, but on our return, some five weeks later, we were forced to run a sobering gauntlet.
Loosened by the heavy rainstorm of the previous day, armchair-sized boulders fell nearly 3,000 feet and crashed into the path, releasing an intense, sulphurous odour.
We held our breath, and with hearts pounding ran through the danger area.
The horsemen and their charges meandered nonchalantly down behind and looked at us as though we were mad.
Above the slab we began to penetrate the gorge.
We had heard that the paths ahead were precarious and exposed, but my heart sank when I noticed that even the horses were being blindfolded.
The trail, though clinging like a ribbon to the steep sides of the canyon, proved to be well sculpted and led without incident to the valley floor.
Soon after we passed a series of extraordinary drawings carved into the smooth granite.
Hillary had also been greatly impressed by this archaeological discovery:
‘Part-way along the gorge we came to a smooth cavity that had been ground into the rock by swift flowing water.
Inside this polished recess were dozens of prehistoric etchings.
Ibex with long knarly horns and antelopes with elaborate antlers’.
We, too, were excited.
However, it seemed rather strange that Shipton, a man with enormous powers of observation, should have failed to notice such an important recording of ancient life.
An explanation was soon at hand when it was revealed the ‘etchings’ were carved by none other than Ladakhi road-builders, employed on the path in 1982.
Three days later, as the sun began to set on a cloudless horizon, we reached the ‘comforts’ of the highest permanent army outpost.
This micro-colony, set at 16,700ft, was supplied by air-drop, constructed entirely from discarded jerry-cans and covered with white parachute cotton so as to stand out like a sore thumb!
The following morning, as we wandered along in the warm sunshine, a brilliant, azure sky enhancing the already remarkable scenery, Harish related a little more history.
‘Crossing the Saser La was always considered the most arduous part of the journey for the animals.
On the way north to China they were still quite healthy and well fed, but on the return, the pass comes near the end, when both ponies and men were weak from hunger and exhaustion.
It was the last big exertion that often killed them, even in surprisingly mild weather’.
LINE OF SKULLS
We stumbled along a very rough track on the glacier moraine and were soon stepping over or round a dismal line of skulls and bones, bleached pure white by the elements.
It was a macabre sight, strongly reminiscent of a scene from a TV western — or at least it would have been.
Alongside, or occasionally entwined with the bones, ran the army telegraph cable!
It proved a nuisance to the horses, who were continually tripping over, and I began to see why communications ‘up at the front’ were so haphazard.
A wide ice slope led gently up to the pass.
There was little soft snow and the ponies had no difficulty whatsoever negotiating the few small crevasses that cut across the route.
The crest was so rounded it was impossible to pinpoint the exact position of the infamous La.
To the south rose a fine assortment of small, unclimbed peaks.
Many were quite spectacular, but several could offer suitable objectives to an adventurous trekking group, given a little practice in the use of ice-axe and crampons.
In complete contrast, the northern skyline was dominated by the huge granite walls and steep icy gullies of the 23,000 ft Ak Tash massif.
Blessed by fine weather and perfect snow underfoot, the day had proved something of an anticlimax.
However, a light but bitterly cold breeze was a strong reminder of the horrors which had occurred to previous travellers, in far worse conditions.
It still seemed quite amazing the old traders should have chosen a route as totally inhospitable as this to make their crossing of the Himalayan barrier.
We could only surmise that alternative passages must have been worse.
Skipping down old moraine we reached the banks of the Shyok, more than 160 miles above our last crossing point.
The La lies on the watershed of the main Karakoram and although we were still politically in India, geographically we had reached the valleys of Central Asia.
From here, Hillary had continued east from the plains.
We turned north along the Shyok gorge and passed through some of the most incredible scenery that any of us had witnessed.
Shipton thought so too:
‘The valley was fascinating.
I think it was the weirdest place I have ever seen.
To the right, for mile upon mile, precipices rose straight out of the river for several thousand feet.
These vast walls were slashed across with bizarre colours like some monstrous oil-painting…it was the kind of valley one would expect to find in the exotic landscape of a dead planet’.
Shipton would have been saddened to see the old rotting tins and abandoned jerrycans that seemed to be typical of all military movement in this area.
We could only dispose of this debris in the raging Shyok and hope that it would eventually be carried, via the Indus, to the northern frontiers of Pakistan — a region I well remember for its almost total lack of any suitable fuel container!
On our second d ay we passed below several large glaciers — their snouts festooned with tall ice pinnacles, resembling lines of giant marching penguins.
Towards mid-afternoon we camped close to the site of the old Shyok dam.
The air was still, the heat intense and the glare from the shingle plains quite dazzling as we walked up to look at this historic site.
At irregular intervals during the past, the Chong Kumdan glacier would surge, forcing its enormous, icy bulk across the river and into the great red cliffs on the opposite bank.
The huge reservoir so created stretched many miles upstream.
At some later date, a slight glacial retreat would weaken the dam wall and its subsequent collapse would prove catastrophic.
This event last occurred in 1928 and it is a measure of the immense volume of water released that there was flooding on the Punjabi Plains, more than 800 miles away.
Above: The Chong Kumdan peaks, with CK1, 23,300ft, in the centre.
Before Griffin's expedition this was the highest unclimbed group of peaks in India.
Right: Ice pinnacles, some more than 150ft tall, on the Chong Kumdan glacier.
To us, the glacier now appeared to lie more than half a mile away from the river, but scrambling across the black gravel of the terminal moraine, we were surprised to find that this rubble concealed the true icy snout.
The glacier, it seemed, spread out into the river and squeezed it into a gap of less than 250 yards.
Clearly visible on the red cliffs, 400ft above our heads, were the highwater marks of the 1928 lake.
The following evening we established base camp at 16,700fft and spent the next 28 days, in fairly unpredictable weather, climbing  many of the graceful peaks that make up the Chong Kumdan massif.
Two days after our arrival the British contingent — John Porter, Neil McAdie, Bill Church, Paul Nunn, Dave Wilkinson and myself — together with Ajay Tambe and Bupesh Ashar, set out for CK5.
Apart from a few hundred feet just below the summit, the climbing was straightforward, yet at 21,400ft provided useful acclimatization and fleeting views through swirling clouds towards other, less accessible peaks.
Harish was keen to leave no stone unturned so, splitting into several groups, we climbed a further nine peaks including the highest point, before turning for home.
Perhaps my most memorable day occurred with Paul on our ascent of Kichik Kumdan.
With John Neil we had ventured to the head of a glacier, on the west side of Chong Kumdan, to prospect a possible route.
It was too early in the trip for a serious attempt and all of us were decidedly under the weather.
Paul and I, believing an extra night at this altitude would prove beneficial in the long run, elected to stay while the others went down.
At fractionally under 22,000ft the subsidiary summit of CK1 looked like a walk.
The following day we could knock it off in few hours before returning to base.
BARE ICE
How wrong we were!
In the morning clouds boiled ominously over the distant Baltoro peaks as we cramponed to the start of the east ridge.
Our ‘easy’ snow slopes had somehow steepened and, although seldom reaching 50 degrees, had become bare ice.
The gentle walk along the crest was now transformed into sideways front-pointing, 40ft down on the south side, to avoid the monstrously overhanging cornices.
It was time to rope up.
Our equipment, brought solely for a ‘recce’ and consisting of a seven mm rope and two ice screws, suddenly seemed a little inadequate.
It took four and a half hours to reach the summit and, believing it would be easier and quicker to regain the glacier by traversing the mountain, we continued our crab-like progression to the west.
An advanced state of dehydration may have affected my judgement, for it was almost 12 hours later, in the dead of night, that we finally stumbled into the tent!
Autumn was already approaching when the horses returned.
As we passed the dam, a little snow lay on the shingle plains and the rivers were a mere shadow of their former selves.
Clear skies allowed us to witness, once again, sensational scenery; the worst storm of the summer only caught us a few hours away from Sasoma.
As mountaineers, we would long remember the great companionship that made the expedition so successful; the days spent on ice faces or silver crests; the extensive views west along the Karakoram chain.
However, as explorers, it is the country through which we travel that always leaves the greatest impression and, in this respect, our passage along the ‘train of bones’ would remain an unforgettable journey.
EQUIPMENT
AURORA SA 7000
Gladys Sellers reports on the launch of a new large capacity, £350 rucksack from Karrimor
If you are into backpacking, self-sufficient trekking abroad, or expeditions of any kind where carrying heavy loads is essential, you will be interested in Karrimor's newly launched Aurora SA7000 rucksack, their latest big load carrier.
The project that produced the Aurora started as long ago as 1982 as a search for major improvements to the Condor, Karrimor's then brand new 60–80 litres, top of the range rucksack.
No great progress was made over several years, so it was decided to enlist the services of the Ergonomic Department of Loughborough University.
Analysing the comfort of the Aurora using computer equipment.
They perceived that a fundamental requirement was to develop a scientific and reproducible method for measuring the efficiency of load carrying, for only then could the value of changes in rucksack design be compared accurately.
Anatomy, physiology, electronic and computer sciences were all called into play, and five factors that affect the performance of a rucksack were identified: comfort, pressure, friction, excess warmth and muscle tension.
All these factors are felt by the muscles that take the strain of load carrying.
They can only be assessed subjectively, and this was done by questioning volunteers after a stint on a treadmill and on a hillocky outdoor circuit.
The guinea pigs were asked to rate the five factors on a scale of 1–5, ranging from very comfortable to very uncomfortable for each of the 13 muscle groups involved.
Loughborough also put together the electronic gear to record a trace of the heartbeat, not only in the lab but by remote control while the volunteer was walking the outdoor test circuit.
The heartbeat is a record of energy output and ensures the tester puts the same effort into the test indoors or out.
Hundreds of tests were done by all sorts, shapes, and sizes of student volunteers to establish the validity of the method, which was then used to assess the performance of a rucksack more accurately than ever before.
Over the years I've learnt to mistrust claims for better equipment based on small improvements in lab results, but the figures for the Aurora are in a different league.
Though subjective, they are analytical, semi-quantitabe measurements — far better than the general assessments made by even very experienced field testers.
So what does the Aurora SA7000 look like and how were these improvements achieved?
From the back the sack looks very much like the Condor, for it has the same capacity — 60 litres expanding to 80.
It is, however, made of a new fabric called KS1000L.
‘L’ stands for laminate, and this fabric is claimed to have a hydrostatic head of 10 metres — thoroughly waterproof — but the seams are not hot-taped.
From the front the Aurora looks very different from the Condor, or indeed any other rucksack.
Though it uses a modified self adjusting back, this is not obvious.
Shiny plastic and vivid purple padding on the waist and shoulder straps make the sack stand out and guarantee a closer look.
Plastic plays a big part in the new design.
The shoulder straps are reinforced by a sheet of firm but flexible plastic which distributes and carries the load.
It is made even more flexible by a set of parallel slots that run over the shoulder and enable its width and angle to be self-adjusting.
The redesigned straps and shoulder pads spread the load over a much greater area instead of concentrating it under the armpits and on top of the shoulders.
The sack effectively feels lighter, it is claimed.
The hipbelt is far more complex.
It is plastic reinforced, angled in several places (cranked is a better word) in order to locate and the fit the pelvis, and looks a bit outlandish.
It is inclined at an angle to match that of the pelvis and is in two halves, connected by a type of swivel hinge.
The gap between the two halves ensures that the spine itself is not loaded and as the familiar lumbar pad has gone, there is a space for ventilation.
The hipbelt's purple padding is deeply grooved at the sides so that it makes contact with the body.
This contributes considerably to comfort.
The changes of angle the belt makes as it goes around the pelvis allow much greater freedom of movement.
Karrimor's project development engineer demonstrated that he could do shoulder high kicks just as easily wearing with its 20kg load as without.
This demonstrates the Aurora's great stability.
It needs no chest strap but will be provided with one as buyers apparently expect it.
The sack should be in certain Karrimor agents' shops by now, priced £350, but at present it will only fit people of average size or bigger — those who take, say, size 42–47 boots.
Smaller folk will be catered for in due course.
Karrimor intent to spread these improvements down their range of rucksacks during the next two or three years, though it is clear the benefits are greater for the big load carriers.
It is not considered that rucksacks designed to carry less than 10kg will benefit from the new hipbelt, but even the modest capacity Hot Series will be more comfortable with the new type of shoulder straps.
I look forward to that day — I'm not in the big load carrier league!
SCOTLAND
HILL WALKING
A return to the slopes of Ben Tee sets Hamish Brown on the hunt for the elusive Kilfinnan Falls
SECRET WATERS
People often ask me if I get tired of exploring little Scotland —‘Haven't you seen it all yet?’
My reaction probably seems polite and restrained, but inside I explode with the feelings voiced by Hugh Macdiarmid: ‘Scotland, small?
Our multiform, our infinite Scotland,small ?
It would take a hundred lifetimes merely to skim the surface and, alas, we are only given one.
One of my favourite places is the Laggan area, the Laggan in the Great Glen (one has to be specific as there are other Laggans — a common name, meaning a hollow ).
As a teenager exploring Scotland ‘by bike and hike’ I came to know Loch Lochy Youth Hostel well.
Later we stayed there many times, canoeing or exploring the hills.
Mrs Fraser was a much-loved warden for several decades.
Laggan Locks, just along from the hostel, was very much the heart of the area for all our doings — and not just because it has a tearoom!
This is where one sets off for what are often called the Loch Lochy Munros: Sron a'Choire Ghairbh and Meall na Teanga, and the no less worthy Corbett of Ben Tee.
It is Ben Tee which is the real eyecatcher from anywhere along Loch Garry or the Great Glen itself: a solitary, lofty cone seen through birch and pine, mirror-imaged in the waters of the surrounding lochs.
I climbed it long before I knew anything of eponymous lists, and did so again recently.
This is mainly why I'm writing, for the visit caused a mystery of real personal embarrassment, of which more shortly.
In trying to sort out this problem I was driven to delving through old logbooks, and it was reading them that made me realise just how often we had based ourselves in the area.
It also made me realise how fickle memory can prove.
There are some visits I just can't remember at all.
Others, saved by the brief notes, leap into focus again.
Several visits in the area were for canoeing or sailing, but with the participants usually demanding hills as well.
Canoeing over to tackle the mountains was far more romantic than plodding in by Kilfinnan from Laggan Locks (the wild and lonely western approaches are another matter).
A log account of late autumn 1968 has: ‘Marvellous feeling to land on a ‘strange shore.
We almost expected Red Indians’.
Awkward to reach if you want a close-up view, the Kilfinnan Falls (photos )
Mrs Fraser once packed me off to bed as I was groggy with summer flu, and the four lads with me were sent off to do Ben Tee on their own — a perfect challenge for their particular hill experience at the time.
They came back full of glee, raving about it and making me quite jealous and determined to ascend the peak a.s.a.p., which I did — and they were right.
The most-used line, from Laggan Locks and Kilfinnan, goes close by the Kilfinnan Falls, yet many pass by without ever seeing this superb sight.
I supplied a picture of the falls for The Waterfalls of Scotland — Stott's Tables — and an infinitely more attractive list than the Munros or Corbetts.
‘Stotting’ has a certain ring to it for the waterfall-collection game.
However, Kilfinnan is dismissed with a mere mention in that compendium, which showed that the compiler had not made its acquaintance nor found much about it in any other book.
This set me searching, with no more success, yet it is one of the best falls in the west.
So why the neglect?
I was back to visit it because Ben Tee, via the falls, was one of a series of outings I was proposing for a book of Lochaber walks, and despite all my nosing about I was not prepared to describe things without another visit.
My memory of the falls was non-existent, or rather was based on that picture of the falls in Stott's book which showed a small waterfall on a moorland burn with Ben Tee beyond.
Something niggled me over this.
The falls were in a deep gorge.
How on earth could you see the hill as a background?
Above: Ben Tee across the waters of Loch Garry.
Below: Ben Tee from above Kilfinnan Falls.
SUDDEN REVELATION
The path to Ben Tee kept high on the bank of the great V-shaped gorge, avoiding the steep heather and lower jungle of birch.
A path is supposed to keep close by the river (but in reality stays above the treeline) so I set off up quite a marked track, which very soon petered out.
A cliff forced me to cross the river, and several scrambles led to a corner and the sudden revelation of the falls: a long mare's tail, akin to Kinlochleven's, and utterly different from the one in Stott.
Oh dear!
A black wall of rock circled the gorge, barring any way past the falls.
The water half slithered, then fell free down this bulge of rock into a deep, pitch black pool.
I was almost tempted to strip off for a plunge but sensed, then saw, a figure on the bank above.
I scrambled up to find a rather nervous photographer who had not enjoyed the path that led him to that spot.
I went back along with him to check the path was the tree line route to the falls.
It was.
I returned after a ten minute wait and the clouds rolled away to waken the scene from its gloomy darkness.
My camera clicked away.
The haul up from there to the top of the highest bank was several hundred feet of deep heather, pollen-dusty and honey-scented, but as friendly as a hedgehog for a flea.
Along the top of the bank was the Ben Tee path, leading to a stile and wending up by the burn — rather than towards the peak — so I just headed over the dried-out moor for the steady ascent to the summit.
Home again, I wasted hours trying to make sense of things, and did so eventually.
The Stott picture couldn't be found, but its black and white equivalent was clearly labelled ‘Kilfinnan’.
Above: Ben Tee across the waters of Loch Garry.
Below: Ben Tee from above Kilfinnan falls.
Then I read my log of a 1973 visit, which had utterly gone from memory, and dug out some poor slides taken then.
In my log I had mentioned cutting in especially to see the fall.
I had called it a ‘wee bridal veil’— obviously foxed by the scale.
It is a big bridal veil, but my picture was taken from a long way off.
So there it was.
My Stott picture may not be the Kilfinnan Fall, but it is a Kilfinnan fall.
I'm writing this while memory is clear.
The real Kilfinnan Fall is worth a special visit but it is elusive and is not the safest of access — hence the neglect.
To reach it, follow the path along above the treeline aware of the fall, just visible through the trees.
Scramble up the heather slope for a clear view and decide if you want to continue.
The path on is across slopes just as steep as these and, in the wet especially, the exposure may be too much for some.
The path peters out at the falls and you either backtrack or tackle the heather hedgehog upwards to escape the gorge.
After that, Ben Tee is a doddle.
ANYONE FOR Stennis
Sun-baked rock, easy access and every hold an incut — Pembroke's Stennis Head has it all.
Bill Mckee takes a trip to the seaside.
Stennis Head gives away few of its secrets to the casual passer-by.
Those interested in seeking out something special, however, will find this flat-topped and apparently featureless headland — one of many within South Pembrokeshire's Castlemartin artillery range — plays host to several of the finest climbs and some of the very best rock to be found in the area.
The crag is approached by a short, flat stroll from the St Govan's Chapel car park near Bosherston, the usual disgorging point for hordes of eager climbers — during holiday time at least!
Unfortunately, HM Armed Forces remain active in this spot from time to time, and access is officially banned during military exercises.
The main coastal track is followed until past the wide, steep-sided zawn of Stennis Ford, with its bold wall climbs, from where a path across the intricately cratered ground leads to a short descent gully on the west side of the headland.
It is in the nature of sea cliffs to remain largely hidden from view until you are more or less in contact with them, but for much of this side of Stennis this is not the case, for the gully descends to a non-tidal terrace descending beneath the cliff.
Climbs on the west face thus gain steadily in height, culminating in an impressive blunt arête.
The is the point where the cliff swings round to form the dramatic and much less amenable territory of the south face — home to a number of spectacular routes.
Centred on the arête are two outstanding climbs of high calibre.
Manzoku and Cool for Cats.
Both seem to crop up with predictable regularity on my visits to this part of the world.
They are non-tidal, easy of access, composed of flawless rock and highly enjoyable.
This is not to say that everything is roses hereabouts though, for when a mountainous swell approaches Stennis from the south west, the platform at the lower end of the terrace can be awash with spray and quite a lively place to be!
When atrocious weather precludes any possibility of climbing at all, it's worth descending a ‘comfortable’ distance down the terrace to witness the natural turmoil taking place in the inlet between Stennis and neighbouring Bosherston Head; a simultaneously exhilarating and sobering sight.
In anything like calm weather either climb is a good bet, remaining in good condition far more often than many options of adjacent crags.
GOLDEN AGE
Manzoku and Cool for Cats share a common start before diverging into separate lines (to describe them as grooves would be a touch too expressive on either side of the crag's blunt nose.
Although both climbs currently bear the grade E1 5b, a little reading between the lines reveals them to be less comparable in difficulty than this might indicate.
Cool for Cats is a soft touch, and a viable target for the confident HVS climber, while Manzoku represents the upper limit of its grade.
They both date from the late 1970s, the beginning of what many climbers consider to be Pembroke's ‘golden age’, although I think just as many would probably say this age is still with us.
My first acquaintance with Manzoku came on a bitter day during a New Year visit.
Having to stop on every other move to bury one hand at a time in the confines of barely warm armpits made for rather a stilted ascent, but it was worth it.
Easy moves up a short arête lead off, and with the cliff being plumb vertical for 120ft at this point, the exposure is soon felt in both mind and arms.
A brief traverse right gains a semi-rest, protection, and decision time for those who've approached with an open mind about which route to take.
It will be abundantly clear already that you are in the midst of superb quality rock.
Rough, spiky, juggy — anything less than a gratifying incut is something of a rarity here — and steep enough to give that exhilarating feel.
Protection, too, thanks to the many thin cracks and cracklets seaming the rock, is plentiful and both pitches will obligingly swallow just about as much gear as you can carry.
With this in mind and a few sound nuts to bear it out, move left for Manzoku, onto a blanker patch — one of the more testing sections of the climb — then up and into true ‘jug-hauling’ territory and the obvious line.
A series of small overlaps above give rise to technical and varied climbing, with the odd blindish move making for some entertaining sequences — something which caused a little consternation on my initial freezing encounter.
The line is never a true crack until near the top, where pumped arms alight on bigger, better jugs and the usual abrupt Pembroke finish: horizontal relief stands in sharp contrast to the unrelenting verticality beneath.
LAYAWAY MOVES
Cool for Cats is of only slightly lesser quality, which means it's a splendid climb on equally fine rock in a rewarding position, but just lacking the extra ‘something’ evident on its neighbour.
From the bifurcation of the two routes, Cool for Cats moves airily up the shallowest of grooves above the semi-rest, with more Stennis jugs for company, to a stopping place beneath a faintly bulging section which bars entry to the more pronounced line on the right flank of the blunt arête.
Fear not, for excellent runners are once more in abundance and arms, should they be feeling the angle, need only last a few layaway moves to gain larger holds in the base of the slim upper groove.
This crux section of Cool for Cats is perhaps just 5b, but is sufficiently close to 5a for the grade to warrant ‘bone of contention’ status.
Whichever way you choose to interpret the number, the final 30ft up the groove marks a considerable easing in standard before regaining flat ground and the commanding position of the belay, set on the crest of the headland facing the incoming waves.
There are certainly equally worthwhile climbs on Stennis Head, but none at this kind of standard with such ease of access.
Climbs on the east side of the headland are somewhat different in character and must be reached by entertaining traversing above the high tide level, but superb rock prevails throughout, making Bludgeon (HVS) well worth seeking out.
The south face is dominated by the very impressive, well-nigh awesome, sheet of the central Pleasure Dome wall, where a sound ability on at least E3 territory is necessary.
Although this vast grey bulk is flanked by the fine corner/chimney lines of Stennis Pillar and Stennis Chimney, Severe and VS respectively, most of the remaining points of interest to the middle-grader reside above the terrace.
In particular, World War Three Blues gives a graunchy, gritstone-style struggle at HVS, requiring liberal deployment of jams and gritted teeth.
By way of contrast, Limbo is an excellent, varied VS 4c, culminating in an exciting traverse to join the last few moves of the former route.
Nearby, Quickstep, a pleasant VS 4b, lacks the stature of its more imposing neighbours but has the rock and the moves to prove more than a match for many a celebrated limestone VS.
Although Stennis lacks the scope and sheer number of routes to be found at nearby St Govan's Head, its climbs certainly make up in quality for any lack of quantity.
The cliffs of South Pembrokeshire are justly renowned for their fine, solid rock and that at Stennis is among the very best to be found on this length of coast; a real delight to climb.
Providing the military or the wild west sea don't thwart your plans, I doubt very much these climbs will disappoint.
Below and main picture: Dave McCann on the juggy limestone of Manzoku (E1 5b), Stennis Head.
Photos by 
ON THE ROCK By Ed Douglas
MOUNTAIN FRAMEWORK
A profile of Gordon Stainforth
Main photo: Dehydration of the Cuillin Ridge.
Inset above: Suilven at sunrise (photos by  from Eyes to the Hills .
There were once twin brothers, both climbers and both at university.
One was studying philosophy in South Wales, the other was wound into the celebrated and productive Leeds scene of the early 70s.
This brother was a partner of John Syrett for several years, and made some notable ascents.
The other went on to film school and a career in the movie business.
Unsurprisingly, one brother is still immersed in the outdoors and the other is a high-powered executive with a salary to match.
The point being — and students of life's dice rolls will appreciate this — that it is the philosopher who is still out there, and the Leeds player who is drawing the loot.
There are two ways of playing at life.
There's the percentage game of wage slavery, mortgage and pension plans, and then there's the less predictable option of throwing yourself to the fates and seeing what happens.
They both have advantages and they're both vulnerable to the cosmic short straw.
To wit: Syrett, beautiful but doomed, cut his hand on a wine glass at a party and, after ignoring his doctor's advice to avoid climbing, did irreparable damage to his tendons which started him on a tightening spiral of alcoholism and eventual suicide.
The man who held his rope and tried to help, ended up with his wife, family and job.
And high blood pressure.
His brother, meanwhile, made an enemy in the fraught and envious film world, and cashed in his London home for a Hasselblad and a rough-looking Volkswagen Derby.
Since then he's acquired a growing reputation as a landscape photographer.
Which brings me to a small room in an Ambleside hotel and an impossibly short deadline.
I wait in the lounge.
It's April and it's probably going to rain.
Through the door hurries Gordon Stainforth, bespectacled and preoccupied.
He takes me in at a glance and starts peering around the room, checking out the sofa, examining the ceiling.
I think: ‘Heis either worried or manic’.
Turns out he's both.
Upstairs in his room there's an Apple computer sitting on a tiny desk close to the bed.
I express an interest and Gordon launches into a detailed and exhausting explanation of its functions and the quality of the investment he's made.
He moves onto a review he's just read of his book Eyes To The Hills , considers in detail the argument it follows and expresses frustration that his rigorous intellectual approach has been mistaken for  pretension .
Eyes To The Hills is Stainforth's first book, and judging by the wealth of positive remarks it's received, it won't be his last.
It son a Thomas Cook Travel Book award along with its good reviews and I wanted to  spend some time with the lensman responsible, to find out why this man sees so much more than nearly all his contemporaries.
ABUNDANT ENTHUSIASM
Most photographic books that feature mountains drift too easily into postcard images and predictable views.
There is a feeling that the photographer's vision has been compromised, that between the idea and the execution something has escaped.
A few books have avoided the trap.
John Cleare's pictures in Rock Climbers in Action in Snowdonia , published in 1966, is one such, and to my mind, Fay Godwin's Our Forbidden Land is another.
The vision is there.
The camera is no longer an obstruction but a medium.
Stainforth's success rests on three qualities he possesses in abundance.
The first, as I was rapidly discovering in his hotel room, is enthusiasm.
He has a ready supply, and despite the heavy atmosphere and flat light it carries us out to Langdale.
Gordon is working on his next project, a book about the Lakes, and his publishers, keen to capitalise on his recent success, have given him very little time to complete it.
Out on the road in the battered VW we talk routes; more specifically, about Gimmer.
A magnificent study of An Teallach at dawn.
I confess to him that I have never done Kipling Groove and he launches into a celebration of Arthur Dolphin's famous classic.
‘It's absolutely superb’, he says, as a few fat raindrops are brushed imperiously from the windscreen.
‘Brilliant.
It deserves ten stars, not three.
In fact it deserves a new rating system altogether’.
There follows a detailed analysis of the important moves, indeed, the important holds , before Gordon reiterates his belief that it is surely one of the finest routes known to man.
There's a pause, and then: ‘What about Central Buttress?
Have you done Central Buttress?
Superb!
Brilliant!
It deserves at least fifteen stars.
You know the flake is a lot harder than it looks and there's this traverse…’
Before I can summon up some energy, we've parked near the Old Dungeon Ghyll and Gordon is hoisting a huge frame rucksack onto his back, packed with his Hasselblad medium format camera and various other photographic gizmos.
There is a period each year before the onset of spring when the land breathes anticipation.
It is as though the promise of sun and warm winds is better than their realisation.
The flowers remain curled tight, the trees demand confirmation before reaching out their leaves.
In Pembrokeshire the week before, I had watched lambs sleek and steady on their feet.
Here in Langdale an ewe stood weakly, blood still damp on its haunches as its offspring staggered in the shock of birth, cord still trailing in the grass.
This impression that you can't see, or smell, or feel how can you take its picture?
Gordon mentions this pause before the onset of summer as we walk towards Crinkle Ghyll.
He has finished with winter and is waiting for May.
Then he knows he will get the landscape that is already present in his mind's eye.
In London, and he regularly gives thanks for his escape, he worked as a film editor after attending the Royal College of Art.
His period there exposed him to a world of living theories, of using his preferred medium as a vehicle of ideas.
The understanding that technical proficiency is a step on the path, rather than a destination, is obvious from Gordon's photos.
After film school he progressed, with helpful rolls of those cosmic dice, and his credits include working with Stanley Kubrick on his 1980 thriller The Shining .
SEEKING PERFECTION
When he talks of his work as a film editor, an edge appears in Gordon's voice, a timbre of professionalism.
‘Working with those people was a great education’, he says, as we begin scrambling over the damp boulders on the floor of the ghyll.
‘A lot of people thing they're difficult people, but it's more a case of them knowing what they want and doing it again and again until they get it right’.
It's a principle that most people, including myself, aspire to, and usually claim, but which very few, including Gordon, actually have.
There is a picture in his book of Snowdon taken from the north, from high on the Glyders.
It's far from being the best photo, but illustrates what I mean.
There is a dusting of snow in Cwm Glas Mawr and above, while clouds have just rolled back from the summit ridge.
In the notes at the back of the book Gordon explains how he waited for hours for that one photo.
In fact, it involved days of tension, because the light wasn't happening and Gordon wanted the shot.
And he got it.
He didn't need to fulfil a specific commission and could have made do with what he already had, but he wanted something better.
That level of professionalism is the second quality Gordon has in abundance.
In Crinkle Ghyll he stops to examine the sky.
‘This kind of light is very marginal’, he announces.
What he means is that the light is dreadful and only desperate hacks like me would take photos in it.
By marginal he means that he doesn't know whether it will clear up or become irretrievably hopeless.
I am not surprised when he continues in an upward direction.
Despite carrying only a camera and an apple, I soon lag behind again.
The damp rock and tangled trees and grass give the ghyll a forbidding atmosphere, and I am not disappointed when we emerge beneath Crinkle Crags.
Though the steady march of grey clouds, a tiny square of blue emerges.
Gordon, who has already noted the novel view of Langdale spread beneath us, starts exhuming his camera from his sack.
Comments on location, light, quality of shot, me and virtually everything else are made into a dictaphone.
He scurries round the numerous vantage points, peering down into the camera.
A frame is dispatched.
The sun disappears.
It is more than probable that this shot will not feature in the book.
Gordon explains that shots usually have a propitious feel to them, and the added ingredient of adventure increases the likelihood of a successful picture.
I think hi's telling me you have to suffer for your art.
The third quality he has, and perhaps the most important, is commitment.
On top of Crinkle Crags there is a keen wind and occasional flakes of snow swirl round our heads.
There is menace in the sky.
Gordon notices a tangle of walkers stomping towards us.
One carries a rope and he frets about its purpose, whether it's required, where they could possibly have used it.
Peering through a lens, examining the view for intrusive imperfections means he notices every blemish on the landscape.
Perhaps the most revealing shot in Eyes To The Hills is of Helvellyn's Striding Edge on a Bank Holiday.
Picked out in silhouette is a swarm, a veritable plague, of humanity.
I mention this now to Gordon and he chuckles: ‘I went specially for that shot.
I got up there quite early and just waited.
At about midday they all arrived, altogether’.
Looking at this picture now, I notice a sentence below it.
‘More and more it is just another path to be followed, another wellworn script to be repeated’.
This is a man who understands scripts, who chooses and places each frame with a sense of meaning and structure.
But Stainforth understands mountains as well, and while they also have their own structure, they are changelings which we cannot take for granted.
We parted company, he to wait for light on Bowfell, which did not look likely, while I headed down The Band for Hodge Close and an impatient climbing partner.
Hitching out of Langdale, the mountains were suddenly transformed; the clouds stood black against the unexpected sunlight and the landscape took on another, indefinable dimension.
I had a sudden mental image of a figure on Bowfell moulding this revelation onto a few square centimetres of film, rushing from one spot to the next, barking rapidly into a tape recorder.
A lift pulled up and took me away.
REPORTS
BEYOND THE MICRO-ROUTE
‘Competitions now seem derisory to me after the ascent of a route of this scale’.
Jean-Baptiste Tribout, one of the keenest competitors on the indoor climbing circuit, is overawed by the new route he has just climbed.
Just Do It at Smith Rock (see last month's Compass column) may just be the hardest rock climb in the world.
The climb tackles the east face of the cliff's most imposing feature, the Monkey Face.
The climb is 43 metres high and overhangs by eight metres.
It is America's first 5.14c.
In France it would be the first ever 8c+.
In Britain the grade might be as high as E10!
But more important than the numbers is the style of the climb.
Just Do It is the first long climb to reach the ranks of the modern desperate.
‘Every attempt on the route took about 20 minutes’, says Jibé.
‘That was extremely mentally testing.
This route is the first of this level which is higher than 10 metres and takes longer than one minute to climb.
‘Success on Just Do It was one of the most intense moments of my life.
This climb surpasses, through its line, its difficulty and its beauty, all the other new routes I've previously done’.
Prolific New Router
Jibé Tribout, a Parisian now in permanent voluntary exile in Pertuis, a small village just outside Aix-en-Provence, has for many years been one of the world's leading sport climbers, without ever quite reaching the levels of public acclaim accorded to contemporaries such as Patrick Edlinger and Catherine Destivelle.
A prolific new-router, he achieved brief notoriety by claiming the world's first 8c, Les Specialistes, a roof climb on an outlying crag of the Verdon Gorge.
The climb was quickly repeated and downgraded, and Tribout ruefully admitted he'd made a mistake.
One of the rare continental  visitors to a Britain, he found the bolted sport climbs of Yorkshire to his liking — but was not shy of climbing routes with natural protection — and his on-sight flashes at Malhal and Kilnsey astonished many locals.
His latest visit to Yorkshire caused controversy, when he was accused of ‘stealing’ another climber's bolted line.
Jibé is far from the French provincial stereotype of the haughty Parisian, and despite his success within the climbing world earns a modest living through sponsorship and his work with Enterprises, the French climbing wall manufacturers.
Jean Baptiste Tribout on the first ascent of Just Do It (5.14c), Smith Rock.
Is this the world's hardest climb?
Photo by .
He takes his climbing seriously.
He does not smoke, eats frugally to keep down his weight and trains six days each week.
In the loft of his small terraced cottage he has constructed a training facility: a hinged wooden board dotted with artificial holds, which can be swung to any angle from very overhanging to ludicrously overhanging.
He rarely visits climbing walls ‘they are not hard enough’ and prefers the old maxim that the best training for climbing is climbing itself.
In a day's outing on the 30 degrees overhanging climbs at Volx, Provence, he will top-rope several 7c routes, downclimbing them as well.
He believes reversing moves on steep rock is an excellent training device.
He trained specifically for Just Do it.
He already knew the moves, having unsuccessfully spent 15 days working it in 1990, only to be thwarted by bad weather — it was too hot!
This year he returned in April, in peak form, and succeeded on the climb after seven days of attempts spread over two weeks.
Seventeen bolts protect the route.
The first 25 metres are 8a+, serving to sap strength and stamina for the harder moves to come.
Eighteen metres of extremely strenuous 8b+ follow; the crus arrives in the final eight metres of climbing.
Jibé is enthusiastic that a route of this length and level of difficulty will divert attention away from the fashion for ‘microroute’ 8c's, like Ben Moon's Maginot Line/le Plafond and Hubble.
‘This is, I believe, the beginning of another conception of extreme climbs, where pure force is not the sole criterion for success, but must be balanced with mental abilities, technique and strength’, he says.
PEAK By Graeme Alderson
The Roaches Lower Teir has seen a ‘big numbers’ new route recently.
Obsession Fatale, E8 6c, is the complete ascent of the slab left of Piece Of Mind and has been claimed by Julian Lines.
The route is 35ft long and unprotected.
The crux is at the top and Julian took a groundfall on a previous attempt and was lucky to walk away from it.
Unfortunately the route was chipped by persons unknown before the first ascent, but this misdemeanour has been rectified by Julian, who filled the offending holds with resin.
Stanage has yet again proved its capacity to yield another route, this time the direct start to Nuke the Midgies, called The Invisible Maniac, E2 6b, by Richie Patterson.
More goings on from the south of the area, with Bend Tor given some renewed attention.
Red Shoes By The Drugstore, E4 6a, is the line of bolts 25ft left of Dancing With Mr D; while Blue Balentine, E4+ 6a, is the line 12ft left of Mr D, which now has a direct finish up the arête — Prospero's Buoux, E3 5c.
All these routes are the work of Chris Rudd.
Simon Lee has added Whatta Riot, E5 6b (F7b), to Willersley Castle.
The route moves left round the arête where White Riot moves right.
 Armageddon the Movie, VS 4c, is in Peter Dale and climbs the slab 20ft right of Revenge Of The Nerd.
It was climbed by the well known singer Anthony Bennett.
Finally this month, Horseshoe Quarry is the home of Hardcore!
You Know The Score, E2 5b, by Jon Cort and quarterback Jim Kelly.
The route is 20ft left of Do Androids Dream Of Electric Sheep and has six bolt runners.
COMPETITIONS
Glen Sutcliffe, a consistent performer on the British competition circuit (photo 
While last year's world championship final in Birmingham was a marvellous showpiece for the sport of competition climbing, it was also slightly depressing (if you were British) to watch.
There is little doubt Brits are among the world's most powerful boulderers, but put them on anything higher than an average cellar roof and they climb, with very few exceptions, like pumped, nervous and confused lemmings.
One of the fundamental reasons behind this is simply a lack of competition experience, and that's why regional leading contests like the Yorkshire and North East Indoor Climbing League are so important.
This league was set up by David Baggaley and Paul Craven to ‘promote indoor climbing competitions at all standards’.
Many of the would-be hotshots who entered Birmingham competed in the super division (E5+ leaders), while many less experienced and often very young climbers had their first taste of competition or even indoor leading in division one (E2-E4) and division two (E2 and below).
The league consisted of four leading competitions held over a period of three months at various venues in North Yorkshire on a 10 metres high Enterprises panel wall.
The use of different divisions gave many more climbers the chance to experience the thrill of competing at their own level.
For the most part this wasn't abused, although the winner of one of the division one (E2-E4) events was seen working an E7 the following day!
Seventeen year old Ian Vickers again impressed all, winning three of the four super division events.
Veteran John Sheard took division one in a very closely fought competition, while Jill Gardiner took the division one women's event.
Perhaps surprisingly, it was division two which had the largest number of entrants.
It was great to see so many climbers just having a go and obviously enjoying themselves.
Notable performances here came from 10 year old Ben Bransby, who finished seventh in the men's event, Emma Williams, who dominated the women's event, and eight year old Adam Dewhurst, who would have placed higher than his tenth if he had been able to reach all the holds!
ROUND four of the Foundry bouldering league was very poorly attended, falling on the exact day when the masses headed off for sunny France.
Category one had the largest entry as well as the most interesting (and hardest — we were using Northumberland grades!) problems.
Joint first were Dave Hinton and M. Meysner with 147, with K. McAteer third on 131.
Category two had the usual tussle between Andy Crome, Mike Lea and Hugh Harris, with Mike coming out on top this month on 110, Andy on 104 and Hugh on 97.
The second and third categories suffered from the humidity and the long reaches created by Jaspar ‘he's not short’ Sharpe.
Category three had an interesting result, with John ‘I'm not short either’ Godding outreaching the others with a score of 94.
Richie Fatterson took the runner-up spot with 71, and Simon Nadin took third place with 30 — he also came last due to the low turnout.
MOUNTAINEERING COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND
MOUNTAIN ARTICLE COMPETITION WINNERS
Overall there was a much more varied selection of entries this year both in regard to the wide assortment of subjects tackled and to the quality of the writing.
First prize (£100) was awarded to Robert Davidson of the Highland Hillwalking Club with a well written piece describing the life and times of the ‘boring’ Munro., Ben Wyvis.
Uamhas brings the hill to life through the many tales enacted on its flanks every year by its jumble of human pilgrims, while lamenting their effect on its future.
Second prize (£50) goes to Sue Grout of Kirkcudbright for her well constructed fictional article Mountain Monster .
This concerns the challenge and rewards encountered by a Glaswegian probationary youth tackling the Aonach Eagach ridge as his first trip into the hills.
Thought by one of the judges to make a good radio play.
Third prize (£25) was awarded to Jonathon Preston of .
His tale (Off Piste ) of salvaging a dismal winter season with a superb day in April will arouse the jealousy of many a jaded ice-man of late.
The differing styles of these articles mean they are not all suited to publication in similar outlets, but it is hoped that unlike past years' winners we shall see all of them published in some form or other in the coming year.
RATHO QUARRY SAVED
Plans mooted some months ago by Wimpey Asphalt to infill Ratho Quarry during their expansion operations led to an outcry by local residents and Edinburgh climbers.
Pleas from the MCofS for climbers to send objections seems to have worked and Wimpey have amended their expansion plans to leave the quarry untouched.
However, the company is not sympathetic to climbing, and should you encounter access problems contact me immediately.
BARYTES MINE — ABERFEDLY
The plans by M-1 Great Britain Ltd to mine on the Corbetts of Faragon Hill and Meall Rairneachan have attracted objections from local people, the MCofS, the Scottish Scenic Trust and the Countryside Commission for Scotland (now Scottish Natural Heritage), while the RSPB and Historic Scotland have expressed reservations.
But despite this, and the mine would lie partly within a National Scenic Area, Perth and Kinross District Council have granted permission.
The Secretary of State is now likely to call in the application and subject it to a public enquiry.
If you oppose this development then make your voice heard.
GLEN BRITTLE VISITOR CENTRE
The Portree Planning Office has received over 50 objections to this development (many from mountaineers no doubt) and the matter is now being dealt with by Highland Region HQ in Inverness.
The issue has been referred back to the MacLeod Estates, from whom a reply is awaited.
Highland Region's track record over planning standards gives cause for concern that, despite objections, the council may end up passing a proposal or design that wouldn't get a second glance in a national park or a city.
WALES
By Andy Newton
Two dates have been arranged so far for climbers who wish to obtain a pass to Range West.
The passes will be valid until the end of 1992 (fresh passes will be needed for 1993) and the dates set are August 15 and September 26.
Both will be held at the Castlemartin Camp.
Climbers attending the briefing will need to bring with them some form of identification, preferably a passport!
Those interested should contact 
Although the numbers will not apparently be limited at the briefings, a notional limit may be set on the number of climbers admitted to the range on any one occasion.
Although rendered rather unnecessary by the current spell of good weather, the usual rainy summer season should see a warm welcome for a new climbing wall opened in norther Snowdonia.
Created by Steve Chadwick, ‘The Bunker’ features a variety of climbing surfaces including a 45 degrees overhanging wall, a two metres roof, a number of mini routes and a slab for beginners.
The construction is of resin panels with featured and bolted holds.
The wall can be found behind the Beran Filling Station, which lies at the highest point of the Bangor on Llanberis road (B4547), about 200 metres from the Deiniolen turn-off.
Opening times and admission charges have not yet been published.
Rumours circulating recently suggesting a ‘super route’ had been climbed in Twll Mawr (Dinorwig Quarries) proved to be untrue, and the chalk spotted on Johnny Dawes' bold route The Indian Face (Cloggy), still unrepeated, came from an inspection by a local activism, who decided discretion was better than a serious scuffing!
The long awaited guide to the Ormes, by Steve Meyers, has appeared, but one marvels at the arrogance of a publisher who cannot be bothered to credit in full the first ascent teams.
The majority of the routes on the Ormes were not climbed as sport climbs, but as traditional routes where the second played a crucial role.
It is absolutely vital that the access notes in the guide are respected if the popular climbing area of Upper Pen Trwyn is not to be lost permanently.
Finally, if you are wondering where the new Ogwen guidebook has gone, so is the guidebook team!
FOOTNOTE Rumours that Johnny Dawes had redpointed The Meltdown on Quarryman wall in the Llanberis slate quarries have proved premature.
Johnny plans to work the climb this summer; he has already managed all the moves but still has to piece together the sequences.
When the climb is completed it seems likely to enter the elite F8c+ club — about E10.
YORKSHIRE By name;
With the popularity of the Foundry in Sheffield and other leading walls at Huddersfield and York, there has been little new activity in Yorkshire.
However, the early season fitness the walls have produced contributed to a couple of hard repeats and some rapid ascents at Malham.
John Gaskins and I both succeeded on Magnetic Fields (F8b).
Stuart Cameron made a single day ascent of Energy Vampire (F8+), flashing the English 7a (?) crux move.
The reputation of Connect Four as a hard F8a was demolished as Glen Sutcliffe and Ian Vickers both made single day redpoints of the route within minutes of each other, while I made a one day ascent of Toadal Recall (F8a).
SOUTH WEST By 
In West Penwith Mike Raine is continuing his de-bolting campaign.
Personally I don't think this is as ethical as removing the bolts prior to a repeat ascent, but it will undoubtedly please many people.
The message for visiting climbers is to check whether a bolt is still in place if you are repeating a route where a placement is mentioned in the description.
While on the subject of ironmongery, I would still like to see the removal of ancient, rusting pegs that litter the cliffs, serving no useful purpose, and some discussion about replacing them, where necessary, with stainless steel ones.
This also applies to the Cheesewring Quarry, which seems to have had a higher than normal accident rate in the past few years.
Given the atrocious landings and the fact that the rock is extremely treacherous when wet, many climbs are very bold.
Route finding can also be difficult so caution is urged on first acquaintance.
If in doubt, climb well within your grade.
So to new routes.
At lower Sharpnose, Paul Twomey has climbed an obvious rising traverse of the south face of middle fine, starting as for Coronary Country, joining Fay at the spike, moving down to join Pacemaker and continuing to finish as for Break On Through.
Hell Hound on my Trail is given E4 5c and is said to be worth three stars.
At Cornakey cliff, Paul also produced Sailing the Seas of Cheese, E3 5c, taking a bold line up the slab right of Sunday Bloody Sunday.
At Sanctuary Wall in Torbay, Nick White put up two E6 6bs, both starting as for Call Of The Wild.
The first goes up left of COTW following a line of pegs and is said to hard for the grade.
The right hand route, Call of Nature, moves out on jugs to reach a crack and finishes up this.
A pumpy pitch.
On the same wall, Ken Palmer added Gus Honeybun, E5 6b, starting 10ft right of False Gods, climbing left to a peg and finishing past two more.
The ability to do some ‘magic bunnyhops’ is said to be useful.
And if you haven't heard of Gus then shame on you!
In West Penwith at Sennen, Mark Edwards has climbed Pinch The Egyption, 7b+ (Spanish grades) which climbs the wall right of Golva, and Messenger From The Furnace, 8a+, taking the wall left of Angel's Highway.
An RP1 behind a crystal is the only protection on the latter route.
At Carn Barra, Just Another Inquisition, 7c, takes the arête left of Crack In The Sky, with a bold lower section.
At Carn Vellan, Wild at Heart, E6 6b, climbs the wall and crack right of Bridge of Sies.
A new addition at Lands End, The Great Green Wave, E7 6c, takes a brown seam right of the top pitch of Atlantic Ocean Wall past two pegs.
At Chair Ladder The Rodent Laughs Last, E1 5b, goes up the arête right of Original Route and is, I presume, a riposte to Hysterical Hamsters.
Glorious weather has brought increased activity; new routes can be faxed to me on .
New route books are at .
LAKES By 
In Runestone Lower Quarry there are two new additions in the middle grades: Capsian, VS 4c, and Fancy A Jump, E2 5c.
In Parrock, the rib left of Cup And Lip was climbed by Andy Chambers to give Far Out, E1 6a.
B. Teasdale reports that he has removed the loose flake (?) from GFI with no change in grade.
Some mindless individual has again stripped all the hangers from Parrock.
The reason escapes me — perhaps it is just a case of common theft.
In the Thirlmere area development continues at the newly discovered Smaithwaite Bank Crags with Andrew Slattery and girlfriend ‘Eddy’ Davidson putting up The Dambusters, HS, and Independence, MVS.
Paul Twomey opens Hellbound on my Trail (E4 5c), on the shale slabs of Cornakey Cliff, Devon (photo 
April 15 was the centenary of the first ascent of Eagle's Nest Ridge Direct on the Napes crags of Great Gable.
This epoch making climb, graded Mild Very Severe and still bold, was first climbed in 1892 by .
A truly remarkable effort.
(newly returned to climbing) visited the Napes crags on April 15 to pay due homage and make a centenary ascent, apparently finding Fay McHaffie and TV cameras in situ.
Cold fingers meant little upward progress, so traditional techniques were employed, with the teams combining forces and Al and Ed leading through.
REVISED GUIDE TO CLIMBS AND WALKS ON KILI AND KENYA
BOOKS
GUIDE TO MOUNT KENYA AND KILIMANJARO
Editor: The Mountain Club of Kenya £12.95.
This guidebook was first published in 1959, and it has been revised and reprinted several times since, the present copy being a revised impression of the 1981 edition.
The book has, for more than 30 years, been regarded as the definitive guide to these two great mountains of East Africa.
, editor of the present edition, is very well qualified for the task as he has, for many years, worked as a guide on these mountains, in particular on Mount Kenya, which he must know as well as anyone.
The book wastes no time in stressing in its first paragraph the medical hazards of climbing these mountains, on which one can rapidly gain height up the accessible tourist routes to altitudes high enough to cause acute mountain sickness.
This is a salutary warning, for it is said Mount Kenya claims as many as half the cases of pulmonary oedema in the world each year.
After the initial chapter on mountain medicine, the book continues with interesting sections on the geology, glaciers, climate, flora and fauna.
Many of these features are unique to these mountains, and make them of much more than mere climbing interest.
The greater part of the book is devoted to descriptions of the many climbing routes on the several peaks of Mount Kenya, and the smaller number of routes on Kilimanjaro and its satellite Mawenzi.
The Mount Kenya routes are the most important in terms of their quality and popularity, and the detailed descriptions are supplemented by topo diagrams for the most significant of them.
No post-1980 routes are described in this 1990 revision.
It is pointed out that all the climbs on Nelion and Batian should be regarded as two-day ascents.
This may well be the case, but it leaves one with an increased sense of respect for Eric Shipton and his companions who, in 1929, made each of the first three Nelion-Batian traverses (up and down by what is now regarded as the Normal Route), in one day.
The vast majority of those who go to Mount Kenya and Kilimanjaro are walkers rather than climbers, and the book deals with many of the excellent walking and approach routes through the surrounding forests.
Useful information is also given about porters, guides, costs and local regulations in the national parks in which both mountains are situated.
This guidebook is essential reading for all who go to walk or climb on East Africa's two great mountains.
The snows of Kilimanjaro.
Although the mountain is often considered a ‘walker's mountain’, its steeper flanks offer some demanding climbing.
FROM THE PENNINES TO THE HIGHLANDS
Hamish Brown, Lochar Publishing, £7.99
It is rather odd for someone who tends to denigrate official footpaths to be promoting a link between the Pennine and West Highland Ways.
Nevertheless this is a more mature Hamish, who contents himself with only an occasional swipe at Ways, and gets on with enjoying his explorations, post Munro and Corbett.
His route of 250 kilometres is broken into 13 stages and runs from Byrness in Northumbria to Milngavie in Strathclyde.
It follows a very sensible line which makes good use of the existing paths along Dere Street and the Minchmoor, the drove road from Peebles over the Cauldstane Slap to the Lothian plain, the towpaths of the Union and the Forth-Clyde canals, and the Antonine Wall.
With his great experience of Scotland and his wide reading, Hamish is able to bring together many disciplines for a detailed and interlinked account of the districts he passes through.
Inevitable, in such an encyclopaedic view, there are things to disagree with.
Dawyck Gardens could be an expensive taxi journey from Peebles as they are not on the back road to Innerleithen; the Southern Upland Way is 212 miles long, not 202; Dunslair Heights can best be reached from Lee Pen by sticking to the ridge and taking a firebreak from the south; and the suggested route from Byrness to Chew Green along Harden Edge saves no distance over the normal route outside the fence, while taking the walker one kilometre inside the MOD warning signs.
Despite various friends trying out the route and checking the text, the book is not up to date.
There is no mention of the military exclusion zone which has existed for at least two years, for anything up to seven days a week, around the highest Eildon.
A five kilometres stretch of Dere Street north of Monteviot was easy to walk in 1990, yet Hamish diverted around it as it showed ‘no indication of being salvaged and made available’(only the Teviot crossing and Monteviot House required a diversion, and Borders Region plans to open this stretch in 1992).
Several of the photo captions are mixed up and some text is missing from pages 117–118.
Despite these flaws the book is a very useful addition to the literature on southern Scotland, as it champions some fine but very under-rated areas and offers new ideas to most travellers.
& name'  
GLENCOE ROCK & ICE CLIMBS
Publication of this long-awaited new guide has been delayed due to unforeseen production problems, outwith control of the publishers — the Scottish Mountaineering Trust.
The guide should now appear around the end of this month.
Readers who have taken advantage of our pre-publication offer in the May issue will get copies first, once they are available.
SWOPPING SPARE MUNROS, FEES FOR TREKKERS AND THE SAFETY OF GEAR LEFT IN CARS
MAIL
Exchange your Munros
Recently, while in Scotland enjoying the company of a longtime climbing friend, I was introduced to the concept of ‘Munro-swopping’.
This is the splendid idea of exchanging one's own ‘spare’ ascents of Munros with other Munroists' spare ascents.
The following day, while flogging up Beinn Tulaichean, it occurred to me this is a scheme capable of considerable development, and a National Munro Exchange could be set up — computerised of course.
There must be many middle aged climbers such as myself who have dozens of spare ascents of Ben Nevis they would be willing to swop for some of the odd hills difficult of access.
I have, for example, a spare traverse of the Skye Ridge which must have high bargaining value and could be swopped for the Mamores, the Grey Corries, the Aonachs or similar.
Two great advantages would flow from the creation of such a Munro exchange:
1
Damage to the ageing knees of Munroists would be reduced by 50%, with consequent savings to the NHS of ligament operations and the supply of Zimmer frames and elbow crutches in later life.
2
More importantly, damage to the fragile environment of the Scottish hills would be reduced by the same 50%.
The reduction of single-width road passing places blocked by parked cars would of itself be a considerable benefit.
The cost of operating the exchange could be covered by a small transfer charge, based perhaps on a ‘height × distance from the road’ basis.
I am sure the BMC?
MCofS would be glad to operate the scheme — to the great benefit of everybody.
Current rules for Nepal trekkers
Your feature article ‘Base Camp Blitz’(March) states that the Nepal government has doubled the trekking visa fee to $20 a day.
This is wrong and misleading.
The current rules for individual trekkers are as follows:
For the first 30 days in Nepal bank exchange receipts for $20 a day are no longer required to obtain a trekking permit.
There is, however, a fee of $5 per week, or part of, for the permit, which is paid in rupees.
The entrance fee for the national parks, such as Annapurna, Langtang or Sagamartha, has recently gone up from 250 to 650 rupees.
This is about $14.
Tourists wanting to extend their three-day visas must show bank exchange receipts equivalent to $20 for every extra day.
There is a fee of $5 a week, or part, of, for the first visa extension.
Further extensions cost $10 a week, or part of.
Tourists can stay up to a maximum of 90 days in theory but longer is possible by showing a confirmed return air ticket.
Up to 15% of any money changed can be legally converted back into hard currency at the end of a trip.
But this can only be done at the international airport and with the original exchange receipts.
Rendezvous
The Rendezvous Hautes Montagnes women climbers' meet will be held this year from August 23–30 at San Martinao Valmasino in Italy.
For details please send an sae to UK rep  at the following address:.
Mystery Samaratin
On the Tuesday after Easter I was climbing with my 18 year old daughter on rocks at Burbage North.
To her horror and my shame I free fell 20 feet, landing on my back next to her, and was unconscious for some time.
A number of friendly faces appeared in response to her cries for help and one, Dave, took control.
All we know of him was that he had been involved in RAF mountain rescue in Anglesey, and had quite recently been on a posting in Lincolnshire.
In any event he did a very professional job with me and took a great weight off Laura's shoulders.
I would like to thank him through your columns, but would also dearly like to hear form him if he feels so inclined.
Thanks also to anyone else involved who may read this letter.
Yours faithfully.
Cars, not cyclists, pose threat to our hills
It is ironic that an article about mountain bikes on Snowdon appeared in the same issue (May) as  glorification of Ed Douglas's lamebrain driving.
Driving like his is helping the growth of off-road riding.
Similarly, the cars of ramblers who don't like to see bikes on the hills are, by weight of numbers, forcing cyclists off the road.
No walker has yet been hit by a bike on Snowdon but last year a cyclist was killed in Gwynedd by a motorist fiddling with his radio.
(Maybe he swerved, like Douglas).
I suspect that these walkers who resent bikes in the hills imagine that the environment begins at the edge of the tarmac.
It does not.
Tourist's cars (I include climbers and walkers) are a plague in Eryri.
The real danger to the mountain vegetation comes not from cycle wheels but from acid rain and global warming.
Cars are a major source of the gases causing these problems.
Incidentally, the train collided with the cyclist, who was stationary, not vice versa, as you put it.
The train, in mist, was unable to stop in time.
The railway company consistently quote this only incident, but the train was really at fault.
Risking one's own life on the crag is fine, but risking other people's lives by brainless, Al Harris-type macho driving, should not be celebrated in your magazine.